
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1421:111-25. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3591-8_10.

Northwestern Blot Analysis: Detecting RNA-Protein Interaction After Gel
Separation of Protein Mixture.

Zang S(1), Lin RJ(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of
the City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. (2)Irell & Manella
Graduate School of Biological Sciences of the City of Hope, Duarte, CA, USA.
RLin@coh.org. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of the City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA.
RLin@coh.org.

Northwestern assays detect a direct binding of a given RNA molecule to a protein 
immobilized on a nitrocellulose membrane. Here, we describe protocols to prepare 
(32)P-labeled RNA probes and to use them to assay for RNA-protein interactions
after partially purified protein preparations are resolved on denaturing
SDS-polyacrylamide gels. The method can unambiguously determine whether the
protein of interest can directly and independently bind RNA even in the presence 
of contaminating bacterial proteins or degradation products that at times may
hinder interpretation of results obtained from gel mobility shift or RNP
immunoprecipitation assays.

PMID: 26965261  [PubMed - in process]


2. Br Poult Sci. 2016 Mar 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Anti-predator behaviour of adult red-legged partridge (Alectoris rufa) tutors
improves the defensive responses of farm-reared broods.

Sánchez-García C(1,)(2), Alonso ME(1), Tizado EJ(3), Pérez JA(1,)(4), Armenteros 
JA(1), Gaudioso VR(1).

Author information: 
(1)a University of León, Campus de Vegazana, Research Group on Game Species
Breeding and Management , Departament of Animal Production, Facultad de
Veterinaria , 24071 León , Spain. (2)b The Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust,
Burgate Manor , Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF , United Kingdom. (3)c
University of León, Campus of Ponferrada, Department of Biodiversity and
Environmental Managament , 24401 Ponferrada , Spain. (4)d Global Sigma S.L.,
Onzonilla 24231 , León , Spain.

1. The aim of this work was to improve natural anti-predator behaviour of
farm-reared gamebirds. 2. We evaluated the anti-predator behaviour of reared
red-legged partridge Alectoris rufa chicks kept in brooder houses in large groups
(> 350 chicks), trained and not trained by parent red-legged partridges acting as
experienced tutors. 2. The experiment consisted of two conditioned tests (a
raptor model and a human) and two control tests, which were conducted during
three consecutive phases of life (1-4, 15-17 and 30-32 d after hatching). The
motor anti-predator behaviour, its duration, the intensity of response in chicks 
and alarm calls elicited by adults were recorded. 3. Tutors elicited aerial alarm
calls (76% of tests) and showed prolonged crouching (59% of tests) in response to
the raptor model whereas uttering the ground alarm call (73% of tests) and
showing vigilance behaviour (78% of tests) was the main pattern during the human 
test. 4. Trained and not trained chicks showed similar motor behaviour in
response to the raptor model (crouching) and the human test (escaping), but
frequency of strong responses (all chicks responding) from chicks trained with
tutors was double that of chicks trained without them, and chicks trained with
tutors showed a higher frequency of long responses (41-60 s). 5. This study
indicates that anti-predator training programs before release may improve
behaviour of farm-reared partridges which may confer benefits to survival of
birds.

PMID: 26955894  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Parasitology. 2016 Mar 2:1-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Density-dependent regulation of fecundity in Syngamus trachea infrapopulations in
semi-naturally occurring ring-necked pheasants (Phasianus colchicus) and wild
Carrion Crows (Corvus corone).

Gethings OJ(1), Sage RB(2), Leather SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop and Environment Sciences,Harper Adams
University,Edgmond,Newport TF10 8NB,UK. (2)Game and Wildlife Conservation
Trust,Burgate Manor,Fordingbridge SP6 1EF,UK.

Previous work has highlighted increased opportunities for the transmission of
Syngamus trachea within pheasant release pens, due in part to high levels of
environmental contamination around communal areas. Despite this, the distribution
of adult worms within their definitive hosts is not significantly different from 
predicted distributions under Taylor's power law. Therefore, density-dependent
processes are probably acting to regulate S. trachea population dynamics.
Patterns of nematode fecundity were investigated in a semi-naturally occurring
population of ring-necked pheasants (Phasianus colchicus) and a wild population
of carrion crows (Corvus carone). Worm length was a reliable indicator of
nematode fecundity, and a negative association between mean worm length and mean 
worm burden was identified within both the species. The stunting of worms at
greater parasite densities was present in both immunologically naïve and
previously exposed pheasants, so is unlikely to be a function of age-dependent
acquired immunity. Interestingly, the effect of parasite crowding in the crow
population explained more of the variation in mean worm length, apparently driven
by a greater mean worm burden when compared with pheasants. The findings of the
present study suggest that fecundity is a function of parasite density, i.e.
parasite-mediated competition and not host-mediated heterogeneities in
immunocompetence.

PMID: 26932519  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Res Microbiol. 2016 Feb 23. pii: S0923-2508(16)00031-0. doi:
10.1016/j.resmic.2016.02.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Influence of tryptophan and indole-3-acetic acid on starch accumulation in the
synthetic mutualistic Chlorella sorokiniana-Azospirillum brasilense system under 
heterotrophic conditions.

Palacios OA(1), Choix FJ(1), Bashan Y(2), de-Bashan LE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Microbiology Group, Northwestern Center for Biological Research 
(CIBNOR), Av. IPN 195, La Paz, B.C.S. 23096, Mexico. (2)Environmental
Microbiology Group, Northwestern Center for Biological Research (CIBNOR), Av. IPN
195, La Paz, B.C.S. 23096, Mexico; The Bashan Institute of Science, 1730 Post Oak
Court, Auburn, AL 36830, USA; Dept. of Entomology and Plant Pathology, 301
Funchess Hall, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA. (3)Environmental
Microbiology Group, Northwestern Center for Biological Research (CIBNOR), Av. IPN
195, La Paz, B.C.S. 23096, Mexico; The Bashan Institute of Science, 1730 Post Oak
Court, Auburn, AL 36830, USA; Dept. of Entomology and Plant Pathology, 301
Funchess Hall, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA. Electronic address:
legonzal04@cibnor.mx.

This study measured the relations between tryptophan production, the phytohormone
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and the metabolism and accumulation of starch during
synthetic mutualism between the microalgae Chlorella sorokiniana and the
microalgae growth-promoting bacteria Azospirillum brasilense, created by
co-immobilization in alginate beads. Experiments used two wild-type A. brasilense
strains (Cd and Sp6) and an IAA-attenuated mutant (SpM7918) grown under
nitrogen-replete and nitrogen-starved conditions tested under dark, heterotrophic
and aerobic growth conditions. Under all incubating conditions, C. sorokiniana,
but not A. brasilense, produced tryptophan. A significant correlation between
IAA-production by A. brasilense and starch accumulation in C. sorokiniana was
found, since the IAA-attenuated mutant was not producing increased starch levels.
The highest ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) activity, starch content and
glucose uptake were found during the interaction of A. brasilense wild type
strains with the microalgae. When the microalgae were grown alone, they produced 
only small amounts of starch. Supplementation with synthetic IAA to C.
sorokiniana grown alone enhanced the above parameters, but only transiently.
Activity of a-amylase decreased under nitrogen-replete conditions, but increased 
under nitrogen-starved conditions. In summary, this study demonstrated that,
during synthetic mutualism, the exchange of tryptophan and IAA between the
partners is a mechanism that governs several changes in starch metabolism of C.
sorokiniana, yielding an increase in starch content.

Copyright © 2016 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26924113  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Acupunct Med. 2016 Feb 25. pii: acupmed-2015-010839. doi:
10.1136/acupmed-2015-010839. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of the medial preoptic area in electroacupuncture treatment of reproductive 
dysfunction in ovariectomised rats.

Ma S(1), Li D(2), Jiang J(3), Shen B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Training Center of Medical Experiments, Basic Medical School, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China Department of Integrative Medicine and Neurobiology, 
State Key Lab of Medical Neurobiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Training Center of Medical Experiments, Basic
Medical School, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Integrative
Medicine and Neurobiology, State Key Lab of Medical Neurobiology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (4)Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the medial preoptic area (MPOA) of the
hypothalamus in electroacupuncture (EA) treatment of reproductive dysfunction in 
ovariectomised (OVX) rats and to examine the underlying mechanisms of action.
METHODS: 62 female Sprague-Dawley rats (200-220 g) underwent bilateral
ovariectomy (OVX). Three weeks later, 32 rats assigned to experiment 1 were
randomly divided into four groups: two groups underwent MPOA lesioning (n=16)
followed by EA at CV4, CV3, SP6 and bilateral Zigong (30 min per day) for 3 days 
(OVX+MPOA+EA group, n=8) or no treatment (OVX+MPOA group, n=8); and two groups
underwent sham (S) surgery (n=16) followed by EA (OVX+SMPOA+EA group, n=8) or no 
treatment (OVX+SMPOA group, n=8). Plasma oestradiol and luteinising hormone (LH) 
were measured by radioimmunoassay and mature vaginal epithelial cells stained and
quantified post-treatment. 30 rats assigned to experiment 2 were randomised to
receive EA (OVX+EA group, n=15) or remain untreated (OVX group, n=15), following 
which push-pull perfusion in combination with high pressure liquid
chromatography/electrochemical (HPLC-EC) detection was used to measure
neurotransmitter release in the MPOA.
RESULTS: EA significantly increased the percentage of mature vaginal epithelial
cells and plasma oestradiol levels in sham MPOA-lesioned rats compared with
MPOA-lesioned OVX rats (p<0.05). In sham MPOA-lesioned OVX rats, EA significantly
decreased plasma LH levels compared with no treatment (p<0.01). HPLC-EC results
showed that <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and ß-endorphin levels in the MPAO were
significantly increased in OVX rats following EA (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that the MPOA plays a crucial role in EA 
treatment of abnormal reproductive function in OVX rats.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26917326  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Neural Regen Res. 2015 Dec;10(12):2033-9. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.172323.

Electroacupuncture promotes the recovery of motor neuron function in the anterior
horn of the injured spinal cord.

Yang JH(1), Lv JG(1), Wang H(1), Nie HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rehabilitation Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Health Science Center,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

Acupuncture has been shown to lessen the inflammatory reaction after acute spinal
cord injury and reduce secondary injury. However, the mechanism of action remains
unclear. In this study, a rat model of spinal cord injury was established by
compressing the T8-9 segments using a modified Nystrom method. Twenty-four hours 
after injury, Zusanli (ST36), Xuanzhong (GB39), Futu (ST32) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) 
were stimulated with electroacupuncture. Rats with spinal cord injury alone were 
used as controls. At 2, 4 and 6 weeks after injury, acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
activity at the site of injury, the number of medium and large neurons in the
spinal cord anterior horn, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
mRNA expression, and Basso, Beattie and Bresnahan locomotor rating scale scores
were greater in the electroacupuncture group compared with the control group.
These results demonstrate that electroacupuncture increases AChE activity,
up-regulates GDNF mRNA expression, and promotes the recovery of motor neuron
function in the anterior horn after spinal cord injury.

PMCID: PMC4730831
PMID: 26889195  [PubMed]


7. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;35(12):1463-8.

[Effects of Acupuncture on Neurofunction and Neuropsychological Factors of
Chronic Alcoholic Peripheral Neuropathy Patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Mei JH, Wang JI, Luo LJ, Chen GH, Zhang ZW, Pan XF, Wei D, Shao W.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of acupuncture on neurofunction and
neuropsychological factors of chronic alcoholic peripheral neuropathy (CAPN)
patients.
METHODS: Totally 120 CAPN patients were assigned to the common treatment group,
acupuncture group A, and acupuncture group B according to random digit table, 40 
in each group. All patients recieved conventional drug therapy. Besides, patients
in the acupuncture group A were additionally needled at Pishu (BL20), Weishu
(BL21), Xuehai (SP10), Yinlingquan (SP9), Zusanli (ST36), Yanglingquan (GB34),
Jiexi (ST41), Xuanzhong (GB39), Xiangu (ST43),Taixi (KI3), Quchi (LI11), Waiguan 
(SJ5), Hegu (LI4), and so on. On these bases patients in the acupuncture group B 
were needled at Sishencong (EX-HN1), Yintang (EX-HN3), Neiguan (PC6), Taichong
(LR3), Sanyinjiao (SP6), and Taiyang (EX-HN5). Acupuncture was performed once a
day, 14 times as a course; and then once on every other day, 14 times in total
for 4 weeks. All treatment lasted for 8 successive weeks. Neuropathy Impairment
Score in the Lower Limbs (NIS-LL), Neurological Severity Score (NSS), Hamilton
Depression Scale (HAMD), and Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) were assessed, motor
nerve conduction velocity (MCV) and sensory nerve conduction velocity (SCV) were 
detected before and after treatment.
RESULTS: After 8 weeks of treatment the scores of NIS-LL and NSS significantly
decreased in the 3 groups, with statistical difference as compared with before
treatment (P < 0.05). Scores of NIS-LL and NSS decreased more in acupuncture
groups A and B than in the common treatment group (P < 0.05), and more obvious in
acupuncture group B (P < 0.05). Compared with the same group before treatment,
MCV and SCV of median nerve, ulnar nerve, common peroneal nerve and tibial nerve 
increased in acupuncture treatment group A and B after 8-week treatment (P <
0.05). MCV of median nerve, MCV and SCV of common peroneal nerve and tibial nerve
significantly increased in the common treatment group (P < 0.05). Compared with
the common treatment group, SCV of median nerve, MCV and SCV of ulnar nerve,
common peroneal nerve and tibial nerve obviously increased in acupuncture
treatment groups A and B after treatment (P < 0.05). MCV of ulnar nerve, MCV and 
SCV of common peroneal nerve and tibial nerve obviously increased more in
acupuncture treatment group A than in acupuncture treatment group B (P < 0.05).
At week 8 after treatment scores of HAMD and HAMA were obviously lowered in
acupuncture groups A and B, with statistical difference as compared with before
treatment (P < 0.05). The scores of HAMD were also decreased in the common
treatment group, as compared with before treatment (P < 0.05). At week 8 after
treatment scores of HAMD and HAMA were obviously lowered more in acupuncture
treatment group B than in acupuncture treatment group A (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture therapy could effectively improve the neurofunction of
CAPN patients, and improve complicated anxiety and depression by additionally
needling at Sishencong (EX-HN1), Yintang (EX-HN3), Taichong (LR3), Sanyinjiao
(SP6), and Taiyang (EX-HN5).

PMID: 26882609  [PubMed - in process]


8. Virus Res. 2016 Apr 2;215:76-83. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.02.003. Epub 2016
Feb 11.

Interactive mechanism between avian infectious bronchitis S1 protein T cell
peptide and avian MHC I molecule.

Zhu FZ(1), Lu M(2), Huang QH(3), Huang YY(3), Yang SH(3), Cui YS(4), Liu C(3),
Tan L(4), Kong Z(4), Xu CT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Shandong Key Lab of Animal Disease Control and Breeding,
Jinan, Shandong 2501001, PR China; College of Animal Science, Shandong
Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong 271018, PR China. (2)Weifang
Engineering Vocational College, Qingzhou, Shandong 262500, PR China. (3)Institute
of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shandong Key Lab of Animal Disease Control and Breeding, Jinan,
Shandong 2501001, PR China. (4)College of Animal Science, Shandong Agricultural
University, Tai'an, Shandong 271018, PR China. (5)Institute of Animal Science and
Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shandong Key Lab 
of Animal Disease Control and Breeding, Jinan, Shandong 2501001, PR China.
Electronic address: xcttaian2002@163.com.

This study aims to construct a 3D structure of the avian major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)-ß2M complex through homology modelling technology, perform
molecular docking of the predicted infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) S1 protein
potential epitope peptide Sp6 (NQFYIKLT) and the avian MHC-ß2M complex, and
demonstrate the interactive mechanism between Sp6 and MHC using molecular
dynamical simulations. The peptide Sp6 and the non-related peptide NP89-97
(PKKTGGPIY) were used to stimulate in vitro recombinant plasmid (pCAGGS-S1) avian
splenic lymphocytes. Flow cytometric results show that CD8(+) T lymphocytes
reproduce stimulated by the Sp6 and the nonrelated peptide proliferate by 34.8%
and 2.6%, respectively. Meanwhile, fluorescent quantitative PCR results show that
the secretion of IFN-<U+03B3> in avian splenic lymphocytes increases after Sp6
stimulation. These data suggest that Sp6 can induce the activated avian
lymphocytes in vitro to produce CTL, which is the CTL epitope in IBV S1.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876645  [PubMed - in process]


9. Lasers Surg Med. 2016 Feb 14. doi: 10.1002/lsm.22487. [Epub ahead of print]

Therapeutic antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects of laser acupuncture on
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Attia AM(1), Ibrahim FA(1), Abd El-Latif NA(1), Aziz SW(1), Elwan AM(1), Abdel
Aziz AA(2), Elgendy A(3), Elgengehy FT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biophysical Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, National Research Centre, 
Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. (2)Department of Spectroscopy, National Research Centre,
Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. (3)Department of Complementary Medicine, National Research
Centre, Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. (4)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Faculty of
Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The laser acupuncture has many potential therapeutic
effects. Currently, they are not evaluated for their therapeutic effects on
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
effects of laser acupuncture on the oxidative and antioxidative markers, as well 
as the inflammatory markers and disease activity of RA patients.
DESIGN/MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was conducted on 30 RA patients and 20
healthy subjects. The patients were subjected to laser acupuncture (904<U+2009>nm,
100<U+2009>mW power output, 1 minute irradiation time, beam area of 1<U+2009>cm(2) , total
energy per point 6<U+2009>J, energy density 6<U+2009>J/<U+2009>cm(2) , irradiance 0.1<U+2009>W/cm(2) ,
frequency 10000<U+2009>Hz, duty-cycle 100%) for 3 days/week for duration of 4 weeks. The
acupuncture points of exposure were LI4, TE5, LI 11, DU 14, LIV3, SP6, GB34, and 
S36. The levels of oxidative and antioxidant markers were determined by
spectrophotometric methods whereas the inflammatory markers were determined by
ELISA methods. Lastly, using DAS28 scores the disease activity was assessed.
RESULTS: After laser acupuncture, the study group revealed significantly
increased plasma superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione reductase (GR), catalase
activities, blood glutathione (GSH), and plasma ATP concentrations, compared to
those before treatment (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005). Moreover, the results revealed significantly
reduced plasma malondialdehyde (MDA), serum nitrate and nitrite, serum C-reactive
protein (CRP), plasma interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels and significantly reduced
glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activity and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) in
laser exposed patients, compared to those before treatment (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005). The RA
patients subjected to laser acupuncture showed highly significant reduction in
disease activity (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0005) based on DAS28 score.
CONCLUSION: Our study results confirmed the effectiveness of laser acupuncture in
alleviating oxidative stress and inflammation, improving antioxidant and energy
metabolic status, while also suppressing the disease activity in RA patients.
Laser acupuncture is a promising treatment modality to reduce the pain and
suffering of RA patients because of its efficiency in inhibiting most of the main
factors involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. Lasers Surg. Med. © 2016
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26875769  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Behav Brain Res. 2016 Apr 15;303:168-75. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.02.003. Epub
2016 Feb 3.

Evidence for involvement of NK3 receptors in the anxiogenic-like effect of
SP6-11(C-terminal), a metabolite of substance P, in rats evaluated in the
elevated plus-maze.

Duarte FS(1), Duzzioni M(2), Leme LR(3), Smith Sde P(3), De Lima TC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Federal University of Pernambuco,
Recife, PE 50670-901, Brazil. Electronic address: duartefilipe@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Federal University of Alagoas,
Maceió, AL 57020-720, Brazil. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University
of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC 88049-900, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Substance P (SP) is a neuropeptide widely expressed throughout the 
fear-processing pathways of the brain. SP is cleaved by several proteolytic
enzymes in amino (N-) and carboxy (C-) terminal sequences, which can have
biological activities per se. We have previously shown that the anxiogenic-like
effects elicited by SP6-11(C-terminal), a specific metabolite of SP, are mediated
via NK1 and NK2 receptors. Nevertheless, there are evidences that C-terminal
fragments may have a greater affinity for NK3 receptors.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study was to further investigate the possible 
involvement of NK3 receptors in the anxiogenic-like effects induced by
SP6-11(C-terminal).
METHODS: Adult male Wistar rats were intracerebroventricularly (i.c.v.) treated
with SR142801 (NK3 receptors antagonist) or vehicle one minute to prior
SP6-11(C-terminal) or vehicle. Other experimental groups received
SP6-11(C-terminal) or vehicle i.c.v. one minute prior to senktide (NK3 receptors 
agonist) or vehicle. After five minutes, the animals were behaviorally evaluated 
in the elevated plus-maze test (EPM).
RESULTS: SR142801 (100pmol) or SP6-11(C-terminal) (10pmol) reduced all the
parameters of open-arms exploration and increased the number of protected
stretch-attend postures in the EPM, indicating an anxiogenic-like effect.
Senktide (10pmol) promoted an opposite effect on these behavioral parameters,
characterizing an anxiolytic-like profile. Pretreatment with SR142801, in an
ineffective dose, potentiated the SP6-11-induced anxiety, especially in the
unprotected head-dipping and protected stretch-attend postures behaviors.
Moreover, the anxiolytic-like effect induced by senktide (1pmol) was prevented by
SP6-11.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results give support to the involvement of NK3 receptors in the 
anxiogenic-like actions of SP6-11(C-terminal), where this metabolite seems to
behave as an antagonist, in a way similar to SR142801.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26851555  [PubMed - in process]


11. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 1;11(2):e0148282. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148282.
eCollection 2016.

Studies on Transcriptional Incorporation of 5'-N-Triphosphates of
5'-Amino-5'-Deoxyribonucleosides.

Kotkowiak W(1), Pasternak A(1), Kierzek R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

In this study, several RNA polymerases were used for the first time to examine
the possibility of transcriptional incorporation of 5'-N-triphosphates of
5'-amino-5'-deoxyribonucleosides (5'NH NTPs). The T3, T7, Sp6 and T7 Y639F RNA
polymerases were employed to show that the full-length transcript cannot be
synthesized. The results suggest that the application of 5'NH NTPs could decrease
transcription reaction rates. What is more, the modification of transcription
conditions had no influence on the rate of 5'NH NTPs incorporation. Based on
experimental data it is postulated that 5'NH NTPs can be used as potential
transcription inhibitors. Our findings expand the knowledge on suitable uses of
the 5'-N-triphosphates of 5'-amino-5'-deoxyribonucleoside and the exact mechanism
of transcriptional inhibition.

PMCID: PMC4735469
PMID: 26829482  [PubMed - in process]


12. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1350:469-76. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3043-2_24.

Gene Silencing in Insect Cells Using RNAi.

Wu HC(1), March JC(2), Bentley WE(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. (3)Fischell Department of Bioengineering,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. bentley@umd.edu. (4)Institute for 
Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 
USA. bentley@umd.edu.

A technique is described for synthesizing and transfecting double stranded RNA
(dsRNA) for RNA interference (RNAi) in Sf-21 cell culture. Transfection with
dsRNA only requires an hour and the cells usually recover within 12 h.
Suggestions for designing dsRNA are included in the methods. Furthermore,
websites are provided for rapid and effective dsRNA design. Three kits are
essential for using the described methods: RNAqueous(®)-4PCR, Megascript T7 kit,
and the Superscript III kit from Life Technologies, Inc.

PMID: 26820874  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Integr Med. 2016 Jan;14(1):29-35. doi: 10.1016/S2095-4964(16)60235-2.

Short-term complementary and alternative medicine on quality of life in women
with fibromyalgia.

Dias PA(1), Guimarães AB(1), Albuquerque Ade O(1), de Oliveira KL(2), Cavalcante 
ML(1), Guimarães SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery, Federal University of Ceará,
60430-140, Fortaleza, Brazil. (2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Dentistry and Nursing,
Federal University of Ceará, 60430-140, Fortaleza, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Fibromyalgia (FMS) is a syndrome characterized by chronic widespread 
musculoskeletal pain, whose etiology is not completely understood. Different
therapeutic approaches have been used with inconsistent results. This observation
does not invalidate the continued search for alternative treatments aimed at
improving quality of life (QoL) in FMS.
OBJECTIVE: This study compared three classical traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
therapies: acupuncture (AC), electroacupuncture (EAC) and moxibustion (MX) in the
management of pain and promotion of QoL in FMS patients.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS AND INTERVENTIONS: A preliminary, group-assigned,
comparative study enrolled 30 women, mean age (46.90±9.24) years (range 20-60
years), who met the 1990 American College of Rheumatology criteria for FMS
diagnosis and a pain-pressure threshold (PPT) < 4 kg/cm(2). The study was
conducted in a teaching tertiary-care medical institution from May 2010 through
April 2012. AC, EAC and MX were delivered for 30 min, once a week, for 8 weeks,
bilaterally at Neiguan (PC6), Hegu (LI4), Yanglingquan (GB34), Sanyinjiao (SP6)
and Taichong (LR3) acupoints.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Each week, immediately before treatment and after
treatment, subjects were tested for PPTs, Wong-Baker Faces Pain Scale (WBFPS; for
pain intensity) and Medical Outcomes Study 36-item Short Form Health Survey
(SF-36: for QoL).
RESULTS: There was no significant improvement in pain or reduction of tender
points in any of the groups studied, at the end of the 8th session. Significant
improvement of QoL was perceived in vitality (after AC treatment) and in mental
health (after EAC and MX treatments).
CONCLUSION: TCM therapies (AC, EAC and MX) promoted an improvement in the QoL in 
two areas (vitality and mental health) in FMS women. Further large-scale clinical
trials are required to confirm this effect.

PMID: 26778226  [PubMed - in process]


14. Acupunct Med. 2016 Jan 5. pii: acupmed-2015-010951. doi:
10.1136/acupmed-2015-010951. [Epub ahead of print]

Electroacupuncture relieves labour pain and influences the spinal
dynorphin/<U+03BA>-opioid receptor system in rats.

Jiang QY(1), Wang MY(1), Li L(1), Mo HX(1), Song JL(1), Tang QL(2), Feng XT(3).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine,
Nanning, Guangxi, China. (2)Scientific Experimental Center, Youjiang Medical
University for Nationalities, Baise, Guangxi, China. (3)Guangxi Scientific
Experimental Center of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangxi University of
Chinese Medicine, Nanning, Guangxi, China.

BACKGROUND: The dynorphin (DYN)/<U+03BA>-opioid receptor (KOR) system plays a key role
in the control of labour pain. Our previous clinical study reported that
electroacupuncture (EA) provided intrapartum analgesia, but the underlying
mechanisms of action have not been fully elucidated.
AIMS: To observe the effect of EA on labour pain and to explore the underlying
mechanisms of action in a rat model.
METHODS: Copulation-confirmed pregnant rats (n=120) were given castor oil to
induce labour. Rats remained untreated (control group, n=20) or received either
meperidine (an opioid that is commonly used to treat labour pain, n=20) or EA at 
SP6, LI4, SP6+LI4 or SP10 (four groups, n=20 each). Labour pain was evaluated by 
the warm water tail-flick test. Serum DYN values were measured by ELISA. Protein 
and mRNA expression of prodynorphin (PDYN, the precursor protein of DYN) and KOR 
were analysed by Western blotting and real-time PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: EA treatment at all acupuncture point combinations studied significantly
relieved labour pain and increased serum DYN concentrations, to a degree similar 
to that achieved with meperidine. EA notably enhanced protein expression of KOR
and PDYN and mRNA expression in the lumbar spinal cord but not in the cerebral
cortex. The size of effect varied by EA group in the order: SP6>LI4>SP6+LI4>SP10 
for all parameters measured, indicating differential effects relating to
acupuncture point selection/combination.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates that EA relieves labour pain, at least
in part, by regulation of the spinal DYN/KOR system in a rat model.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26732307  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Neural Regen Res. 2015 Oct;10(10):1628-34. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.167762.

Neuroprotective effects of electroacupuncture on early- and late-stage spinal
cord injury.

Wu MF(1), Zhang SQ(2), Liu JB(3), Li Y(3), Zhu QS(3), Gu R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Bethune Second Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin Province, China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Nankai
Hospital, Tianjin, China. (3)Department of Orthopedics, China-Japan Union
Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province, China.

Previous studies have shown that the neurite growth inhibitor Nogo-A can cause
secondary neural damage by activating RhoA. In the present study, we hypothesized
that electroacupuncture promotes neurological functional recovery after spinal
cord injury by inhibiting RhoA expression. We established a rat model of acute
spinal cord injury using a modification of Allen's method. The rats were given
electroacupuncture treatment at Dazhui (Du14), Mingmen (Du4), Sanyinjiao (SP6),
Huantiao (GB30), Zusanli (ST36) and Kunlun (BL60) acupoints with a sparse-dense
wave at a frequency of 4 Hz for 30 minutes, once a day, for a total of 7 days.
Seven days after injury, the Basso, Beattie and Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor scale
and inclined plane test scores were significantly increased, the number of
apoptotic cells in the spinal cord tissue was significantly reduced, and RhoA and
Nogo-A mRNA and protein expression levels were decreased in rats given
electroacupuncture compared with rats not given electroacupuncture. Four weeks
after injury, pathological tissue damage in the spinal cord at the site of injury
was alleviated, the numbers of glial fibrillary acidic protein- and neurofilament
200-positive fibers were increased, the latencies of somatosensory-evoked and
motor-evoked potentials were shortened, and their amplitudes were increased in
rats given electroacupuncture. These findings suggest that electroacupuncture
treatment reduces neuronal apoptosis and decreases RhoA and Nogo-A mRNA and
protein expression at the site of spinal cord injury, thereby promoting tissue
repair and neurological functional recovery.

PMCID: PMC4660757
PMID: 26692861  [PubMed]


16. BMJ Open. 2015 Dec 11;5(12):e008338. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008338.

Moxibustion as an adjuvant for benign prostatic hyperplasia with lower urinary
tract symptoms: a protocol for a parallel-group, randomised, controlled pilot
trial.

Lee HY(1), Nam JK(2), Lee SD(2), Lee DH(2), Han JY(2), Yun YJ(3), Lee JH(4), Park
HL(1), Park SH(3), Kwon JN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University Korean Medicine
Hospital, Yangsan, South Korea Department of Korean Medicine, School of Korean
Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan, South Korea. (2)Department of
Urology, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital, Yangsan, South Korea
Department of Urology, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan,
South Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University Korean
Medicine Hospital, Yangsan, South Korea Division of Clinical Medicine, School of 
Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan, South Korea. (4)Department
of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University Korean Medicine Hospital,
Yangsan, South Korea Department of Korean Medical Science, School of Korean
Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan, South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: This study aims to explore the feasibility of using moxibustion as 
a supplementary intervention and to assess the sample size for verifying the
effectiveness and safety of integrative treatment involving moxibustion compared 
with conventional treatment for patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia
accompanying moderate to severe lower urinary tract symptoms.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: A total of 60 patients diagnosed with benign prostatic
hyperplasia by a urologist based on prostate size, prostate-specific antigen and 
clinical symptoms will participate of their own free will; urologists will
monitor the patients and evaluate their symptoms. The patients will be randomised
to either a conventional group or an integrative group with a 1:1 allocation
according to computer-generated random numbers concealed in opaque, sealed,
sequentially numbered envelopes. Watchful waiting or oral medication including a 
blocker, 5a-reductase inhibitors or antimuscarinic drugs will be offered as
conventional treatment. Integrative treatment will include moxibustion therapy in
addition to the conventional treatment. The moxibustion therapy will be conducted
twice a week for 4 weeks on the bilateral acupoints SP6, LR3 and CV4 by a
qualified Korean medical doctor. The primary outcome will be the International
Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) after eight sessions. The secondary outcomes will
be the post-void residual urine volume, the maximum urinary flow rate, IPSS, the 
results of a Short-Form 36-Question Health Survey after 12 weeks, and the
patients' global impression of changes at each visit.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Written informed consent will be obtained from all
participants. This study was approved by the institutional review boards of both 
Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital and Pusan National University Korean
Medicine Hospital. The trial results will be disseminated through open-access
journals and conferences.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02051036.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMCID: PMC4679882
PMID: 26656981  [PubMed - in process]


17. Am J Transplant. 2016 Mar;16(3):821-32. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13541. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

BK Polyomavirus Replication in Renal Tubular Epithelial Cells Is Inhibited by
Sirolimus, but Activated by Tacrolimus Through a Pathway Involving FKBP-12.

Hirsch HH(1,)(2,)(3), Yakhontova K(1), Lu M(1), Manzetti J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation & Clinical Virology, Department of Biomedicine (Haus
Petersplatz), University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (2)Division Infection
Diagnostics, Department of Biomedicine (Haus Petersplatz), University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. (3)Infectious Diseases & Hospital Epidemiology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

BK polyomavirus (BKPyV) replication causes nephropathy and premature kidney
transplant failure. Insufficient BKPyV-specific T cell control is regarded as a
key mechanism, but direct effects of immunosuppressive drugs on BKPyV replication
might play an additional role. We compared the effects of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR)- and calcineurin-inhibitors on BKPyV replication in primary
human renal tubular epithelial cells. Sirolimus impaired BKPyV replication with a
90% inhibitory concentration of 4<U+2009>ng/mL by interfering with mTOR-SP6-kinase
activation. Sirolimus inhibition was rapid and effective up to 24<U+2009>h postinfection
during viral early gene expression, but not thereafter, during viral late gene
expression. The mTORC-1 kinase inhibitor torin-1 showed a similar inhibition
profile, supporting the notion that early steps of BKPyV replication depend on
mTOR activity. Cyclosporine A also inhibited BKPyV replication, while tacrolimus 
activated BKPyV replication and reversed sirolimus inhibition. FK binding protein
12kda (FKBP-12) siRNA knockdown abrogated sirolimus inhibition and increased
BKPyV replication similar to adding tacrolimus. Thus, sirolimus and tacrolimus
exert opposite effects on BKPyV replication in renal tubular epithelial cells by 
a mechanism involving FKBP-12 as common target. Immunosuppressive drugs may
therefore contribute directly to the risk of BKPyV replication and nephropathy
besides suppressing T cell functions. The data provide rationales for clinical
trials aiming at reducing the risk of BKPyV replication and disease in kidney
transplantation.

© Copyright 2015 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

PMID: 26639422  [PubMed - in process]


18. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Aug;10(2):541-548. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Electroacupuncture at the governor vessel and bladder meridian acupoints improves
postmenopausal osteoporosis through osteoprotegerin/RANKL/RANK and Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling pathways.

Zheng X(1), Wu G(1), Nie Y(2), Lin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture College, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China. (2)The Affiliated Traditional Chinese Medicine
Hospital of Fuzhou, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou,
Fujian 350001, P.R. China.

Previous studies have demonstrated that pretreatment with electroacupuncture (EA)
at the zusanli/ST36 and sanyinjiao/SP6 acupoints prevents ovariectomy-induced
osteoporosis in rats; however, the therapeutic effects of EA at the governor
vessel (GV) and bladder meridian (BL) acupoints remain unclear. In the present
study, the effects of EA at the GV4, GV6, BL20 and BL23 acupoints on the bones of
ovariectomized (OVX) rats were investigated to identify the pathways that mediate
the action of EA on the bones. A postmenopausal osteoporosis model was
established by performing an ovariectomy in six-month-old female Sprague Dawley
rats. Following the ovariectomy, EA treatment was administered once per day for
90 days, with an interval of 5 days per 10 days. The changes in the serum levels 
of estradiol (E2) and the bone turnover markers, osteocalcin (OC) and
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP 5b), were determined, while the
bone mineral density (BMD) of the lumbar vertebra and the histomorphology of the 
femur were observed. Furthermore, the expression of osteoprotegerin (OPG) and
receptor activator of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL), which are involved in the
OPG/RANKL pathway, were detected by ELISA. In addition, the protein expression
levels of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) 5, ß-catenin and
runt-related transcription factor (Runx) 2, which are involved in the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, were detected by western blot analysis. The
results revealed that the GV and BL EA treatment groups significantly increased
the serum levels of E2 and OC, decreased the serum levels of TRACP 5b and
increased the BMD of the lumbar vertebra when compared with the OVX group. With
regard to the histomorphology of the bone tissue, an ordered arrangement and a
slight thinning of the trabeculae, with no evident hairline fractures, was
observed in the femurs following EA treatment in the OVX rats. Furthermore,
histomorphological analysis revealed that EA treatment significantly increased
the values of the bone histomorphometry indices, trabecular area percentage,
trabecular thickness and trabecular number, and reduced the value of trabecular
separation, as compared with the OVX group. In addition, the ratio of OPG/RANKL
expression was significantly upregulated, and the expression levels of LRP5,
ß-catenin and Runx2 were significantly upregulated in the EA treatment groups.
Therefore, these results demonstrated that long-term stimulation with EA
treatment at the GV and BL acupoints was able to alleviate osteoporosis induced
by an ovariectomy through regulating the OPG/RANKL and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathways.

PMCID: PMC4509043
PMID: 26622351  [PubMed]


19. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 30;5:17409. doi: 10.1038/srep17409.

Transcriptome analysis of human OXR1 depleted cells reveals its role in
regulating the p53 signaling pathway.

Yang M(1,)(2), Lin X(2,)(3), Rowe A(2), Rognes T(1,)(4), Eide L(2), Bjørås
M(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
Norway. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Norway. (3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research (Ministry of Education), Department of Breast Oncology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, P.R. China. (4)Department of
Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway. (5)Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway.

The oxidation resistance gene 1 (OXR1) is crucial for protecting against
oxidative stress; however, its molecular function is unknown. We employed RNA
sequencing to examine the role of human OXR1 for genome wide transcription
regulation. In total, in non-treated and hydrogen peroxide exposed HeLa cells,
OXR1 depletion resulted in down-regulation of 554 genes and up-regulation of 253 
genes. These differentially expressed genes include transcription factors (i.e.
HIF1A, SP6, E2F8 and TCF3), antioxidant genes (PRDX4, PTGS1 and CYGB) and
numerous genes of the p53 signaling pathway involved in cell-cycle arrest (i.e.
cyclin D, CDK6 and RPRM) and apoptosis (i.e. CytC and CASP9). We demonstrated
that OXR1 depleted cells undergo cell cycle arrest in G2/M phase during oxidative
stress and increase protein expression of the apoptosis initiator protease CASP9.
In summary, OXR1 may act as a sensor of cellular oxidative stress to regulate the
transcriptional networks required to detoxify reactive oxygen species and
modulate cell cycle and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4663793
PMID: 26616534  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oral Dis. 2016 Mar;22(2):132-9. doi: 10.1111/odi.12396. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Isolation and characterization of dental epithelial cells derived from
amelogenesis imperfecta rat.

Adiningrat A(1), Tanimura A(2), Miyoshi K(2), Hagita H(2), Yanuaryska RD(1,)(3), 
Arinawati DY(1), Horiguchi T(2), Noma T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Oral Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima
University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan. (3)Department of Dentomaxillofacial
Radiology, Faculty of Dentistry, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

OBJECTIVE: Disruption of the third zinc finger domain of specificity protein 6
(SP6) presents an enamel-specific defect in a rat model of amelogenesis
imperfecta (AMI rats). To understand the molecular basis of amelogenesis
imperfecta caused by the Sp6 mutation, we established and characterized
AMI-derived rat dental epithelial (ARE) cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ARE cell clones were isolated from the mandibular incisors
of AMI rats, and amelogenesis-related gene expression was analyzed by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Localization of wild-type SP6
(SP6WT) and mutant-type SP6 (SP6AMI) was analyzed by immunocytochemistry. SP6
transcriptional activity was monitored by rho-associated protein kinase 1 (Rock1)
promoter activity with its specific binding to the promoter region in dental (G5 
and ARE) and non-dental (COS-7) epithelial cells.
RESULTS: Isolated ARE cells were varied in morphology and gene expression. Both
SP6WT and SP6AMI were mainly detected in nuclei. The promoter analysis revealed
that SP6WT and SP6AMI enhanced Rock1 promoter activity in G5 cells but that
enhancement by SP6AMI was weaker, whereas no enhancement was observed in the ARE 
and COS-7 cells, even though SP6WT and SP6AMI bound to the promoter in all
instances.
CONCLUSION: ARE cell clones can provide a useful in vitro model to study the
mechanism of SP6-mediated amelogenesis imperfecta.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26582753  [PubMed - in process]


21. Neuromodulation. 2015 Nov 16. doi: 10.1111/ner.12366. [Epub ahead of print]

Arginine Vasopressin and Arginine Vasopressin Receptor 1b Involved in
Electroacupuncture-Attenuated Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis Hyperactivity
in Hepatectomy Rats.

Zhu J(1), Chen Z(1), Zhu L(1), Meng Z(1), Wu G(1), Tian Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine and Neurobiology, State Key Laboratory of
Medical Neurobiology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science,
Institute of Acupuncture Research, WHO Collaborating Centre for Traditional
Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The study aims to know the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) in
maintenance of the homeostasis of the neuroendocrine system in hepatectomy rats
and the involvement of arginine vasopressin (AVP) signaling in hypothalamus after
EA was observed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were randomly assigned to four groups, including the 
intact group, model group, sham-EA group, and EA group. EA was given during the
perioperative period at the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) points after
hepatectomy. The serum adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and corticosterone
(CORT) levels were detected via radioimmunoassay. The expression of AVP, arginine
vasopressin receptor 1a (AVPR1a), arginine vasopressin receptor 1b (AVPR1b), and 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) was detected by Western blot after surgery.
RESULTS: Compared with the intact group, the ACTH and CORT levels in the serum of
model group were increased, whereas the ACTH and CORT levels were decreased in
the EA group compared with the model group. Moreover, AVP and AVPR1b protein
levels in the pituitary gland were increased in the model group and decreased in 
the EA group. Further, a distinct increase in the AVP and AVPR1a protein levels
was observed in the model group, whereas they were significantly decreased in the
EA group. Blockade of AVPR1b by nelivaptan reduced the increase of ACTH and CORT.
D [Leu(4) , Lys(8) ] vasopressin can inhibit the effect of EA in rectification of
the hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis.
CONCLUSIONS: EA application at ST36 and SP6 can ameliorate the hyperactivity of
the HPA axis via AVP signaling during the perioperative period.

© 2015 The Authors. Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface published
by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Neuromodulation Society.

PMID: 26573696  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142504. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142504.
eCollection 2015.

Complete Genomic and Lysis-Cassette Characterization of the Novel Phage,
KBNP1315, which Infects Avian Pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC).

Lee JS(1), Jang HB(2), Kim KS(3), Kim TH(3), Im SP(1), Kim SW(1), Lazarte JM(1), 
Kim JS(1), Jung TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Diseases, Institute of Animal Medicine, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 660-701, South
Korea. (2)Laboratory of Gene Technology, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 21,
3001, Leuven, Belgium. (3)KBNP Technology Institute, KBNP, Inc., Yesan,
Choongcheongnam-do, South Korea.

Avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) is a major pathogen that causes avian
colibacillosis and is associated with severe economic losses in the
chicken-farming industry. Here, bacteriophage KBNP1315, infecting APEC strain
KBP1315, was genomically and functionally characterized. The evolutionary
relationships of KBNP1315 were analyzed at the genomic level using gene
(protein)-sharing networks, the Markov clustering (MCL) algorithm, and
comparative genomics. Our network analysis showed that KBNP1315 was connected to 
30 members of the Autographivirinae subfamily, which comprises the SP6-, T7-,
P60-, phiKMV-, GAP227- and KP34-related groups. Network decomposition suggested
that KBNP1315 belongs to the SP6-like phages, but our comparison of putative
encoded proteins revealed that key proteins of KBNP1315, including the tail spike
protein and endolysin, had relative low levels of amino acid sequence similarity 
with other members of the SP6-like phages. Thus KBNP1315 may only be distantly
related to the SP6-like phages, and (based on the difference in endolysin) its
lysis mechanism may differ from theirs. To characterize the lytic functions of
the holin and endolysin proteins from KBNP1315, we expressed these proteins
individually or simultaneously in E. coli BL21 (DE3) competent cell.
Interestingly, the expressed endolysin was secreted into the periplasm and caused
a high degree of host cell lysis that was dose-dependently delayed/blocked by
NaN3-mediated inhibition of the SecA pathway. The expressed holin triggered only 
a moderate inhibition of cell growth, whereas coexpression of holin and endolysin
enhanced the lytic effect of endolysin. Together, these results revealed that
KBNP1315 appears to use a pin-holin/signal-arrest-release (SAR) endolysin pathway
to trigger host cell lysis.

PMCID: PMC4640515
PMID: 26555076  [PubMed - in process]


23. Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2015 Aug 24;17(8):e28691. doi: 10.5812/ircmj.28691.
eCollection 2015.

Effect of Acupressure on Cervical Ripening.

Torkzahrani S(1), Ghobadi K(2), Heshmat R(3), Shakeri N(4), Jalali Aria K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, IR Iran. (2)Counseling and Reproductive
Health Research Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, IR Iran 
; Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, IR Iran. (3)Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, IR Iran ; Acupuncture Medicine
Association, Tehran, IR Iran. (4)Acupuncture Medicine Association, Tehran, IR
Iran ; Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, IR Iran. (5)Counseling and
Reproductive Health Research Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences,
Gorgan, IR Iran ; Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery,
Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, IR Iran.

BACKGROUND: Cervical ripening is one of the main stages of initiation labor.
Acupressure in Chinese medicine is considered as an invasive technique, which
through reliving oxytocin ripens the cervix. Acupoint Sanyinjiao (SP6) was
selected in this study because it is the acupoint selected in gynecology and it
is easy for women to locate and apply pressure without medical assistance.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the effect of acupressure on
cervical ripening.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this randomized clinical trial, 150 primigravida with
term pregnancy who had referred to Deziani hospital in Gorgan were chosen and
divided to three groups: in the first group acupressure was done by the
researcher while in the second groups this was performed by the mother her self, 
and the third group served as a control and only received routine care. For both 
intervention groups the pressure was applied on Sp6 for about 20 minutes during
one to five days. Elements were checked from cervical ripening at 48 and 96 hours
after intervention and at the time of hospitalization. The tools for gathering
information included demographic characteristics and midwifery history
questionnaire, daily records and follow up forms. Content validity was used for
validity of tools. Reliability of the observation check-list and physical
examination was confirmed by inter-rater scores (inter observer), and daily
records by test-re-test. Data was analyzed by analysis of variance (ANOVA),
Kruskal-Wallis and Chi-squared tests (P = 0.05).
RESULTS: There was a significant difference between mothers' educations in the
three groups. Most of the mothers (59.5%) in the researcher-performed acupressure
group had secondary education. Cervical ripening was significantly different
between the three groups after 48 hours (P = 0.05), yet there was no significant 
difference after 96 hours and at the time of admission. Mean Bishop score was
enhanced after 48 hours in the researcher-performed acupressure group (P = 0.021)
and the self-performed acupressure group (P = 0.007) in comparison to the control
group.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that acupressure is a safe technique and leads to
cervical ripening. Thus, regarding the desired results that were achieved when
mothers applied acupressure themselves, it could be suggested that it is
beneficial for mothers to be trained to apply this method at home.

PMCID: PMC4586896
PMID: 26430530  [PubMed]


24. Poult Sci. 2015 Oct;94(10):2330-8. doi: 10.3382/ps/pev210. Epub 2015 Sep 10.

Are parent-reared red-legged partridges (Alectoris rufa) better candidates for
re-establishment purposes?

Pérez JA(1), Sánchez-García C(2), Díez C(3), Bartolomé DJ(3), Alonso ME(3),
Gaudioso VR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group on Game Species Breeding and Management, Department of Animal
Rearing, School of Veterinary Science, Vegazana Campus, 24071 León, Spain Global 
Sigma S.L., Onzonilla 24231, León, Spain. (2)Research Group on Game Species
Breeding and Management, Department of Animal Rearing, School of Veterinary
Science, Vegazana Campus, 24071 León, Spain Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust,
Burgate Manor, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF, United Kingdom csang@unileon.es.
(3)Research Group on Game Species Breeding and Management, Department of Animal
Rearing, School of Veterinary Science, Vegazana Campus, 24071 León, Spain.

Aiming to produce game birds suitable for re-establishment purposes, we studied
the survival and behavior of 31 adult red-legged partridges reared by their
natural parents in captivity (parent-reared) and 67 wild red-legs (35 adults and 
32 subadults). Birds were radio-tracked and released in a game estate where
management targeting small game species was conducted and shooting was not
allowed. Survival of parent-reared partridges was shorter (mean 108 d) than wild 
adults (mean 160 d), though no significant differences were found. Parent-reared 
birds showed a longer escape reaction (mean 11.7 sec) than wild adults (mean 0.4 
sec) and were mainly predated by terrestrial predators (52%), whereas the most
important source of predation in wild red-legs was raptors (49%). The home range 
of parent-reared (mean 23 ha) was not significantly lower than wild adults (mean 
27 ha). Nineteen percent of parent-reared and 31.4% of wild adults paired
successfully, and we recorded 6 pairs in which one bird was wild and the other
parent-reared and one pair in which both birds were parent-reared. A small
proportion of red-legs started incubation (parent-reared 12.9%, wild 20%), and
the proportion completing incubation was similar among wild and parent-reared
birds. Overall, parent-reared red-legs showed similar survival and behavior
compared to wild red-legs and better than intensively reared, so parent-reared
red-legs should be chosen for the re-establishment of wild populations.

© 2015 Poultry Science Association Inc.

PMID: 26362976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:238790. doi: 10.1155/2015/238790.
Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Influences of Deqi on Immediate Analgesia Effect of Needling SP6 (Sanyinjiao) in 
Patients with Primary Dysmenorrhea in Cold and Dampness Stagnation Pattern: Study
Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial.

Liu YQ(1), Zhang P(2), Xie JP(3), Ma LX(3), Yuan HW(4), Li J(5), Lin C(5), Wang
P(5), Yang GY(5), Zhu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing 100029, China ; Institute of Basic Research in Clinical
Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China.
(2)School of Acupuncture Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing 100029, China ; Beijing Tongren Hospital Affiliated to Capital 
Medical University, Beijing 100730, China. (3)School of Acupuncture Moxibustion
and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100029, China ; The
Key Unit of State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Evaluation of
Characteristic Acupuncture Therapy, Beijing 100029, China. (4)School of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. 
(5)School of Acupuncture Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing 100029, China.

Deqi, according to traditional Chinese medicine, is a specific needle sensation
during the retention of needles at certain acupoints and is considered to be
necessary to produce therapeutic effects from acupuncture. Although some modern
researches have showed that Deqi is essential for producing acupuncture analgesia
and anesthesia, the data are not enough. It is a paper of a multicenter,
randomized controlled study protocol, to evaluate the influences of Deqi on
acupuncture SP6 in Cold and Dampness Stagnation pattern primary dysmenorrhea
patients, in terms of reducing pain and anxiety, and to find out the relationship
between Deqi and the temperature changes at SP6 (Sanyinjiao) and CV4 (Guanyuan). 
The results of this trial will be helpful to explain the role of Deqi in
acupuncture analgesia and may provide a new objective index for measuring Deqi in
the future study. This trial is registered with ChiCTR-TRC-13003086.

PMCID: PMC4534612
PMID: 26294921  [PubMed]


26. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;31(8):1048-52.

[Down-regulation of human intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression in MCF-7
cells infected by lentiviral short hairpin RNA interference vectors].

[Article in Chinese]

Di D(1), Chen L(2), Wang L(1), Wang C(3), Ju J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang 261053, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, Hospital Affiliated to Weifang Medical University,
Weifang 261031, China. (3)Prenatal Diagnosis Laboratory, Weifang People's
Hospital, Weifang 261041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct lentiviral interference vectors of human intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), then infect human breast cancer MCF-7 cells and
identify the interference effects.
METHODS: Three short hairpin RNA (shRNA) interference sequences targeting human
ICAM-1 gene (ICAM-1 shRNA1, ICAM-1 shRNA2 and ICAM-1 shRNA3) and a negative
control sequence (NS) were designed, synthesized and cloned into the
pLKO.1-SP6-PGK-GFP vector. After DNA sequencing, three plasmid-based lentiviral
packaging system (vector plasmid-psPAX2-pMD2.G) was used to transfect HEK293T
cells to package lentiviruses. The supernatants containing viruses were harvested
to detect the viral titer. Human MCF-7 breast cancer cells were infected with the
lentiviruses and the interference efficiency was detected by real-time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting.
RESULTS: PCR showed that the designed sequences were successfully inserted into
the pLKO.1-SP6-PGK-GFP vector and DNA sequencing results were correct. The
qRT-PCR and Western blotting showed that the mRNA and protein expression levels
of ICAM-1 in the infected MCF-7 cells decreased significantly in the ICAM-1
shRNA3 group.
CONCLUSION: Lentiviral interference vectors of human ICAM-1 were constructed
successfully and the expression of ICAM-1 in MCF-7 cells was down-regulated by
ICAM-1 shRNA.

PMID: 26271977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:621490. doi: 10.1155/2015/621490.
Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Research of Herb-Partitioned Moxibustion for Primary Dysmenorrhea Patients Based 
on the LC-MS Metabonomics.

Ma YX(1), Yang XY(1), Guo G(2), Du DQ(3), Yu YP(1), Gao SZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shandong 250355, China.
(2)Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Shandong 250012, China. (3)Jinan
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shandong 250012, China.

Objective. To explore the efficacy and mechanism of primary dysmenorrhea patients
were treated with herb-partitioned moxibustion through metabonomics. Methods. 20 
patients with primary dysmenorrhea were randomized into two groups, separately
treated with herb-partitioned moxibustion at CV8 (shenque) and acupuncture at SP6
(sanyinjiao). After three menstrual cycles' treatment, the intensity of menstrual
pain using VAS and the changes of metabolites of plasma using LC-MS were
observed. Results. The VAS of two groups decreased with different descending
range. Herb-partitioned moxibustion upregulated 20a-dihydroprogesterone,
pregnenolone, prostaglandin E2 and <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid and downregulated the
content of estrone and prostaglandin H2, while acupuncture upregulated
pregnenolone and 20a-dihydroprogesterone and downregulated
2-methoxyestradiol-3-methylether, 15-hydroxyeicosatrienoic acid and
6-keto-prostaglandin. Discussion. It was effective in relieving the abdominal
pain by these two therapies. Herb-partitioned moxibustion is superior to
acupuncture for primary dysmenorrhea, which could be related to regulating the
endocrine hormone.

PMCID: PMC4502312
PMID: 26229545  [PubMed]


28. Vet Parasitol. 2015 Sep 15;212(3-4):267-74. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2015.07.016.
Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Spatial distribution of infectious stages of the nematode Syngamus trachea within
pheasant (Phasianus colchicus) release pens on estates in the South West of
England: Potential density dependence?

Gethings OJ(1), Sage RB(2), Leather SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop & Environment Sciences, Harper Adams University, Edgmond,
Newport TF10 8NB, UK. Electronic address: owengethings@hotmail.co.uk. (2)Game &
Wildlife Conservation Trust, Burgate Manor, Fordingbridge SP6 1EF, UK.
(3)Department of Crop & Environment Sciences, Harper Adams University, Edgmond,
Newport TF10 8NB, UK.

The spatial distribution of the infectious stages of parasites with a direct life
cycle is one of the most important factors influencing infectious disease
dynamics, and acquisition rates will generally increase as the contact time
between parasite and host increases. For animal species that are constrained by
feeding opportunities, one might expect disease patterns to be highly skewed
within confined systems. The aim of the present study was to identify to what
extent, if any, eggs of avian parasites are aggregated within the release pen,
and to evaluate what effect, if any, this aggregation had on the distribution of 
the adult stages within the host species. The abundance of Syngamus trachea eggs 
were highly aggregated within pens, with high levels of contamination driven by a
combination of feeder placement, soil moisture and host-mediated heterogeneities 
in immuno-competence. The log mean and log variance of egg abundance was highly
linear (R(2)=0.97-0.99), with an estimated slope (b) of between 1.79 and 1.97 for
individual sites, and 2.11 when sites were combined, which indicated aggregation 
relative to an estimated Poisson slope of unity. Although the placement of
feeders and environmental moisture could be contributing to parasite aggregation,
density-dependent processes appear to be ensuring the population does not become 
too over or under-dispersed, in order to maintain the transmission-virulence
equilibrium. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to explicitly 
demonstrate the high spatial aggregation of eggs around feeding sites and the
first to suggest possible density-dependent regulatory mechanisms stabilising
disease dynamics between S. trachea and ring necked Pheasants (Phasianus
colchicus).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26220022  [PubMed - in process]


29. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2015 Apr 4;55(4):476-83.

[Detection of CRISPR and its relationship to drug resistance in Shigella].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L, Wang Y, Duan G, Xue Z, Guo X, Wang P, Xi Y, Yang H.

OBJECTIVE: To detect clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) in Shigella, and to analyze its relationship to drug resistance.
METHODS: Four pairs of primers were used for the detection of convincing CRISPR
structures CRISPR-S2 and CRISPR-S4, questionable CRISPR structures CRISPR-S1 and 
CRISPR-S3 in 60 Shigella strains. All primers were designed using sequences in
CRISPR database. CRISPR Finder was used to analyze CRISPR and susceptibilities of
Shigella strains were tested by agar diffusion method. Furthermore, we analyzed
the relationship between drug resistance and CRISPR-S4.
RESULTS: The positive rate of convincing CRISPR structures was 95%. The four
CRISPR loci formed 12 spectral patterns (A-L), all of which contained convincing 
CRISPR structures except type K. We found one new repeat and 12 new spacers. The 
multi-drug resistance rate was 53. 33% . We found no significant difference
between CRISPR-S4 and drug resistant. However, the repeat sequence of CRISPR-S4
in multi- or TE-resistance strains was mainly R4.1 with AC deletions in the 3'
end, and the spacer sequences of CRISPR-S4 in multi-drug resistance strains were 
mainly Sp5.1, Sp6.1 and Sp7.
CONCLUSION: CRISPR was common in Shigella. Variations df repeat sequences and
diversities of spacer sequences might be related to drug resistance in Shigella.

PMID: 26211322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gene. 2015 Nov 15;573(1):91-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.07.031. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

C2H2 zinc finger proteins of the SP/KLF, Wilms tumor, EGR, Huckebein, and
Klumpfuss families in metazoans and beyond.

Pei J(1), Grishin NV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX, USA. Electronic address: jpei@chop.swmed.edu. (2)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA; Department of Biophysics and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Specificity proteins (SPs) and Krüppel-Like Factors (KLFs) are C2H2-type zinc
finger transcription factors that play essential roles in differentiation,
development, proliferation and cell death. SP/KLF proteins, similarly to Wilms
tumor protein 1 (WT1), Early Growth Response (EGR), Huckebein, and Klumpfuss,
prefer to bind GC-rich sequences such as GC-box and CACCC-box (GT-box). We
searched various genomes and transcriptomes of metazoans and single-cell
holozoans for members of these families. Seven groups of KLFs (KLFA-G) and three 
groups of SPs (SPA-C) were identified in the three lineages of Bilateria
(Deuterostomia, Ecdysozoa, and Lophotrochozoa). The last ancestor of jawed
vertebrates was inferred to have at least 18 KLFs (group A: KLF1/2/4/17, group B:
KLF3/8/12; group C: KLF5/5l; group D: KLF6/7; group E: KLF9/13/16; group F:
KLF10/KLF11; group G: KLF15/15l) and 10 SPs (group A: SP1/2/3/4; group B: SP5/5l;
group C: SP6/7/8/9), since they were found in both cartilaginous and boned
fishes. Placental mammals have added KLF14 (group E) and KLF18 (group A), and
lost KLF5l (KLF5-like) and KLF15l (KLF15-like). Multiple KLF members were found
in basal metazoans (Ctenophora, Porifera, Placozoa, and Cnidaria). Ctenophora has
the least number of KLFs and no SPs, which could be attributed to its proposed
sister group relationship to other metazoans or gene loss. While SP, EGR and
Klumpfuss were only detected in metazoans, KLF, WT1, and Huckebein are present in
nonmetazoan holozoans. Of the seven metazoan KLF groups, only KLFG, represented
by KLF15 in human, was found in nonmetazoans. In addition, two nonmetazoan groups
of KLFs are present in Choanoflagellatea and Filasterea. WT1 could be
evolutionarily the earliest among these GC/GT-box-binding families due to its
sole presence in Ichthyosporea.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Glob Chang Biol. 2015 Nov;21(11):3931-50. doi: 10.1111/gcb.13026. Epub 2015 Sep
29.

Influences of extreme weather, climate and pesticide use on invertebrates in
cereal fields over 42 years.

Ewald JA(1), Wheatley CJ(1), Aebischer NJ(1), Moreby SJ(1), Duffield SJ(2), Crick
HQ(3), Morecroft MB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire, SP6 1EF, UK.
(2)Natural England, Cromwell House, Andover Road, Winchester, SO23 7BT, UK.
(3)Natural England, Eastbrook, Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge, CB2 8DR, UK.

Cereal fields are central to balancing food production and environmental health
in the face of climate change. Within them, invertebrates provide key ecosystem
services. Using 42 years of monitoring data collected in southern England, we
investigated the sensitivity and resilience of invertebrates in cereal fields to 
extreme weather events and examined the effect of long-term changes in
temperature, rainfall and pesticide use on invertebrate abundance. Of the 26
invertebrate groups examined, eleven proved sensitive to extreme weather events. 
Average abundance increased in hot/dry years and decreased in cold/wet years for 
Araneae, Cicadellidae, adult Heteroptera, Thysanoptera, Braconidae, Enicmus and
Lathridiidae. The average abundance of Delphacidae, Cryptophagidae and
Mycetophilidae increased in both hot/dry and cold/wet years relative to other
years. The abundance of all 10 groups usually returned to their long-term trend
within a year after the extreme event. For five of them, sensitivity to cold/wet 
events was lowest (translating into higher abundances) at locations with a
westerly aspect. Some long-term trends in invertebrate abundance correlated with 
temperature and rainfall, indicating that climate change may affect them.
However, pesticide use was more important in explaining the trends, suggesting
that reduced pesticide use would mitigate the effects of climate change.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26149473  [PubMed - in process]


32. Methods Enzymol. 2015;558:417-63. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.02.010. Epub 2015 May 
5.

Studying RNA-Protein Interactions of Pre-mRNA Complexes by Mass Spectrometry.

Qamar S(1), Kramer K(1), Urlaub H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Department of Cellular Biochemistry,
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany; Bioanalytics 
Research Group, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center,
Göttingen, Germany. (2)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Department of
Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen,
Germany; Bioanalytics Research Group, Institute for Clinical Chemistry,
University Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address:
henning.urlaub@mpibpc.mpg.de.

RNA-protein interactions play a crucial role in gene expression. These
interactions take place in so-called ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. To
investigate which proteins interact with RNA in these complexes, and how they do 
so, UV-light-induced cross-linking has proven to be a valuable, yet
straightforward technique. UV irradiation induces a covalent bond between the RNA
and the proteins, whereafter cross-linked proteins can be identified by mass
spectrometric (MS) approaches. Moreover, the cross-linked region of the protein, 
and often the actual cross-linked amino acid, can be identified by
state-of-the-art MS, as can the cross-linked RNA moiety. This protocol describes 
in detail how to isolate peptide-RNA oligonucleotide cross-links from
UV-irradiated human pre-mRNA RNPs and to perform the subsequent MS investigation 
of these peptide-RNA conjugates in combination with a dedicated computational
analysis, in order to obtain sequence information about the cross-linked peptide 
and oligoribonucleotide. The described workflow can be applied to any RNP,
irrespective of its origin, e.g., RNPs assembled in vitro (as described here) or 
RNPs isolated from UV-irradiated cells, either ex vivo or in vivo.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26068749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;35(4):425-8.

[Relief of urinary retention after radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer
patients by acupressure: a randomized controlled trial].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HF, Wang DB, Chen YH, Zhou MY.

OBJECTIVE: To study whether acupressure could relieve urinary retention after
radical hysterectomy in cervical cancer patients.
METHODS: A randomized controlled prospective double-blinded trial was carried out
in 107 urinary retention patients undergoing grade III radical hysterectomy. They
were assigned to Group A (positive acupoints, 40 cases), Group B (negative
acupoints, 32 cases) , and Group C (with no acupoints, 35 cases). All patients
received protective 115 000 potassium permanganate sitz bath, 15 - 20 min each
time, 3 times per day. Patients in Group A received acupressure at positive
points [liniao point and Qihai (RN6)] combined points by syndrome typing
[Guanyuan (RN4) , Zhongji (RN3) , Shenshu (BL23) , Zusanli (ST36), Sanyinjiao
(SP6), and Taixi (K13)]. Patients in Group B received negative acupressure at
sham-acupoints (for adjusting gastrointestinal functions). Patients in Group C
only received conventional sitz bath. All medication was performed 3 times per
day, 7 days as one therapeutic course, 21 days in total. The residual urine
volume was detected. The recovery time for bladder function was recorded. The
average residual urine volume was also recorded at day 7, 14, and 21.
RESULTS: Compared with Group B and C, the time for ureter retention was shortened
for mild and severe CKD patients in Group A (P <0. 01). The residual urine volume
was also lessened for mild and severe CKD patients in Group A at day 7, 14, and
21 (P <0.01).
CONCLUSION: Cervical cancer patients could relieve urinary retention by
self-acupressure after radical hysterectomy.

PMID: 26043564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 May;56(5):3085-94. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-15930.

Differential Radiosensitivity of Uveal Melanoma Cell Lines After X-rays or Carbon
Ions Radiation.

Calipel A(1), Lux AL(2), Guérin S(3), Lefaix JL(4), Laurent C(5), Bernaudin M(1),
Mouriaux F(6).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy group, Caen, France 2Université de Caen
Basse-Normandie, CNRS, UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy group, Caen, France 3CEA, CNRS,
UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy group, Caen, France. (2)CNRS, UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy
group, Caen, France 2Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, CNRS, UMR6301-ISTCT,
CERVOxy group, Caen, France 3CEA, CNRS, UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy group, Caen,
France 4CHU de Caen, Service d'Ophtalmologie, Caen, France. (3)Centre
Universitaire d'Ophtalmologie-Recherche, Axe Médecine Régénératrice, Centre de
Recherche FRQS du CHU de Québec, Québec, Canada 6Département d'Ophtalmologie,
Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada. (4)CEA-DSV-IRCM - 
LARIA, GANIL, Caen, France. (5)SAPHYN/ARCHADE, Caen, France. (6)CNRS,
UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy group, Caen, France 3CEA, CNRS, UMR6301-ISTCT, CERVOxy
group, Caen, France 5Centre Universitaire d'Ophtalmologie-Recherche, Axe Médecine
Régénératrice, Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU de Québec, Québec, Canada
6Département d'O.

PURPOSE: We compared the radiosensitivity of uveal melanoma (UM) cell lines after
x-ray or carbon-ions radiation (C-ions).
METHODS: We characterized the radiosensitivity toward x-rays and C-ions of UM
cell lines: 92.1, MEL270, SP6.5, MKT-BR, µ2, and TP17. Normal choroidal
melanocytes and the retinal pigment epithelial cell line ARPE19 were used as
controls for normal cells. X-rays were delivered with an energy of 6 MV at a dose
rate of 2 Gy/min. X-rays served as a reference for Relative Biological
Effectiveness (RBE) evaluation. Radiation with C-ions was delivered at 75 MeV/u
(34 keV/µm) at a dose rate of 2 Gy/min. After single-doses (0-8 Gy) of medical
x-rays (6 MV) or C-ions (33 keV/µm), cells sensitivity was measured using
standard colony formation assay, and cell growth was examined by counting the
cell colonies. The effect of x-rays or C-ions on the expression and activation of
ERK1/2 was evaluated by Western Blot.
RESULTS: C-ions presented with regard to the x-rays a RBE of 1.9 to 2.5 at 10% of
UM cells survival. The x-ray sensitivity of UM cells was neither influenced by
the synchronization of cells in phase G0/G1 of the cell cycle nor by the level of
oxygenation. X-ray and C-ions radiation had the same effects on cell cycle
leading to a mitotic catastrophe that appeared earlier after C-ions than x-ray
treatment. However, C-ions radiation induced a sustained inhibition of ERK1/2
activation compared to the transitory induction of that signalization pathway
after x-ray radiation.
CONCLUSIONS: This in vitro study shows that C-ions had a better biological
effectiveness than x-rays leading to a sustained inhibition of the ERK1/2
pathway.

PMID: 26024093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Infect Immun. 2015 Aug;83(8):3176-83. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00532-15. Epub 2015 May
26.

Chlamydial variants differ in ability to ascend the genital tract in the guinea
pig model of chlamydial genital infection.

Yeruva L(1), Bowlin AK(2), Spencer N(1), Maurelli AT(3), Rank RG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and
Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences and Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute, Little Rock,
Arkansas, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, F. Edward Hébert
School of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and Arkansas Children's Hospital Research
Institute, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA rankrogerg@uams.edu.

An important question in the study of chlamydial genital tract disease is why
some women develop severe upper tract disease while others have mild or even
"silent" infections with or without pathology. Animal studies suggest that the
pathological outcome of an infection is dependent upon both the composition of
the infecting chlamydial population and the genotype of the host, along with host
physiological effects, such as the cyclical production of reproductive hormones
and even the size of the infecting inoculum or the number of repeated infections.
In this study, we compared two variants of Chlamydia caviae, contrasting in
virulence, with respect to their abilities to ascend the guinea pig genital
tract. We then determined the effect of combining the two variants on the course 
of infection and on the bacterial loads of the two variants in the genital tract.
Although the variants individually had similar infection kinetics in the cervix, 
SP6, the virulent variant, could be isolated from the oviducts more often and in 
greater numbers than the attenuated variant, AZ2. SP6 also elicited higher levels
of interleukin 8 (IL-8) in the lower genital tract and increased leukocyte
infiltration in the cervix and uterus compared to AZ2. When the two variants were
combined in a mixed infection, SP6 outcompeted AZ2 in the lower genital tract;
however, AZ2 was able to ascend the genital tract as readily as SP6. These data
suggest that the ability of SP6 to elicit an inflammatory response in the lower
genital tract facilitates the spread of both variants to the oviducts.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4496626
PMID: 26015484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Anim Ecol. 2015 Nov;84(6):1480-9. doi: 10.1111/1365-2656.12401. Epub 2015 Jun
25.

Diet complexity in early life affects survival in released pheasants by altering 
foraging efficiency, food choice, handling skills and gut morphology.

Whiteside MA(1,)(2), Sage R(2), Madden JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Animal Behaviour, Psychology, University of Exeter,
Exeter, EX4 4QG, UK. (2)Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust, Burgate Manor,
Fordingbridge, Hampshire, SP6 1EF, UK.

Behavioural and physiological deficiencies are major reasons why reintroduction
programmes suffer from high mortality when captive animals are used. Mitigation
of these deficiencies is essential for successful reintroduction programmes. Our 
study manipulated early developmental diet to better replicate foraging behaviour
in the wild. Over 2 years, we hand-reared 1800 pheasants (Phasianus colchicus),
from 1 day old, for 7 weeks under different dietary conditions. In year one, 900 
pheasants were divided into three groups and reared with (i) commercial chick
crumb, (ii) crumb plus 1% live mealworm or (iii) crumb plus 5% mixed seed and
fruit. In year two, a further 900 pheasants were divided into two groups and
reared with (i) commercial chick crumb or (ii) crumb plus a combination of 1%
mealworm and 5% mixed seed and fruit. In both years, the commercial chick crumb
acted as a control treatment, whilst those with live prey and mixed seeds and
fruits mimicking a more naturalistic diet. After 7 weeks reared on these diets,
pheasants were released into the wild. Postrelease survival was improved with
exposure to more naturalistic diets prior to release. We identified four
mechanisms to explain this. Pheasants reared with more naturalistic diets (i)
foraged for less time and had a higher likelihood of performing vigilance
behaviours, (ii) were quicker at handling live prey items, (iii) were less
reliant on supplementary feed which could be withdrawn and (iv) developed
different gut morphologies. These mechanisms allowed the pheasants to (i) reduce 
the risk of predation by reducing exposure time whilst foraging and allowing more
time to be vigilant; (ii) be better at handling and discriminating natural food
items and not be solely reliant on supplementary feed; and (iii) have a better
gut system to cope with the natural forage after the cessation of supplementary
feeding in the spring. Learning food discrimination, preference and handling
skills by the provision of a more naturalistic diet is essential prior to the
release of pheasants in a reintroduction programme. Subsequent diet, foraging
behaviour, gut morphology and digestive capabilities all work together as one
nutritional complex. Simple manipulations during early development can influence 
these characteristics to better prepare an individual for survival upon release.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Animal Ecology © 2015 British Ecological Society.

PMID: 25994283  [PubMed - in process]


37. Immunology. 2015 Sep;146(1):33-49. doi: 10.1111/imm.12477. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Autologous cellular vaccine overcomes cancer immunoediting in a mouse model of
myeloma.

Mazzocco M(1), Martini M(1), Rosato A(2,)(3), Stefani E(1), Matucci A(1), Dalla
Santa S(3), De Sanctis F(1), Ugel S(1), Sandri S(1), Ferrarini G(1), Cestari
T(1), Ferrari S(4), Zanovello P(2,)(3), Bronte V(1), Sartoris S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. 
(2)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padua,
Padua, Italy. (3)Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV - IRCCS, Padua, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurological and Movement Sciences, University of Verona,
Verona, Italy.

In the Sp6 mouse plasmacytoma model, a whole-cell vaccination with Sp6 cells
expressing de novo B7-1 (Sp6/B7) induced anatomically localized and cytotoxic T
cell (CTL)-mediated protection against wild-type (WT) Sp6. Both WT Sp6 and Sp6/B7
showed down-regulated expression of MHC H-2 L(d). Increase of H-2 L(d) expression
by cDNA transfection (Sp6/B7/L(d)) raised tumour immune protection and shifted
most CTL responses towards H-2 L(d)-restricted antigenic epitopes. The
tumour-protective responses were not specific for the H-2 L(d)-restricted
immunodominant AH1 epitope of the gp70 common mouse tumour antigen, although WT
Sp6 and transfectants were able to present it to specific T cells in vitro. Gp70 
transcripts, absent in secondary lymphoid organs of naive mice, were detected in 
immunized mice as well as in splenocytes from naive mice incubated in vitro with 
supernatants of CTL-lysed Sp6 cell cultures, containing damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs). It has been shown that Toll-like receptor triggering 
induces gp70 expression. Damage-associated molecular patterns are released by
CTL-mediated killing of Sp6/B7-Sp6/B7/L(d) cells migrated to draining lymph nodes
during immunization and may activate gp70 expression and presentation in most
resident antigen-presenting cells. The same could also apply for Mus musculus
endogenous ecotropic murine leukaemia virus 1 particles present in Sp6-cytosol,
discharged by dying cells and superinfecting antigen-presenting cells. The
outcome of such a massive gp70 cross-presentation would probably be tolerogenic
for the high-affinity AH1-gp70-specific CTL clones. In this scenario, autologous 
whole-tumour-cell vaccines rescue tumour-specific immunoprotection by
amplification of subdominant tumour antigen responses when those against the
immune dominant antigens are lost.

© 2015 The Authors. Immunology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4552499 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25959091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Glob J Health Sci. 2015 Jan 26;7(4):375-81. doi: 10.5539/gjhs.v7n4p375.

Effect of acupressure on fatigue in women with multiple sclerosis.

Bastani F, Sobhani M, Emamzadeh Ghasemi HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tehran university of medical sciences. emamzade@sina.tums.ac.ir.

INTRODUCTION: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common cause of progressive
neurological disability. The prevalence of MS is much more common in women than
men. The women are exposed to a variety of symptoms including fatigue.
Acupressure is a noninvasive procedure that can be used to control symptoms
including fatigue. The aim of the study was to evaluate the effect of acupressure
on fatigue in women with multiple sclerosis.
METHODS: A randomized clinical trial was conducted on 100 women with MS at Tehran
MS Association. The subjects were equally allocated to experimental group and a
placebo group (50 women per group) by blocking randomization method. The
experimental group were received acupressure, at the true points (ST36, SP6, LI4)
and the placebo group, were received touching at the same points. Fatigue was
measured by a Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) in the groups at immediately prior to,
two and four weeks after the beginning of the intervention. The data was analyzed
using descriptive and inferential statistics by SPSS version 17.
RESULTS: The findings indicated no differences in demographic characteristics and
the severity of fatigue at the baseline in two groups (p=0.54). But there were
significant reductions of the mean score of fatigue in the experimental group
compared to the placebo group immediately, two and four weeks after the
intervention respectively (p=0.03, p?0/001, p=0.04).
CONCLUSION: According to the findings, the study provided an alternative method
for health care providers including nurses to train acupressure to the clients
with MS to managing their fatigue.

PMID: 25946938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Acupunct Med. 2015 Aug;33(4):254-61. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2014-010633. Epub 2015 
Apr 21.

Acupuncture for melasma in women: a systematic review of randomised controlled
trials.

Chai Q(1), Fei Y(1), Cao H(1), Wang C(1), Tian J(2), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Evidence-Based Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing, China. (2)The 3rd Department of Neurology, Dongzhimen
Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Melasma is a common facial skin disorder seen in women. Manual
acupuncture (MA) is widely used alone or in combination with conventional
treatments for melasma in China.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness and safety of MA for melasma, and explore
the range of treatments applied.
METHODS: Six databases were searched systematically for randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) on acupuncture for melasma in women up to November 2014. RevMan
software was used for data analysis. The Cochrane tool of Risk of Bias was used
to assess the methodological quality of the RCTs.
RESULTS: Eight RCTs involving 587 women were included. Seven studies used the
encircling needling method, four studies used the quick needling method and four 
studies used intensive needle manipulations. Five studies provided individualised
acupuncture treatments. Points used with highest frequency were SP6, ST36 and
SP10. MA was compared with oral tranexamic acid, vitamin C and E, vitamin C and
tamoxifen, topical 20% azelaic acid, hydroquinone, vitamin A and no treatment.
Studies were too heterogeneous to conduct a meta-analysis. For global outcome
measures, seven trials showed that MA groups were significantly better than the
conventional treatments either with a better cure rate or with a better combined 
cure rate and markedly effective rate, and one trial did not (MA vs vitamin A).
No acupuncture-related adverse events were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: MA appeared to be beneficial and safe for women with melasma, but
insufficient evidence was found to reach conclusions. The encircling needling
method, the quick needling method, intensive needle manipulations and
individualised points' selection were widely used. Well-designed trials are
required.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO Systematic review registration:
CRD42013006396.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25900923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):702-14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.117. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Androgen signaling is a confounding factor for ß-catenin-mediated prostate
tumorigenesis.

Lee SH(1), Luong R(2), Johnson DT(1), Cunha GR(3), Rivina L(1), Gonzalgo ML(1),
Sun Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA. (2)Department of Comparative Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. (3)Department of Urology, School of Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Emerging evidence has demonstrated the critical roles for both androgen and Wnt
pathways in prostate tumorigenesis. A recent integrative genomic analysis of
human prostate cancers (PCas) has revealed a unique enrichment of androgen and
Wnt signaling in early-onset PCas, implying their clinical significance in the
disease. Additionally, interaction between the androgen receptor (AR) and
ß-catenin has long been detected in PCa cells. However, the consequence of this
interaction in prostate tumorigenesis is still unknown. Because mutations in
adenomatous polyposis coli, ß-catenin and other components of the destruction
complex are generally rare in PCas, other mechanisms of aberrant Wnt signaling
activation have been speculated. To address these critical questions, we
developed Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+)/R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 mice, in which transgenic AR and
stabilized ß-catenin are co-expressed in prostatic epithelial cells. We observed 
accelerated tumor development, aggressive tumor invasion and a decreased survival
rate in Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+)/R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 compound mice compared with
age-matched Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+):PB-Cre4 littermate controls, which only have
stabilized ß-catenin expression in the prostate. Castration of the above
transgenic mice resulted in significant tumor regression, implying an essential
role of androgen signaling in tumor growth and maintenance. Implantation of the
prostatic epithelial cells isolated from the transgenic mice regenerated prostate
intraepithelial neoplasias and prostatic adenocarcinoma lesions. Microarray
analyses of transcriptional profiles showed more robust enrichment of known
tumor- and metastasis-promoting genes: Spp1, Egr1, c-Myc, Sp5, and Sp6 genes, in 
samples isolated from Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+)/R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 compound mice than
those from Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+):PB-Cre4 and R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 littermate controls. 
Together, these data demonstrate a confounding role of androgen signaling in
ß-catenin-initiated oncogenic transformation in prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4615253 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 25893287  [PubMed - in process]


41. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2015 Jan;35(1):98-103.

[Gastric dynamics analysis of TEAS combined SNP induced general anesthesia when
controlled hypotension dropped to 60% of the MAP baseline].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang LL, Fang JQ, Shao X, Lian LL, Yu XJ, Dong ZH, Mo YD.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of gastric dynamics by transcutaneous electrical
acupoint stimulation (TEAS) combined general anesthesia when controlled
hypotension dropped to 60% of the mean arterial prenssure (MAP) baseline, and to 
provide experimental evidence for organ protection in clinical controlled
hypotension.
METHODS: Eighteen male beagles were randomly divided into three groups, the
general anesthesia group (blank), the general anesthesia induced controlled
hypotension group (control), and the general anesthesia combined TEAS induced
controlled hypotension group (experiment), 6 in each group. Controlled
hypotension was performed in the latter two groups with isoflurane inhalation and
intravenous injection of sodium nitroprusside (SNP). The mean arterial pressure
(MAP) was lowered to 60% of the MAP baseline and kept for 60 min. Controlled
hypotension was not performed in Beagles of the control group. For Beagles in the
experiment group, TEAS [2/100 Hz, (4 ± 1) mA] was applied to bilateral Hegu
(LI4), Quchi (LI11), Zusanli (ST36), and Sanyinjiao (SP6) from stable
physiological conditions to the end of maintaining stages. Changes of EGG
frequencies and EGG amplitudes were monitored. Serum levels of gastrin (GAS) and 
motilin (MTL) were also detected at corresponding time points during and after
experiment.
RESULTS: As for the pressure control effect of TEAS combined general anesthesia
in the controlled hypotension, during the process of controlled hypotension
(T1-T4), MAP levels of two controlled pressure groups remained relatively stable,
and were kept at 60% of the MAP baseline. When the blood pressure dropped to the 
target low MAP and maintained at 60 min (T1-T4), EGG amplitudes of Beagles in all
the three groups showed decreasing tendency. But it was more obviously lower than
its basic level in the control group (P <0.05), while it was not obviously
decreased in the experiment group (P < 0.05). EGG frequencies of Beagles in all
the three groups showed no obvious change during this stage. By the end of the
MAP rising stage (T8), the EGG amplitude of the experimental group was
significantly higher than that of the control group and the blank group (P <
0.05), while it didn' t show any obvious increase in the control group. During
this period, EGG frequencies of the two controlled hypotension groups decreased
more than those of the blank group. Two h after rising blood pressure (at T9),
EGG amplitudes and frequencies in the two controlled hypotension groups basically
restored to their respective baselines and levels of the blank group at T9. At 2 
h (T9) after controlled hypotension, serum levels of GAS and MTL were lower than 
those of basic levels in the two controlled hypotension groups (P <0.05).
However, serum levels of GAS and MTL had an increasing trend in the two
controlled hypotension groups at 24-72 h (T10-T12). Besides, the increasing speed
and amplitude was better in experiment group than in the control group at
T10-T12. However, there was no statistical difference between the two groups (P >
0.05). At 72 h (T12) serum levels of GAS and MTL had basically restored to their 
basic levels in the two controlled hypotension groups and that of the blank
control group.
CONCLUSION: EGG amplitudes could be effectively improved in TEAS combined general
anesthesia for controlled hypotension at 60% of the MAP baseline, the recovery of
the serum GAS level accelerated, gastric power improved and stomach protected.

PMID: 25790683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Pharmacopuncture. 2014 Jun;17(2):27-33. doi: 10.3831/KPI.2014.17.013.

Effects of Sumsu (Bufonis venenum) Pharmacopuncture Treatment on Depression in
Mice.

Choi MJ(1), Kim KN(1), Lee JE(1), Suh JW(1), Kim SC(2), Kwon KR(3), Cho SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, College of Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Acupuncture & Moxibustion, Wonkwang
Gwangju Oriental Medical Hospital, Gwangju, Korea. (3)Research Center of
Pharmacopuncture Medicine, Korean Pharmacopuncture Institute, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Neuropsychiatry, College of Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea ; Department of Neuropsychiatry, Hospital of Korean
Medicine, Kyung Hee University Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: The main objective of this study was to evaluate the anti-depressant 
effects of pharmacopuncture using sumsu (Bufonis venenum).
METHODS: Animals were divided into three groups (control, sham, and
experimental), with eight mice per group. The sham and the experimental groups
were exposed to 2 hours of immobilization stress daily for 14 days. They were
also injected with normal saline (sham) or subjected to pharmacopuncture with
sumsu at the acupoints HT7, SP6, and GV20 (experimental). The depression or
anxiety-like behaviors of the mice in each group were evaluated 1 day after
treatment.
RESULTS: There was no difference in locomotor activity between the groups during 
the open-field test; i.e., all groups had normal motor function. However, the
open-field and the forced-swimming tests revealed that depression and
anxiety-like behaviors were decreased significantly in the group treated with
sumsu pharmacopuncture.
CONCLUSION: Sumsu pharmacopuncture attenuated depressive or anxiety-like behavior
in mice stressed with chronic immobilization. These results suggest that sumsu
pharmacopuncture has therapeutic potential for treating neuropsychiatric
disorders such as anxiety or depression disorder.

PMCID: PMC4331994
PMID: 25780696  [PubMed]


43. Rev Saude Publica. 2015;49:9. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Effects of acupressure on progress of labor and cesarean section rate: randomized
clinical trial.

Mafetoni RR, Shimo AK.

OBJECTIVE To analyze the effects of acupressure at the SP6 point on labor
duration and cesarean section rates in parturients served in a public maternity
hospital. METHODS This controlled, randomized, double-blind, pragmatic clinical
trial involved 156 participants with gestational age = 37 weeks, cervical
dilation = 4 cm, and = 2 contractions in 10 min. The women were randomly divided 
into an acupressure, placebo, or control group at a university hospital in an
inland city in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 2013. Acupressure was applied
to the SP6 point during contractions for 20 min. RESULTS The average labor
duration was significantly different between the SP6 acupressure group [221.5 min
(SD = 162.4)] versus placebo [397.9 min (SD = 265.6)] and versus control [381.9
min (SD = 358.3)] (p = 0.0047); however, the groups were similar regarding the
cesarean section rates (p = 0.2526) and Apgar scores in the first minute (p =
0.9542) and the fifth minute (p = 0.7218) of life of the neonate. CONCLUSIONS The
SP6 acupressure point proved to be a complementary measure to induce labor and
may shorten the labor duration without causing adverse effects to the mother or
the newborn. However, it did not affect the cesarean section rate.

PMCID: PMC4386552
PMID: 25741644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Dec 1;7(12):8899-904. eCollection 2014.

Diagnostic implications of Ki-67 expression in adipocytes and lipoblasts: an
immunohistochemical study.

Wang HJ(1), Li CY(2), Wang YK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yexian First People's Hospital Yexian 467200, Henan, 
China. (2)Department of Pathology, 152 Hospital of PLA Room 42, Jianshe Road,
Pingdingshan 467000, Henan, China. (3)Department of Pathology, 150 Hospital of
PLA Luoyang 471031, Henan, China.

Ki-67 expression is an important tool for distinguishing between malignant and
benign tumors. It usually shows the nuclear staining. However, the cell membrane 
staining of MIB-1, which is one of the clones of Ki-67, in the hyalinizing
trabecular adenoma of the thyroid gland and other tumors had also been reported. 
In our practice, we found that the 7B11 antibody could be immunoreactived with
the adipose tissues inside or around tumors in the membrane. Thus, in this study,
we determined if Ki-67 expression would be useful in recognizing the lipoblasts
and adipocytes. The five clones of the Ki-67 antibody, namely, 7B11, K-2, SP5,
MIB-1, and SP6 were selected. The adipocytes showed strong 7B11 staining in the
cell membrane. The brown fat cells were strongly immunoreactive with 7B11 in the 
arachnoid layer of the cytoplasm. The adipocytes and brown fat cells showed
positive, albeit weaker K-2 staining in the cell membrane and cytoplasm,
respectively, compared to 7B11. The adipose tissues and brown fat cells were
non-reactive to clones SP5, MIB-1, and SP6. All adipocytes in the lipomas,
angiolipomas, uterine lipoleiomyomas, and angioleiomyolipomas showed diffusedly
positive 7B11 and K-2 staining in the cell membrane, with stronger
immunoreactivity to 7B11 compared with K-2. All hibernomas showed diffusedly
cytoplasmic arachnoid staining of 7B11, but only focal to K-2. The lipoblasts in 
adipocytic tumors also showed positive 7B11 and K-2 staining; however, nearly all
of the vacuolated lipoblasts showed strong 7B11 staining, only focal vacuolated
lipoblasts in the adipocytic tumors were immunoreactive to K-2 positivity. All
other components of the adipocytic tumors were non-reactive to 7B11, K-2, SP5,
MIB-1, and SP6 in the cell membrane and cytoplasm. Our results showed that the
7B11 could well help to identify the lipoblasts, which would be useful to
diagnose the malignant adipocytic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4313985
PMID: 25674262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Trials. 2015 Jan 30;16:35. doi: 10.1186/s13063-015-0552-1.

Use of moxibustion to treat primary dysmenorrhea at two interventional times:
study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.

Yang J(1), Yu S(2), Lao L(3), Yang M(4), Chen J(5,)(6), Luo X(7), Wang Y(8), Chen
X(9), Li J(10), Zhu L(11), Zheng Q(12), Hu Y(13), Wu X(14), Liang F(15).

Author information: 
(1)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road,
Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China. jenny_yang_jie@126.com.
(2)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road,
Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China. 380895114@qq.com. (3)School of 
Chinese Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 10 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong, China. lxlao1@hku.hk. (4)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072,
China. mingxiaoyang@hotmail.com. (5)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072,
China. abchen@hku.hk. (6)School of Chinese Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
10 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. abchen@hku.hk. (7)Chengdu University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu,
Sichuan, 610072, China. 16959188@qq.com. (8)Chengdu University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan,
610072, China. 825506684@qq.com. (9)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072,
China. 1143026181@qq.com. (10)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China.
785939016@qq.com. (11)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, NO.37, 
Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China.
zlhcdzy2012@163.com. (12)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China.
zhengqianhua@gmail.com. (13)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China.
hypcdutcm@yeah.net. (14)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
NO.37, Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China.
wuxi403@126.com. (15)Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, NO.37,
Shierqiao Road, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610072, China.
acuresearch@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Dysmenorrhea is a common menstrual complaint among adolescent girls
and women of reproductive age. The treatment of dysmenorrhea is typically
selected from multidisciplinary options, including complementary and alternative 
medicine such as acupuncture and moxibustion. However, there are few published
randomized controlled trials concerning moxibustion treatment for dysmenorrhea.
This trial aims to investigate the efficacy and safety of moxibustion for primary
dysmenorrhea, and to identify the optimal time of moxibustion treatment for
primary dysmenorrhea.
METHODS/DESIGN: This protocol is for a randomized controlled trial in which the
assessor and statistician will be blinded. A total of 222 eligible patients with 
dysmenorrhea will be randomly assigned to three groups in a 1:1:1 ratio as
treatment group A (treated before menstruation onset), treatment group B (treated
at the onset of menstruation), or control group C (waiting list group). The
participants assigned to the treatment groups will receive suspended moxibustion 
treatment at Sanyinjiao (SP6) and Guanyuan (CV4), while the waiting list group
will not receive moxibustion treatment until the completion of the study. The
trial period will consist of three baseline menstrual cycles, three menstrual
cycles of treatment, and three menstrual cycles in the follow-up period. The
primary outcome will be measured by changes in the Cox Menstrual Symptom Scale
and the secondary outcomes will be measured using the Visual Analogue Scale, Cox 
Retrospective Symptom Scale, diary entries, the Self-rating Depression Scale, and
the Self-rating Anxiety Scale. The safety of moxibustion will be assessed at
every visit.
DISCUSSION: This trial aims to assess the effectiveness and safety of moxibustion
for primary dysmenorrhea, as well as to determine whether the optimal time of
treatment for primary dysmenorrhea in clinical practice is before or after the
onset of menstrual pain.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Register: ChiCTR-TRC-14004627 ,
registered on 9 May 2014.

PMCID: PMC4347976
PMID: 25633584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Jan;35(1):133-6.

[Effects of electro-acupuncture on expression of triggering receptor expressed on
myeloid cells 1 in ankle joint synovial tissue of acute gouty arthritis rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang CN(1), Huang XK, Luo Y, Jiang J, Wan L, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)College of TCM, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 401331, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of electro-acupuncture (EA) on the
expression of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cell (TREM)l in ankle
joint synovial tissue of acute gouty arthritis (AGA) rats.
METHODS: Forty male SD rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: normal, AGA,
medication and EA group, 10 rats in each group. AGA model was established by
induced monosodium urate (MSU) method, except the normal group. Tow days before
AGA model was established, normal and AGA groups were lavaged with normal saline 
(20 ml/kg), medication group was lavaged with colchicine solution (20 ml/kg),
EA(1.5-2 Hz, D.-D.wave, 9v; 1-3 rnA) was applied to "Sanyinjiao" (SP6), "jiexi"
(ST41) and "Kunlun" (BL60) for 20 min, once daily;continuously for 9 days. Then
observed the changes in dysfunction, and the content of TNF-a and IL-lß detected 
by ELISA, the expression of TREM-l detected by immunohistochemistry and western
blot.
RESULTS: Compared to the normal group, the AGA group of the dysfunction index
increased significantly (P<0.01), the content of TNF-a and IL-lß increased
significantly (P<0.05), the expression of TREM-l in synovial tissue increased
significantly (P<0.05); the medication and EA groups compared to the AGA group,
the dysfunction index decreased significantly (P<0.01), the content of TNF-a and 
IL-lß decreased significantly (P<0.05), the expression of TREM-l in synovial
tissue decreased significantly (P<0.05); there were not statistically significant
between the medication and EA group (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: EA treating AGA may be through down-regulating the expression of TREM
-1 in synovial tissue.

PMID: 25613635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Nov;45(6):924-7.

[The effects of electro-acupuncture on the signaling pathway of TLR/MYD88 in
ankle joint synovial tissue of acute gouty arthritis rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang CN(1), Huang XK, Luo Y, Jiang J, Wan L, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)College of TCM, Chongqing Medical University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of electro-acupuncture ( EA) on the related
protein expression of the signaling pathway of the toll-like receptor2
(TLR2)/myeloid differentiation factor (MYD) 88 in ankle joint synovial tissue of 
acute gouty arthritis (AGA) rats.
METHODS: Fifty male SD rats were randomly divided into 5 groups: normal group,
SMD group, AGA model group, medication group and EA group, 10 rats in each group.
SMD group established model by inducing SMD, other groups established AGA model
by inducing monosodium urate, except the normal group. Two days before model was 
established, normal and SMD and AGA model groups were lavaged with normal saline 
(20 mL/kg), medication group was lavaged with colchicine solution (1 mg/kg), EA
(1. 5-2 Hz, D.-D. wave, 9 V, 1-3 mA) was applied to"Sanyinjiao"
(SP6),"Jiexi"(ST41) and "kunlun" (BL60) for 20 min, once daily, continuously for 
9 days. Then the join sewlling index was observed periodically, the protein
expression of TLR2 and MYD88 was determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Compared to the normal group, the join sewlling of the SMD group in test
join increased significantly (P<0. 05) and the protein expression of TLR2 and
MYD88 in synovial tissue has not statistically significant (P>0.05), the oin
sewlling and protein expression of TLR2 and MYD88 in synovial tissue of model
group increased significantly P<0. 05); The medication and EA group compared to
the model group, the protein expression of TLR2 and MYD88 in synovial tissue
decreased significantly (P <0. 05), the join sewlling in test join decreased
significantly P<1. 05); There were not statistically significant between the EA
group and the medication group (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: EA can alleviate the symptoms of AGA, which may be related to
regulation of the protein expression Y TRI and MYD88 in the TLR/MYD88 signaling
pathway.

PMID: 25571716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2014 Oct 5;16(10):e16461. doi: 10.5812/ircmj.16461.
eCollection 2014.

Effects of SP6 Acupuncture Point Stimulation on Labor Pain and Duration of Labor.

Yesilcicek Calik K(1), Komurcu N(2).

Author information: 
(1)epartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey. (2)Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Marmara University, Istanbul,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Acupressure has been used frequently to improve labor, manage labor
pain, and shorten delivery time. However, there has been little research-based
evidence to support the positive effects of acupressure in the obstetric area and
obstetric nursing.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of SP6 acupressure 
on labor pain and delivery time in primigravida women in labor.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was conducted at the Trabzon Maternity Hospital
in Turkey. Its design was a randomized controlled clinical trial study using a
single-blinded method. One hundred (100) primigravida women in labor were
randomly assigned to either the SP6 acupressure (n = 50) or control group (n =
50). Acupressure was practiced 35 times in total on the SP6 point of both legs in
the SP6 acupressure group; 15 times (during contraction) when cervical dilation
was 2-3 cm, 10 times when cervical dilation was 5-6 cm and 10 times at 9-10 cm
dilation, while the women in the control group received standard care. Labor pain
was measured five times using a structured questionnaire of a subjective labor
pain scale (visual analogue scale-VAS) when dilation was 2-3 cm (VAS 2), 5-6 cm
(VAS 3) and 8-9 cm (VAS 4) before and after acupressure was applied to the SP6
point (VAS 1), and finally at the early postpartum period (VAS 5). The duration
of labor in both groups was measured with a partograph and the length of delivery
time was calculated in two stages: from 3 cm cervical dilation to full cervical
dilation, and from full cervical dilation to delivery.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the groups in subjective
labor pain scores (except VAS 4) (P < 0.001). The duration of the Phase one (3 cm
dilatation to full dilatation) and Phase two (full dilatation to birth) in the
acupressure group was shorter than the control group (Phase one, 225 min and 320 
min, respectively; Phase two, 15 min and 20 min, respectively; both P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: It was determined that SP6 acupressure was effective in decreasing
pain and duration of labor.

PMCID: PMC4270652
PMID: 25558386  [PubMed]


49. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;34(10):1212-5.

[Regulatory effect of electroacupuncture on heart and stomach of rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren BB, Yu Zh, Wang YL, Xu B.

OBJECTIVE: To explore different regulatory effects of electroacupuncture (EA) at 
the same acupoint on the heart and the stomach.
METHODS: Eighty male SD rats were randomly divided into eight groups equally,
i.e., the Neiguan (PC6) group, the Quchi (LI11) group, the Tianshu (ST25) group, 
the Danzhong (RN17) group, the Zusanli (ST36) group, the Sanyinjiao (SP6) group, 
the Xinshu (BL15) group, and the Weishu (BL21) group, 10 in each group. The
regulatory effects of EA (2/15 Hz, 3 mA, 2 min) at different acupoints on the
gastric motility (intragastric pressure) and the cardiac function (the left
ventricular pressure) were observed. The mean values of effect of two-min pre-EA 
and after-EA were compared.
RESULTS: Compared with the pre-EA in the same group, the left ventricular
pressure decreased in the Neiguan (PC6) group, the Quchi (LI11) group, the
Danzhong (RN17) group, the Sanyinjiao (SP6) group, and the Xinshu (BL15) group (P
<0.05). The intragastric pressure increased in the Quchi (LI11) group, the
Zusanli (ST36) group, the Sanyinjiao (SP6) group, and the Xinshu (BL15) group,
while it decreased in the Tianshu (ST25) group, the Danzhong (RN17) group, and
the Weishu (BL21) group (P <0.05). The difference of the left ventricular
pressure was sequenced from high to low as Xinshu (BL15) >Danzhong (RN17)
>Neiguan (PC6) >Sanyinjiao (SP6) >Quchi (LI11). The difference of the
intragastric pressure was sequenced from high to low as Tianshu (ST25) >Weishu
(BL21) > Xinshu (BL15) > Danzhong (RN17) > Zusanli (ST36) > Sanyinjiao (SP6) >
Quchi (LI11).
CONCLUSIONS: EA at the same acupoint (2/15 Hz, 3 mA) showed different regulatory 
effects on the heart and stomach. There existed some difference in the direction 
and size due to the acupoint location, meridians, dominant nerve segment or
relating organs. A fixed effect direction to the specific target was also shown.

PMID: 25509264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Vet Parasitol. 2015 Jan 15;207(1-2):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2014.11.018.
Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Spatio-temporal factors influencing the occurrence of Syngamus trachea within
release pens in the South West of England.

Gethings OJ(1), Sage RB(2), Leather SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop and Environment Sciences, Harper Adams University, Edgmond,
Newport TF10 8NB, UK. Electronic address: owengethings@hotmail.co.uk. (2)Game &
Wildlife Conservation Trust, Burgate Manor, Fordingbridge SP6 1EF, UK.
(3)Department of Crop and Environment Sciences, Harper Adams University, Edgmond,
Newport TF10 8NB, UK.

Syngamus trachea is a pathogenic tracheal nematode that causes syngamiasis in
wild and game birds, especially when birds are managed at high densities. Despite
its pathogenic nature, very little is known about its epidemiology and
relationship with ambient temperature and humidity. The spatial and temporal
modelling of disease was undertaken on two pheasant estates within the South West
of England from April 2014 to August 2014. Significant differences between the
mean numbers of eggs per gram of soil were identified between pens at both site 1
and site 2 but did not differ significantly between sites. Egg abundance was
significantly associated with soil moisture content, with greater egg survival
between years in pens with higher average volumetric soil moisture content.
Previous years stocking density and pen age were also associated with greater egg
survival between years with more eggs being recovered in pens with greater
stocking densities, and pens that had been sited longer. The greatest model to
explain the variation in the numbers of eggs per gram of soil per pen was a
combination of soil moisture content, stocking density and pen age. Larval
recovery differed significantly between sites. Larval abundance was significantly
and positively associated with temperature and relative humidity at site 1.
Similarly, temperature and humidity were also positively and significantly
associated with larval abundance at site 2. Rainfall did not influence larval
recovery at either site 1 or site 2. The model with the greatest ability to
explain larval abundance at both sites, was a combination of temperature,
humidity and rainfall. Infection status (positive faecal egg counts) was
significantly and positively associated with larval abundance at both sites, but 
rainfall was only positively associated at site 1. Temperature and humidity were 
positively associated with infection status at site 2, but not at site 1. The
present study highlights the influence of climatic variables on both egg survival
and larval abundance, and could therefore be used to develop more targeted
treatment strategies around periods of higher disease risk. The frequent use of
release pens is a clear factor in the epidemiology of syngamiasis, and it is
recommended that pens be rested and/or rotated in order to reduce infection
pressure in subsequent flocks.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25497159  [PubMed - in process]


51. Chin J Integr Med. 2014 Dec 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Acupuncture points used in the prophylaxis against recurrent uncomplicated
cystitis, patterns identified and their possible relationship to physiological
measurements.

Alraek T(1), Baerheim A, Birch S.

Author information: 
(1)The National Research Center in Complementary and Alternative Medicine,
Department of Community Medicine, Faculty of Health Science, UiT The Arctic
University of Norway, Tromso, Norway, terje.alrak@uit.no.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the correlation between single acupoints used and the
recurrence rate of cystitis among cystitis-prone women receiving acupuncture as a
prophylactic treatment.
METHODS: In all, 58 cystitis-prone women were included in the analysis.
Customised acupuncture treatments were given twice a week, over 4 weeks. The main
effect parameter was the number of cystitis episodes during the 6-month
observation time. Residual urine was measured at baseline, 2, 4 and 6 months
using portable ultrasound equipment. Sympathetic and vagotone nerve activities
were measured by using skin conductance and respiratory sinus arrhythmia,
respectively.
RESULTS: The main acupoints used for patients with Kidney (Shen) qi/yang
deficiency were Shenshu (BL23), Taixi (KI3), Zhongji (CV3), Sanyinjiao (SP6) and 
Pangguangshu (BL28), compared with Taichong (LR3), CV3, BL28, Yinlingquan (SP9)
and SP6 for Liver (Gan) qi stagnation, and SP6, CV3, BL28, Zusanli (ST36) and SP9
for Spleen (Pi) qi/yang deficiency patients. The combination BL23 and KI3 were
used in 16 women, 13 of which were Kidney pattern related patients. When used,
the number of symptomatic episodes were reduced to a third compared with what
occurred in the 42 women where this combination was not used (3/16 vs. 28/42,
P<0.05). BL23 application correlated to a significant reduction in residual urine
measured a few days after treatment. Patients with the pattern of Spleen qi/yang 
deficiency had an initial increase in residual urine after treatments.
CONCLUSION: Treating Kidney pattern related patients with the combination of BL23
and KI3 resulted in far better outcome than other points/combination of points
for other Chinese medicine diagnoses. The acupoint SP6 may be less indicated than
previously assumed when treating cystitis-prone women prophylactically.

PMID: 25491541  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Virus Genes. 2015 Feb;50(1):118-28. doi: 10.1007/s11262-014-1138-9. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Complete nucleotide sequence of Klebsiella phage P13 and prediction of an EPS
depolymerase gene.

Shang A(1), Liu Y, Wang J, Mo Z, Li G, Mou H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, 5 Yushan
Road, Qingdao, 266003, Shandong, China.

The complete genome of Klebsiella phage P13 was sequenced and analyzed.
Bacteriophage P13 has a double-stranded linear DNA with a length of 45,976 bp and
a G+C content of 51.7 %, which is slightly lower than that of Klebsiella
pneumoniae KCTC 2242. The codon biases of phage P13 are very similar to those of 
SP6-like phages and K. pneumoniae KCTC 2242. Bioinformatics analysis shows that
the phage P13 genome has 282 open reading frames (ORFs) that are greater than 100
bp in length, and 50 of these ORFs were identified as predicted genes with an
average length of 833 bp. Among these genes, 41 show homology to known proteins
in the GenBank database. The functions of the 24 putative proteins were
investigated, and 13 of these were found to be highly conserved. According to the
homology analysis of the 50 predicted genes and the whole genome, phage P13 is
homologous to SP6-like phages. Furthermore, the morphological characteristics of 
phage P13 suggest that it belongs to the SP6-like viral genus of the Podoviridae 
subfamily Autographivirinae. Two hypothetical genes encoding an extracellular
polysaccharide depolymerase were predicted using PSI-BLAST. This analysis serves 
as groundwork for further research and application of the enzyme.

PMID: 25392088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Cell Sci. 2014 Dec 15;127(Pt 24):5261-72. doi: 10.1242/jcs.156778. Epub 2014
Oct 24.

Epiprofin orchestrates epidermal keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation.

Nakamura T(1), Yoshitomi Y(2), Sakai K(2), Patel V(3), Fukumoto S(4), Yamada
Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Oral Health and Development
Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan 
Liaison Center for Innovative Dentistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology,
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA taka@dent.tohoku.ac.jp yoshi.yamada@nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Oral Health and Development
Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
taka@dent.tohoku.ac.jp yoshi.yamada@nih.gov.

The basal layer of the epidermis contains stem cells and transit amplifying cells
that rapidly proliferate and differentiate further into the upper layers of the
epidermis. A number of molecules have been identified as regulators of this
process, including p63 (also known as tumor protein 63) and Notch1. However,
little is known about the mechanisms that regulate the transitions from stem cell
to proliferating or differentiating transit amplifying cell. Here, we demonstrate
that epiprofin (Epfn, also known as Sp6) plays crucial distinct roles in these
transition stages as a cell cycle regulator and a transcription factor. Epfn
knockout mice have a thickened epidermis, in which p63-expressing basal cells
form multiple layers owing to the accumulation of premature transit amplifying
cells with reduced proliferation and a reduction in the number of differentiating
keratinocytes expressing Notch1. We found that low levels of Epfn expression
increased the proliferation of human immortalized keratinocyte (HaCaT) cells by
increasing EGF responsiveness and superphosphorylation of Rb. By contrast, high
levels of Epfn expression promoted cell cycle exit and differentiation, by
reducing E2F transactivation and inducing Notch1 expression. Our findings
identify multiple novel functions of Epfn in epidermal development.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4265740
PMID: 25344255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Trials. 2014 Oct 23;15:403. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-403.

Effect of acupuncture on patients with insomnia: study protocol for a randomized 
controlled trial.

Han KH, Kim SY, Chung SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hwabyung/Stress Clinic, Kyung Hee University Korean Medicine
Hospital at Gangdong, 149, Sangil-Dong, Gangdong-gu, Seoul, Korea.
lovepwr@khu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Hypnotic drugs tend to be the dominant form of treatment of insomnia,
but these come with a number of reported side effects. Acupuncture has been
studied as an alternative, resulting in a rising need for methodological research
towards verifying its efficacy as insomnia treatment.
METHODS/DESIGN: We describe a proposal for a single-center,
patient-assessor-blinded, randomized controlled trial with two parallel arms. A
total of 38 patients complete screening tests at the first visit, are registered 
into the clinical trial, and then randomly assigned to the experimental or sham
control groups (19 patients for each group). All subjects are clinical insomnia
patients who score a 6 or above on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and 
meet all inclusion criteria. All subjects are treated with acupuncture and
intradermal acupuncture (IDA) three times during the first week. Five sham
acupoints are used in the control group. In the experimental group, five real
acupoints (PC6, SP6, HT7, KI6, and BL62) are used unilaterally in turn. Sham
acupoints are over 1 cm away from each real acupoint.The primary outcomes are the
scores on the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) and PSQI. Secondary outcomes are the 
sleep log, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
(STAI), the World Health Organization Quality of Life Abbreviated Version
(WHOQOL-BREF), the Korean-Auditory Verbal Learning Test (K-AVLT), the Digit Span 
Test (DS), Event Related Potentials (ERPs) and heart rate variability (HRV) to
assess emotional states, sleep quality, cognitive functioning, and
electro-physiological changes.Subjects are assessed at three time points:
baseline, post-treatment and follow-up. The duration of the clinical trial is 18 
days.
DISCUSSION: To study the enhancement of the effectiveness of acupuncture for
insomnia, we test the intradermal acupuncture method, which is performed
continuously on the subject's skin and stimulated at home by the subject every
night. In the trial, objective measurements including ERPs and HRV are used to
evaluate states of cognition and autonomic nervous system functioning and
subjective self-report questionnaires assess insomnia symptoms.'Sham' acupuncture
points provided by STRICTA are used for the control group.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01956760, registered 5 September 2013.

PMCID: PMC4213556
PMID: 25342100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Acupunct Med. 2015 Feb;33(1):9-15. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2014-010572. Epub 2014
Oct 10.

Effect of transcutaneous electrical acupuncture point stimulation on endometrial 
receptivity in women undergoing frozen-thawed embryo transfer: a single-blind
prospective randomised controlled trial.

Shuai Z(1), Lian F(2), Li P(3), Yang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.
(2)Integrative Medicine Research Centre of Reproduction and Heredity, the
Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Jinan, China. (3)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Acupunct Med. 2015 Feb;33(1):2-6.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of transcutaneous electrical acupuncture point 
stimulation (TEAS) on endometrial HOXA10 protein expression and three-dimensional
(3D) power Doppler ultrasound parameters as markers of endometrial receptivity in
women undergoing frozen-thawed embryo transfer (FET).
METHODS: A total of 68 women undergoing FET were randomised to receive TEAS or
mock TEAS at acupuncture points CV3, CV4 and SP6 and Zigong bilaterally. Both
groups had six sessions per cycle for three menstrual cycles prior to the
scheduled FET. Each session lasted 30 min and was repeated every other day. 3D
power Doppler ultrasound parameters, HOXA10 protein expression and rates of
embryo implantation, clinical pregnancy and live birth were compared.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the two groups in
endometrial thickness or endometrial volume. The ultrasonographic endometrial
triple-line pattern was present more often in the TEAS group (p=0.002). The TEAS 
group had a greater endometrial and subendometrial vascularisation index (VI)
than the mock TEAS group (p=0.001 and p<0.001, respectively) on 3D ultrasound and
increased endometrial HOXA10 expression (p=0.001) immediately prior to FET.
Subsequently, the rates of embryo implantation, clinical pregnancy and live birth
rates were all higher in the TEAS group than in the mock TEAS group (p=0.024,
p=0.038 and p=0.033, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients undergoing FET, TEAS may have beneficial effects on
endometrial HOXA10 expression and ultrasound markers of endometrial receptivity. 
These findings may explain the improvement in clinical outcome of FET associated 
with the use of TEAS.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ChiCTR-TRC-14004448.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25303950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Med Invest. 2014;61(3-4):306-17.

Sp6 regulation of Rock1 promoter activity in dental epithelial cells.

Yanuaryska RD(1), Miyoshi K, Adiningrat A, Horiguchi T, Tanimura A, Hagita H,
Noma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Health Biosciences, the
University of Tokushima Graduate School.

Sp6 is a transcription factor of the SP/KLF family and an indispensable regulator
of the morphological dynamics of ameloblast differentiation during tooth
development. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. We have
previously identified one of the Sp6 downstream genes, Rock1, which is involved
in ameloblast polarization. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms of Rock1 by Sp6. First, we identified the transcription
start sites (TSS) and cloned the 5'-flanking region of Rock1. Serial deletion
analyses identified a critical region for Rock1 promoter activity within the
249-bp upstream region of TSS, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed 
Sp6-binding to this region. Subsequent transient transfection experiments showed 
that Rock1 promoter activity is enhanced by Sp6, but reduced by Sp1. Treatment of
dental epithelial cells with the GC-selective DNA binding inhibitor, mithramycin 
A, affected Rock1 promoter activity in loss of enhancement by Sp6, but not
repression by Sp1. Further site-directed mutagenesis indicated that the region
from -206 to -150 contains responsive elements for Sp6. Taken together, we
conclude that Sp6 positively regulates Rock1 transcription by direct binding to
the Rock1 promoter region from -206 to -150, which functionally distinct from
Sp1.

PMID: 25264049  [PubMed - in process]


57. Acupunct Med. 2014 Dec;32(6):506-8. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2014-010607. Epub 2014
Sep 5.

Acupuncture for retained placenta: a retrospective case series.

Djakovic I(1), Bilic N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Center "Sestre
milosrdnice", Zagreb, Croatia. (2)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive
Care, University Hospital Center "Sestre milosrdnice", Zagreb, Croatia.

BACKGROUND: A placenta is considered to be retained when it remains undelivered
30 or 60 min after the birth of the baby following active or physiological
management of the third stage of labour, respectively. It can be life threatening
for the mother.
METHODS: We retrospectively examined the influence of acupuncture on the delivery
of retained placentas in the third stage of labour in 70 women. In all cases the 
third stage of labour was actively managed, and acupuncture was provided 30 min
after delivery at points KI16 and SP6 for 15 min.
RESULTS: After acupuncture 77% of placentas separated successfully. In 10% of
cases some retained placental tissue was detected and manual removal of the
avulsed cotyledon was performed, while in 13% the entire placenta was retained
and manual removal of the placenta under general anaesthesia was necessary.
CONCLUSIONS: Acupuncture may help to facilitate placental separation but further 
controlled trials are needed.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25193928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pain Manag Nurs. 2015 Jun;16(3):188-97. doi: 10.1016/j.pmn.2014.06.002. Epub 2014
Aug 28.

Effects of acupressure on menstrual distress and low back pain in dysmenorrheic
young adult women: an experimental study.

Chen HM(1), Wang HH(2), Chiu MH(3), Hu HM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chung Hwa University of Medical Technology, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)College of
Nursing, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
hhwang@kmu.edu.tw. (3)Department of Nursing, Chi Mei Medical Center, Liouying,
Taiwan. (4)University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of acupressure on menstrual 
distress and low back pain (LBP) in dysmenorrheic young adult women. In all, 129 
female students, who had been experiencing dysmenorrhea with LBP during
menstruation and who scored more than 4 points on the visual analog scale for
pain, were randomly assigned to an experimental group and a control group. The
experimental group (n = 65) received acupressure massage three times a week for
30 minutes on the sanyinjiao (SP6), ciliao (BL32), and taichong (Liver 3)
acupoints. The control group (n = 64) received only a manual of menstrual health 
education without acupressure intervention. Data were collected at five time
points: at baseline, 30 minutes, and 4, 8, and 12 months after the intervention. 
During the 12-month follow-up, the experimental group had significantly lower
menstrual distress and LBP scores than the control group. Among 65 participants
in the experimental group, 53 (82%) reported a moderate to high levels of
menstrual distress, 51 (78%) reported moderate to high levels of LBP relief, and 
49 (75%) reported moderate to high levels of satisfaction with acupressure. Our
findings may serve as a reference for health care professionals and young women
to improve self-care during menstruation and help further understand the
therapeutic effects of acupressure on menstrual distress and LBP.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Pain Management Nursing. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175554  [PubMed - in process]


59. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 28;10(8):e1004468. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004468.
eCollection 2014.

Sp6 and Sp8 transcription factors control AER formation and dorsal-ventral
patterning in limb development.

Haro E(1), Delgado I(1), Junco M(1), Yamada Y(2), Mansouri A(3), Oberg KC(4), Ros
MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (CSIC-UC-SODERCAN),
Santander, Spain. (2)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, NIDCR,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Am Fassberg, Göttingen, Germany; Department of Clinical Neurophysiology,
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany; Genome and Stem Cell Center, GENKOK,
Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (4)Department of Pathology and Human
Anatomy, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, California, United States of America.
(5)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (CSIC-UC-SODERCAN),
Santander, Spain; Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

The formation and maintenance of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is critical
for the outgrowth and patterning of the vertebrate limb. The induction of the AER
is a complex process that relies on integrated interactions among the Fgf, Wnt,
and Bmp signaling pathways that operate within the ectoderm and between the
ectoderm and the mesoderm of the early limb bud. The transcription factors Sp6
and Sp8 are expressed in the limb ectoderm and AER during limb development. Sp6
mutant mice display a mild syndactyly phenotype while Sp8 mutants exhibit severe 
limb truncations. Both mutants show defects in AER maturation and in
dorsal-ventral patterning. To gain further insights into the role Sp6 and Sp8
play in limb development, we have produced mice lacking both Sp6 and Sp8 activity
in the limb ectoderm. Remarkably, the elimination or significant reduction in
Sp6;Sp8 gene dosage leads to tetra-amelia; initial budding occurs, but neither
Fgf8 nor En1 are activated. Mutants bearing a single functional allele of Sp8
(Sp6-/-;Sp8+/-) exhibit a split-hand/foot malformation phenotype with double
dorsal digit tips probably due to an irregular and immature AER that is not
maintained in the center of the bud and on the abnormal expansion of Wnt7a
expression to the ventral ectoderm. Our data are compatible with Sp6 and Sp8
working together and in a dose-dependent manner as indispensable mediators of
Wnt/ßcatenin and Bmp signaling in the limb ectoderm. We suggest that the function
of these factors links proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral patterning.

PMCID: PMC4148220
PMID: 25166858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Acupunct Med. 2014 Oct;32(5):376-80. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2014-010612. Epub 2014 
Aug 27.

Acupuncture decreases matrix metalloproteinase-2 activity in patients with
migraine.

Cayir Y(1), Ozdemir G(2), Celik M(3), Aksoy H(4), Akturk Z(1), Laloglu E(4),
Akcay F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Ataturk University Faculty of Medicine,
Erzurum, Turkey Research and Practice Center for Acupuncture and Complementary
Therapy Modalities, Erzurum, Turkey. (2)Department of Neurology, Ataturk
University Faculty of Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey. (3)Department of Anesthesia,
Ataturk University Faculty of Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Ataturk University Faculty of Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey.
(5)Research and Practice Center for Acupuncture and Complementary Therapy
Modalities, Erzurum, Turkey.

Comment in
    Acupunct Med. 2014 Oct;32(5):373-5.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of acupuncture on the serum matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) level and activity in patients with migraine.
METHODS: After baseline testing, eligible patients with migraine according to the
criteria of the International Headache Society who volunteered to join the study 
were included (n=27). The patients received 10 sessions of acupuncture treatment.
The points selected were bilateral ST8, ST44, LI4, LI11, LIV3, SP6, GB1, GB14,
GB20, GV14, GV20, Yintang, Taiyang and ear Shenmen. Pain was measured using a
visual analogue scale (VAS). Short form-36 (SF-36) was used to determine their
quality of life. Blood samples were taken before treatment and after the first
and last sessions of acupuncture for measurement of MMP-2 concentration and
activity.
RESULTS: The mean VAS was 85.5±16.6 before acupuncture and was significantly
decreased to 39.8±20.6 after 10 sessions of acupuncture (p<0.0001). There was a
significant increase in all SF-36 scores after acupuncture compared with values
before treatment (p<0.0001). No significant differences were found in MMP-2
concentrations before treatment and after the first and last sessions (p>0.05).
However, there were significant changes in MMP-2 activity (p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study showed a clinically relevant decrease in
MMP-2 activity in patients with migraine treated with acupuncture. The mechanism 
underlying the effect of acupuncture in alleviating pain may be associated with a
decrease in MMP-2 activity.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25164776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Complement Ther Med. 2014 Aug;22(4):581-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2014.05.006. Epub
2014 May 20.

Effects of acupressure on fatigue of lung cancer patients undergoing
chemotherapy: an experimental pilot study.

Tang WR(1), Chen WJ(2), Yu CT(3), Chang YC(4), Chen CM(2), Wang CH(2), Yang
SH(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan. Electronic address: wtang@mail.cgu.edu.tw. (2)School of Nursing, College 
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Thoracic
Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; School of Medicine,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Mathematics, Tamkang University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; School of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: This study explored the effects of acupressure on fatigue of lung
cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: For this experimental study, 57 subjects were randomly
assigned to three groups: acupressure with essential oils (n=17), acupressure
only (n=24), and sham acupressure (n=16). Acupoints were Hegu (LI4), Zusanli
(ST36), and Sanyingjiao (SP6). All subjects received acupressure once every
morning for 5 months, with each acupoint pressed for 1 min. Fatigue, functional
status, anxiety, depression, and sleep quality were measured before initial
chemotherapy (T0), on Day 1 of third chemotherapy (T1), and on Day 1 of sixth
chemotherapy (T2). Outcome differences between groups were analyzed at T0, T1,
and T2 by general estimating equations.
RESULTS: After controlling for baseline outcome values, age, and adherence to
acupressure, subjects who received acupressure with essential oils and
acupressure had significantly less fatigue in daily living activities and sleep
better quality at T1 than subjects who received sham acupressure. Subjects who
received acupressure with essential oils had significantly better sleep quality
at T2 than the sham acupressure group. Subjects who received acupressure with or 
without essential oils had greater odds of better functional status at T1 than
the sham group.
CONCLUSION: It is plausible that acupressure with or without essential oils helps
lung cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy reduce cancer-related fatigue and
increase activity level. Further study is wanted to test this hypothesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25146059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Mar;291(3):531-6. doi: 10.1007/s00404-014-3427-x. Epub 
2014 Aug 20.

Effects of electro-acupuncture on labor pain management.

Dong C(1), Hu L, Liang F, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Aug;292(2):235-6.
    Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Aug;292(2):237.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the effects of a non-pharmacologic electro-acupuncture
method at different acupoints on labor pain management.
METHODS: Nulliparous women under the maternity care of the Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital were recruited and
allocated into two experimental groups (EX-B2 group and SP6 group) and one
control group, each with 60 eligible participants. Visual analog scale (VAS) was 
used to assess the pain during active phase of labor before and 30, 60, 120 min
after intervention. The duration of active phase, the duration of second stage of
labor, the duration of third stage of labor, use of oxytocin, neonatal birth
weight, neonatal Apgar score at 1 and 5 min were considered as secondary outcomes
of this study.
RESULTS: After 30 min intervention, the mean VAS scores of both EX-B2 group and
SP6 group were significantly decreased compared with the control group (P <
0.01); however, no significant difference was observed between the two
experimental groups (P > 0.05). After 60 and 120 min intervention, the mean VAS
scores of EX-B2 group were significantly lower than SP-6 group (P < 0.05). Both
EX-B2 group and SP6 group had significant lower VAS scores after interventions
and shorter time used in active phase of labor than the control group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The study revealed that the application of electro-acupuncture at
EX-B2 and SP6 acupoints could be used as a non-pharmacologic method to reduce
labor pain and shorten the duration of active phase of labor.

PMID: 25138127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Virology. 2014 Sep;464-465:365-74. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.07.032. Epub 2014
Aug 9.

Infectious cDNA clones of the crinivirus Tomato chlorosis virus are competent for
systemic plant infection and whitefly-transmission.

Orílio AF(1), Fortes IM(1), Navas-Castillo J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea "La Mayora",
Universidad de Málaga - Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(IHSM-UMA-CSIC), Estación Experimental "La Mayora", 29750 Algarrobo-Costa,
Málaga, Spain. (2)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea "La
Mayora", Universidad de Málaga - Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(IHSM-UMA-CSIC), Estación Experimental "La Mayora", 29750 Algarrobo-Costa,
Málaga, Spain. Electronic address: jnavas@eelm.csic.es.

Tomato chlorosis virus (ToCV) (genus Crinivirus, family Closteroviridae) causes
important emergent diseases in tomato and other solanaceous crops. ToCV is not
transmitted mechanically and is naturally transmitted by whiteflies. The ToCV
genome consists of two molecules of linear, positive-sense RNA encapsidated into 
long flexuous virions. We present the construction of full-length cDNA clones of 
the ToCV genome (RNA1 and RNA2) fused to the SP6 RNA polymerase promoter and
under the control of the CaMV 35S promoter. RNA1 replicated in the absence of
RNA2 in Nicotiana benthamiana and tomato protoplasts after inoculation with
cDNA-derived in vitro transcripts. Agroinfiltration of RNA1 and RNA2 under the
35S promoter resulted in systemic infection in N. benthamiana plants. In
addition, tomato plants were infected by grafting with agroinfected N.
benthamiana scions, showing the typical ToCV symptoms. The viral progeny
generated in tomato was transmissible by the whitefly Bemisia tabaci.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25113907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Nov;210(11):739-45. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.06.023. Epub
2014 Jul 1.

Expression of focal adhesion kinase in uveal melanoma and the effects of Hsp90
inhibition by 17-AAG.

Faingold D(1), Filho VB(2), Fernandes B(3), Jagan L(4), de Barros AM Jr(5),
Orellana ME(6), Antecka E(7), Burnier MN Jr(8).

Author information: 
(1)Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology,
McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address:
faingolddana@yahoo.com. (2)Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory,
Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada; Department of Ophthalmology, São Paulo Federal University - UNIFESP, São 
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: vascobravofilho@yahoo.com.br. (3)Henry C.
Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address:
bruno.mtl@gmail.com. (4)Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory,
Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. Electronic address: ljagan@qmed.ca. (5)Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic
Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Center,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: alexm_barros@yahoo.com.br. (6)Henry
C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Ocular Pathology Department, 
Anatomy Pathology Institute, University Central of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
Electronic address: euorellana@gmail.com. (7)Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic
Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Center,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: emilia.antecka@mcgill.ca. (8)Henry 
C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Ophthalmology, 
São Paulo Federal University - UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
miguel.burnier@mcgill.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is implicated in tumor progression and 
metastatic cascade, and has been shown to be overexpressed in a variety of human 
cancers. However, the role of FAK in human uveal melanoma (UM) is not well
defined. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the expression of FAK in UM
tumors and normal eyes, and to determine the effect of Hsp90 inhibition on FAK
expression in UM cells.
METHODS: FAK expression was assessed in 39 UM specimens, FAK[pY397] expression
was assessed in 51 UM specimens, and both FAK and FAK[pY397] expression were
assessed in 20 normal eyes. The expression of FAK and FAK[pY397] was detected by 
Western blot in five UM cell lines after treatment with 10 µmol/L of 17-AAG.
RESULTS: FAK was positive in 87.2% and FAK[pY397] in 90% of UM specimens. Low FAK
expression was detected in non-tumor structures and in normal eyes. The cell
lines with the most proliferative, invasive phenotype (92.1, SP6.5 and MKT-BR)
displayed high expression of FAK[pY397], and the levels of FAK and FAK[pY397]
were decreased in the presence of 17-AAG starting with 24 h of exposure.
CONCLUSION: FAK and FAK[pY397] were overexpressed in human UM tumors compared to 
normal ocular tissue and high levels of FAK[pY397] were seen in the most
aggressive UM cell lines. Hsp90 inhibition led to downregulation of FAK
expression. We propose a role for FAK in the pathogenesis of UM. Future studies
are needed to explore the use of Hsp90 inhibitors as a feasible approach for
modulating FAK in UM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25041838  [PubMed - in process]


65. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:465760. doi: 10.1155/2014/465760.
Epub 2014 Jun 15.

Differential activation patterns of FMRI in sleep-deprived brain: restoring
effects of acupuncture.

Gao L(1), Zhang M(1), Gong H(2), Bai L(3), Dai XJ(2), Min Y(4), Zhou F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Imaging, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province 710061, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi Province 330006, China. (3)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical
Information Engineering, Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Ministry of Education, China. 
(4)Acupuncture & Rehabilitation Department, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangxi
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanchang, Jiangxi Province 330006,
China.

Previous studies suggested a remediation role of acupuncture in insomnia, and
acupuncture also has been used in insomnia empirically and clinically. In this
study, we employed fMRI to test the role of acupuncture in sleep deprivation
(SD). Sixteen healthy volunteers (8 males) were recruited and scheduled for three
fMRI scanning procedures, one following the individual's normal sleep and
received acupuncture SP6 (NOR group) and the other two after 24<U+2009>h of total SD
with acupuncture on SP6 (SD group) or sham (Sham group). The sessions were
counterbalanced approximately two weeks apart. Acupuncture stimuli elicited
significantly different activation patterns of three groups. In NOR group, the
right superior temporal lobe, left inferior parietal lobule, and left postcentral
gyrus were activated; in SD group, the anterior cingulate cortex, bilateral
insula, left basal ganglia, and thalamus were significantly activated while, in
Sham group, the bilateral thalamus and left cerebellum were activated. Different 
activation patterns suggest a unique role of acupuncture on SP6 in remediation of
SD. SP6 elicits greater and anatomically different activations than those of sham
stimuli; that is, the salience network, a unique interoceptive autonomic circuit,
may indicate the mechanism underlying acupuncture in restoring sleep deprivation.

PMCID: PMC4082872
PMID: 25024729  [PubMed]


66. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;51(1):19-31. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8790-x. Epub 2014
Jun 25.

IL-10 cytokine released from M2 macrophages is crucial for analgesic and
anti-inflammatory effects of acupuncture in a model of inflammatory muscle pain.

da Silva MD(1), Bobinski F, Sato KL, Kolker SJ, Sluka KA, Santos AR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Neurobiologia da Dor e Inflamação, Departamento de Ciências
Fisiológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina, Campus Universitário, Trindade, Florianópolis, SC, 88040-900, Brazil.

Muscle pain is a common medical problem that is difficult to treat. One
nonpharmacological treatment used is acupuncture, a procedure in which fine
needles are inserted into body points with the intent of relieving pain and other
symptoms. Here we investigated the effects of manual acupuncture (MA) on
modulating macrophage phenotype and interleukin-10 (IL-10) concentrations in
animals with muscle inflammation. Carrageenan, injected in the gastrocnemius
muscle of mice, induces an inflammatory response characterized by mechanical
hyperalgesia and edema. The inflammation is initially a neutrophilic infiltration
that converts to a macrophage-dominated inflammation by 48 h. MA of the
Sanyinjiao or Spleen 6 (SP6) acupoint reduces nociceptive behaviors, heat, and
mechanical hyperalgesia and enhanced escape/avoidance and the accompanying edema.
SP6 MA increased muscle IL-10 levels and was ineffective in reducing pain
behaviors and edema in IL-10 knockout (IL-10(-/-)) mice. Repeated daily
treatments with SP6 MA induced a phenotypic switch of muscle macrophages with
reduced M1 macrophages (pro-inflammatory cells) and an increase of M2 macrophages
(anti-inflammatory cells and important IL-10 source). These findings provide new 
evidence that MA produces a phenotypic switch in macrophages and increases IL-10 
concentrations in muscle to reduce pain and inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4276737
PMID: 24961568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 21;15:505. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-505.

Genome sequences characterizing five mutations in RNA polymerase and major capsid
of phages <U+03D5>A318 and <U+03D5>As51 of Vibrio alginolyticus with different burst
efficiencies.

Liu W, Lin YR, Lu MW, Sung PJ, Wang WH, Lin CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biotechnology and Resources, Asia-Pacific Ocean Research 
Center, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 80424, Taiwan.
shinlin@faculty.nsysu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The burst size of a phage is important prior to phage therapy and
probiotic usage. The efficiency for a phage to burst its host bacterium can
result from molecular domino effects of the phage gene expressions which dominate
to control host machinery after infection. We found two Podoviridae phages, <U+03D5>A318
and <U+03D5>As51, burst a common host V. alginolyticus with different efficiencies of 72
and 10 PFU/bacterium, respectively. Presumably, the genome sequences can be
compared to explain their differences in burst sizes.
RESULTS: Among genes in 42.5 kb genomes with a GC content of 43.5%, 16 out of 47 
open-reading frames (ORFs) were annotated to known functions, including RNA
polymerase (RNAP) and phage structure proteins. 11 strong phage promoters and
three terminators were found. The consensus sequence for the new vibriophage
promoters is AATAAAGTTGCCCTATA, where the AGTTG bases of -8 through -12 are
important for the vibriophage specificity, especially a consensus T at -9
position eliminating RNAP of K1E, T7 and SP6 phages to transcribe the genes.
<U+03D5>A318 and <U+03D5>As51 RNAP shared their own specific promoters. In comparing <U+03D5>As51 with
<U+03D5>A318 genomes, only two nucleotides were deleted in the RNAP gene and three
mutating nucleotides were found in the major capsid genes.
CONCLUSION: Subtle analyses on the residue alterations uncovered the effects of
five nucleotide mutations on the functions of the RNAP and capsid proteins, which
account for the host-bursting efficiency. The deletion of two nucleotides in RNAP
gene truncates the primary translation due to early stop codon, while a second
translational peptide starting from GTG just at deletion point can remediate the 
polymerase activity. Out of three nucleotide mutations in major capsid gene, H53N
mutation weakens the subunit assembly between capsomeres for the phage head;
E313K reduces the fold binding between ß-sheet and Spine Helix inside the
peptide.

PMCID: PMC4099482
PMID: 24952762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Oncol Lett. 2014 Jun;7(6):1847-1850. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

DNA copy number alterations in pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma: A case report.

Kanamori M(1), Yasuda T(2), Nogami S(2), Suzuki K(2), Hori T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Science, University of Toyama, Toyama City, Toyama
930-0194, Japan ; Department of Orthopaedics, University of Toyama, Toyama City, 
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Toyama,
Toyama City, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

Pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma (P-LMS) is a rare morphological variant of LMS. The
current study presents the cytogenetic data of a P-LMS that arose in the axillary
region of a 31-year-old male. The results of array-based comparative genomic
hybridization for the primary tumor showed DNA copy number alteration (DCNA)
gains of 8ptel, 17ptel and 17q11.2 and losses of 2ptel, 7ptel, 7qtel, 10p15,
12p12-13.1, 13q14.2-14.3, 15q25-26 and Yq11. However, a metastatic lesion showed 
cytogenetic data different from the primary tumor DCNAs, with only the locus of
17ptel (282M15/SP6) in common between them. These observations add to the
spectrum of DCNAs that have been reported in previous cases of LMS and provide
novel cytogenetic data.

PMCID: PMC4049769
PMID: 24932246  [PubMed]


69. J Acupunct Meridian Stud. 2014 Jun;7(3):151-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jams.2014.01.004.
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Increase in plasma phylloquinone concentrations following acupoint injection for 
the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea.

Chao MT(1), Wade CM(2), Booth SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: ChaoM@ocim.ucsf.edu. (2)Institute for
East-West Medicine, New York, NY, USA. (3)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition
Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA.

The therapeutic benefits of acupoint injection of vitamin K in spleen-6 (SP6) for
the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea have been observed in limited clinical
settings. However, menadione, the form of vitamin K most studied for treating
dysmenorrhea, is not routinely used in clinical practice in North America. As
part of a larger clinical trial among women aged 18-25 years with primary
dysmenorrhea, we conducted a substudy to test the plasma concentration of
phylloquinone (vitamin K1). We collected blood samples from four women before and
24-48 hours after an acupoint injection of phylloquinone in SP6. Despite the
rapid turnover of phylloquinone observed in previous studies, we found that the
plasma phylloquinone concentrations increased significantly from preinjection to 
1-2 days after the injection. Interestingly, higher phylloquinone concentrations 
were correlated with less pain intensity among women with dysmenorrhea.
Additional research is needed to understand the association between vitamin K and
menstrual pain, including the role of vitamin K deficiency in inflammation and
pain, and on the possible mechanisms of acupoint injection of vitamin K for the
treatment of primary dysmenorrhea.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4096683
PMID: 24929459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:836026. doi: 10.1155/2014/836026.
Epub 2014 Apr 27.

Do changes in electrical skin resistance of acupuncture points reflect menstrual 
pain? A comparative study in healthy volunteers and primary dysmenorrhea
patients.

She YF(1), Ma LX(2), Qi CH(3), Wang YX(4), Tang L(4), Li CH(5), Yuan HW(6), Liu
YQ(7), Song JS(8), Zhu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100029, China ; Hebei
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shijiazhuang 050200, China.
(2)Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100029, China. (3)Hebei
General Hospital, Shijiazhuang 050051, China. (4)Dong Zhi Men Hospital Affiliated
to Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100007, China. (5)Beijing
Electric Power Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100072, China.
(6)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing
100069, China. (7)China Academy of Chinese Medical Science, Beijing 100007,
China. (8)The Third Affiliated Hospital of Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing 100029, China.

Electrical skin resistance (ESR) measurements were performed with a
four-electrode impedance detector at 10 points bilaterally on the first day of
and the third day after menstruation in 48 healthy volunteers and 46 primary
dysmenorrhea (PD) patients, to assess whether ESR changes of acupuncture points
can reflect menstrual pain or not. The results showed statistical reductions in
ESR imbalance ratio between left and right side that were detected at SP8 (Diji) 
and GB39 (Xuanzhong) (P < 0.05), and a statistical increase was detected at SP6
(Sanyinjiao) (P = 0.05) on the first day of menstruation compared with those
values on the third day after menstruation in dysmenorrhea group. No significant 
differences were detected at other points within and between two groups (P >
0.05). This study showed that the imbalance of ESR at uterine-relevant points in 
PD patients is not significantly different from those of healthy women on both
the 1st day of and the 3rd day after menstruation. The ESR imbalance ratio of
certain points can either be lower or higher during menstruation in PD patients. 
The ESR property of acupuncture points needs to be investigated in further
clinical trials with appropriate points, diseases, larger sample sizes, and
optimal device.

PMCID: PMC4020393
PMID: 24876879  [PubMed]


71. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015 Jan;21(1):147-55. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9800-z. Epub
2014 May 25.

Different methods of pretreatment Ki-67 labeling index evaluation in core
biopsies of breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
their relation to response to therapy.

Vörös A(1), Csörgo E, Kovári B, Lázár P, Kelemen G, Rusz O, Nyári T, Cserni G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Szeged, Allomás u 2, 6725, Szeged,
Hungary, andrasvoros@libero.it.

Increased proliferation activity of breast cancer cells evaluated by Ki-67
immunohistochemistry, i.e. a high Ki-67 labeling index (Ki-67 LI), may predict
better tumor regression in case of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Despite
recommendations for the evaluation of Ki-67 LI, there are variations in
methodology. We assessed the effect of different evaluation methods on the Ki-67 
LI in patients with different response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Thirty
pretreatment core-biopsy samples of patients receiving neoadjuvant
docetaxel-epirubicin chemotherapy with or without capecitabine were evaluated for
their Ki-67 LI. Pathologic regression was categorized as no regression, partial
regression and complete regression, with 10 cases in each category. Three
antibodies (MIB1, B56, SP6), 4 observers and 4 methods (counting or estimating on
glass slides and counting or estimating on representative digital images) were
compared. The Kruskal-Wallis test and analyses of variance were performed to
investigate the differences in Ki-67 LIs between different clinical outcomes
(tumor regression categories). Breast carcinomas with pathological complete
regression had a higher mean Ki-67 LI than tumors not achieving complete
regression with any methods, observers and antibodies investigated, although
there was a variation between different evaluations in what may represent high
proliferation. Estimating the Ki-67 LI on digital images representing the highest
proliferation in the core biopsy seemed the best in separating complete
responders from non-responders. High Ki-67 LI values were more likely associated 
with pathological complete regression independently of the method of evaluation
used, although the definition of high proliferation is problematic. Estimating
the Ki-67 LI may be an adequate method of evaluation.

PMID: 24859973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:802134. doi: 10.1155/2014/802134.
Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Acupuncture for preventing complications after radical hysterectomy: a randomized
controlled clinical trial.

Yi WM(1), Chen Q(2), Liu CH(2), Hou JY(3), Chen LD(3), Wu WK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Acupuncture, Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China ; Department
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510635, China. (2)Department of Gynecology Oncology, Sun
Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(3)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Acupuncture, Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(4)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510635, China ; Institute of Integrated
Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou
510080, China.

We aimed to investigate the preventive effects of acupuncture for complications
after radical hysterectomy. A single-center randomized controlled single-blinded 
trial was performed in a western-style hospital in China. One hundred and twenty 
patients after radical hysterectomy were randomly allocated to two groups and
started acupuncture from sixth postoperative day for five consecutive days.
Sanyinjiao (SP6), Shuidao (ST28), and Epangxian III (MS4) were selected with
electrical stimulation and Zusanli (ST36) without electrical stimulation for
thirty minutes in treatment group. Binao (LI14) was selected as sham acupuncture 
point without any stimulation in control group. The main outcome measures were
bladder function and prevalence of postoperative complications. Compared with
control group, treatment group reported significantly improved bladder function
in terms of maximal cystometric capacity, first voiding desire, maximal flow
rate, residual urine, and bladder compliance, and decreased bladder sensory loss,
incontinence, and urinary retention on fifteenth and thirtieth postoperative
days. Treatment group showed significant advantage in reduction of urinary tract 
infection on thirtieth postoperative day. But no significant difference between
groups was observed for lymphocyst formation. By improving postoperative bladder 
function, early intervention of acupuncture may provide a valuable alternative
method to prevent bladder dysfunctional disorders and urinary tract infection
after radical hysterectomy.

PMCID: PMC4009289
PMID: 24839455  [PubMed]


73. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:328657. doi: 10.1155/2014/328657.
Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Effects of acupuncture applied to sanyinjiao with different stimuli on uterine
contraction and microcirculation in rats with dysmenorrhea of cold coagulation
syndrome.

Hsu WS(1), Shen XY(1), Yang JM(1), Luo L(1), Zhang L(1), Qi DD(1), Shen SX(1),
Zhu SP(1), Zhao YF(1), Ren XX(1), Guo MW(1), Li XH(1), Ji B(1), Zhang LF(1), Zhu 
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
No. 11 Bei San Huan Dong Lu, Chao Yang District, Beijing 100029, China.

In this study, we try to evaluate the effects of acupuncture stimulation with
different amounts at Sanyinjiao (SP6) on uterine contraction and uterus
microcirculation in rats with dysmenorrhea of cold coagulation syndrome and to
explore whether there is direct relativity between "De qi" and needle stimulus
intensity. Diestrus female rats were randomly divided into 4 groups, including
saline control group, model control group, "A" stimulus group (with strong
stimulus), and "B" stimulus group (with weak stimulus). We found that
dysmenorrhea rats of the cold coagulation syndrome present a high intensity in
uterine tension and high contraction of microvascular diameter. Acupuncture
applied with two different stimuli could relieve the symptoms, but, compared with
"B" stimulus, "A" stimulus leads to better outcomes on reducing uterine
contraction and increasing diameter of uterine microvascular; moreover, hand
manipulation during needling mediates the curative effect on the microvascular
diameter. Our finding indicates that using thick needles and deep insertion with 
hand manipulation are more effective and achieve desired level of "De qi" in
dysmenorrhea rats.

PMCID: PMC4000648
PMID: 24812566  [PubMed]


74. J Wound Ostomy Continence Nurs. 2014 May-Jun;41(3):268-72. doi:
10.1097/WON.0000000000000025.

Effect of electroacupuncture combined with tolterodine on treating female mixed
urinary incontinence.

Jin C(1), Zhou X, Pang R.

Author information: 
(1)Chunlan Jin, MD, L.Ac., Attending physician, Institute of Acupuncture and
Moxibustion, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, and Division of
Gynecology, Hospital of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Dong Cheng District, Beijing, China. Xinyao Zhou, MD, Attending
physician, Division of Internal Medicine, Guang An Men Hospital, China Academy of
Chinese Medical Sciences, Xi Cheng District, Beijing, China. Ran Pang, MD,
Attending surgeon, Division of Urology, Guang An Men Hospital, China Academy of
Chinese Medical Sciences, Xi Cheng District, Beijing, China, and Visiting
scientist, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

PURPOSE: To examine the effectiveness of combination therapy of
electroacupuncture and tolterodine in treating female patients with mixed urinary
incontinence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy-one women with mixed urinary incontinence were
recruited to receive electroacupuncture therapy or combination therapy with
electroacupuncture and tolterodine 2 mg orally twice a day for 8 weeks. In
electroacupuncture therapy, the acupoints, including BL32 (Ci Liao), BL35 (Hui
Yang), SP6 (San Yin Jiao), and ST36 (Zu San Li), were selected with the
stimulation of a low-frequency (20 Hz) disperse-dense wave. The International
Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire score, the number of incontinence
episodes, and urine leakage were measured before and after the treatment to
evaluate the effect.
RESULTS: Response rates were 73.5% and 78.4% in electroacupuncture therapy group 
and in the combination therapy group respectively. No significant differences
were found when group outcomes were compared. The International Consultation on
Incontinence Questionnaire score, the number of incontinence episodes, and urine 
leakage improved significantly (P < .001) after 8 weeks compared with baseline
values in both groups. Significantly more patients in the combination therapy
group experienced more than 50% reduction in the number of incontinent episodes
than in the electroacupuncture group (75.7% vs 58.8%, P < .01). They also had
significantly less urine leakage than those in electroacupuncture therapy group
(11.2 ± 7.6 g vs 15 ± 9.1 g) (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: The effect of electroacupuncture for female mixed urinary
incontinence may be enhanced by tolterodine.

PMID: 24805179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:485043. doi: 10.1155/2014/485043.
Epub 2014 Mar 19.

Electroacupuncture reduces hyperalgesia after injections of acidic saline in
rats.

Maciel LY(1), da Cruz KM(2), de Araujo AM(3), Silva ZM(1), Badauê-Passos D Jr(4),
Santana-Filho VJ(5), Desantana JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Health Science, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju,
SE, Brazil. (2)Graduate Program in Physiological Science, Federal University of
Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil. (3)Department of Physical Therapy, Federal
University of Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil. (4)Graduate Program in Health
Science, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil ; Graduate Program in
Physiological Science, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil ;
Department of Physiology, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil.
(5)Graduate Program in Health Science, Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju,
SE, Brazil ; Graduate Program in Physiological Science, Federal University of
Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil ; Department of Physical Therapy, Federal University
of Sergipe, Aracaju, SE, Brazil.

Background. Injections of acidic saline into the gastrocnemius muscle in rats
produce a bilateral long-lasting hyperalgesia similar to fibromyalgia in humans. 
No previous study investigated the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) on this
acidic saline model. This study aimed to identify the effects of EA in the
hyperalgesia produced by repeated intramuscular injections of acidic saline.
Methods. Rats were divided into four groups (n = 6, each group): control,
acupuncture, EA 15<U+2009>Hz, and 100<U+2009>Hz. Left gastrocnemius muscle was injected with
100<U+2009> µ L of pH 4.0 sterile saline twice five days apart. EA, acupuncture, or
control therapy was daily administered (20<U+2009>min) for 5 consecutive days under
anesthesia. Needles were placed in the St36 and Sp6 acupoints. The assessment of 
secondary mechanical hyperalgesia, thermal hyperalgesia, and motor performance
was performed before injections and before and after the treatment performed on
each day. The paw withdrawal threshold was tested using the nonparametric
Kruskal-Wallis test and differences within the group Wilcoxon Matched Pairs. The 
latency and motor performance were tested for ANOVA parametric test for
independent measures, and for differences in the group, we used t-test for paired
samples. Post hoc Tukey test was used for multiple corrections. P values less
than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Results. Indicate that there
was a significant reduction of mechanical withdrawal threshold and paw withdrawal
latency 24 hours following the second injection. Moreover, mechanical and thermal
hyperalgesia were significantly reversed by EA 15, 100<U+2009>Hz, and acupuncture.
Conclusions. The results suggest that EA high and low frequency as well as
acupuncture are effective in reducing hyperalgesia in chronic muscle pain model.

PMCID: PMC3977512
PMID: 24772181  [PubMed]


76. Exp Brain Res. 2014 Sep;232(9):2721-9. doi: 10.1007/s00221-014-3965-2. Epub 2014 
Apr 26.

Depressing effect of electroacupuncture on the spinal non-painful sensory input
of the rat.

Quiroz-González S(1), Segura-Alegría B, Jiménez-Estrada I.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Acupuntura y Rehabilitación, Universidad Estatal del Valle de 
Ecatepec, Av. Central s/n, Esq. Leona Vicario, Col. Valle de Anáhuac, Secc. "A", 
CP 55210, Ecatepec, Estado de México, Mexico, sqg20@yahoo.com.mx.

The aim of this study was to explore the effect of electroacupuncture (EA)
applied in the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) points on the N1 component of 
the cord dorsum potential (CDP) evoked by electrical stimulation of the sural
nerve (SU) in the rat. The experiments were performed in 44 Wistar rats (250-300 
g) anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (2 mg/kg). A bilateral
laminectomy was performed to expose the L3 to S2 segments of the spinal cord. The
SU nerve was exposed and placed on pairs of hook electrodes for electrical
stimulation. The N1-CDPs were recorded with three silver-ball electrodes located 
on the dorsal surface of the L5 to S1 segments. Ipsilateral high and low EA
stimulation (100, 2 Hz, 6 mA, 30 min) induced a considerable reduction in the
amplitude (45 ± 5.6, 41 ± 6.2%) of the N1-CDP recorded at the L6 segmental level.
Recovery of the N1-CDP amplitude occurred approximately 1-3 s after EA.
Sectioning of the saphenous and superficial peroneal nerves reduced the
depressing effect provoked by the EA stimulation (18.7 ± 1.3, 27 ± 3.8%).
Similarly, sectioning of the posterior and anterior tibial, deep peroneal and
gastrocnemius nerves partially reduced the effect provoked by EA (11 ± 1.5, 9.8 ±
1.1, 12.6 ± 1.9%). Intravenous picrotoxin (1 mg/kg) also reduced the action of
low and high EA (23 ± 4.8, 27 ± 5.2%). It is suggested that EA stimulation
depresses non-painful sensory pathways through the activation of specific
inhibitory pathways that receive modulatory actions from other sensory and muscle
afferent inputs in the rat spinal cord.

PMID: 24770863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Caffeine Res. 2013 Sep;3(3):143-148.

Caffeine at Moderate Doses Can Inhibit Acupuncture-Induced Analgesia in a Mouse
Model of Postoperative Pain.

Moré AO(1), Cidral-Filho FJ(2), Mazzardo-Martins L(2), Martins DF(2), Nascimento 
FP(3), Li SM(4), Santos AR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Neurobiologia da Dor e Inflamação, Departamento de Ciências
Fisiológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina , Florianópolis, Brasil . ; Pós-Graduação em Neurociências, Centro de
Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina , Florianópolis,
Brasil . ; Laboratório de Engenharia Biomecânica, Hospital Universitário ,
Florianópolis, Brasil . (2)Laboratório de Neurobiologia da Dor e Inflamação,
Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina , Florianópolis, Brasil . ; Pós-Graduação 
em Neurociências, Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina , Florianópolis, Brasil . (3)Laboratório de Neurobiologia da Dor e
Inflamação, Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina , Florianópolis, Brasil . (4)Departamento 
de Clínica Médica, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina , Florianópolis, Brasil .

BACKGROUND: The use of acupuncture in the treatment of pain conditions has been
extensively investigated. However, the influence of dietary ingredients on
acupuncture-induced analgesia (AA) remains unexplored. Recently, the role of
adenosine receptors in AA has been shown, and caffeine, one of the world's most
commonly consumed dietary ingredients, is an antagonist of these receptors. In
this study, the postincisional pain model was used to investigate caffeine's
influence on AA.
METHOD: Mice submitted to plantar incision surgery were treated with acupuncture 
needling after administration of acute or chronic caffeine. Acupuncture needling 
was performed using two different types of stimuli, manual acupuncture and
electroacupuncture bilaterally in the acupoint SP6.
RESULTS: We found that acute preadministration of caffeine (10<U+2009>mg/kg, i.p.)
completely reversed AA in both types of acupuncture. In the chronic
preadministration, we used two doses that mimicked the average daily caffeine
consumption in Western countries and China. Interestingly, the Western dose of
caffeine (70<U+2009>mg/kg/day) administered during 8 days in the drinking water reversed
AA and the Chinese dose (4<U+2009>mg/kg/day) administered during the same period did
not.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the use of caffeine can inhibit the
analgesic effect of different forms of acupuncture. In addition, our findings
suggest that doses of caffeine relevant to dietary human intake levels could be a
confounding factor in the context of acupuncture research.

PMCID: PMC3777297
PMID: 24761281  [PubMed]


78. J Med Invest. 2014;61(1-2):126-36.

Ctip2-mediated Sp6 transcriptional regulation in dental epithelium-derived cells.

Adiningrat A(1), Tanimura A, Miyoshi K, Yanuaryska RD, Hagita H, Horiguchi T,
Noma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Health Biosciences, the
University of Tokushima Graduate School.

Tooth development relies on the interaction between the oral ectoderm and
underlying mesenchyme, and is regulated by a complex genetic cascade. This
transcriptional cascade is regulated by the spatiotemporal activation and
deactivation of transcription factors. The specificity proteins 6 (Sp6) and
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor-interacting protein 2
(Ctip2) were identified in loss-of-function studies as key transcription factors 
required for tooth development. Ctip2 binds to the Sp6 promoter in vivo; however,
its role in Sp6 expression remains unclear. In this study, we investigated Sp6
transcriptional regulation by Ctip2. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that
Sp6 and Ctip2 colocalize in the rat incisor during tooth development. We examined
whether Ctip2 regulates Sp6 promoter activity in dental epithelial cells.
Cotransfection experiments using serial Sp6 promoter-luciferase constructs and
Ctip2 expression plasmids showed that Ctip2 significantly suppressed the Sp6
second promoter activity, although the Sp6 first promoter activity was
unaffected. Ctip2 was able to bind to the proximal region of the Sp6 first
promoter, as previously demonstrated, and also to the novel distal region of the 
first, and second promoter regions. Our findings indicate that Ctip2 regulates
Sp6 gene expression through direct binding to the Sp6 second promoter region. J. 
Med. Invest. 61: 126-136, February, 2014.

PMID: 24705758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:595963. doi: 10.1155/2014/595963.
Epub 2014 Feb 10.

The Effect of Acupuncture to SP6 on Skin Temperature Changes of SP6 and SP10: An 
Observation of "Deqi".

Yang JM(1), Shen XY(1), Zhang L(1), Shen SX(1), Qi DD(1), Zhu SP(1), Luo L(1),
Ren XX(1), Ji B(1), Zhang LF(1), Li XH(1), Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture, Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, No. 11 Beisanhuan Donglu, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, China.

Background. Deqi sensation is a complex but an important component for
acupuncture effect. In this study, we tried to observe the relationship between
Deqi and skin temperature changes and whether there was some relativity between
Deqi and needle stimulations on cold congealing and dysmenorrhea rat model.
Thirty-two female Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided into four groups
(Saline Control Group, Model Group, Group A with strong stimulation, and Group B 
with small stimulation). Group A and Group B were performed with different
stimulations. We found that, compared with saline control group, model group, and
Group B, Group A showed that the skin temperature changes on right acupoint SP6
and SP10 increased significantly at 5<U+2009>min-10<U+2009>min interval. The skin temperature
changes on left SP6 decreased at instant-5<U+2009>min interval. The skin temperature
changes on right SP10 decreased significantly at instant-5<U+2009>min interval and
10<U+2009>min-20<U+2009>min interval. Thermogenic action along Spleen Meridian of Foot Greater 
Yin was manifested as simultaneous skin temperature increase on right SP6 and
SP10 at 5<U+2009>min-10<U+2009>min interval after needling SP6, which was helpful to illustrate
the relationship between the characteristic of Deqi and needle stimulations.

PMCID: PMC3934096
PMID: 24665334  [PubMed]


80. Acupunct Med. 2014 Jun;32(3):242-9. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2013-010495. Epub 2014
Mar 21.

Role of acupuncture in the management of diabetic painful neuropathy (DPN): a
pilot RCT.

Garrow AP(1), Xing M(2), Vere J(3), Verrall B(3), Wang L(4), Jude EB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Tameside Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Diabetes Centre, Tameside General
Hospital, Ashton-Under-Lyne, Greater Manchester, UK The University of Manchester,
School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, Manchester, Greater Manchester, UK.
(2)Tameside Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Diabetes Centre, Tameside General
Hospital, Ashton-Under-Lyne, Greater Manchester, UK The University of Salford,
School of Health Sciences, Salford, UK. (3)Tameside Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Diabetes Centre, Tameside General Hospital, Ashton-Under-Lyne, Greater
Manchester, UK. (4)Tameside Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Diabetes Centre,
Tameside General Hospital, Ashton-Under-Lyne, Greater Manchester, UK Christie
Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, Greater Manchester, UK. (5)Tameside Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, Diabetes Centre, Tameside General Hospital, Ashton-Under-Lyne, 
Greater Manchester, UK School of Clinical and Laboratory Sciences, The University
of Manchester, Manchester, Greater Manchester, UK.

AIMS: To examine the role of acupuncture in the treatment of diabetic painful
neuropathy (DPN) using a single-blind, placebo-controlled RCT and to collect data
that would be required in a future definitive study of the efficacy of
acupuncture in DPN.
METHODS: 45 patients were allocated to receive a 10-week course either of real
(53%) or sham (47%) acupuncture. Five standardised acupuncture points on the
lower limb of each leg were used in the study: LR3, KI3, SP6, SP10 and ST36.
Outcome measures included the Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms and Signs 
(LANSS) scale, lower limb pain (Visual Analogue Scale, VAS); Sleep Problem Scale 
(SPS); Measure Yourself Medical Outcome Profile (MYMOP); 36-item Short Form 36
Health Survey and resting blood pressure (BP).
RESULTS: Over the 10-week treatment period, small improvements were seen in VAS
-15 (-26 to -3.5), MYMOP -0.89 (-1.4 to -0.3), SPS -2.5 (-4.2 to -0.82) and
resting diastolic BP -5.2 (-10.4 to -0.14) in the true acupuncture group. In
contrast, there was little change in those receiving sham acupuncture. A moderate
treatment effect in favour of active acupuncture was detected in MYMOP scores
-0.66 (-0.96 to -0.35) but non-significant effect sizes in LANSS Pain Scale -0.37
(-2.2 to 1.4), resting diastolic BP -0.50 (-3.0 to 1.99) and the SPS -0.51 (-2.2 
to 1.16).
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated the practicality and feasibility of acupuncture
as an additional treatment for people with DPN. The treatment was well tolerated 
with no appreciable side effects. Larger randomised trials are needed to confirm 
the clinical and cost-effectiveness of acupuncture in the treatment of DPN.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN number: 39740785.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24657491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Pain Med. 2014 Jun;15(6):910-20. doi: 10.1111/pme.12392. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

A randomized controlled trial of single point acupuncture in primary
dysmenorrhea.

Liu CZ(1), Xie JP, Wang LP, Liu YQ, Song JS, Chen YY, Shi GX, Zhou W, Gao SZ, Li 
SL, Xing JM, Ma LX, Wang YX, Zhu J, Liu JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture-Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing, China; Acupuncture and Moxibustion Department, Beijing
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine affiliated to Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Acupuncture is often used for primary dysmenorrhea. But there is no
convincing evidence due to low methodological quality. We aim to assess immediate
effect of acupuncture at specific acupoint compared with unrelated acupoint and
nonacupoint on primary dysmenorrhea.
METHODS: The Acupuncture Analgesia Effect in Primary Dysmenorrhoea-II is a
multicenter controlled trial conducted in six large hospitals of China. Patients 
who met inclusion criteria were randomly assigned to classic acupoint (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>167), 
unrelated acupoint (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>167), or non-acupoint (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>167) group on a 1:1:1 basis.
They received three sessions with electro-acupuncture at a classic acupoint
(Sanyinjiao, SP6), or an unrelated acupoint (Xuanzhong, GB39), or nonacupoint
location, respectively. The primary outcome was subjective pain as measured by a 
100-mm visual analog scale (VAS). Measurements were obtained at 0, 5, 10, 30, and
60 minutes following the first intervention. In addition, patients scored changes
of general complaints using Cox retrospective symptom scales (RSS-Cox) and
7-point verbal rating scale (VRS) during three menstrual cycles. Secondary
outcomes included VAS score for average pain, pain total time, additional in-bed 
time, and proportion of participants using analgesics during three menstrual
cycles.
FINDINGS: Five hundred and one people underwent random assignment. The primary
comparison of VAS scores following the first intervention demonstrated that
classic acupoint group was more effective both than unrelated acupoint (-4.0<U+2009>mm, 
95% CI -7.1 to -0.9, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010) and nonacupoint (-4.0<U+2009>mm, 95% CI -7.0 to -0.9,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012) groups. However, no significant differences were detected among the
three acupuncture groups for RSS-Cox or VRS outcomes. The per-protocol analysis
showed similar pattern. No serious adverse events were noted.
CONCLUSION: Specific acupoint acupuncture produced a statistically, but not
clinically, significant effect compared with unrelated acupoint and nonacupoint
acupuncture in primary dysmenorrhea patients. Future studies should focus on
effects of multiple points acupuncture on primary dysmenorrhea.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24636695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Med Sci Monit. 2014 Mar 12;20:406-12. doi: 10.12659/MSM.890111.

Effect of electroacupuncture at Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) acupoints on 
adrenocortical function in etomidate anesthesia patients.

Yu JB(1), Dong SA(1), Gong LR(1), Wang M(1), Mu R(1), Li C(1), Zhang Y(1), Li
ZD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nankai Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND: We aimed to investigate the effect of electroacupuncture at Zusanli
(ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) on adrenocortical function in patients with etomidate
anesthesia.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We randomly divided 80 patients who underwent elective
surgery into 4 groups: group etomidate (ETO), group etomidate +
electroacupuncture (ETO+EA), group etomidate + sham acupuncture (ETO+SEA), and
group propofol (PRO). The patients in group ETO, ETO+EA, and ETO+SEA were induced
with etomidate and sufentanil and maintained with intravenous infusion of
etomidate and remifentanil. Group PRO was induced with propofol and sufentanil
and maintained with propofol and remifentanil. Group ETO+EA received
electro-acupuncture stimulation at Zusanli and Sanyinjiao throughout the
operation, while group ETO+SEA received electro-acupuncture stimulation at
non-acupoints. We recorded the values of MAP, HR, BIS, CVP, cortisol, ACTH,
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and arterial blood gas during the perioperative
period.
RESULTS: Cortisol concentrations were significantly higher at all times except T0
in group ETO+EA compared with group ETO. The ACTH concentrations were lower in
group ETO+EA than that in group ETO at point T3.
CONCLUSIONS: Electroacupuncture at ST 36 and SP 6 can mitigate the adrenal
cortical inhibition induced by etomidate and can reduce the secretion of
catecholamines during surgery.

PMCID: PMC3958570
PMID: 24621826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Chin J Integr Med. 2014 Feb;20(2):130-5. doi: 10.1007/s11655-013-1584-6. Epub
2014 Mar 6.

Study on acupuncture parameters impacting on the acupuncture effect using cluster
analysis in a rat model with middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Chang XB(1), Wang S, Meng ZH, Fan XN, Yang X, Shi XM.

Author information: 
(1)First Hospital Affiliated to Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Tianjin, 300193, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of acupuncture parameters on the
acupuncture effect through the cluster analysis in Wistar rat model with middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO).
METHODS: Duplicated MCAO models by Zea-longa's thread ligation and chose rats
with 1-3 scores assessed by Zausinger's six-score method to be grouped. The rats 
were divided into 6 basic control groups [(including a normal group, a sham
group, a model control group, a model group without intervention, a Nimodipine
group, a lateral-to-Renzhong (DU6) group] and 6 acupuncture groups [a Neiguan
(PC6) group, a Weizhong (BL40) group, a Sanyinjiao (SP6) group, a Chize (LU5)
group, a Renzhong (DU6) group and a Feixue (non-acupoint) group]. In the
acupuncture groups, for every acupoint or needling site, 9 different parameters
[2 factors (frequency and time) and 3 levels (180, 120, and 60 cpm of the
frequency and 5, 60, and 180 s of the time)] were set respectively by the
orthogonal intersection method, in total 54 groups. The rats were treated by
acupuncture with a lifting-thrusting manipulation once every 12 h, in total 6
times. Neurobehavioral scores, cerebral blood flow, infarction rate,
microcirculation, light microscopy, etc. were measured. The factor analysis was
first applied to get the comprehensive effect scores of the samples in the
acupuncture groups and then by which the cluster analysis was made with the
statistical software of SPSS17.0.
RESULTS: For the Neiguan (PC6) group, the exceptional results of acupuncture
comprehensive effect were parameters 7, 8, 9, 10; the valid results were
parameters 2, 3, 4, and the invalid were parameters 5, 6. For the Weizhong (BL40)
group, the exceptional results were parameters 2, 4; the valid results were
parameters 3, 5, 6, 7, and the invalid were parameters 8, 9, 10. For the Chize
(LU5) group, the exceptional results were parameters 7, 8; the valid results were
parameters 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10; and the invalid was parameter 2. For the Sanyinjiao
(SP6) group, the exceptional results were parameters 4, 6; the valid results were
parameters 2, 3, 5; and the invalid were parameters 7, 8, 9,10. For the Renzhong 
(DU6) group, the exceptional results were parameters 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10; the valid
results were parameters 2, 5; and the invalid was parameter 8. For the
Non-acupoint group, the exceptional result was parameter 10; the valid results
were parameters 2, 3, 4, 7, 9; and the invalid were parameters 5, 6, 8.
CONCLUSIONS: For each meridian acupoint, different acupuncture parameters could
consequently get a different acupuncture effect; each meridian acupoint had the
most suitable or optimal acupuncture parameters; acupuncture parameters might be 
the main factors impacting on acupuncture effect.

PMID: 24619238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Feb 21;14:69. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-69.

Effect of acupuncture on Deqi traits and pain intensity in primary dysmenorrhea: 
analysis of data from a larger randomized controlled trial.

Shi GX, Li QQ, Liu CZ(1), Zhu J, Wang LP, Wang J, Han LL, Guan LP, Wu MM.

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture and Moxibustion Department, Beijing Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, affiliated to Capital Medical University, 23 Meishuguanhou
Street, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100010, China. lcz623780@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Deqi is a central concept in traditional Chinese acupuncture. We
performed a secondary analysis on data from a larger randomized controlled trial 
(RCT) in order to assess the effect of acupuncture on deqi traits and pain
intensity in primary dysmenorrhea.
METHODS: A total of 60 primary dysmenorrhea patients were enrolled and randomly
assigned to one of three treatment groups. Acupuncture was given at SP6, GB39 or 
nonacupoint. Subjective pain was measured by a 100-mm visual analogue scale (VAS)
before and after acupuncture. The Massachusetts General Hospital acupuncture
sensation scales (MASS) with minor modification was used to rate deqi sensations 
during acupuncture.
RESULTS: The results showed that VAS scores of pain after acupuncture were
significantly decreased comparing to before acupuncture treatment in all three
groups (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000). However, no significant differences were found among three
groups at the beginning or end of acupuncture treatment (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.928, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.419).
CONCLUSIONS: There was no statistical difference among three groups in terms of
intensity of deqi feeling. The types of sensation were similar across the groups 
with only minor differences among them.
TRIAL REGISTRATION:
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Controlled-Trials.com ISRCTN24863192.

PMCID: PMC3933504
PMID: 24555788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):252-60. doi: 10.1111/his.12392. Epub 2014 May 16.

Immunohistochemical assessment of Ki67 with antibodies SP6 and MIB1 in primary
breast cancer: a comparison of prognostic value and reproducibility.

Ekholm M(1), Beglerbegovic S, Grabau D, Lövgren K, Malmström P, Hartman L, Fernö 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Ryhov County Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden; Division of 
Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden.

AIMS: To compare SP6 and MIB1 antibodies for assessment of Ki67 in primary breast
cancer with regard to prognostic value and reproducibility.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A cohort of 237 premenopausal women with node-negative
breast cancer, mainly (87%) not treated with adjuvant systemic therapy, was used.
Assessment of Ki67 (SP6 and MIB1) was performed on tissue microarray by three
different investigators. The seventh decile was applied for cut-off. Distant
disease-free survival (DDFS) was chosen as endpoint and the follow-up was
restricted to 5 years. Eighty-nine per cent of the samples were classified into
the same proliferation group, irrespective of antibody used. For both antibodies,
high Ki67 was associated with inferior DDFS in univariable analyses (SP6: HR 2.5,
P = 0.01; and MIB1: HR 2.8, P = 0.004), but failed to reach statistical
significance for DDFS in multivariable analyses adjusted for HER2, age, and
tumour size (SP6: HR 2.0, P = 0.074; and MIB1: HR 2.2, P = 0.058). The agreement 
between different assessors was somewhat higher for MIB1 than for SP6 (<U+03BA>
0.83-0.88 versus 0.72-0.77).
CONCLUSIONS: SP6 was not superior to MIB1, but the two antibodies were comparable
in the assessment of Ki67. Both MIB1 and SP6 could therefore be considered for
prognostic use in primary breast cancer.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24527721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:216503. doi: 10.1155/2014/216503.
Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Acupuncture Stimulation Attenuates Impaired Emotional-Like Behaviors and
Activation of the Noradrenergic System during Protracted Abstinence following
Chronic Morphine Exposure in Rats.

Lee B(1), Sur BJ(2), Shim I(3), Hahm DH(3), Lee H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture and Meridian Science Research Center, College of Oriental
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (2)The Graduate School of Basic Science of Oriental Medicine, 
College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of
Korea. (3)Acupuncture and Meridian Science Research Center, College of Oriental
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea ; The Graduate School of Basic Science of Oriental Medicine,
College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of
Korea.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether acupuncture stimulation
attenuates withdrawal-induced behaviors in the rats during protracted abstinence 
following chronic morphine exposure. To do this, male rats were first exposed to 
morphine gradually from 20 to 100<U+2009>mg/kg for 5 days, and subsequently naloxone was
injected once to extend despair-related withdrawal behaviors for 4 weeks.
Acupuncture stimulation was performed once at the SP6 (Sanyinjiao) acupoint on
rat's; hind leg for 5<U+2009>min during protracted abstinence from morphine. The
acupuncture stimulation significantly decreased despair-like behavior deficits in
the forced swimming test and low sociability in the open-field test as well as
increased open-arm exploration in the elevated plus maze test in the last week of
4-week withdrawal period. Also the acupuncture stimulation significantly
suppressed the increase in the hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) 
expression, the decrease in the tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the locus
coeruleus, and the decrease in the hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
mRNA expression, induced by repeated injection of morphine. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that the acupuncture stimulation of SP6 significantly
reduces withdrawal-induced behaviors, induced by repeated administration of
morphine in rats, possibly through the modulation of hypothalamic CRF and the
central noradrenergic system.

PMCID: PMC3912640
PMID: 24527041  [PubMed]


87. Vet Rec. 2014 Feb 22;174(8):198. doi: 10.1136/vr.102059. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

The effects of plastic spectacles on the condition and behaviour of pheasants.

Butler DA(1), Davis C.

Author information: 
(1)The Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF, UK.

Plastic spectacles are often fitted to pheasants in laying pens to reduce feather
pecking and egg eating. This study examined the effects of spectacles on the
physiological condition and behaviour of pheasants in harem and flock laying
pens. In 2006 and 2007, data were collected from 21 game farms across England. On
each site, two identical pens were randomly allocated a treatment, with or
without spectacles. The physiological condition of pheasants in each treatment
pen was assessed before and after the laying season. In flock pens, the behaviour
of spectacled and non-spectacled pheasants was also assessed weekly. Detailed
records of egg collections and mortality were also kept. Spectacles had no effect
on the behaviour of male pheasants but affected the behaviour of females by
reducing pecking and increasing head shaking/scratching. Although spectacles
halved feather damage in females, and at least halved incidences of skin damage
in both sexes, they increased bill and nostril damage in females while causing no
detectable damage in males. Egg collections and mortality rates did not differ
between spectacled and non-spectacled pens.

PMID: 24420872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Dermatol Sci. 2014 Apr;74(1):23-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.11.015. Epub
2013 Dec 21.

Effects of electroacupuncture on capsaicin-induced model of atopic dermatitis in 
rats.

Jung DL(1), Lee SD(2), Choi IH(3), Na HS(4), Hong SU(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oriental Opthalmotolaryngology & Dermatology, College of Korean 
Medicine, Dongguk University, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Acupuncture &
Moxibusition, Dongguk University, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Oriental
Opthalmotolaryngology & Dermatology, Kyunghee University, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Physiology, Korea University, Republic of Korea. (5)Department
of Oriental Opthalmotolaryngology & Dermatology, College of Korean Medicine,
Dongguk University, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: heenthsu@daum.net.

BACKGROUND: Electroacupuncture (EA) is used as a prescription to treat pruritus
and atopic dermatitis. Whether EA affects experimental itch in rat models of
immunologic or neuronal damages, however, is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was designed to determine the therapeutic effects
of high-frequency EA on atopic dermatitis-like lesions in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Capsaicin (50mg/kg) was subcutaneously administered rat
pups within 48h after birth. Rats then underwent 30min of EA at six acupoints
(bilateral BL13, and unilateral LI11, ST36, SP10, SP6) every other day (EA group)
for 3 weeks. Measurements of IgE, mast cells, scratching behavior, dynorphin
release, skin thickness and dermatitis score were obtained.
RESULTS: Only the dermatitis score and dynorphin expression were decreased in the
EA group compared with the control non-EA group.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that high-frequency EA alleviates pruritus of atopic
dermatitis-like lesions in rats induced by capsaicin injection, via the release
of dynorphin. These findings indicate a new potential therapeutic approach for
the amelioration of symptoms of atopic dermatitis.

Copyright © 2013 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24418195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Acupunct Med. 2014 Apr;32(2):194-6. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2013-010491. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

Acupuncture for neuropathic pain due to bortezomib in a patient with multiple
myeloma.

Mandiroglu S(1), Cevik C, Ayli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Ankara Physical Medicine
and Rehabilitation Training and Research Hospital, , Ankara, Turkey.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is characterised by an increase in plasma cells,
particularly in the bone marrow but also in other organs and systems, and with
the abnormal production of immunoglobulin. Bortezomib, a current treatment
option, inhibits angiogenesis by proteasome inhibition and is known to be
effective in the treatment of MM. Peripheral neuropathy (PN) is a common
dose-related side effect of bortezomib in patients with MM. We describe a case of
PN due to bortezomib treatment which responded dramatically to acupuncture
treatment, enabling his bortezomib treatment to continue. The patient was a
74-year-old man with pain, numbness, tingling and weakness in his hands and feet 
after 22 days of bortezomib treatment given by the haematology clinic. His
neuropathic pain score was 8/10. There were no autonomic symptoms.
Electroneurophysiological testing confirmed sensorimotor PN. Acupuncture
treatment was planned as his neuropathic pain continued. Acupuncture was
administered bilaterally to ST36, SP6 and LI4 15 times (every other day in the
first five sessions and then twice a week). The numbness, tingling and pain
symptoms substantially decreased after the first two treatments. After the 15th
session acupuncture treatment was continued once a month. At the end of the sixth
month the neuropathic pain assessment score was 0/10. There was no side effect of
acupuncture treatment. Acupuncture seems promising as a complementary medical
treatment for neuropathic pain from bortezomib-induced PN. Clinical studies
involving more cases and electrophysiological studies are necessary to
investigate the effectiveness of acupuncture.

PMID: 24389811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mod Rheumatol. 2014 Sep;24(5):808-15. doi: 10.3109/14397595.2013.868070. Epub
2013 Dec 29.

Association between E-selectin expression and histopathological modification of
glomerular lesions by non-nephritogenic IgM antibodies in experimental lupus
nephritis.

Nakatani K(1), Asai O, Sakan H, Yoshimoto S, Terada M, Nose M, Iwano M, Konishi
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Kyoto Yamashiro General Medical
Center , Kizugawa, Kyoto , Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the role played by E-selectin in bystander IgM-mediated
modification of glomerular lesions in experimental lupus nephritis.
METHODS: Experimental lupus SCID mice were induced by an intraperitoneal
injection of clone 7B6.8, which was derived from a MRL/lpr mouse and shown to
induce wire-loop type glomerular lesions. Mice were subsequently administered
clone Sp6, a non-nephritogenic IgM antibody- producing hybridoma. E-selectin
expression was then evaluated in glomeruli showing histopathological conversion
of lesions from wire-loop-like to a cell-proliferative form. We also investigated
the effects of a circulating soluble form of E-selectin (sE-selectin) on the
modification of glomerular lesions in this lupus model.
RESULTS: In experimental lupus mice, glomerular E-selectin expression
significantly increased during the conversion from wire-loop-like glomerular
lesions to a cell-proliferative type mediated by a non-nephritogenic bystander
IgM antibody in presence of a nephritogenic antibody. Intraglomerular
infiltration of CD68 + macrophages correlated significantly with the glomerular
level of E-selectin expression. In addition, overexpression of circulating
sE-selectin significantly suppressed conversion to cell-proliferative glomerular 
lesions and glomerular macrophage infiltration in these lupus model mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The histopathological modification of lupus nephritis by
non-nephritogenic bystander IgM antibodies is associated in part with glomerular 
E-selectin expression.

PMID: 24372297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):74-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.084. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

The goldfish hAT-family transposon Tgf2 is capable of autonomous excision in
zebrafish embryos.

Cheng LD(1), Jiang XY(1), Tian YM(1), Chen J(1), Zou SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Aquatic Genetic Resources, Shanghai Ocean
University, Huchenghuan Road 999, Shanghai 201306, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Aquatic Genetic Resources, Shanghai Ocean University, Huchenghuan Road
999, Shanghai 201306, China. Electronic address: smzou@shou.edu.cn.

The goldfish (Carassius auratus) Tgf2 transposon is a vertebrate DNA transposon
that belongs to the hAT transposon family. In this study, we constructed plasmids
containing either the full-length Tgf2 transposon (pTgf2 plasmid) or a
partially-deleted Tgf2 transposon (<U+0394>pTgf2 plasmid), and microinjected these
plasmids into fertilized zebrafish (Danio rerio) eggs at the one- to two-cell
stage. DNA extracted from the embryos was analyzed by PCR to assess transient
excision, if any, of the exogenous plasmid and to verify whether Tgf2 is an
autonomous transposon. The results showed that excision-specific bands were not
detected in embryos injected with the <U+0394>pTgf2 plasmid, while bands of 300-500bp
were detected in embryos injected with pTgf2, which indicated that the
full-length Tgf2-containing plasmid could undergo autonomous excision in
zebrafish embryos. DNA cloned from 24 embryos injected with pTgf2 was sequenced, 
and the results suggested that Tgf2 underwent self-excision in zebrafish embryos.
Cloning and PCR analysis of DNA extracted from embryos co-injected with <U+0394>pTgf2
and in vitro-transcribed transposase mRNA indicated that
partially-deleted-Tgf2-containing <U+0394>pTgf2 plasmid also underwent excision, in the 
presence of functional transposase mRNA. DNA cloned from 25 embryos co-injected
with <U+0394>pTgf2 and transposase mRNA was sequenced, and the results suggested that
partially-deleted Tgf2 transposons plasmids were excised. These results
demonstrated that excisions of Tgf2 transposons were mediated by the Tgf2
transposase, which in turn confirmed that Tgf2 is an autonomous transposon.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24321692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:817674. doi: 10.1155/2013/817674.
Epub 2013 Oct 31.

Subtoxic Levels of Apigenin Inhibit Expression and Secretion of VEGF by Uveal
Melanoma Cells via Suppression of ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt Pathways.

Chao SC(1), Huang SC, Hu DN, Lin HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua 500,
Taiwan ; Institute of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan.

The effects of apigenin on the expression of VEGF in uveal melanoma cells have
not been reported. We studied this effect and relevant signaling pathways in two 
human uveal melanoma cell lines (SP6.5 and C918). ELISA assay revealed that the
constitutive secretion of VEGF by uveal melanoma cells was 21-fold higher than
that in normal uveal melanocytes. Apigenin at subtoxic levels (1-5<U+2009> µ M)
significantly suppressed the secretion of VEGF in a dose- and time-dependent
manner in melanoma cells. VEGF levels in the conditioned culture media from SP6.5
and C918 cell lines treated with 5<U+2009> µ M apigenin for 24<U+2009>h reduced to 29% and 21% 
of those in cells not treated with apigenin, respectively. RT-PCR analysis found 
that apigenin also decreased the expression of VEGF mRNA in melanoma cells. ELISA
study of various signal pathways showed that apigenin significantly decreased
phosphorylated Akt and ERK1/2 but increased phosphorylated JNK1/2 and p38 MAPK
levels in melanoma cells. PI3K/Akt or ERK1/2 inhibitors significantly decreased, 
but JNK1/2 and p38 MAPK inhibitors did not influence the secretion of VEGF by
melanoma cells, suggesting that apigenin suppresses the secretion of VEGF mainly 
through the inhibition of PI3K/Akt and ERK1/2 pathways.

PMCID: PMC3833119
PMID: 24288566  [PubMed]


93. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:205082. doi: 10.1155/2013/205082.
Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Zeaxanthin Induces Apoptosis in Human Uveal Melanoma Cells through Bcl-2 Family
Proteins and Intrinsic Apoptosis Pathway.

Bi MC(1), Rosen R, Zha RY, McCormick SA, Song E, Hu DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 71 Xinmin
Street, Changchun 130021, China.

The cytotoxic effects of zeaxanthin on two human uveal melanoma cell lines (SP6.5
and C918) and related signaling pathways were studied and compared to effects on 
normal ocular cells (uveal melanocytes, retinal pigment epithelial cells, and
scleral fibroblasts). MTT assay revealed that zeaxanthin reduced the cell
viability of melanoma cells in a dose-dependent manner (10, 30, and 100<U+2009> µ M),
with IC50 at 40.8 and 28.7<U+2009> µ M in SP6.5 and C918 cell lines, respectively.
Zeaxanthin did not affect the viability of normal ocular cells even at the
highest levels tested (300<U+2009> µ M), suggesting that zeaxanthin has a selectively
cytotoxic effect on melanoma cells. Zeaxanthin induced apoptosis in melanoma
cells as indicated by annexin V and ethidium III flow cytometry. Western blot
analysis demonstrated that zeaxanthin decreased the expression of antiapoptotic
proteins (Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL) and increased the expression of proapoptotic proteins
(Bak and Bax) in zeaxanthin-treated melanoma cells. Zeaxanthin increased
mitochondrial permeability as determined by JC-1 fluorescein study. Zeaxanthin
also increased the level of cytosol cytochrome c and caspase-9 and -3 activities,
but not caspase-8, as measured by ELISA assay or colorimetric assay. All of these
findings indicate that the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway is involved in
zeaxanthin-induced apoptosis in uveal melanoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3810440
PMID: 24223611  [PubMed]


94. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2013 Nov 1;2013(11). pii: pdb.prot078527. doi:
10.1101/pdb.prot078527.

Expression and purification of active recombinant T7 RNA polymerase from E. coli.

Rio DC.

For large-scale transcription reactions or for cost savings, a laboratory may
want to prepare its own recombinant T7-, SP6-, or T3-phage RNA polymerases. It is
convenient to perform this preparation every 2-3 years and have a consistent and 
reliable source of phage RNA polymerase for many in vitro transcription
reactions. In the protocol presented here, the recombinant plasmid expressing T7 
RNA polymerase (RNAP) as a his6-tagged molecule is under an isopropyl
ß-d-1-thio-galactopyranoside (IPTG)-inducible promoter. The bacteria are lysed by
sonication, the his6-tagged protein in the bacterial lysate is purified by
binding to Ni-NTA agarose, and the resin is then extensively washed and eluted
with imidazole. The purified enzyme is dialyzed against a glycerol-containing
storage buffer and can then be stored for months or years at -20°C.

PMID: 24184761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Chin J Integr Med. 2013 Nov;19(11):853-8. doi: 10.1007/s11655-013-1530-7. Epub
2013 Oct 30.

Cluster analysis for acupoint specificity of acupuncture effect based on cerebral
infarction rat model.

Chang XB(1), Fan XN, Wang S, Meng ZH, Yang X, Shi XM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Acupuncture-Moxibustion and Tuina, Tianjin University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 300193, China.

Erratum in
    Chin J Integr Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):48.

OBJECTIVES: To study the acupoint specificity through the comprehensive
evaluation of the acupuncture effect on rat model with the middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO).
METHODS: Duplicated MCAO model by Zea-longa's thread ligation was assessed by
Zausinger's six-point method, and rats with 1-3 scores were chosen to be grouped.
According to the randomized and controlled principle, rats were divided into 6
basic control groups (including normal group, sham group, model control group,
model group without intervention, Nimodipine group, lateral-to-Renzhong group)
and 6 acupuncture groups [including Neiguan (PC6) group, Weizhong (BL40) group,
Chize (LU5) group, Sanyinjiao (SP6) group, Renzhong (DU6) group and non-acupoint 
group]; in each acupoint or non-acupoint 9 different parameter combinations were 
respectively set by orthogonal intersection method. There were in total 60
groups, and each group had 12 rats. The rats were treated by acupuncture with the
lifting-thrusting manipulation every 12 h, in total 6 times. Indices of
neurobehavioral scores, cerebral blood flow, infarction rate, microcirculation,
and light microscope, etc. were measured. In order to comprehensively evaluate
the acupuncture effect to research the specificity of acupoint, a cluster
analysis was made with SPSS17.0 for the comprehensive effect scores of the
samples computed according to the comprehensive evaluation models, and then
sorting and classification were made for the comprehensive effect scores.
RESULTS: In the acupuncture groups every acupoint had different therapeutic
effect due to different acupuncture parameter combinations; among the acupuncture
groups the orders of curative effect were as followings: Neiguan group was of
exceptional result, Weizhong group and Sanyinjiao group were of valid results in 
upper level, Chize group and Renzhong group were of valid results in lower level,
and non-acupoint group was of invalid result; the therapeutic result of acupoint 
group was superior to non-acupoint group; and the curative effect of acupuncture 
group was also superior to basic control group.
CONCLUSION: The acupoint has the specificity of acupuncture effect, and the
acupoint specificity is relative.

PMID: 24170631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:205316. doi: 10.1155/2013/205316.
Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Electroacupuncture at 2/100<U+2009>hz activates antinociceptive spinal mechanisms
different from those activated by electroacupuncture at 2 and 100<U+2009>hz in responder
rats.

da Silva JR(1), da Silva ML, Prado WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São
Paulo, Avenue Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

We examined the effects of intrathecal injection of desipramine and fluoxetine
(selective inhibitors of norepinephrine and 5-HT uptake, resp.), thiorphan and
neostigmine (inhibitors of enkephalinase and acetylcholinesterase, resp.),
gabapentin (a GABA releaser), and vigabatrin (an inhibitor of GABA-transaminase) 
on the antinociception induced by 2<U+2009>Hz, 100<U+2009>Hz, or 2/100<U+2009>Hz electroacupuncture
(EA) applied bilaterally to the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) acupoints
using the rat tail-flick test. We show that 2<U+2009>Hz EA antinociception lasts longer 
after the administration of drugs that increase the spinal availability of
norepinephrine, acetylcholine, or GABA; 100<U+2009>Hz EA antinociception lasts longer
after drug that increases the spinal availability of norepinephrine; 2/100<U+2009>Hz EA 
antinociception lasts longer after drugs that increase the spinal availability of
endogenous opioids or GABA. We conclude that the antinociceptive effect of
2/100<U+2009>Hz EA is different from the synergistic effect of alternate stimulation at 
2 and 100<U+2009>Hz because the effect of the former is not changed by increasing the
spinal availability of serotonin and lasts longer after the administration of
vigabatrin. The combination of EA with drugs that increase the availability of
spinal neurotransmitters involved in the modulation of nociceptive inputs may
result in a synergistic antinociceptive effect in the rat tail-flick test.

PMCID: PMC3789442
PMID: 24159340  [PubMed]


97. Oncol Lett. 2013 Aug;6(2):329-335. Epub 2013 Jun 20.

ER-a36-mediated gastric cancer cell proliferation via the c-Src pathway.

Wang X(1), Deng H, Zou F, Fu Z, Chen Y, Wang Z, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Science
of Wuhan University, P.R. China.

Previously, a novel variant of estrogen receptor (ER)-a, ER-a36, was identified
and cloned and reported to mainly mediate non-genomic estrogen signaling. More
recently, we identified that ER-a36 is important for the invasion and lymph node 
metastasis of human gastric cancer. In the present study, the c-Src signaling
pathway was demonstrated to be involved in the non-genomic estrogen signaling
mediated by ER-a36 in SGC7901 gastric cancer cells. SGC7901 cells were subjected 
to the siRNA-mediated knockdown of ER-a36 (PLKO.1-PURO-SP6-ER-a36-L) or
transfected with an ER-a36 upregulated expression plasmid (PLJM1-ER-a36-H) and
treated with 17ß-estradiol (E2ß) and PP2, a c-Src protein inhibitor. The
expression of ER-a36 and c-src/p-c-Src and cyclin D1 was examined by western blot
analysis, and tumor cell growth was analyzed by cell proliferation and nude mouse
xenograft assays. The ER variant, ER-a36, was shown to enhance gastric cancer
cell proliferation through activation of the membrane-initiated c-Src signaling
pathways, indicating that ER-a36 is important for the regulation of proliferation
in gastric cancer. In addition, ER-a36 was shown to directly interact with c-Src 
by immunoprecipitation. The results of the present study indicate that the use of
ER-a36 may be a targeted therapeutic approach in gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3789085
PMID: 24137325  [PubMed]


98. Tumour Biol. 2014 Feb;35(2):1169-75. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1156-6. Epub 2013
Sep 7.

The role of Bax and Bcl-2 in gemcitabine-mediated cytotoxicity in uveal melanoma 
cells.

Wang J(1), Jia R, Zhang Y, Xu X, Song X, Zhou Y, Zhang H, Ge S, Fan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, Shanghai, 200011, China.

Gemcitabine (GEM), a new cytotoxic agent, was shown to be effective against uveal
melanoma (UM) which is noted for its resistance to chemotherapy. In this study,
we found the different sensitivities to GEM in UM cell lines and identified
apoptotic cell death as the cause of GEM cytotoxicity. Both UM cell lines showed 
an increase in Bax protein levels and activation of cleaved Caspase 3.
Additionally, SP6.5 cells showed a gradual increase in Bcl-2 expression over
time, whereas VUP cells showed almost none. After interfering in the expression
of Bcl-2, the sensitivity to GEM was obviously enhanced in SP6.5 cells. These
results suggest that an increase in Bax plays a crucial role in apoptotic cell
death induced by GEM in the absence of p53. Moreover, inhibition of Bcl-2
expression can efficiently enhance the cytotoxic effect of, and sensitivity to,
GEM in UM cells.

PMID: 24014050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Altern Ther Health Med. 2013 Sep-Oct;19(5):12-8.

Effect of acupressure on patients in Turkey receiving hemodialysis treatment for 
uremic pruritus.

Kiliç Akça N(1), Tasçi S, Karatas N.

Author information: 
(1)Bozok University Health School, Yozgat, Turkey. nazanakca7@hotmail.com

CONTEXT: Pruritus develops for various reasons at any stage of treatment for the 
majority of patients receiving hemodialysis (HD) due to end-stage renal failure
(ESRF). Today, many nonpharmacological treatment methods, including acupressure, 
are used to relieve the discomfort experienced by patients due to pruritus.
Acupressure has been proven to reduce the intensity of pruritus when it is used
alone or in combination with pharmacologic methods.
OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to determine the effect of acupressure on
pruritus in patients receiving hemodialysis treatment.
DESIGN: This study was a nonrandomized, controlled trial.
SETTING: The study occurred at four hemodialysis centers in Turkey.
PARTICIPANTS: Seventy-eight patients, 38 in the intervention group (IG) and 40 in
the control group (CG), met the inclusion criteria and completed the study.
INTERVENTION: The IG received acupressure that was applied using a transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) acupressure apparatus, and the control group 
(CG) received no acupressure. The study used the SP6, ST36, SP10, and LI11
acupuncture points, with acupressure occurring three times/wk for 6 wks for a
total of 18 sessions.
OUTCOME MEASURES: The study's data were collected using a patient identification 
form, a visual analogue scale (VAS), and a pruritus score.
RESULTS: It was found that IG participants' mean VAS and pruritus scores
significantly decreased at wk 6 (P < .001), as compared to the CG, and that the
decrease showed a stable trend in wks 12 and 18 (P > .05). The IG was observed to
use less medication than the CG throughout the study (P < .001).
CONCLUSION: It was concluded that acupressure provided to hemodialysis patients
was effective in reducing pruritus. The research team suggests that the use of
acupressure should be expanded by informing HD patients and nurses working in HD 
units about the benefits of acupressure.

PMID: 23981400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Gen Virol. 2013 Nov;94(Pt 11):2569-76. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.053991-0. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

Characterization and genomic analysis of two Staphylococcus aureus bacteriophages
isolated from poultry/livestock farms.

Yoon H(1), Yun J, Lim JA, Roh E, Jung KS, Chang Y, Ryu S, Heu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Technology and Services, College of Health Industry, Eulji 
university, Seongnam 461-713, Korea.

Staphylococcus aureus is one of the most important pathogens, causing various
diseases in humans and animals. As methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) has
become increasingly prevalent, controlling this pathogen with standard antibiotic
treatment has become challenging. Bacteriophages (phages) have attracted interest
as alternative antibacterial agents to control MRSA. In this study, we isolated
six S. aureus phages from soils of poultry/livestock farms. Based on the results 
of host range determination with 150 S. aureus strains and restriction enzyme
treatment of phage DNA, two phages, designated SP5 and SP6, were selected for
further characterization and genome sequencing. Both SP5 and SP6 were classified 
as members of the family Siphoviridae. The genome of SP5 comprises 43 305 bp and 
contains 63 ORFs, while the SP6 genome comprises 42 902 bp and contains 61 ORFs. 
Although they have different host spectra, the phage genomes exhibit high
nucleotide similarity to each other. Adsorption assay results suggested that the 
host range determinants of the two phages are involved in both adsorption and
infection. Comparative genomic analyses of the two phages provided evidence that 
the lysogenic/lytic control module and tail proteins may be important for host
specificity.

PMCID: PMC3809110
PMID: 23973965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Acupunct Med. 2013 Dec;31(4):404-8. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2013-010392. Epub 2013
Aug 16.

MRI evaluation of metal acupuncture needles.

Mei L(1), Long X, Diao Y, Yu H, Yang W, Standish LJ, Qiu B.

Author information: 
(1)Paul C Lauterbur Research Centers for Biomedical Imaging, Shenzhen Institutes 
of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, , Shenzhen, Guangdong,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the MR compatibility of three metal acupuncture needles (a
standard stainless steel needle, a gold needle and an austenitic stainless steel 
needle) by comparing their imaging artefacts, radiofrequency heating effects and 
ease of operation.
METHODS: The MRI artefacts of the three metal needles were first evaluated by
placing them in an agar gel phantom and performing MRI of the phantom. The
increase in temperature during MRI was recorded using an MR-compatible fibreoptic
thermometer. MRI of acupuncture at SP6 was performed using the MR-compatible gold
needle and the austenitic stainless steel needle.
RESULTS: The standard stainless steel acupuncture needle produced large imaging
artefacts on MRI. The gold needle was superior for MRI but not rigid enough for
some clinical applications such as scalp acupuncture. The austenitic stainless
steel needle is non-ferromagnetic and compatible with MRI. None of these
acupuncture needles introduced radiofrequency heating during MRI.
CONCLUSIONS: The evaluation of MR compatibility showed that gold and austenitic
stainless steel needles are MR-compatible and therefore can be used for MRI of
acupuncture.

PMID: 23956382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2013 May;33(5):611-3.

[Effect of electroacupuncture combined epidural anesthesia on plasma
concentration of IL-1beta in patients undergoing gynecological surgery].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng XM(1), Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Wuhan Hospital of Integrative Medicine, Wuhan
430022, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) combined epidural
anesthesia on plasma concentration of IL-1beta in patients undergoing
gynecological surgery.
METHODS: Forty patients who were scheduled to receive gynecological operation
under epidural anesthesia were randomly assigned to the epidural anesthesia group
(Group A, 20 cases) and the epidural combined EA group (Group B, 20 cases). All
patients in the two groups received epidural anesthesia. Continuous EA at Zusanli
(ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) with the frequency of 30 -100 Hz was applied in those
in Group B. The peri-operative hemodynamic changes, visual analog scale (VAS),
and the plasma concentration of IL-1 3 were observed.
RESULTS: There was no statistical difference in peri-operative hemodynamic
changes between the two groups (P >0.05). Compared with Group A, the VAS was
lower in Group B at post-operative 8, 24, and 48 h, respectively (P <0.05), and
the plasma concentration of IL-1beta was also lower in Group B at post-operative 
4 h, 24 h, and 3 days (P <0. 05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture could ease postoperative pain and reduce the plasma
concentration of IL-1beta.

PMID: 23905377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Jul 19;14(7):15092-104. doi: 10.3390/ijms140715092.

Targeted silencing of MART-1 gene expression by RNA interference enhances the
migration ability of uveal melanoma cells.

Zhang Y(1), Jia R, Wang J, Xu X, Yao Y, Ge S, Fan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China.

Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy and the
leading potentially fatal primary intraocular disease in adults. Melanoma antigen
recognized by T-cells (MART-1) has been studied extensively as a clinically
important diagnostic marker for melanoma, however, its biological function
remains unclear. In the present study, the UM cell line SP6.5, which showed a
high level of MART-1 expression, was subjected to small interfering RNA-mediated 
silencing of MART-1. Silencing of MART-1 expression increased the migration
ability of SP6.5 cells and down-regulated the expression of the metastasis
suppressor NM23. Our results suggest that MART-1 is a candidate target for the
development of therapeutic strategies for UM and in particular for the
suppression of metastasis associated with this malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3742289
PMID: 23877836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Trials. 2013 Jul 18;14:225. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-14-225.

Electroacupuncture to treat painful diabetic neuropathy: study protocol for a
three-armed, randomized, controlled pilot trial.

Lee S(1), Kim JH, Shin KM, Kim JE, Kim TH, Kang KW, Lee M, Jung SY, Shin MS, Kim 
AR, Park HJ, Hong KE, Choi SM.

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture, Moxibustion & Meridian Research Group, Korea Institute of
Oriental Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study is to conduct a basic analysis of the
effectiveness and safety of electroacupuncture in the treatment of painful
diabetic neuropathy (PDN) as compared to placebo and usual care and to evaluate
the feasibility of large-scale clinical research.
METHODS/DESIGN: This study is a protocol for a three-armed, randomized,
patient-assessor-blinded (to the type of treatment), controlled pilot trial.
Forty-five participants with a = six month history of PDN and a mean weekly pain 
score of = 4 on the 11-point Pain Intensity Numerical Rating Scale (PI-NRS) will 
be assigned to the electroacupuncture group (n = 15), sham group (n = 15) or
usual care group (n = 15). The participants assigned to the electroacupuncture
group will receive electroacupuncture (remaining for 30 minutes with a mixed
current of 2 Hz/120 Hz and 80% of the bearable intensity) at 12 standard
acupuncture points (bilateral ST36, GB39, SP9, SP6, LR3 and GB41) twice per week 
for eight weeks (a total of 16 sessions) as well as the usual care. The
participants in the sham group will receive sham electroacupuncture (no
electrical current will be passed to the needle, but the light will be seen, and 
the sound of the pulse generator will be heard by the participants) at
non-acupuncture points as well as the usual care. The participants in the usual
care group will not receive electroacupuncture treatment during the study period 
and will receive only the usual care. The follow-up will be in the 5th, 9th and
17th weeks after random allocation. The PI-NRS score assessed at the ninth week
will be the primary outcome measurement used in this study. The Short-Form McGill
Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ), a sleep disturbance score (11-point Likert scale),
the Short-Form 36v2 Health Survey (SF-36), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)
and the Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC) will be used as outcome
variables to evaluate the effectiveness of the acupuncture. Safety will be
assessed at every visit.
DISCUSSION: The result of this trial will provide a basis for the effectiveness
and safety of electroacupuncture for PDN.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Research information Service. Unique identifier:
KCT0000466.

PMCID: PMC3720209
PMID: 23866906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:859763. doi: 10.1155/2013/859763.
Epub 2013 Jun 24.

Hemiparesis after Operation of Astrocytoma Grade II in Adults: Effects of
Acupuncture on Sensory-Motor Behavior and Quality of Life.

Yu H(1), Schröder S, Liu Y, Li Z, Yang Y, Chen Y, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Shenzhen City, Guangdong
518033, China.

To evaluate the effect of acupuncture on hemiparesis and quality of life for
adults with brain astrocytoma grade II, we conducted a randomized,
observer-blinded clinical trial. Fifty-eight patients were randomized to standard
rehabilitation (SR) therapy without acupuncture (n = 20), SR plus standard
acupuncture (SA) (n = 19), and SR plus individualized acupuncture (IA) (n = 19). 
SA points were PC6, SP6, HT1, LU5, BL40, and ST36, while a special concept called
"connecting and regulation Ren and Du" and "Jin-3-needling" served as IA. This
treatment was individualized according to the clinical syndrome. The outcome was 
measured by the Barthel Index (BI), the Fugl-Meyer scale (FM), and the EORTC Core
Quality of Life Questionnaire (QLQ-C30) with the Brain Cancer Module (BCM20). IA 
+ SR reached significantly higher BI scores than SA + SR, which reached
significantly higher BI scores than SR. IA + SR was significantly superior to SA 
+ SR and to SR at the 8th week for the scores of FM motor and sensory assessments
and most QLQ-C30-BCM20 items. In conclusion, the individualized acupuncture
concept of "connecting and regulating Ren and Du" combined with "Jin-3-needling" 
offers a promising possibility for the treatment of hemiparesis due to
astrocytoma, but further evaluation is mandatory.

PMCID: PMC3707219
PMID: 23864900  [PubMed]


106. J Clin Nurs. 2014 Jun;23(11-12):1603-10. doi: 10.1111/jocn.12256. Epub 2013 Jun
20.

Effects of noninvasive electroacupuncture on labour pain and duration.

Mucuk S(1), Baser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetric Nursing, Health Science Faculty,
Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effects of noninvasive electroacupuncture at
LI4 or SP6 acupuncture points on labour pain and duration.
BACKGROUND: The management of labour pain is one of the main goals of obstetrical
care. Acupuncture has been reported to be useful for reducing labour length and
for pain relief during labour.
DESIGN: This was an experimental study with a control group.
METHODS: The study was conducted at the Kayseri Maternity Hospital in Turkey. The
participants were in the active phase of labour and were divided into three
groups. In the LI4 group (n = 40), bilateral LI4 acupuncture points were
stimulated using transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation-acupuncture pen. In 
the SP6 group (n = 40), the acupuncture points of both legs were stimulated. The 
same procedure that was performed for the LI4 group was used for the SP6 group.
The control group (n = 40) did not receive any stimulation. Visual Analog Scale
was used for the assessment of pain.
RESULTS: Duration of labour from initiation of the intervention was 6·2 ± 6·0
hours in the LI4 group, 7·2 ± 6·1 hours in the SP6 group and 8·2 ± 9·9 hours in
the control group. Pain scores in the LI4 group were found as 8·0 (4-10) in the
30th minute after the intervention, while they were 9·0 (4-10) in the SP6 group
and 10·0 (2-10) in the control group. There was not a statistically significant
difference between the groups in terms of labour duration and pain scores
measured during contraction and between contractions.
CONCLUSION: Although they were not statistically significant, labour pain scores 
and labour duration were lower in the acupuncture groups, especially in the LI4
group.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Noninvasive electroacupuncture on the LI4
acupuncture point could be used easily during labour for labour pain relief.

© John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23786544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Wildl Manage. 2013 Apr;77(3):545-554. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Effective Control of Non-Native American Mink by Strategic Trapping in a River
Catchment in Mainland Britain.

Reynolds JC(1), Richardson SM, Rodgers BJ, Rodgers OR.

Author information: 
(1)Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF, UK.

The introduction of American mink (Neovison vison; hereafter mink) into Europe
has had severe impacts on many native wildlife species, including the water vole 
(Arvicola amphibius) in mainland Britain. Although trapping has been widely used 
to attempt to control mink, managers have little direct evidence of its effect on
mink density or distribution, particularly where immigration of mink from nearby 
areas is inevitable. Such evidence is needed to justify the use of lethal methods
in conservation policy. During 2006-2010 we removed mink from the River Monnow
Catchment in western Britain, using track-recording rafts to monitor continuously
for mink presence, guiding a strategic trapping effort. The area monitored and
trapped was increased in stages, from a core sub-catchment with 109 km of
water-course in 2006, to a 421-km(2) catchment with 203 km of water-course in
2009. In each successive sub-catchment, mink detection and capture rates declined
rapidly to near-zero levels after trapping began. Detections and captures showed 
seasonal peaks in every year corresponding to known dispersal periods, but also
declined steadily from year to year, with increasing periods in which we did not 
detect mink. These results suggested that each sub-catchment was cleared of mink 
within a few months, with subsequent captures attributable to immigration. On
average, we detected each mink 5.1 times before capture (daily probability of
detection = 0.059 per mink and raft), and trapped them 3.4 days after deploying
traps in response. On average, mink entering the area were likely to have been
present for less than 13 days before capture. Water voles had been extinct in the
Monnow Catchment since the 1980s. During 2006-2008 (starting 6 months after mink 
trapping commenced), we released 700 captive-bred water voles into the treatment 
area to re-establish a wild population. Persistence of this population through
the 4 years of the project was considered indicative of effective mink control.
This study demonstrates that, even in a mainland context, a systematic trapping
strategy can have a substantial impact on the density and distribution of a
damaging species, in this case allowing the restoration of a native prey species.
© 2013 The Wildlife Society.

PMCID: PMC3675646
PMID: 23761940  [PubMed]


108. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Feb;48(2):250-4.

[Cloning and bioinformatic analysis of TAGLN2 cDNA of Bufo japonicus formosus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhuge H(1), Yuan JQ, Zhang SF, Yang XY.

Author information: 
(1)The Nurturing Station for the State Key Laboratory of Subtropical
Silviculture, Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, Lin 'an 311300,
China.

To study the bioactive polypeptides included in Bufo skin and its secretions the 
plasmid skin cDNA library of adult Japanese toad Bufo japonicus formosus was
prepared. The pSD64TR has been used as the vector and the cloning sites are Xho I
and EcoR I. To screen cDNAs encoding bioactive components, the plasmid cDNA
library was transformed into E. coli DH5 competent cells, and positive colonies
were screened by colony PCR (polymerase chain reaction). The suspension of a
single colony in LB medium was used as the template, SP6 (the upstream primer of 
the plasmid cDNA library) and a primer with Xho I site and polyT were used as the
primers. As the result, 465 positive colonies out of 1 344 were obtained and
their plasmid were collected and sequenced. By homologous analysis, it was found 
that one of the cDNAs encoding a peptide with high homolog with transgelin-2,
which was registered in GenBank (accession number: JX197456), and it was
indicated as a partial cDNA sequence with a deletion at the 5' end. The
transcript is 997 bp consisting of 31 bp 5', 618 bp 3' untranslated region (UTR) 
and an open reading frame (ORF) of 348 bp encoding a polypeptide of 115 amino
acids. In the putative protein product, there is a calponin homology domain, two 
cysteine residues for a disulfide bond and three a-helix domains, and five
potential phosphorylation sites. The homologous analysis indicates 90% similarity
with Xenopus (Silurana) tropicalis and 89% with Xenopus laevis, and 71%-85% with 
other species.

PMID: 23672022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. ACS Synth Biol. 2012 May 18;1(5):190-6. doi: 10.1021/sb3000113. Epub 2012 May 2.

An in vitro autogene.

Davidson EA(1), Meyer AJ, Ellefson JW, Levy M, Ellington AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biology, Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Recent technological advances have allowed development of increasingly complex
systems for in vitro evolution. Here, we describe an in vitro autogene composed
of a self-amplifying T7 RNA polymerase system. Functional autogene templates in
cell-free lysate produce T7 RNA polymerase, which amplifies the autogene genetic 
information through a positive feedback architecture. Compartmentalization of
individual templates within a water-in-oil emulsion links genotype and phenotype,
allowing evolution.

PMID: 23651157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Altern Complement Med. 2013 Sep;19(9):733-9. doi: 10.1089/acm.2011.0637. Epub
2013 May 6.

Effects of electroacupuncture on depression and the production of glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor compared with fluoxetine: a randomized
controlled pilot study.

Sun H(1), Zhao H, Ma C, Bao F, Zhang J, Wang DH, Zhang YX, He W.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital , Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China .

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Postmortem studies indicate that the number and density
of glial cells are reduced in different brain regions of patients with
depression. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) plays an important
role in the pathogenesis of depressive disorder (DD) and might be a biomarker for
damage to nerve cells. In this study, we compared the therapeutic effects of
electroacupuncture (EA) and fluoxetine, a serotonin reuptake inhibitor, on DD
patients, focusing on the serum level of GDNF.
DESIGN: This was a prospective, randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: Seventy-five patients with DD from the Department of Acupuncture,
Beijing Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, were recruited.
INTERVENTION: Twenty patients were treated with acupuncture for 6 weeks on the
acupoints of Baihui (DU20) and Zusanli (ST36). Sixteen patients were treated with
acupuncture for 6 weeks on the acupoints of Taichong (LR3), Sanyinjiao (SP6),
Neiguan (PC6), and Shenmen (HT7), and constituted the electroacupuncture control 
group. The patients received acupuncture treatment five times per week.
Twenty-five patients were treated with oral fluoxetine (20<U+2009>mg/day) for 6 weeks.
OUTCOME MEASURES: All subjects were evaluated by the Hamilton Depression Rating
Scale at four time points (0 [baseline], 2, 4, and 6 weeks after treatment).
Serum GDNF was quantified in duplicate by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA).
RESULTS: EA and fluoxetine had similar curative effects on DD patients. EA had a 
faster onset of action, better response rate, and better improvement rate than
fluoxetine. Both fluoxetine and EA treatment restored the normal concentration of
GDNF in the serum of DD patients.
CONCLUSION: EA treatment for depression is as effective as a recommended dose of 
fluoxetine. However, EA demonstrates an advantage in the regulation of the
production of GDNF compared with fluoxetine.

PMCID: PMC3768227
PMID: 23647408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061579. Print 2013.

CADM1 is a key receptor mediating human mast cell adhesion to human lung
fibroblasts and airway smooth muscle cells.

Moiseeva EP(1), Roach KM, Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells (MCs) play a central role in the development of many
diseases including asthma and pulmonary fibrosis. Interactions of human lung mast
cells (HLMCs) with human airway smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) are partially
dependent on adhesion mediated by cell adhesion molecule-1 (CADM1), but the
adhesion mechanism through which HLMCs interact with human lung fibroblasts
(HLFs) is not known. CADM1 is expressed as several isoforms (SP4, SP1, SP6) in
HLMCs, with SP4 dominant. These isoforms differentially regulate HLMC homotypic
adhesion and survival.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we have investigated the role of CADM1 isoforms in the
adhesion of HLMCs and HMC-1 cells to primary HASMCs and HLFs.
METHODS: CADM1 overexpression or downregulation was achieved using adenoviral
delivery of CADM1 short hairpin RNAs or isoform-specific cDNAs respectively.
RESULTS: Downregulation of CADM1 attenuated both HLMC and HMC-1 adhesion to both 
primary HASMCs and HLFs. Overexpression of either SP1 or SP4 isoforms did not
alter MC adhesion to HASMCs, whereas overexpression of SP4, but not SP1,
significantly increased both HMC-1 cell and HLMC adhesion to HLFs. The expression
level of CADM1 SP4 strongly predicted the extent of MC adhesion; linear
regression indicated that CADM1 accounts for up to 67% and 32% of adhesion to
HLFs for HMC-1 cells and HLMCs, respectively. HLFs supported HLMC proliferation
and survival through a CADM1-dependent mechanism. With respect to CADM1
counter-receptor expression, HLFs expressed both CADM1 and nectin-3, whereas
HASMCs expressed only nectin-3.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Collectively these data indicate that the
CADM1 SP4 isoform is a key receptor mediating human MC adhesion to HASMCs and
HLFs. The differential expression of CADM1 counter-receptors on HLFs compared to 
HASMCs may allow the specific targeting of either HLMC-HLF or HLMC-HASMC
interactions in the lung parenchyma and airways.

PMCID: PMC3631237
PMID: 23620770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Acupunct Med. 2013 Jun;31(2):195-201. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2012-010268. Epub 2013
Apr 18.

Changes in skin surface temperature at an acupuncture point with moxibustion.

Lin LM(1), Wang SF, Lee RP, Hsu BG, Tsai NM, Peng TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Acupunct Med. 2013 sep;31(3):337.

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluates the thermographic changes associated with moxa
burner moxibustion at the SP6 acupuncture point to establish an appropriate, safe
distance of efficacy for moxibustion.
METHODS: Baseline temperature changes using a moxa burner were obtained for a
paper substrate at various distances and times, and the tested with volunteers in
a pilot study. A single-group trial was then conducted with 36 healthy women to
monitor temperature changes on the body surface at the acupuncture point (SP6).
RESULTS: Based on the temperature changes seen for the paper substrate and in the
pilot study, a distance of 3 cm was chosen as the intervention distance.
Moxibustion significantly increased the SP6 point skin surface temperature, with 
a peak increase of 11°C at 4 min (p<U+2009><0.001). This study also found that during
moxibustion the temperature of the moxa burner's rubber layer and moxa cautery
were 56.9±0.9°C and 65.8±1.2°C, as compared to baseline values of 35.1°C and
43.8°C (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We determined 3 cm was a safe distance between the moxa burner and
acupuncture point. Moxibustion can increase the skin surface temperature at the
SP6 point. This data will aid traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) practitioners in
gauging safer treatment distances when using moxibustion treatments.

PMCID: PMC3686262
PMID: 23598824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:493038. doi: 10.1155/2013/493038.
Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Acupuncture or Acupressure at the Sanyinjiao (SP6) Acupoint for the Treatment of 
Primary Dysmenorrhea: A Meta-Analysis.

Chen MN(1), Chien LW, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Hsin Sheng College of Medical Care and Management, No. 
418, Gaoping Section, Jhongfong Road, Longtan Township, Taoyuan Country 32544,
Taiwan.

This meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of acupuncture or
acupressure at the Sanyinjiao (SP6) acupoint in relieving pain associated with
primary dysmenorrhea. We searched the scientific literature databases to identify
randomized controlled trials. The primary outcome was visual analogue scale (VAS)
pain score. Three acupuncture and four acupressure trials were included in the
meta-analyses. For the acupuncture analysis, there was no difference in the mean 
VAS score reduction between the SP6 acupoint and control (GB39 acupoint) groups
(-4.935; lower limit = -15.757, upper limit = 5.887; P = 0.371). For the
acupressure analysis, there was a significant difference in the mean VAS score
after intervention between the SP6 acupoint and control (rest/light touch at
SP6/nonacupoint acupressure) groups, favoring the SP6 acupoint group (-1.011;
lower limit = -1.622, upper limit = -0.400; P = 0.001). Sensitivity analyses
demonstrated good reliability of the meta-analyses findings. These findings
suggest that acupuncture at SP6 is not more effective than acupuncture at an
unrelated acupoint in the relief from primary dysmenorrhea. Acupressure at SP6
may be effective in the relief from primary dysmenorrhea. High-quality randomized
controlled trials are needed to confirm these findings.

PMCID: PMC3600281
PMID: 23533489  [PubMed]


114. Educ Prim Care. 2013 Feb;24(2):131-4.

Undergraduate teaching in general practice: involving the whole practice team in 
moving students forward in their learning.

McGee JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Fordingbridge Surgery, Bartons Road, Fordingbridge SP6 1RS, UK.
janet.mcgee@nhs.net

PMID: 23498582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2013 Mar 1;2013(3). pii: pdb.prot071910. doi:
10.1101/pdb.prot071910.

The RNase protection assay.

Carey MF, Peterson CL, Smale ST.

The RNase protection assay is a sensitive method for transcription start-site
localization. It begins with an RNA probe that is uniformly labeled by
incorporation of one [a-(32)P]NTP, usually [a-(32)P]UTP. The RNA probe is
synthesized by bacteriophage RNA polymerase (SP6, T7, or T3), which initiates
transcription from specific phage promoters that have been engineered into a
number of common plasmid vectors. The plasmid template contains a genomic DNA
fragment spanning the region thought to contain the transcription start site for 
the gene of interest. This genomic fragment is subcloned into the plasmid
downstream of the phage promoter in the antisense orientation, so that a portion 
of the 5' end of the resulting RNA probe will be complementary to the mRNA of
interest. The radiolabeled probe is annealed to cytoplasmic or total cellular
mRNA purified from the cells of interest, with the hybridization reaction
proceeding for several hours or overnight. RNase A and/or RNase T1 is then added 
to the hybridization reactions. These nucleases digest the single-stranded
overhang regions of RNA molecules, but RNA-RNA hybrids are resistant to cleavage.
This resistance forms the conceptual basis for the procedure; the region of the
probe that anneals to the specific mRNA will be resistant to digestion. The
length of the resistant region of the probe will correspond to the distance from 
the 5' end of the probe to the transcription start site. The size of the
resistant fragment can be determined by electrophoresis on a high-resolution,
denaturing polyacrylamide gel.

PMID: 23457339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Virol J. 2013 Feb 26;10:64. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-64.

Development and characterization of the replicon system of Japanese encephalitis 
live vaccine virus SA14-14-2.

Li SH(1), Li XF, Zhao H, Deng YQ, Yu XD, Zhu SY, Jiang T, Ye Q, Qin ED, Qin CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity,
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, 100071, China.

BACKGROUND: Viral self-replicating sub-genomic replicons represent a powerful
tool for studying viral genome replication, antiviral screening and chimeric
vaccine development. Many kinds of flavivirus replicons have been developed with 
broad applications.
FINDINGS: The replicon system of JEV live vaccine strain SA14-14-2 was
successfully developed in this study. Two kinds of replicons that express
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and Renilla luciferase (R.luc) were
constructed under the control of SP6 promoter, respectively. Robust EGFP and
R.luc signals could be detected in the replicon-transfected BHK-21 cells.
Furthermore, the potential effects of selected amino acids in the C-terminal of
envelope protein on replication were characterized using the replicon system.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide a useful platform not only for the study of JEV 
replication, but also for antiviral screening and chimeric vaccine development.

PMCID: PMC3608946
PMID: 23442449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Acupunct Med. 2013 Jun;31(2):202-6. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2012-010246. Epub 2013
Feb 5.

Could acupuncture at the so-called forbidden points be harmful to the health of
pregnant Wistar rats?

Silva AV(1), Nakamura MU, Silva JB, Cordeiro JA, Mendes GE, Lima L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. 
jbgsilva@hotmail.com

AIM: This study is the second report from a single experiment planned to
determine if acupuncture at LI4 and SP6, or at the sacral points, could produce
any harm in the pregnancy outcome of Wistar rats, as has been hypothesised in
traditional knowledge. Here, we observe if these points can be harmful to the
health of pregnant Wistar rats.
METHODS: A total of 48 pregnant Wistar rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: 
total control, where rats were left in cages without manipulation; anesthetised
control, where rats were manipulated and anesthetised but did not receive
electroacupuncture; and peripheral point and sacral point groups, where rats were
anesthetised and received 6 sessions of electroacupuncture at 4 acupuncture
points: LI4 and SP6, and BL27 and BL28, respectively. In the 19th day of
pregnancy the rats were killed and examined. The primary endpoints were levels of
glucose, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
creatinine and histological changes of liver and kidney.
RESULTS: There were no differences between the levels of biochemical parameters. 
No differences were also seen regarding the histopathological analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence that acupuncture at the LI4, SP6 and sacral
points could be harmful to the Wistar rat dams.

PMID: 23384661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;32(11):1512-5.

[Effects of the renal blood flow at different levels by transcutaneous electrical
acupoint stimulation combined general anesthesia induced controlled hypotension].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang JQ(1), Zhang LL, Shao XM.

Author information: 
(1)Lab for Acupuncture Neurobiology, Third Clinical College, Zhejiang University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou. fangjianqiao7532@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the intervention of transcutaneous electrical acupoint
stimulation (TEAS) on the renal blood flow at different levels of mean arterial
pressure (MAP) in controlled hypotension.
METHODS: Forty-two male beagle dogs were randomly divided into seven groups, i.
e., the general anesthesia group, the 50% controlled group, the 40% controlled
group, the 30% controlled group, the 50% experimental group, the 40% experimental
group, and the 30% experimental group, 6 in each group. Beagles in the general
anesthesia group were not treated with controlled hypotension, and the target MAP
was achieved in those of the rest groups and maintained for 60 min. In the
experimental groups, TEAS was applied to bilateral Hegu (LI4), Zusanli (ST36),
Sanyinjiao (SP6), and Quchi (LI11) at 2/100 Hz with the stimulation strength of
(4 +/- 1) mA starting from the stability of their physiological conditions to 60 
min of maintaining the target MAP level. The changes of the renal blood flow were
monitored at different time points using laser Doppler.
RESULTS: From starting pressure control to the target MAP level, the renal blood 
flow was significantly lower in the 30% controlled group than in the general
anesthesia group and the basic level of the same group (P < 0.05), while there
was no obvious change in the 30% experimental group. In maintaining the blood
pressure, the renal blood flow was significantly lower in the 50% controlled
group, the 40% controlled group, the 30% controlled group, and the 30%
experimental group than in the general anesthesia group (P < 0.05), while there
was no obvious change in the 50% experimental group or the 40% experimental
group. By the end of blood pressure recovery, the renal blood flow restored to
the basic level in the 50% controlled group, the 50% experimental group, and the 
40% experimental group (P > 0.05), while it was not restored to the basic level
in the 40% controlled group, the 30% controlled group, and the 30% experimental
group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: TEAS combined general anesthesia in controlled hypotension could
effectively improve the renal blood flow, thus protecting the kidney.

PMID: 23359976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;32(11):1508-11, 1515.

[Transcriptomics study of the transcriptional response of the spinal dorsal horn 
to electroacupuncture stimulation with different frequencies].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang K(1), Zhang R, Zhao GP.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Disease and Health Genomics, National Engineering Research
Center for Biochip at Shanghai, Shanghai.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of low-and high-frequency electroacupuncture
(EA) on the gene expression profiles in rat spinal dorsal horn (DH) under the
physiological state, thus providing the information to find out the differences
of different EA frequencies induced effects.
METHODS: Using cDNA microarray, the changes of the gene expressions in the DH
were detected and compared between 2 Hz EA and 100 Hz EA at bilateral Zusanli
(ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6). The differentially expressed genes were identified. 
The EASE scores were used to comprehensively analyze the gene functions (by Gene 
Ontology) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways.
RESULTS: (1) After EA stimulation 1 150 genes/expressed sequence tags (ESTs) were
differentially expressed by 2 Hz EA, while 1 270 genes/ESTs were differentially
expressed by 100 Hz EA. (2) Both 2 Hz and 100 Hz EA could induce the modulation
of the same 516 genes/ESTs in the same direction, which was correlated with
neural signal transmission. (3) The differentially expressed genes regulated
specifically by 2 Hz were correlated with neural plasticity. (4) The
differentially expressed genes regulated specifically by 100 Hz were correlated
with stress and immunoregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Either low-or high-frequency EA could extensively regulate the
spinal cord information processing. The low-frequency EA participated more in the
regulation of neural plasticity, while high-frequency EA had more significant
effects on stress and immunoregulation.

PMID: 23359975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:179657. doi: 10.1155/2012/179657.
Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Research on nonlinear feature of electrical resistance of acupuncture points.

Wei J(1), Mao H, Zhou Y, Wang L, Liu S, Shen X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Shanghai University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, 1200 Cailun Road, Shanghai 201203, China.

A highly sensitive volt-ampere characteristics detecting system was applied to
measure the volt-ampere curves of nine acupuncture points, LU9, HT7, LI4, PC6,
ST36, SP6, KI3, LR3, and SP3, and corresponding nonacupuncture points bilaterally
from 42 healthy volunteers. Electric currents intensity was increased from 0<U+2009>µA
to 20<U+2009>µA and then returned to 0<U+2009>µA again. The results showed that the volt-ampere
curves of acupuncture points had nonlinear property and magnetic hysteresis-like 
feature. On all acupuncture point spots, the volt-ampere areas of the increasing 
phase were significantly larger than that of the decreasing phase (P < 0.01). The
volt-ampere areas of ten acupuncture point spots were significantly smaller than 
those of the corresponding nonacupuncture point spots when intensity was increase
(P < 0.05 ~ P < 0.001). And when intensity was decrease, eleven acupuncture point
spots showed the same property as above (P < 0.05 ~ P < 0.001), while two
acupuncture point spots showed opposite phenomenon in which the areas of two
acupuncture point spots were larger than those of the corresponding
nonacupuncture point spots (P < 0.05 ~ P < 0.01). These results show that the
phenomenon of low skin resistance does not exist to all acupuncture points.

PMCID: PMC3533649
PMID: 23346191  [PubMed]


121. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Feb;137(1-2):93-102. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Identification of sperm head subpopulations with defined pleiomorphic
characteristics in ejaculates of captive Goeldi's monkeys (Callimico goeldii).

Valle RR(1), Arakaki PR, Carvalho FM, Muniz JA, Leal CL, García-Herreros M.

Author information: 
(1)ICS, Universidade Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; FMVZ, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the incidence of pleiomorphisms and its
influence on the distribution of sperm morphometric subpopulations in ejaculates 
from the vulnerable Goeldi's monkey (Callimico goeldii) by using a combination of
computerized analysis system and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) methods. Each
sperm head was measured for four primary spermatozoal head dimensional parameters
(area [A (µm(2))], perimeter [P (µm)], length [L (µm)] and width [W (µm)]) and
three head shape derived parameters (ellipticity [(L/W)], elongation
[(L-W)/(L+W)] and rugosity [(4pA/P(2))]). Six separate subpopulations (SPs) were 
identified: SP1, constituted by very large, narrow and very elliptical
spermatozoa (A=16.85±1.56µm(2), W=2.75±0.42µm and ellipticity=2.16±0.24); SP2,
characterized by average sized, short, wide and round spermatozoa
(A=15.00±1.92µm(2), L=5.06±0.49µm, W=3.51±0.31µm and ellipticity=1.44±0.15); SP3,
represented by small, wide and slightly round spermatozoa (A=14.95±1.75µm(2),
W=3.47±0.29µm and ellipticity=1.48±0.14); SP4 included very small, short and very
round spermatozoa (A=14.15±2.38µm(2), L=4.90±0.57µm and elongation=0.18±0.05);
SP5 consisted of average sized and slightly elliptical spermatozoa
(A=15.14±1.72µm(2) and ellipticity=1.49±0.14); and SP6 included large and round
spermatozoa (A=16.30±1.62µm(2) and elongation=0.19±0.04). There were differences 
in the sperm subpopulation distribution (P<0.001) among the five donors analyzed.
In conclusion, the results of the current study confirmed that the use of
computer sperm analysis methods combined with PCA cluster analyses are useful
methods to identify, classify, and characterize different sperm head morphometric
subpopulations in neotropical primates. Broadening our knowledge of C. goeldii
sperm morphometric abnormalities as well as developing reliable techniques for
sperm evaluation may be essential for ex situ conservation of this threatened
species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23294901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Chin J Integr Med. 2013 Jan;19(1):36-41. doi: 10.1007/s11655-013-1324-3. Epub
2012 Dec 29.

Observation on effects of aconitine via acupoint injection in rabbits.

Ni F(1), Lin JY, Guo D, Zhou CQ, Yao X, Ye HZ, Wu GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Fujian Health College, Fuzhou, 350101, China.
nf5910@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the ability of the pericardium meridian (PM) to
mitigate or enhance the cardiotoxic effects of aconitine injected at specific
acupoint and non-acupoint sites in rabbits.
METHODS: This study consisted of 3 experiments that were designed to test the
effects of injection of 30 µg/kg of aconitine at acupoints on the PM (Test 1), at
non-acupoint sites on the PM (Test 2), and at acupoints on other meridians and
non-meridian sites (Test 3). In Test 1, 24 rabbits were randomly assigned to
receive injections at Quze (PC3), Tianquan (PC2), or intramuscularly. In Test 2, 
24 rabbits were randomly assigned to receive injections of aconitine at
non-acupoint I, non-acupoint II, or intramuscularly. In Test 3, 48 rabbits were
randomly assigned to receive injections at Neiguan (PC6), Sanyinjiao (SP6),
Yangjiao (GB35), a non-meridian and non-acupoint site (NMNA), intravenously, and 
intramuscularly. Electrocardiographs of the rabbits were performed before, during
and after injection to determine the incidence of arrhythmia, latency of
ventricular rhythm, and recovery rate after aconitine injection. The recovery
time index and extent of arrhythmia scores were calculated.
RESULTS: In all groups the incidence of arrhythmia was 100%, and the latency of
ventricular rhythm was less than 30 min. In Tests 1 and 2, the recovery rates of 
the Quze and non-acupoint II groups were significantly higher than those of the
muscular group (P < 0.05). In Test 3, the recovery time index and extent of
arrhythmia scores of the Neiguan group were low. There were no significant
differences between the other acupoint groups, or the NMNA group, when compared
with the group receiving aconitine intramuscularly.
CONCLUSIONS: Acupoints or non-acupoints along the PM could reduce the severity of
the arrhythmia induced by aconitine in healthy rabbits. Meridians play an
important role in protecting body functions.

PMID: 23275014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:902578. doi: 10.1155/2012/902578.
Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Prescription of chinese herbal medicine and selection of acupoints in
pattern-based traditional chinese medicine treatment for insomnia: a systematic
review.

Yeung WF(1), Chung KF, Poon MM, Ho FY, Zhang SP, Zhang ZJ, Ziea ET, Wong Taam V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.

Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) treatments are often prescribed based on
individuals' pattern diagnoses. A systematic review of Chinese and English
literatures on TCM pattern differentiation, treatment principle, and
pattern-based treatment for insomnia has therefore been conducted. A total of 227
studies, 17916 subjects, and 87 TCM patterns were analyzed. There was a limited
consistency in pattern-based TCM treatment of insomnia across practitioners.
Except for Gui Pi Tang, An Shen Ding Zhi Wan, and Wen Dan Tang which were used
more commonly for deficiency of both the heart and spleen, internal disturbance
of phlegm-heat, and qi deficiency of the heart and gallbladder, respectively, the
selection of herbal formula for other patterns and pattern-based prescription of 
individual herbs and acupoints were not consistent. Suanzaoren (Semen Z.
spinosae), Fuling (Poria), Yejiaoteng (Caulis P. multiflori), Gancao (Radix
Glycyrrhizae), Baishao (Radix P. alba), Shenmen (HT7), Yintang (EX-HN3),
Sanyinjiao (SP6), Baihui (GV20), Anmian (EX-HN22), and Sishencong (EX-HN1) were
commonly used, but nonspecifically for many patterns. Treatment principles
underlying herb and acupoint selection were seldom reported. Although many
studies were reviewed, the study quality and diagnostic process were inadequate. 
More high quality studies are needed to examine the additional benefits of
pattern differentiation and pattern-based TCM treatment.

PMCID: PMC3521464
PMID: 23259001  [PubMed]


124. Pathobiology. 2013;80(3):111-8. doi: 10.1159/000343795. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

An intra- and interobserver reproducibility analysis of the Ki-67 proliferation
marker assessment on core biopsies of breast cancer patients and its potential
clinical implications.

Vörös A(1), Csörgo E, Nyári T, Cserni G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
andrasvoros@libero.it

OBJECTIVE: The Ki-67 proliferation index has received an important role in
treatment tailoring and molecular classification of estrogen receptor-positive
breast carcinomas. The aim was to analyze the reproducibility of assessing
proliferation on the basis of Ki-67 immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: Thirty core biopsy samples of breast cancer patients were analyzed after
immunostaining with B56, SP6 and MIB-1 monoclonal Ki-67 antibodies. All samples
were evaluated twice and independently by 3 pathologists, with each observer
performing his daily routine practice. The ratio of Ki-67-positive cells was
estimated with 5% accuracy. Correlation was calculated for the results of each
investigator for all pairs of antibodies and for the results of each antibody for
all pairs of investigators. Ki-67 scores were divided into categories of either 4
quarters or into 3 groups reflecting the St. Gallen consensus recommendations
with 15 and 30% as cutoff values. The reproducibility of classifying the tumors
into these categories was assessed with <U+0138> statistics.
RESULTS: Altogether, 540 evaluations were made. Good to excellent correlation
(Spearman's and Pearson's coefficient range 0.74-0.92 and 0.73-0.93,
respectively) was noted for the pairwise comparison of antibodies by observer and
of observers by antibody. The inter- and intraobserver reproducibility of the
Ki-67 score classification into equal quarters (1-25, 26-50, 51-75 and 76-100%)
or into 3 categories with cutoffs at 15 and 30% was fair to poor in the middle
categories, but moderate to substantial in the low and high ranges. Interobserver
differences in practice potentially impacted on less consistent classification.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that the three different Ki-67 antibodies tested
do not substantially influence the reproducibility of the estimated proliferation
rates. Although reproducibility is better in the clinically more relevant
distinction of high versus low proliferation, without standardization, the
current practice of Ki-67 assessment in many laboratories does not allow proper
and consistent therapeutic decision-making.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23258384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2013 May;287(5):887-91. doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2674-y. Epub
2012 Dec 14.

Effects of acupuncture for initiation of labor: a double-blind randomized
sham-controlled trial.

Ajori L(1), Nazari L, Eliaspour D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tajrish Sq, Tehran, Iran.

PURPOSE: This double-blind randomized controlled trial was conducted to evaluate 
whether use of acupuncture could initiate labor at term and thus reduce post-term
induction.
METHODS: Between 2010 and 2011, a total of 80 women at 38 weeks of gestation or
greater were randomized to acupuncture and sham acupuncture groups. Acupuncture
points LI4, SP6 and BL67 were needled bilaterally. The primary outcome was
initiation of labor. The time from acupuncture to delivery, mode of delivery,
fetal and maternal outcome and Apgar scores were recorded. The trial is
registered at irct.ir, number IRCT201111218151N1.
RESULTS: Eighty women were randomized and 75 women completed the study procedure.
Age, BMI, parity and gestational age were similar in both groups. Spontaneous
labor was initiated in 94.7 % of acupuncture group and 89.2 % of sham acupuncture
group (p = 0.430). There were no statistically significant difference between
groups for time from enrollment to delivery (p = 0.06).
CONCLUSION: According to this study, it seems that acupuncture was not effective 
in labor initiation compared to sham acupuncture.

PMID: 23238645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 30;31:100. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-100.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization for genomic-wide screening of DNA
copy number alterations in aggressive bone tumors.

Kanamori M(1), Sano A, Yasuda T, Hori T, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Science, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama city,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. kanamori@med.u-toyama.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The genetic pathways of aggressive changes of bone tumors are still
poorly understood. It is very important to analyze DNA copy number alterations
(DCNAs), to identify the molecular events in the step of progression to the
aggressive change of bone tissue.
METHODS: Genome-wide array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH)
was used to investigate DCNAs of 14 samples from 13 aggressive bone tumors, such 
as giant cell tumors (GCTs) and osteosarcoma (OS), etc.
RESULTS: Primary aggressive bone tumors had copy number gains of 17.8±12.7% in
the genome, and losses of 17.3±11.4% in 287 target clones (threshold for each
DCNA: <U+2266>085, 1.15<U+2266>). Genetic unstable cases, which were defined by the total DCNAs
aberration <U+2267>30%, were identified in 9 of 13 patients (3 of 7 GCTs and all
malignant tumors). High-level amplification of TGFß2, CCND3, WI-6509, SHGC-5557, 
TCL1A, CREBBP, HIC1, THRA, AFM217YD10, LAMA3, RUNX1 and D22S543, were commonly
observed in aggressive bone tumors. On the other hand, NRAS, D2S447, RAF1, ROBO1,
MYB, MOS, FGFR2, HRAS, D13S319, D13S327, D18S552, YES1 and DCC, were commonly
low. We compared genetic instability between a primary OS and its metastatic site
in Case #13. Metastatic lesion showed increased 9 DCNAs of remarkable change (m/p
ratio <U+2267>1.3 folds), compared to a primary lesion. D1S214, D1S1635, EXT1,
AFM137XA11, 8 M16/SP6, CCND2, IGH, 282 M15/SP6, HIC1 and LAMA3, were
overexpressed. We gave attention to HIC1 (17p13.3), which was common high
amplification in this series.
CONCLUSION: Our results may provide several entry points for the identification
of candidate genes associated with aggressive change of bone tumors. Especially, 
the locus 17p11-13 including HIC1 close to p53 was common high amplification in
this series and review of the literature.

PMCID: PMC3576288
PMID: 23199169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Rev Col Bras Cir. 2012 Sep-Oct;39(5):394-400.

Superficial papillary urothelial neoplasms of the bladder (PTA E PT1):
correlation of expression of P53, KI-67 and CK20 with histologic grade,
recurrence and tumor progression.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Ogata DC(1), Marcondes CA, Tuon FF, Busato WF Jr, Cavalli G, Czeczko LE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Institute, Evangelical Faculty of Paraná /
EvangelicalUniversity Hospital of Curitiba, Brazil. daniel.ogata@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the immunohistochemical expressions of p53, ki67, CK20 
in superficial papillary urothelial neoplasms of the bladder and correlate them
with histological grade, tumor progression and recurrence.
METHODS: We selected samples of 43 patients with superficial transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder. They were divided into two groups, one called Recurrent
(R), with 18 individuals, and other Non-Recurrent (NR), with 25. Multi-sampling
blocks were prepared. The immunohistochemical technique employed was
immunoperoxidase, and the antibodies were: p53: Novocastra (clone DO7) at a
dilution of 1/100; Ki67: Spring (clone SP6) at a dilution of 1/100; and CK20:
Dako (clone K20 .8) at a dilution of 1/50.
RESULTS: The expression of p53 was observed in 11 cases, six in the Recurrent
group and five in the Non-Recurrent, all high-grade tumors (p = 0.0001). The
histological progression occurred in six patients (p = 0.0076). Of the 18
Recurrent cases, six showed immunoreactivity for p53 and 12 were negative for
this antibody (p = 0.1715). Ki67 was positive in 17 of the 18 cases from the
Recurrent group (p = 0.0001) and, from 20 high-grade tumors, 18 showed reaction
to this antibody (p = 0.0001). Of the 18 individuals who had recurrence, 13
showed anomalous expression for CK20 (p = 0.0166). In high-grade carcinomas, of
the 20 cases, 16 showed anomalous expression for this antibody, while 18 of the
23 patients with low-grade tumors showed normal expression for CK20 (p = 0.0002).
CONCLUSION: The p53 showed good correlation with histological progression and
histologic grade. Ki67 was strongly associated with recurrence and histological
grade, and CK20 was also associated with these variables.

PMID: 23174791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2012 Nov 22;12:225. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-12-225.

Involvement of spinal orexin A in the electroacupuncture analgesia in a rat model
of post-laparotomy pain.

Feng XM(1), Mi WL, Xia F, Mao-Ying QL, Jiang JW, Xiao S, Wang ZF, Wang YQ, Wu GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine and Neurobiology, Institute of Acupuncture 
Research, WHO Collaborating Center for Traditional Medicine, State Key Laboratory
of Medical Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai, 20032, China.

BACKGROUND: Orexin A (OXA, hypocretin/hcrt 1) is a newly discovered potential
analgesic substance. However, whether OXA is involved in acupuncture analgesia
remains unknown. The present study was designed to investigate the involvement of
spinal OXA in electroacupuncture (EA) analgesia.
METHODS: A modified rat model of post-laparotomy pain was adopted and evaluated. 
Von Frey filaments were used to measure mechanical allodynia of the hind paw and 
abdomen. EA at 2/15 Hz or 2/100 Hz was performed once on the bilateral ST36 and
SP6 for 30 min perioperatively. SB-334867, a selective orexin 1 receptor (OX1R)
antagonist with a higher affinity for OXA than OXB, was intrathecally injected to
observe its effect on EA analgesia.
RESULTS: OXA at 0.3 nmol and EA at 2/15 Hz produced respective analgesic effects 
on the model (P<0.05). Pre-surgical intrathecal administered of SB-334867 30 nmol
antagonized OXA analgesia and attenuated the analgesic effect of EA (P<0.05).
However, SB-334867 did not block fentanyl-induced analgesia (P>0.05). In
addition, naloxone, a selective opioid receptor antagonist, failed to antagonize 
OXA-induced analgesia (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study indicate the involvement of OXA in 
EA analgesia via OX1R in an opioid-independent way.

PMCID: PMC3577429
PMID: 23173601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;32(8):1056-9.

[Acupuncture therapy for the improvement of sleep quality of outpatients
receiving methadone maintenance treatment: a randomized controlled trial].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Liu XB, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Mental Health Center, Tongfi Medical College of Huazhong University
of Science & Technology, Wuhan. psylee@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the efficacy and safety of acupuncture therapy for the
improvement of sleep quality of outpatients receiving methadone maintenance
treatment (MMT).
METHODS: Using randomized double-blinded controlled design, seventy-five MMT
outpatients with low sleep quality [score of Pittsburgh sleep quality index
(PSQI) > or = 8], were randomly assigned to the acupuncture group (38 cases) and 
the sham-acupuncture group (37 cases). All patients maintained previous MMT.
Acupuncture was applied to Baihui (GV20), Shenmen (bilateral, TF4), Shenting
(GV24), Sanyinjiao (bilateral, SP6), and Sishencong (EX-HN1) in the acupuncture
group. The same procedures were performed in the sham-acupuncture group, but not 
to the acupoints (5 mm lateral to the acupoints selected in the acupuncture
group) with shallow needling technique. The treatment was performed 5 times each 
week for 8 successive weeks. The PSQI was assessed before treatment, at the end
of the 2nd, 4th, 6th, and 8th week of the treatment. The detection ratio of low
sleep quality and the incidence of adverse acupuncture reactions were compared
between the two groups at the end of the 8th week.
RESULTS: The overall PSQI score was obviously higher in the acupuncture group
than in the sham-acupuncture group with statistical difference (P < 0.01). The
detection ratio of low sleep quality at the end of the 8th week was lower in the 
acupuncture group (60.53%, 23/38 cases) than in the sham-acupuncture group
(83.78%, 31/37 cases) with statistical difference (P < 0.05). The rate of adverse
acupuncture reaction was 5.26% (2/38 cases) in the acupuncture group and 2.70%
(1/37 cases) in the sham-acupuncture group respectively, showing no statistical
difference (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture therapy could effectively and safely improve the sleep
quality of outpatients receiving MMT.

PMID: 23173252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Acupunct Electrother Res. 2012;37(2-3):89-101.

Acute effects of electro-acupuncture (EA) on hippocampal long term potentiation
(LTP) of perforant path-dentate gyrus granule cells synapse related to memory.

He X(1), Yan T, Chen R, Ran D.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Rehabilitation Medicine, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, PR China.

Acupuncture, a traditional Chinese therapeutic method, has been widely used in
clinical practice to treat diseases such as stroke, Bell's palsy, Alzheimer
disease, Parkinson diseases, dysmenorrhea and chronic pain. Mounting lab data had
suggested that electro-acupuncture could alleviate dementia and restore long term
potentiation of hippocampus in rat. Clinical data also indicated that
electro-acupuncture could improve electrical activity of brain in vascular
dementia patients. However, its biological basis and acute effects on hippocampal
long term potentiation (LTP) remain not well understood. Therefore, we sought to 
investigate whether acute electro-acupuncture (acupoints: ST36 and SP6;
continuous wave, 2 mV, 2Hz; lasted 20 min) could enhance LTP of perforant
path-dentate gyrus granule cells in anesthetized rat and explore its underlying
mechanisms. We found that electro-acupuncture could significantly increase PS2/PS
1 in pair pulse test (P <0.05, inter-pulse interval: 20ms and 90ms). When
compared to control group, electro-acupuncture could significantly enhance LTP to
about 234% which was about 143% of that in control group (P <0.05). It suggested 
that electro-acupuncture could modulate the function of interneurons in
hippocampus hence increase LTP.

PMID: 23156202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Clin Interv Aging. 2012;7:469-74. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S37531. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Effects of electroacupuncture on recent stroke inpatients with incomplete bladder
emptying: a preliminary study.

Yu KW(1), Lin CL, Hung CC, Chou EC, Hsieh YL, Li TM, Chou LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Incomplete bladder emptying (IBE) is defined as having a postvoid
residual (PVR) urine volume greater than 100 mL for 2 consecutive days. IBE is
common in stroke patients and could necessitate indwelling or intermittent
catheterization. The condition is correlated with urinary tract infections, which
could impede rehabilitation progress and increase medical costs. Treatment for
patients with IBE includes bladder retraining, biofeedback, medication, and
botulinum toxin injection, but none of these interventions are completely
effective.
METHODS: All patients with acute stroke who were admitted to the rehabilitation
ward between August 2010 and April 2011 were included in the study and their PVR 
urine volume was checked. Electroacupuncture (EA; 1 Hz, 15 minutes) was performed
on the acupoints Sanyinjiao (SP6), Ciliao (BL32), and Pangguangshu (BL28) of
stroke patients with IBE for a total of ten treatments (five times a week for 2
weeks). Bladder diaries, which included the spontaneous voiding and PVR urine
volumes, were recorded during the course of treatment.
RESULTS: The presence of IBE was not related to sex, history of diabetes
mellitus, stroke type (hemorrhagic or ischemic), or stroke location (P > 0.05).
Among the 49 patients in the study, nine (18%) had IBE, and seven of the stroke
patients with IBE were treated with EA. Increased spontaneous voiding volume and 
decreased PVR urine volume were noted after ten sessions of EA.
CONCLUSION: EA may have beneficial effects on stroke survivors with IBE, thereby 
making it a potential safe modality with which to improve urinary function.

PMCID: PMC3496194
PMID: 23152677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2012 Aug;37(4):302-7.

[Effect of acupuncture at different acupoints on expression of hypothalamic GABA 
and GABA(A) receptor proteins in insomnia rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou YL(1), Gao XY, Wang PY, Ren S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acu-moxibustion and Tuina, Henan College of Chinese Medicine,
Zhengzhou 450008, China. zylaugust@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of acupuncture of "Shenmai" (BL 62) and
"Zhaohai" (KI 6), "Shenmen" (HT 7), etc. on the expression of hypothalamic
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and GABA(A) receptor (GABA(A)R) proteins in
experimental insomnia rats so as to explore its mechanism underlying improving
sleeping.
METHODS: Seventy Wistar rats were randomly divided into normal control, model,
"Sanyinjiao" (SP6), "Neiguan" (PC 6), "Zusanli" (ST 36), "Shenmen" (HT7), and
"Shenmai" (BL 62)-Zhaohai (KI 6, BL 62-KI 6) groups, with 10 rats in each group. 
Insomnia model was established by intraperitoneal injection of
chlorophenylalanine solution (PCPA, 1 mL/100 g). An acupuncture needle was
inserted into each of the bilateral HT 7, PC 6, SP 6, ST 36 and BL 62-KI 6
respectively and manipulated for about 1 min, once daily for 7 days. Hypothamic
GABA and GABA(A)R protein expressions were detected by immunohistochemistry. The 
animals' physical ability was evaluated by using pole-climbing test in a water
tank.
RESULTS: In comparison with the normal control group, the numbers of hypothalamic
GABA immunoreaction (IR)- and GABA(A)R IR-positive neurons and the pole-climbing 
time were reduced significantly in the model group (P < 0.05). While in
comparison with the model group, the numbers of hypothalamic GABA IR-positive
neurons and those of hypothalamic GABA(A)R IR-positive neurons in the HT 7, PC 6,
SP 6, ST 36 and BL 62-KI 6 groups, as well as the pole-climbing duration in the
SP 6, ST 36 and BL 62-KI 6 groups were increased considerably (P < 0.05, P <
0.01). The effects of HT 7 and BL 62-KI 6 groups were significantly superior to
those of PC 6, ST 36 and SP 6 groups in up-regulating GABA and GABA(A)R
expression, and the effect of BL 62-KI 6 group was remarkably better than those
of HT 7, PC 6, SP 6 and ST 36 groups in lengthening the pole-climbing time (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture can effectively suppress insomnia induced down-regulation
of hypothalamic GABA and GABA(A)R in rats and lengthen pole-climbing time, which 
may contribute to its effect in relieving insomnia.

PMID: 23140052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2012 Aug;37(4):291-5.

[Effects of electroacupuncture of "Weizhong" (BL 40), "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) and
"Yinlingquan" (SP 9) on intravesical pressure and bladder adenosine triphosphate 
content in rabbits with acute urinary retention].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng LL(1), Wu CY, Sui MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acu-moxibustion and Massage, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing 100029, China. 2008beijingfuture@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) of "Weizhong" (BL
40), "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) and "Yinlingquan" (SP 9) on changes of intravesical
pressure and contents of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in the urinary bladder
tissue in rabbits with acute urine retention, so as to explore the relatively
specificity of acupoints for urinary bladder problems.
METHODS: Forty-eight male adult rabbits were randomly divided into normal
control, model, Weizhong (BL 40, EA-BL 40), San-yinjiao (SP 6, EA-SP 6),
Yinlingquan (SP9, EA-SP9) and non-acupoint (EA-NA) groups. Acute urinary
retention model was established by filling the rabbits' bladder with normal
saline at a volume of 2 times above their normal capacity for 2 hours. EA (2
Hz/15 Hz, 0.6 mA) was applied to bilateral "Weizhong" (BL 40), "Sanyinjiao" (SP
6) and "Yinlingquan" (SP 9) for 20 min, respectively. Intravesical pressure was
detected by using a pressure transducer and an amplifier. Bladder ATP content was
detected by using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: In comparison with pre-modeling, the intravesical pressure levels were
decreased significantly after modeling in the model, EA-BL 40, EA-SP 6, EA-SP 9
and EA-NA groups (P < 0.05). Compared with pre-EA, intravesical pressure values
were increased remarkably in the EA-BL 40, EA-SP 6, EA-SP 9 and EA-NA groups (P <
0.05). The percentages of the increased vesical pressure after EA were
considerably higher in the EA-BL 40, EA-SP 6, EA-SP 9 and EA-NA groups than in
the model group (P < 0.05). Compared with the normal group, bladder ATP content
in the model group was reduced significantly (P < 0.05); while in comparison with
the model group, ATP contents in the EA-BL 40, EA-SP 6 and EA-SP 9 groups were
up-regulated apparently (P < 0.05). The bladder ATP level of the EA-BL 40 group
was significantly higher than those of EA-SP 6 and EA-SP 9 groups (P < 0.05). No 
significant differences were found between the model and EA-NA groups, and
between the EA-SP6 and EA-SP9 groups in bladder ATP contents (P > 0.05), and
among the EA-BL 40, EA-SP 6 and EA-SP 9 groups in the percentages of the
increased intravesical pressure (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: EA of BL 40, SP 6 and SP 9 can significantly raise intravesical
pressure and bladder ATP content in urine retention rabbits, which may contribute
to its effect in improving urinary retention.

PMID: 23140050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Complement Ther Med. 2012 Dec;20(6):417-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2012.08.001. Epub
2012 Sep 1.

The effect of acupressure on sleep quality in hemodialysis patients.

Shariati A(1), Jahani S, Hooshmand M, Khalili N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Surgical Department, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical
Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to investigate the effects of acupressure on sleep
quality in hemodialysis patients.
DESIGN: Randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: The setting of the study was dialysis wards located in two university
hospitals (Imam and Golestan) in Ahvaz, Iran.
INTERVENTIONS: 48 end-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis who scored 5
points or higher on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) were enrolled to
the study. Acupressure group received acupressure intervention on the Shenmen
(He7) and He Gu (Li4) points in the hands and Sanyingjao (sp6) point in the feet 
for 4 weeks beside routine care and control group received only routine care.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: subjective sleep quality, latency and duration, habitual
sleep efficiency; sleep disturbances, daytime functional status, and use of
sleeping medications.
RESULTS: The result indicated significant differences between the acupressure
group and the control group after intervention in PSQI global scores (p<0.001)
and all sleep quality indices between two groups after intervention: subjective
sleep quality (p<0.001), sleep latency (p<0.001), sleep duration (p<0.001), sleep
efficiency (p=0.006), sleep disturbance (p<0.001), the use of sleeping medication
(p=0.028), and daytime dysfunction (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: This study supports the effectiveness of acupressure in improving
sleep quality of end-stage renal disease patients as a noninvasive therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23131372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Immunol. 2013 Apr;53(4):345-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.08.024. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

CADM1 is expressed as multiple alternatively spliced functional and dysfunctional
isoforms in human mast cells.

Moiseeva EP(1), Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Dept. of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK. em309@le.ac.uk

Cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) is implicated in the pathogenesis of several
diseases and is responsible for adhesion and survival of mast cells (MCs).
Differential expression of CADM1 isoforms was found in different species. We
previously cloned SP4, SP1, SP6 and a dysfunctional isoform from human lung MCs
(HLMCs) and the MC line HMC-1. The aim of this study was to identify all isoforms
expressed in human MCs. The functional isoforms SP4, SP1, SP6 and SP3, with
alternative splicing between exons 7/11, were detected in human MCs by RT-PCR.
Two dysfunctional isoforms with alternative splicing of cryptic exons A and B
between exons 1/2, leading to premature termination of translation, were found in
~40% of MC specimens. Sequencing of genomic DNA showed that splicing of cryptic
exon B did not result from specific SNPs within this exon or its putative splice 
branch point. Highly glycosylated CADM1 (~105 kDa) was detected by western
blotting, but an extracellular domain (~95 kDa) was found only in the culture
medium from HLMCs, but not HMC-1 cells, indicating differential protein
expression. Transfection of SP1 and SP6, but not SP4, reduced adhesion of HMC-1
cells to human lung fibroblasts but not airway smooth muscle cells. Hence,
dysfunctional and functional CADM1 isoforms are found in human MCs. The longer
SP1 and SP6 were most evident in differentiated HLMCs and displayed differential 
adhesion compared to SP4. These multiple isoforms are likely to contribute to MC 
function in both health and disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3550521
PMID: 23063768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Jan 15;237:263-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.09.047. Epub 2012
Oct 2.

High frequency electro-acupuncture enhances striatum DAT and D1 receptor
expression, but decreases D2 receptor level in 6-OHDA lesioned rats.

Rui G(1), Guangjian Z, Yong W, Jie F, Yanchao C, Xi J, Fen L.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Medicine Department of The 1st Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiao Tong 
University, China.

The direct effects of electro-acupuncture (EA) on the dopaminergic
neurotransmitter system in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients remain elusive. In
the present study, 0, 2 or 100Hz EA was applied to acupoints Sanyinjiao (SP6),
Yanglingquan (GB34) and Zusanli (ST36) in a rat model unilaterally lesioned by
6-hydroxydopamine. Rotational behavior tests were performed and the animals were 
then decapitated. Levels of striatal dopamine (DA), dopamine transporter, and D1-
and D2-like DA receptors were subsequently evaluated. EA at 100 Hz was shown to
significantly enhance survival of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra
(52.10 ± 11.41% of the level on the non-lesioned rats vs. 21.22 ± 5.52% in the
non-EA group, P<0.05) and reduce motor deficits (207.80 ± 31.14 vs. 476.11 ±
68.80 turns/30 min, P<0.05), whereas it only slightly restored the
6-hydroxydopamine-induced loss of striatal DA (P>0.05 vs. the non-EA group).
There was a 253.78% increase in dopamine transporter protein expression in the
striatum in the 100 Hz EA group (P<0.05 vs. the non-EA group). Moreover, high
frequency EA induced increases in striatal D1-like receptor mRNA and protein
levels of 81.88% and 62.62%, respectively (P<0.001 and P<0.05 vs. the non-EA
group). However, the D2-like DA receptor up-regulation observed in the non-EA
group was suppressed in high frequency group (P>0.05 vs. the sham operation
group). These findings suggest that high-frequency EA might work by acting on
presynaptic dopamine transporter and postsynaptic dopamine receptors
simultaneously to achieve a therapeutic effect in PD patients and models. This
might shed some light on the mechanism by which EA affects the DA
neurotransmitter system.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23036843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Neural Regen Res. 2012 Sep 25;7(27):2131-5. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2012.27.007.

Electroacupuncture upregulated platelet derived growth factor expression in
spared dorsal root ganglion of cats.

Wang X(1), Zhang L(2), Xu X(3), Zhao W(2), Liu G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit of Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital, Yantai 264000, Shandong
Province, China. (2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Binzhou Medical
College, Yantai 264003, Shandong Province, China. (3)Neuroscience Department,
University of Southern California, CA 90007, USA.

A bilateral spared dorsal root ganglion model was established in healthy adult
cats by bilateral resection of L1-5 and L7-S2 dorsal root ganglia. L6 dorsal root
ganglia were spared. Zusanli (ST36) and Xuanzhong (BL39) or Futu (ST32) and
Sanyinjiao (SP6) were alternatively electro-stimulated on the right leg.
Immunohistochemical staining of anti-serum platelet-derived growth factor
demonstrated that the number of total neurons and medium-small sized
platelet-derived growth factor positive neurons was significantly decreased on
the 7(th) day following injury. After 7 days of acupuncture, the total number of 
positive and large neurons staining for platelet-derived growth factor on the
acupuncture side significantly increased compared to the non-acupuncture side.
After acupuncture for 14 days, the total positive and medium-small sized neurons 
significantly increased compared with the non-acupuncture side. Results indicate 
that acupuncture promoted the synthesis of platelet-derived growth factor in
spared dorsal root ganglia.

PMCID: PMC4281415
PMID: 25558226  [PubMed]


138. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;32(6):785-8.

[Effects of transcutaneous electrical acupoint stimulation combined general
anesthesia in controlled hypotension at different levels on the liver blood flow 
].

[Article in Chinese]

Shao XM(1), Fang JQ, Zhang LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Third Clinical Medical School, Zhejiang University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou.

OBJECTIVE To observe the changes of the liver blood flow in controlled
hypotension by transcutaneous electrical acupoint stimulation (TEAS) combined
general anesthesia, thus clarifying the mechanism of liver protection effect in
acupuncture anesthesia combined with drugs.METHODS: Forty-two male beagles were
randomly divided into seven groups, i.e. , the general anesthesia group, the 50% 
control group, the 50% experiment group, the 40% control group, the 40%
experiment group, the 30% control group, and the 30% experiment group, 6 in each 
group. Beagles in the latter six groups were administered with isoflurane
inhalation and intravenous dripping of sodium nitroprusside (SNP) for controlled 
hypotension. The mean arterial pressure (MAP) was lowered to 50%, 40%, and 30%
basic MAP and lasted for 60 min. Beagles in the general anesthesia group was not 
treated with controlled hypotension. In the experiment groups, TEAS was applied
to bilateral Hegu (LI4), Zusanli (ST36), Sanyinjiao (SP6), and Quchi (LI11) at
2/100 Hz with the stimulation strength of 4 +/- 1 mA. The TEAS started from the
stability of physiological conditions to 60 min after maintaining the target MAP.
The changes of blood flow of the liver tissue surface at corresponding time
points were monitored by laser Doppler blood flow meter.
RESULTS: Between the beginning of hypotension and the maintaining stage of target
low blood pressure, the liver blood flow of the 50% control group was
significantly lower than the level of the general anesthesia group and the basic 
level at corresponding time points (P < 0.05). It was significantly reduced in
the 50% experiment group only at 30-60 min of maintenance. Besides, in the early 
period of maintenance (10-30 min), it was significantly higher in the 50%
experiment group than in the 50% control group at the same time points (P <
0.05). In this stage, there was no obvious increase in the liver blood flow in
the 40% and 30% experiment groups. In the recovery phase of blood pressure (20-30
min), the liver blood flow of the 40% experiment group had been restored to the
level of the 40% control group and the basic level, while it had not been
restored in the general anesthesia group. In this stage, the similar changing
tendency of the liver blood flow occurred in the 50% and 30% experiment groups
and the 50% and 30% control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Line to a high level of controlled hypotension (50%), TEAS liver
protective effect was obviously embodied in the early step-down phase and the
maintenance phase. Line-induced hypotension to a lower level (40%), TEAS liver
protective effect was obviously embodied in the recovery phase.

PMID: 22978104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Pain Manag Nurs. 2012 Sep;13(3):150-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pmn.2009.08.001. Epub 2010 
Jan 6.

Postoperative pain: acupuncture versus percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation.

Gavronsky S(1), Koeniger-Donohue R, Steller J, Hawkins JW.

Author information: 
(1)School for Health Sciences, Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Pain Manag Nurs. 2013 Dec;14(4):e292-3.

The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of traditional acupuncture
compared with acupuncture with percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS)
on postoperative surgical pain relief in gynecologic oncology patients. Twenty
postoperative gynecologic oncology patients were randomly assigned into the two
groups, and the intervention was initiated within 24 hours after surgery. The
patients in each group received four treatments in the subsequent 48 hours, with 
12 hours between each treatment. Either traditional acupuncture needles or
acupuncture needles with a pulsed electric current were applied to stimulate the 
area of points Sp6 and Sp8 near the saphenous nerve. Pain measurement instruments
included a visual analog scale and the McGill Pain Questionnaire. Although the
PENS treatment group demonstrated a consistent decrease in pain with each
treatment application compared with the traditional acupuncture group, after 48
hours both groups experienced equivalent pain relief.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Pain Management Nursing. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22929602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 2012;39(2):209-13.

Importance of acupuncture on premenstrual syndrome.

Anil A(1), Peker T, Göktas T, Kilic S, Erbas D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Beyevler, Ankara, 
Turkey. afitap@gazi.edu.tr

AIM: Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a complex group of symptoms. The clear
reasons for PMS have not been understood completely. PMS includes emotional
symptoms but mostly physical symptoms.
METHODS: The study was carried out on 11 patients (23-40 age range) diagnosed as 
having PMS. DSM IV was taken into account as the criteria for diagnosis. Ren2,
Ren6, Ren12, LI4, LI11, P6, Liv3, Sp6, St36 and Du20 points were used on patients
for the effects of acupuncture. The treatment of acupuncture was applied for
three menses. Furthermore, NOx, MDA and GSH values in blood were studied.
RESULTS: The complaints of patients were observed to decrease or disappear
completely. The most obvious changes were observed in myalgia, mastalgia and
dysmenorrheal complaints (p < 0.000). Moreover, before starting the treatment of 
acupuncture, former blood values of NOx, MDA and GSH were compared with blood
values of NOx, MDA and GSH after three cycles. An increase was observed for NOx
levels after acupuncture treatment (p < 0.05). While there was no change in the
oxidant stress indicator, MDA, an increase in antioxidant indicator GSH levels
was observed (p < or = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture to treat premenstrual syndrome can be considered as an
effective treatment modality.

PMID: 22905466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Tissue Res. 2012 Oct;350(1):95-107. doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1459-8. Epub
2012 Aug 7.

Epiprofin/Sp6 regulates Wnt-BMP signaling and the establishment of cellular
junctions during the bell stage of tooth development.

Ibarretxe G(1), Aurrekoetxea M, Crende O, Badiola I, Jimenez-Rojo L, Nakamura T, 
Yamada Y, Unda F.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology & Histology Department, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of the Basque Country, 48940 Bizkaia, Spain.

Epiprofin/Specificity Protein 6 (Epfn) is a Krüppel-like family (KLF)
transcription factor that is critically involved in tooth morphogenesis and
dental cell differentiation. However, its mechanism of action is still not fully 
understood. We have employed both loss-of-function and gain-of-function
approaches to address the role of Epfn in the formation of cell junctions in
dental cells and in the regulation of junction-associated signal transduction
pathways. We have evaluated the expression of junction proteins in bell-stage
incisor and molar tooth sections from Epfn(-/-) mice and in dental pulp MDPC-23
cells overexpressing Epfn. In Epfn(-/-) mice, a dramatic reduction occurs in the 
expression of tight junction and adherens junction proteins and of the
adherens-junction-associated ß-catenin protein, a major effector of canonical Wnt
signaling. Loss of cell junctions and ß-catenin in Epfn(-/-) mice is correlated
with a clear decrease in bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4) expression, a
decrease in nestin in the tooth mesenchyme, altered cell proliferation, and
failure of ameloblast cell differentiation. Overexpression of Epfn in MDPC-23
cells results in an increased cellular accumulation of ß-catenin protein,
indicative of upregulation of canonical Wnt signaling. Together, these results
suggest that Epfn enhances canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in the developing
dental pulp mesenchyme, a condition that promotes the activity of other
downstream signaling pathways, such as BMP, which are fundamental for cellular
induction and ameloblast differentiation. These altered signaling events might
underlie some of the most prominent dental defects observed in Epfn(-/-) mice,
such as the absence of ameloblasts and enamel, and might throw light on
developmental malformations of the tooth, including hyperdontia.

PMID: 22868911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Clin Pathol. 2012 Nov;65(11):989-95. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-200911. Epub
2012 Aug 2.

Prognostic and predictive significance of proliferation in 867 colorectal
cancers.

Fodor IK(1), Hutchins GG, Espiritu C, Quirke P, Jubb AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, California
94080, USA.

AIM: Recently, the Oncotype DX recurrence score, which measures a gene expression
signature including markers of tumour proliferation, was validated as a
prognostic signature in colorectal cancer. This study aimed to evaluate whether
the Ki67 proliferation index can provide similar prognostic and predictive
information.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays were constructed from triplicate cores of colorectal 
cancer. Immunohistochemistry for Ki67 was performed with the SP6 antibody and the
percentage of positive tumour cells scored. Prognostic significance was evaluated
in 867 cancers (601 events) using Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: The Ki67 labelling index, divided at the median, was not a statistically
or clinically significant prognostic factor in univariate analyses of 5-year
overall survival (HR 0.98, 95% CI 0.84 to 1.15, p=0.84). Multivariate analyses
were similarly non-significant. However, in Dukes' stage C patients, the high
Ki67 subgroup derived a greater 5-year overall survival benefit from chemotherapy
(HR 0.32, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.51, p<0.0001) than the low subgroup (HR 0.57, 95% CI
0.37 to 0.89, p=0.011).
CONCLUSIONS: The Ki67 proliferation index is not a useful prognostic factor in
colorectal cancer, but deserves further evaluation as a predictive factor for the
incremental benefit derived from adjuvant chemotherapy.

PMID: 22859394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biosci Bioeng. 2012 Dec;114(6):671-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.06.011. Epub
2012 Jul 25.

High-throughput screening method for promoter activity using bead display and a
ligase ribozyme.

Kojima T(1), Ohuchi S, Ito Y, Nakano H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Bioagricultural
Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

In this report, we describe the development of a novel in vitro high-throughput
system for detecting and screening promoter activity; the method employs
emulsified reactions and a ligase ribozyme. In our study, a promoter DNA fragment
containing the ribozyme gene was immobilized on a bead by using emulsion PCR,
followed by in vitro transcription of the immobilized DNA in water-in-oil
emulsions. Owing to the self-ligation activity of the ribozyme, it was
co-transcriptionally linked to the active promoter immobilized on the beads. The 
bead complex containing the active promoter sequence was then labeled by reverse 
transcription with a fluorescently labeled primer. Employing flow cytometry, the 
fluorescence intensity corresponding to the strength of each promoter was
observed, indicating the applicability of the system for promoter evaluation.
Moreover, two rounds of screening with T7 RNA polymerase using a cell sorter
enriched the T7 promoter fragment by 70 folds from a 1:100 mixture of T7 promoter
and SP6 promoter fragments, suggesting that this system can be used to screen
promoters.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22835855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Altern Complement Med. 2013 Jan;19(1):43-9. doi: 10.1089/acm.2011.0404. Epub
2012 Jul 23.

Does Traditional Chinese Medicine pattern affect acupoint specific effect?
Analysis of data from a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial for primary
dysmenorrhea.

Liu YQ(1), Ma LX, Xing JM, Cao HJ, Wang YX, Tang L, Li M, Wang Y, Liang Y, Pu LY,
Yu XM, Guo LZ, Jin JL, Wang Z, Ju HM, Jiang YM, Liu JJ, Yuan HW, Li CH, Zhang P, 
She YF, Liu JP, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture-Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study assessed the importance of the Traditional Chinese
Medicine (TCM) pattern on an acupoint-specific effect.
DESIGN: This was a TCM pattern subdivision analysis of the first intervention
data from a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial (ISRCTN24863192) (the main 
trial).
SETTINGS: The main trial recruited participants from six hospitals in three
provinces in China.
SUBJECTS: Five hundred and one (501) participants diagnosed with primary
dysmenorrhea (PD) were enrolled in the main trial.
INTERVENTIONS: The main trial randomly and equally divided participants into
three treatment groups with bilateral electroacupuncture at three sites,
respectively: Sanyinjiao (SP6), Xuanzhong (GB39), and an adjacent nonacupoint.
Participants were diagnosed with TCM patterns before the treatment. The
intervention was carried out when the visual analogue scale (VAS) score of
participant's menstrual pain was = 40 mm on the first day of menstruation and
lasted for 30 minutes.
OUTCOME MEASURES: The immediate improvement of pain was measured with a 100-mm
VAS before the intervention, at 5 minutes, 10 minutes, and 30 minutes during the 
intervention, and at 30 minutes after the completion of this intervention.
RESULTS: Three (3) TCM patterns (n=320) were eligible for analysis, including
Cold and Dampness Stagnation pattern (n=184), Qi and Blood Stagnation pattern
(n=84), and Qi and Blood Deficiency pattern (n=52). In Cold and Dampness
Stagnation pattern, the SP6 group had a significant reduction in VAS scores
compared with the GB39 group (mean difference -7.6 mm) and the nonacupoint group 
(mean difference -8.2 mm), respectively. There was no difference between the
latter two groups. There were no group differences in VAS scores in the other two
patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: It suggested that TCM pattern might affect acupoint specific effect 
on the immediate pain relief obtained for participants with PD.

PMID: 22823583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2012 Jul 7;12:88. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-12-88.

Using a Delphi consensus process to develop an acupuncture treatment protocol by 
consensus for women undergoing Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) treatment.

Smith CA(1), Grant S, Lyttleton J, Cochrane S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Complementary Medicine Research, University of Western Sydney,
Locked Bag 1797, Penrith South DC, NSW, 2751, Australia.
caroline.smith@uws.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Assisted reproductive technologies (ART) are increasingly utilised
for resolving difficulties conceiving. These technologies are expensive to both
the public purse and the individual consumers. Acupuncture is widely used as an
adjunct to ART with indications that it may assist reducing the time to
conception and increasing live birth rates. Heterogeneity is high between
treatment protocols. The aim of this study was to examine what fertility
acupuncturists consider key components of best practice acupuncture during an ART
cycle, and to establish an acupuncture protocol by consensus.
METHODS: Fifteen international acupuncturists with extensive experience treating 
women during ART interventions participated in 3 rounds of Delphi questionnaires.
The first round focused on identifying the parameters of acupuncture treatment as
adjunct to ART, the second round evaluated statements derived from the earlier
round, and the third evaluated specific parameters for a proposed trial protocol.
Consensus was defined as greater than 80% agreement.
RESULTS: Significant agreement was achieved on the parameters of best practice
acupuncture, including an acupuncture protocol suitable for future research.
Study participants confirmed the importance of needling aspects relating to the
dose of acupuncture, the therapeutic relationship, tailoring treatment to the
individual, and the role of co-interventions. From two rounds of the Delphi a
consensus was achieved on seven treatment parameters for the design of the
acupuncture treatment to be used in a clinical trial of acupuncture as an adjunct
to ART. The treatment protocol includes the use of the traditional Chinese
medicine acupuncture, use of manual acupuncture, a first treatment administered
between day 6-8 of the stimulated ART cycle which is individualised to the
participant, two treatments will be administered on the day of embryo transfer,
and will include points SP8, SP10, LR3, ST29, CV4, and post transfer include:
GV20, KD3, ST36, SP6, and PC6. Auricular points Shenmen and Zigong will be used. 
Practitioner intent or yi will be addressed in the treatment protocol.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite a lack of homogeneity in the research and clinical
literature on ART and acupuncture, a consensus amongst experts on key components 
of a best practice treatment protocol was possible. Such consensus offers
guidance for further research.

PMCID: PMC3416745
PMID: 22769059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Acupunct Med. 2012 Sep;30(3):187-94. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2012-010140. Epub 2012 
Jul 3.

External validity in randomised controlled trials of acupuncture for
osteoarthritis knee pain.

Purepong N(1), Jitvimonrat A, Sitthipornvorakul E, Eksakulkla S, Janwantanakul P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, 
Thailand. vnithima@chula.ac.th

OBJECTIVES: To assess two aspects of the external validity of acupuncture
research for osteoarthritis knee pain and determine the common acupoints and
treatment parameters used.
METHODS: The external validity of 16 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) was
investigated using a scale consisting of two aspects: reporting and performance. 
The reporting aspect included acupuncturist's background, study location,
treatment detailed, patient characteristics, positive trial results, adverse
effects and between-group statistical differences, whereas treatment
appropriateness, appropriate controls and outcomes were classified as the
performance aspect. Acupuncture treatment in RCTs was compared with common
practice according to the literature sources and survey of acupuncturists working
in different parts of Thailand.
RESULTS: The levels of external validity for the reporting and performance
aspects were in the range of 31.3% to 100%. Statistic values such as mean
difference and confidence interval were reported by the minority of trials
(43.8%). Patient satisfaction and quality of life were seldom used (31.3%). There
were minor differences between research and practice in terms of the points used 
(25.0%), number of treatment sessions (6.3%) and frequency (12.5%). The most
frequently used points were ST34, ST35, ST36, SP6, SP9, SP10, GB34, Xiyan and ah 
shi points, and the commonly used treatment parameters were 20 minutes, 10-15
sessions and two treatments weekly.
CONCLUSIONS: Reporting of the external validity of acupuncture RCTs for knee pain
was notably inadequate in terms of trial setting, treatment provider and
statistical reporting. The majority of studies involved appropriate controls and 
outcomes and applied acupuncture treatments in line with practice.

PMID: 22759902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Acupunct Med. 2012 Sep;30(3):203-7. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2012-010127. Epub 2012
Jun 22.

Influence of acupuncture on leptin, ghrelin, insulin and cholecystokinin in obese
women: a randomised, sham-controlled preliminary trial.

Güçel F(1), Bahar B, Demirtas C, Mit S, Cevik C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Etlik Zubeyde Hanim Obstetrics and
Gynecology Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is an energy balance problem caused by overeating. Obesity
treatment includes diet, exercise, behaviour treatment, pharmacotherapy and
surgery; in addition, acupuncture is also an option.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of acupuncture on weight loss and whether a 
brief acupuncture treatment of 5 weeks can change circulating levels of leptin,
ghrelin, insulin and cholecystokinin (CCK) in obese women.
METHODS: 40 women with a body mass index (BMI)>30 kg/m(2) were equally randomised
to either an acupuncture group or a sham (non-penetrating) acupuncture group and 
received treatment at LI4, HT7, ST36, ST44 and SP6 bilaterally. Both groups had
two sessions of 20 min/week for a total of 10 sessions. Serum insulin, leptin,
plasma ghrelin and CCK levels were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Acupuncture treatment decreased insulin and leptin levels and induced
weight loss, together with a decrease in BMI compared with sham acupuncture.
Furthermore, between-group analyses demonstrated increases in plasma ghrelin and 
CCK levels in subjects who received acupuncture treatment.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that acupuncture may help to regulate weight
owing to its beneficial effects on hormones such as insulin, leptin, ghrelin and 
CCK in obese subjects even after a few weeks of treatment.

PMID: 22729015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Vet Rec. 2012 Jul 7;171(1):20. doi: 10.1136/vr.100753. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Intestinal nematodes of shot wild grey partridges in Norfolk, England.

Draycott RA(1), Santos JÁ.

Author information: 
(1)Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF, UK.
rdraycott@gwct.org.uk

PMID: 22678618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Jun 7;7:34. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-34.

Novel genetic linkage of rat Sp6 mutation to Amelogenesis imperfecta.

Muto T(1), Miyoshi K, Horiguchi T, Hagita H, Noma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Kuramoto-cho, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) is an inherited disorder characterized
by abnormal formation of tooth enamel. Although several genes responsible for AI 
have been reported, not all causative genes for human AI have been identified to 
date. AMI rat has been reported as an autosomal recessive mutant with hypoplastic
AI isolated from a colony of stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat strain, 
but the causative gene has not yet been clarified. Through a genetic screen, we
identified the causative gene of autosomal recessive AI in AMI and analyzed its
role in amelogenesis.
METHODS: cDNA sequencing of possible AI-candidate genes so far identified using
total RNA of day 6 AMI rat molars identified a novel responsible mutation in
specificity protein 6 (Sp6). Genetic linkage analysis was performed between Sp6
and AI phenotype in AMI. To understand a role of SP6 in AI, we generated the
transgenic rats harboring Sp6 transgene in AMI (Ami/Ami + Tg). Histological
analyses were performed using the thin sections of control rats, AMI, and Ami/Ami
+ Tg incisors in maxillae, respectively.
RESULTS: We found the novel genetic linkage between a 2-bp insertional mutation
of Sp6 gene and the AI phenotype in AMI rats. The position of mutation was
located in the coding region of Sp6, which caused frameshift mutation and
disruption of the third zinc finger domain of SP6 with 11 cryptic amino acid
residues and a stop codon. Transfection studies showed that the mutant protein
can be translated and localized in the nucleus in the same manner as the
wild-type SP6 protein. When we introduced the CMV promoter-driven wild-type Sp6
transgene into AMI rats, the SP6 protein was ectopically expressed in the
maturation stage of ameloblasts associated with the extended maturation stage and
the shortened reduced stage without any other phenotypical changes.
CONCLUSION: We propose the addition of Sp6 mutation as a new molecular diagnostic
criterion for the autosomal recessive AI patients. Our findings expand the
spectrum of genetic causes of autosomal recessive AI and sheds light on the
molecular diagnosis for the classification of AI. Furthermore, tight regulation
of the temporospatial expression of SP6 may have critical roles in completing
amelogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3464675
PMID: 22676574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Aug;84(2):173-80. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.05.006. Epub
2012 May 22.

Establishment and optimization of a wheat germ cell-free protein synthesis system
and its application in venom kallikrein.

Wang Y(1), Xu W, Kou X, Luo Y, Zhang Y, Ma B, Wang M, Huang K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University Tianjin
300072, China.

Wheat germ cell-free protein synthesis systems have the potential to synthesize
functional proteins safely and with high accuracy, but the poor energy supply and
the instability of mRNA templates reduce the productivity of this system, which
restricts its applications. In this report, phosphocreatine and pyruvate were
added to the system to supply ATP as a secondary energy source. After comparing
the protein yield, we found that phosphocreatine is more suitable for use in the 
wheat germ cell-free protein synthesis system. To stabilize the mRNA template,
the plasmid vector, SP6 RNA polymerase, and Cu(2+) were optimized, and a wheat
germ cell-free protein synthesis system with high yield and speed was
established. When plasmid vector (30 ng/µl), SP6 RNA polymerase (15 U),
phosphocreatine (25 mM), and Cu(2+) (5 mM) were added to the system and incubated
at 26°C for 16 h, the yield of venom kallikrein increased from 0.13 to 0.74
mg/ml. The specific activity of the recombinant protein was 1.3 U/mg, which is
only slightly lower than the crude venom kallikrein (1.74 U/mg) due to the lack
of the sugar chain. In this study, the yield of venom kallikrein was improved by 
optimizing the system, and a good foundation has been laid for industrial
applications and for further studies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22626528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;883:121-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-839-9_9.

RNAse mapping and quantitation of RNA isoforms.

Venkatesh LK(1), Fasina O, Pintel DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO, USA.

The ribonuclease protection assay (RPA) has emerged as an important methodology
for the detection, mapping, and quantification of RNAs. In this assay, total or
cytoplasmic RNAs are hybridized to a high-specific activity antisense radioactive
RNA probe synthesized by in vitro transcription from the SP6 or T7 promoter of an
appropriate linearized plasmid template by the bacteriophage SP6 or T7
polymerase, respectively. The RNA hybrids are subjected to RNAse digestion and
the protected products are resolved by denaturing polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis to allow detection of specific RNA fragments by subsequent
autoradiography. RPAs are highly sensitive, the probes can be specifically
targeted, and, when performed in probe excess, are quantitative, making them the 
method of choice for many analyses of RNA processing events.

PMID: 22589129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Curr Eye Res. 2012 Aug;37(8):730-9. doi: 10.3109/02713683.2012.671436. Epub 2012 
May 11.

Butein induces apoptosis in human uveal melanoma cells through mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway.

Cui Z(1), Song E, Hu DN, Chen M, Rosen R, McCormick SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.

Comment in
    Curr Eye Res. 2013 Jul;38(7):810.

PURPOSE: To study the cytotoxic effects and related signaling pathways of butein 
on human uveal melanoma cells in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three human uveal melanoma cell lines (M17, SP6.5, and
C918), retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells and scleral fibroblasts were
treated with butein at different dosages. The effects of butein on cell viability
were assessed by using the MTT assay. Cell apoptosis was determined using annexin
V-FITC/ethidium homodimer III flow cytometry. Mitochondrial transmembrane
potential changes were assessed by using the JC-1 fluorescent reader, cytosol
cytochrome c levels, and the activities of caspase-3, -8, and -9 were measured by
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or colorimetric assay.
RESULTS: Butein reduced the cell viability of cultured human uveal melanoma cells
in a dose-dependent manner (10, 30, and 100 µM), with IC50 at 13.3 µM and 15.8 µM
in SP6.5 and M17 cell lines, respectively. Similar effects were also found in a
highly aggressive and metastatic C918 cell line (IC50 16.7 µM). Butein at lower
concentrations (10-30 µM) selectively reduced the cell viability of uveal
melanoma cells, without affecting cell viability of RPE cells and fibroblasts.
Butein-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells, increased mitochondrial permeability 
and the level of cytosol cytochrome c, caspase-9 and -3 activities (but not
caspase-8) in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Butein has selectively potent pro-apoptotic effects on cultured
human uveal melanoma cells via the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway.

PMID: 22578288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jul;6(1):157-62. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.879. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Phosphoproteomic analysis of electroacupuncture analgesia in an inflammatory pain
rat model.

Lee SH(1), Kim SY, Kim JH, Jung HY, Moon JH, Bae KH, Choi BT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Meridian and Structural Medicine, School of Korean Medicine, Pusan
National University, Yangsan 626-870, Republic of Korea.

The phosphorylation changes of nociceptive signaling proteins in the spinal cord 
dorsal horn (SCDH) are important in creating exaggerated pain following
peripheral inflammation. Electroacupuncture (EA) has been widely used to relieve 
acute and chronic inflammatory pain in human and experimental pain models. In the
present study, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis to investigate whether EA
alters protein phosphorylation in SCDH to attenuate pain development.
Inflammatory hyperalgesia was induced by intraplantar injection of complete
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) into the rat hind paw. EA treatment at ST36 and SP6
acupoints alleviated thermal hyperalgesia of the CFA-induced inflammatory pain
model rats. The SCDH proteins from the control, inflammatory pain model and EA
treatment rats were separated by 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis and the
alterations in phosphoproteins were detected by Pro-Q Diamond staining. Eight
proteins were differentially phosphorylated following EA treatment in the
inflammatory pain model. Aldolase C, nascent polypeptide-associated complex a,
stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 and heat shock protein 90 were identified as
phosphoproteins whose expression was increased, whereas GDP dissociation
inhibitor 1, thiamine triphosphatase, phosphoglycerate kinase 1 and 14-3-3 <U+03B3> were
phosphoproteins whose expression was decreased. This is the first
phosphoproteomic screening study to elucidate the working mechanisms of EA
analgesia. The results suggest that the regulation of cellular pathways in which 
the identified proteins are involved may be associated with an EA analgesic
mechanism.

PMID: 22576741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biosci Bioeng. 2012 Jul;114(1):110-2. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.02.017. Epub
2012 May 3.

In vitro selection of bacteriophage promoters employing a terminally capped
template DNA and a streptavidin-binding aptamer.

Ohuchi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Science, University
of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
sohuchi@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

In vitro selection system for the isolation of bacteriophage promoters was
developed. Employing the system, one round of the selection achieved ~20-30 fold 
enrichment of an active promoter from mixtures with an inactive one. In addition,
active T7 promoter variants were successfully selected from a library with six
randomized bases.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22560719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Spermatogenesis. 2012 Jan 1;2(1):53-62.

Electroacupuncture enhances spermatogenesis in rats after scrotal heat treatment.

Gao J, Zuo Y, So KH, Yeung WS, Ng EH, Lee KF.

Spermatogenesis is regulated by a cascade of steroid regulated genes in the
testis. Recent studies suggested that acupuncture may improve fertility in men
with abnormal semen parameters. Yet, the underlying mechanisms in which
acupuncture enhances spermatogenesis remain largely unknown. Here we used a
scrotal heat-treated rat model to study the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) on 
recovery of spermatogenesis. In this model, spermatogenesis was disrupted by 30
min scrotal heat treatment at 43°C. Ten sessions of EA were given at Baihui
(GV20), Guanyuan (CV4), Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) from day 9 to day 36 
post-treatment. Sperm motility and production, morphology of the germinal
epithelium by Johnsen's scoring, germ cell apoptosis by TUNEL staining,
proliferation by proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) staining, as well as
serum testosterone and inhibin B levels by immunoassays were evaluated on day 0, 
1, 9, 25, 37, 46, 56 and 79. When compared with the heat-treated (H) group, the
heat-treated plus EA (H(+)EA) group showed a significant increase (p < 0.05) in
PCNA-positive cells and inhibin B levels on days 37 and 46, and a higher
Johnsen's score till day 56. On day 79, motile spermatozoa could be found in the 
vas deferens of H(+)EA group only. Consistently, there was a trend of improved
motility and increased number of motile epididymal spermatozoa in the H(+)EA
group than the H group; while apoptosis of germ cells and serum testosterone
levels were similar between the two groups. Taken together, EA enhanced germ cell
proliferation through improvement of Sertoli cell functions. This may facilitate 
the recovery of spermatogenesis and may restore normal semen parameters in
subfertile patients.

PMCID: PMC3341246
PMID: 22553490  [PubMed]


156. J Vis Exp. 2012 Mar 26;(61). pii: 3702. doi: 10.3791/3702.

In vitro transcription and capping of Gaussia luciferase mRNA followed by HeLa
cell transfection.

Jani B(1), Fuchs R.

Author information: 
(1)RNA Biology, New England Biolabs.

In vitro transcription is the synthesis of RNA transcripts by RNA polymerase from
a linear DNA template containing the corresponding promoter sequence (T7, T3,
SP6) and the gene to be transcribed (Figure 1A). A typical transcription reaction
consists of the template DNA, RNA polymerase, ribonucleotide triphosphates, RNase
inhibitor and buffer containing Mg(2+) ions. Large amounts of high quality RNA
are often required for a variety of applications. Use of in vitro transcription
has been reported for RNA structure and function studies such as splicing(1),
RNAi experiments in mammalian cells(2), antisense RNA amplification by the
"Eberwine method"(3), microarray analysis(4) and for RNA vaccine studies(5). The 
technique can also be used for producing radiolabeled and dye labeled probes(6). 
Warren, et al. recently reported reprogramming of human cells by transfection
with in vitro transcribed capped RNA(7). The T7 High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit from
New England Biolabs has been designed to synthesize up to 180 µg RNA per 20 µl
reaction. RNA of length up to 10kb has been successfully transcribed using this
kit. Linearized plasmid DNA, PCR products and synthetic DNA oligonucleotides can 
be used as templates for transcription as long as they have the T7 promoter
sequence upstream of the gene to be transcribed. Addition of a 5' end cap
structure to the RNA is an important process in eukaryotes. It is essential for
RNA stability(8), efficient translation(9), nuclear transport(10) and
splicing(11). The process involves addition of a 7-methylguanosine cap at the 5' 
triphosphate end of the RNA. RNA capping can be carried out
post-transcriptionally using capping enzymes or co-transcriptionally using cap
analogs. In the enzymatic method, the mRNA is capped using the Vaccinia virus
capping enzyme(12,13). The enzyme adds on a 7-methylguanosine cap at the 5' end
of the RNA using GTP and S-adenosyl methionine as donors (cap 0 structure). Both 
methods yield functionally active capped RNA suitable for transfection or other
applications(14) such as generating viral genomic RNA for reverse-genetic
systems(15) and crystallographic studies of cap binding proteins such as
eIF4E(16). In the method described below, the T7 High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit
from NEB is used to synthesize capped and uncapped RNA transcripts of Gaussia
luciferase (GLuc) and Cypridina luciferase (CLuc). A portion of the uncapped GLuc
RNA is capped using the Vaccinia Capping System (NEB). A linearized plasmid
containing the GLuc or CLuc gene and T7 promoter is used as the template DNA. The
transcribed RNA is transfected into HeLa cells and cell culture supernatants are 
assayed for luciferase activity. Capped CLuc RNA is used as the internal control 
to normalize GLuc expression.

PMCID: PMC3460589
PMID: 22473375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Histopathology. 2012 Aug;61(2):306-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04237.x.
Epub 2012 Mar 28.

A fast and efficient polymerase chain reaction-based method for the preparation
of in situ hybridization probes.

Ghafoory S(1), Breitkopf-Heinlein K, Li Q, Dzieran J, Scholl C, Dooley S, Wölfl
S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, Ruprecht-Karls-University
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

AIMS: In situ hybridization (ISH) is the method of choice for analysis of the
local distribution of gene expression in tissue samples at the cellular level. In
this study we present a rapid and efficient protocol for the generation of
labelled cRNA probes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The protocol is based on the preparation of DNA in vitro
transcription templates using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), using primers that
include RNA polymerase promoter sequences and size-based purification of PCR
fragments containing the target gene-specific cDNA and promoter elements for T7
and SP6 RNA polymerase. The optimized purification protocols ensure high
transcription efficiency and target specificity of the labelled cRNA. The cRNA
hybridization probes obtained are compatible with established in situ
hybridization protocols.
CONCLUSIONS: Purified PCR fragment-based in vitro transcription enables
preparation of in situ hybridization probes which allow the rapid detection of
gene expression distribution in tissue slices from any gene of interest.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22458731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:492471. doi: 10.1155/2012/492471.
Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Effects of Electroacupuncture on N-Methyl-D-aspartate Receptor-Related Signaling 
Pathway in the Spinal Cord of Normal Rats.

Kim HN(1), Kim YR, Jang JY, Shin HK, Choi BT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Meridian and Structural Medicine, School of Korean Medicine, Pusan
National University, Yangsan 626-870, Republic of Korea.

This study examined the influence of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) on
the modulation of related spinal signaling after electroacupuncture (EA)
treatment in normal rats. Bilateral 2<U+2009>Hz EA stimulations (1-2-3.0<U+2009>mA) were
delivered at acupoints corresponding to Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) in
men for 30<U+2009>min. Thermal sensitization was strongly inhibited by EA, but this
analgesia was reduced by preintrathecal injection of the NMDAR antagonist, MK801.
Phosphorylation of the NMDAR NR2B subunit, cAMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB), and especially phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) were significantly
induced by EA. However, these marked phosphorylations were not observed in
MK801-pretreated rats. EA analgesia was reduced by preintrathecal injection with 
the calcium chelators Quin2 and TMB8, similar to the results evident using MK801.
Phosphorylation of PI3K and CREB induced by EA was also inhibited by TMB8.
Calcium influx by NMDAR activation may play an important role in EA analgesia of 
normal rats through the modulation of the phosphorylation of spinal PI3K and
CREB.

PMCID: PMC3290892
PMID: 22454669  [PubMed]


159. J Med Invest. 2012;59(1-2):59-68.

Dissection of morphological and metabolic differentiation of ameloblasts via
ectopic SP6 expression.

Muto T(1), Miyoshi K, Horiguchi T, Noma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Health Biosciences, the
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Tooth enamel is the hardest organ in the body. In rodent incisor, the enamel is
exclusively produced by ameloblasts with yellowish-brown pigmentation, indicating
normal enamel formation. However, the molecular mechanisms of ameloblast
differentiation and amelogenesis are not fully understood. Specificity protein
(Sp) 6 has been reported as one of the critical factors for tooth development. To
explore SP6 function, we generated Sp6 transgenic (Tg) rats. Unexpectedly, the
enamel surfaces of the incisors in Tg rats were discolored, even though enamel
formation and serum iron concentrations were normal. Histological analysis of
incisors from 6-week-old Tg rats demonstrated that the ameloblast layer at the
pigmentation stage was elongated up to the gingival margin with ectopic SP6
expression in longitudinal incisor sections. In contrast, the incisors from
10-week-old Tg rats revealed that the pigmented ameloblasts were morphologically 
changed to those of the reduced stage, concomitant with the sporadic
disappearance of ectopic SP6 expression. Here we report that morphological
differentiation and metabolism of the iron-containing pigment in ameloblasts are 
independently regulated during amelogenesis by means of ectopic SP6 expression.

PMID: 22449994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Aug;69(16):2751-64. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-0948-y. Epub 
2012 Mar 22.

CADM1 isoforms differentially regulate human mast cell survival and homotypic
adhesion.

Moiseeva EP(1), Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Institute for Lung Health,
Clinical Sciences Wing, Glenfield Hospital, University of Leicester, Leicester
LE3 9QP, UK. em9@le.ac.uk

Cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1), expressed by human lung mast cells (HLMCs),
mediates their adhesion to airway smooth muscle (ASM), and contributes to
ASM-dependent HLMC proliferation and survival. CADM1 is expressed in
alternatively spliced isoforms, but those present in HLMCs and their function are
not known. We cloned three functional and one cryptic non-functional isoform with
alternative splicing between exons 7/11 and 1/2, respectively, from HLMCs and
human MC lines (HMC-1 and LAD2). Differentiated HLMCs and LAD2 cells expressed
the functional isoform SP4 containing exons 7/8/11 (~80% of clones), as well as
SP1 (exons 7/8/9/11) and a novel SP6 (exons 7/8/9/10/11). In contrast, immature
HMC-1 cells expressed only functional SP4. SP4 overexpression in HMC-1 cells and 
HLMCs augmented homotypic adhesion to a greater extent than SP1 in various
conditions. In contrast, CADM1 downregulation abolished homotypic adhesion,
indicating that CADM1 is the sole receptor mediating mast cell aggregation.
CADM1-mediated adhesion was enhanced by the presence of cell survival factors.
SP1 overexpression in HMC-1 cells compromised survival compared to SP4
overexpression or control. CADM1 downregulation resulted in reduced viability and
decreased expression of the pro-survival protein Mcl-1(L), but not Blc-2 or
Bcl-X(L), and increased caspase-3/7 activity in both HMC-1 cells and HLMCs. This 
coincided with decreased basal Kit levels in HLMCs. In summary, human MCs express
multiple CADM1 isoforms which exhibit differential regulation of survival and
homotypic adhesion. The most highly expressed SP4 isoform is likely to contribute
to MC aggregation and longevity in mastocytosis, and augment the pathophysiology 
of allergic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3400039
PMID: 22438059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 6;420(2):440-3. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.014. Epub 2012 Mar 9.

Inhibitory RNA aptamer against SP6 RNA polymerase.

Mori Y(1), Nakamura Y, Ohuchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Science, University
of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Aptamers are attractive tools for modulating function of a desired target. In
this study, we isolated an RNA aptamer that specifically inhibits transcription
of SP6 RNA polymerase. The dissociation constant and 50% inhibitory concentration
of the aptamer were estimated 9.5 nM and 24.8 nM, respectively. Doped-SELEX and
mutational analysis revealed that the aptamer adopts the structure including two 
stems, two loops, and 5' single-stranded region. Based on the results, the
aptamer could be engineered to circular permutant and binary construct forms
without decreasing the activity. The aptamer would be applicable for the
construction of expression regulation systems.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22426482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. MBio. 2012 Mar 13;3(2). pii: e00312-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00312-11. Print 2012.

Generation of a novel nucleic acid-based reporter system to detect phenotypic
susceptibility to antibiotics in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Mulvey MC(1), Sacksteder KA, Einck L, Nacy CA.

Author information: 
(1)Sequella, Inc., Rockville, Maryland, USA.

We designed, constructed, and evaluated a prototype novel reporter system
comprised of two functional cassettes: (i) the SP6 RNA polymerase gene under
transcriptional control of a promoter active in mycobacteria and (ii) the
consensus SP6 polymerase promoter that directs expression of an otherwise
unexpressed sequence. We incorporated the reporter system into a
mycobacteriophage for delivery into viable Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and
introduction led to synthesis of an SP6 polymerase-dependent surrogate marker RNA
that we detected by reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). The reporter confirmed
the susceptibility profile of both drug-susceptible and drug-resistant M.
tuberculosis strains exposed to first-line antitubercular drugs and required as
little as 16 h of exposure to antibacterial agents targeting bacterial metabolic 
processes to accurately read the reaction. The reporter system translated the
bacterial phenotype into a language interpretable by rapid and sensitive nucleic 
acid detection. As a phenotypic assay that works only on viable M. tuberculosis, 
it could be used to rapidly assess resistance to any drug, including drugs for
which the mechanism of resistance is unknown or which result from many potential 
known (and unknown) genetic alterations.IMPORTANCE: The ability to detect
antibiotic resistance of slow-growing bacteria (i.e., Mycobacterium tuberculosis)
is hampered by two factors, the time to detection (weeks to months) and the
resistance mechanism (unknown for many drugs), delaying the appropriate treatment
of patients with drug-resistant or multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (TB). The
novel technique described in this article uses a unique surrogate nucleic acid
marker produced by phage that infects M. tuberculosis to record phenotypic
antibiotic susceptibility in less than a day.

PMCID: PMC3312217
PMID: 22415006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Jul;90(7):1464-73. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23028. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Electroacupuncture frequency-related transcriptional response in rat arcuate
nucleus revealed region-distinctive changes in response to low- and
high-frequency electroacupuncture.

Wang K(1), Zhang R, He F, Lin LB, Xiang XH, Ping XJ, Han JS, Zhao GP, Zhang QH,
Cui CL.

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Research Center for Biochip at Shanghai, Shanghai 201203,
Peoples Republic of China.

Electroacupuncture (EA) has been clinically applied for treating different
medical conditions, such as pain, strain, and immune diseases. Low- and
high-frequency EAs have distinct therapeutic effects in clinical practice and
experimental studies. However, the molecular mechanism of this difference remains
obscure. The arcuate nucleus (Arc) is a critical region of the hypothalamus and
is responsible for the effect of EA stimulation to remote acupoints. Gene
expression profiling provides a powerful tool with which to explore the basis of 
physiopathological responses to external stimulus. In this study, using cDNA
microarray, we investigated gene expressions in the rat Arc region induced by
low-frequency (2-Hz) and high-frequency (100-Hz) EAs to two remote acupoints,
zusanli (ST36) and sanyinjiao (SP6). We have found that more genes were
differentially regulated by 2-Hz EA than 100-Hz EA (154 vs. 66 regulated
genes/ESTs) in Arc, especially those related to neurogenesis, which was confirmed
by qRT-PCR. These results demonstrate that the expression level of genes in the
Arc region could be effectively regulated by low-frequency EA, compared with
high-frequency EA, helping to uncover the mechanisms of the therapeutic effects
of the low-frequency EA. Our results also indicate different-frequency EAs are
spatially specific.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22411682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2012;6:137-42. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S27127. Epub 2012 Feb
13.

The effects of acupressure on severity of primary dysmenorrhea.

Gharloghi S(1), Torkzahrani S, Akbarzadeh AR, Heshmat R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Midwifery, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Kermanshah
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah.

BACKGROUND: Dysmenorrhea constitutes one of the most frequent disorders in women 
of a fertile age. The objective of this research was to determine the effects of 
acupressure at Sanyinjiao (SP6) point and DiJi (SP8) point on pain severity of
primary dysmenorrhea and the associated systemic symptoms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this crossover clinical trial, 50 females aged 18-30
years old who met the study criteria and were under the care of Sarpolezahab
Health Center were selected. Subjects were randomly assigned to one of two groups
and evaluated during three menstrual cycles. We evaluated pain severity using the
McGill pain scale and associated systemic symptoms using a verbal
multidimensional scoring system. Data acquired from 42 cases were analyzed using 
SPSS software, with a P value of <0.05 considered significant.
RESULTS: The findings of our study indicate that the severity of dysmenorrhea
pain diminishes significantly for up to 2 hours following treatment with
acupressure at the SP6 and SP8 points (P < 0.001). Furthermore, the severity of
associated systemic symptoms reduced significantly after acupressure at the SP6
and SP8 points, except for nausea and vomiting. Comparison of the severity of
systemic symptoms with acupressure at the SP6 and SP8 points revealed no
significant difference except for severity of fatigue, which was reduced
significantly further with SP6 point compared to SP8 point (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: Acupressure at the SP6 and SP8 points can reduce pain severity of
dysmenorrhea for up to 2 hours after application, and these points may be used to
alleviate the severity of systemic symptoms accompanying dysmenorrhea.

PMCID: PMC3287417
PMID: 22379364  [PubMed]


165. Acupunct Med. 2012 Mar;30(1):12-6. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2011-010089.

Traditional Chinese medicine patterns and recommended acupuncture points in
infertile and fertile women.

Birkeflet O(1), Laake P, Vøllestad N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo N-0318, Norway.
oddveig.birkeflet@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Acupuncture is rooted in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and
emphasises individualised treatment according to TCM patterns. Eight TCM patterns
are regarded as typical for female infertility. There are no empirical data
comparing these patterns in fertile and infertile women.
OBJECTIVE: To identify and compare the TCM patterns and recommended acupuncture
points in infertile and fertile women. The hypothesis that infertile and fertile 
women should differ in occurrence of TCM patterns described as typical for
infertility was examined.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study examined the distribution of TCM patterns and
acupuncture points among 24 infertile and 24 fertile women. TCM patterns and
points proposed by two acupuncturists were analysed. The odds ratio was used as
the effect measure.
RESULTS: Three patterns were found in more than 92% of the women. Five patterns
occurred more frequently among infertile (p=0.03), and four among fertile
(p=0.02) women. Only three of the eight patterns assumed typical for infertile
women were more common among infertile women. Two of the eight patterns were more
common among fertile women. Acupuncture points KI3, LI3 and SP6 were chosen for
almost all women, whereas CV4, CV3 and ST29 were chosen more often for infertile 
women (p<0.03), and SP3 more often for fertile women (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The data indicate that the presence of some, and the absence of
other, TCM patterns are associated with infertility. These results are not
consistent with the assumed associations between eight specific patterns and
infertility, as maintained by TCM textbooks.

PMID: 22378581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Chin Med. 2012 Feb 27;7:3. doi: 10.1186/1749-8546-7-3.

The antinociceptive effect of electroacupuncture at different depths of acupoints
and under the needling surface.

Silva ML(1), Silva JR, Prado WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto-USP, Avenue 
Bandeirantes 3900, CEP 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
wadprado@fmrp.usp.br.

BACKGROUND: The stimulation of acupoints along the meridians, but not the
non-acupoints outside of the meridians, produces analgesia. Although the acupoint
is defined at the body surface, the exact location of the acupoints is not known.
This study aims to examine whether the intensity and duration of the analgesic
effect of electroacupuncture (EA) at the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanynjiao acupoints
(SP6) change according to the depth of the stimulation.
METHODS: Ninety-six male Wistar rats classified as responders were arbitrarily
allocated into 16 groups of six rats each. Six groups received EA with
uninsulated acupuncture needles (type I) or needles that were immersed in varnish
and had the varnish circularly peeled 0.2 mm from the tip (type II), 0.2 mm at 3 
mm (type III) or 5 mm (type IV) from the tip, or 0.2 mm at 5 and 1 mm from the
tip (type V), or EA sham for 20 min. Five groups received injection of formalin
into the acupoint bilaterally at 5 mm or 1 mm deep into ST36, 5 mm below ST36 but
inserting the needle at 45° to the skin surface, or 5 mm deep into non-acupoints.
The remaining groups received intraplantar injection of saline, 1% or 2.5%
formalin. The analgesic effects were measured by the rat tail-flick test.
RESULTS: The bilateral stimulation of ST36 and SP6 by uninsulated or insulated
needles produced analgesia in the rat tail-flick test. The stronger and longer
lasting effects occurred after EA with the types I and V needles, or injection of
formalin 5 mm deep into ST36. The remaining needles produced weaker and shorter
lasting effects. Slow analgesic effect also occurred after formalin injection at 
1 mm or 5 mm below ST36 by inserting the needle at 45° to the skin surface.
CONCLUSION: The experimental results suggest that the efficacy of the EA
stimulation depends on the spatial distribution of the current density under the 
needling surface rather than only the acupoint or the depth of needling.

PMCID: PMC3305550
PMID: 22369266  [PubMed]


167. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Nov;124(22):3794-9.

Inhibition of connective tissue growth factor overexpression decreases growth of 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells in vitro and in vivo.

Jia XQ(1), Cheng HQ, Li H, Zhu Y, Li YH, Feng ZQ, Zhang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
Jiangsu 225500, China.

BACKGROUND: We have previously found that connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) 
is highly expressed in a rat model of liver cancer. Here, we examined expression 
of CTGF in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells and its effect on cell
growth.
METHODS: Real-time PCR was used to observe expression of CTGF in human HCC cell
lines HepG2, SMMC-7721, MHCC-97H and LO2. siRNA for the CTGF gene was designed,
synthesized and cloned into a Plk0.1-GFP-SP6 vector to construct a
lentivirus-mediated shRNA/CTGF. CTGF mRNA and protein expression in HepG2 cells
treated by CTGF-specific shRNA was evaluated by real-time PCR and Western
blotting. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
assay was utilized to evaluate the growth effect, and a colony formation assay
was used for observing clonogenic growth. In vivo, tumor cell proliferation was
evaluated in a nude mouse model of xenotransplantation. Statistical significance 
was determined by t test for comparison between two groups, or analysis of
variance (ANOVA) for multiple groups.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining of CTGF was seen in 35 of 40 HCC samples
(87.5%). CTGF was overexpressed 5-fold in 20 HCC tissues, compared with
surrounding non-tumor liver tissue. CTGF mRNA level was 5 - 8-fold higher in
HepG2, SMMC-7721 and MHCC-97H than in LO2 cells. This indicated that the
inhibition rate of cell growth was 43% after knockdown of CTGF expression (P <
0.05). Soft agar colony formation assay showed that siRNA mediated knockdown of
CTGF inhibited colony formation in soft agar of HepG2 cells (P < 0.05). The
volume of tumors from CTGF-shRNA-expressing cells only accounted for 35% of the
tumors from the scrambled control-infected HepG2 cells (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: CTGF was overexpressed in human HCC cells and downregulation of CTGF
inhibited HCC growth in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of CTGF may be a potential
therapeutic strategy for treatment of HCC.

PMID: 22340243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Altern Complement Med. 2012 Feb;18(2):137-42. doi: 10.1089/acm.2010.0506.

Effects of noninvasive electroacupuncture at Hegu (LI4) and Sanyinjiao (SP6)
acupoints on dysmenorrhea: a randomized controlled trial.

Wu LL(1), Su CH, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing of Taiwan Adventist Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the effects of noninvasive acupoint
stimulation therapy with middle-frequency electrical waves on dysmenorrhea in
young women.
METHODS: This randomized controlled trial enrolled 66 gynecology patients who had
primary dysmenorrhea, which was defined as painful menstruation without pelvic
pathology (secondary dysmenorrhea). Pathology was ruled out by gynecological
ultrasound examination and serum concentration of CA-125. Subjects were randomly 
assigned to an experimental group (n=34) and control group (n=32). Main outcome
measures included McGill Questionnaire Short-form and numerical rating scale for 
pain intensity. Acupuncture-like trancutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(AL-TENS) of middle-frequency (1000<U+2009>Hz-10,000<U+2009>Hz) was applied at Hegu (LI4) and
Sanyinjiao (SP6) points in the experimental group twice weekly for 8 weeks; the
control group received AL-TENS on nonacupoints. Pre- and postintervention results
were recorded.
RESULTS: Prior to AL-TENS intervention, no significant differences were found in 
pain scale and pain intensity between experimental and control groups. After
AL-TENS intervention, average total pain score in the experimental group was
significantly lower than in the control group (experimental group 2.9±1.2,
control group 5.4±2.2; p<0.001). Significant differences were observed between
experimental and control groups in average change in pain scores between pre- and
postintervention (experimental group 4.5±1.9, control group 1.39±2.0; p<0.001).
Pain severity at postintervention was also significantly different between groups
(p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Noninvasive electro-acupuncture stimulation therapy with
middle-frequency electric waves applied at both Hegu (LI4) and Sanyinjiao (SP6)
acupoints mitigates pain in dysmenorrhea.

PMID: 22339102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Arch Virol. 2012 May;157(5):917-26. doi: 10.1007/s00705-012-1244-8. Epub 2012 Feb
11.

Characterization of a new phage, termed <U+03D5>A318, which is specific for Vibrio
alginolyticus.

Lin YR(1), Chiu CW, Chang FY, Lin CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biotechnology and Resources, Asia-Pacific Ocean Research 
Center, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 80424, Taiwan.

Vibrio alginolyticus is an opportunistic pathogen of animals and humans; its
related strains can also produce tetrodotoxin and hemolysins. A new phage, <U+03D5>A318,
which lysed its host V. alginolyticus with high efficiency, was characterized.
The burst size of <U+03D5>A318 in V. alginolyticus was 72 PFU/bacterium at an MOI of 1
at room temperature; the plaque size was as large as 5 mm in diameter. Electron
microscopy (EM) of the phage particles revealed a 50- to 55-nm isomorphous
icosahedral head with a 12-nm non-contractile tail, similar to the T7-like phages
of the family Podoviridae. Phylogenetic analysis based on complete sequences of
the DNA-directed RNA polymerase gene revealed that <U+03D5>A318 had 28-47% amino acid
identity to enterobacteria phages T7 and SP6, and other Vibrio phages, and the
phylogenetic distance suggested that <U+03D5>A318 could be classified as a new T7-like
bacteriophage. Nevertheless, several motifs in the <U+03D5>A318 phage RNA polymerase
were highly conserved, including DFRGR (T7-421 motif), DG (T7-537 motif),
PSEKPQDIYGAVS (T7-563 motif), RSMTKKPVMTL PYGS (T7-627 motif), and HDS (T7-811
motif). Genetic analysis indicated that phage <U+03D5>A318 is not a thermostable direct 
hemolysin producer. The results suggest that the MOI should be higher than 0.1 to
prevent the chance of hemolysin production by the bacteria before they are lysed 
by the phage.

PMID: 22327389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Chin J Integr Med. 2012 Feb;18(2):146-51. doi: 10.1007/s11655-012-0990-5. Epub
2012 Feb 5.

Effects of electroacupuncture combined psycho-intervention on cognitive function 
and event-related potentials P300 and mismatch negativity in patients with
internet addiction.

Zhu TM(1), Li H, Jin RJ, Zheng Z, Luo Y, Ye H, Zhu HM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Acupuncture and Massage, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chengdu, China. tmzhu@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of comprehensive therapy (CT) with
electroacupuncture (EA) in combination with psycho-intervention (PI) on the
cognitive function and event-related potentials (ERP), P300 and mismatch
negativity (MMN), in patients with internet addiction (IA) for a preliminary
exploration of the possible mechanism of the therapy.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty patients with IA were randomly divided into three
groups, and a total of 112 subjects reached the final analysis of the trial, the 
EA group (39 patients), the PI group (36 patients) and the CT group (37
patients). EA was applied at acupoints Baihui (GV20), Sishencong (EX-HN1), Hegu
(LI4), Neiguan (PC6), Taichong (LR3) and Sanyinjiao (SP6), once every other day; 
PI with the cognitionbehavior mode was implemented every 4 days; both EA and PI
were used in the CT group. The treatment course for all patients was 40 days.
Changes before and after treatment in terms of scoring by the IA self-rating
scale, short-term memory capacity, short-term memory span, and the latency and
amplitude of P300 and MMN in patients were observed.
RESULTS: After treatment, in all groups, the IA score was lowered significantly
(P <0.05) and scores of short-term memory capacity and short-term memory span
increased significantly (P <0.05), while the decreased IA score in the CT group
was more significant than that in the other two groups (P <0.05). ERP
measurements showed that P300 latency was depressed and its amplitude raised in
the EA group; MMN amplitude increased in the CT group (all P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The EA in combination with PI could improve the cognitive function of
IA patients, and its mechanism might be related to the speedup of cerebral
discrimination on external stimulus and the enhancement of effective resource
mobilization during information processing of the brain.

PMID: 22311411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Manag Care. 2012 Feb;18(1 Spec No.):SP6-7.

Payer management of oncology gets serious.

Snyder M, Goldberg L, Ryan T.

PMID: 22468875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Evolution. 2012 Feb;66(2):363-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2011.01433.x. Epub
2011 Sep 20.

Multiple genetic pathways to similar fitness limits during viral adaptation to a 
new host.

Nguyen AH(1), Molineux IJ, Springman R, Bull JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Integrative Biology, The University of Texas at Austin Austin,
Texas 78712, USA.

The gain in fitness during adaptation depends on the supply of beneficial
mutations. Despite a good theoretical understanding of how evolution proceeds for
a defined set of mutations, there is little understanding of constraints on net
fitness-whether fitness will reach a limit despite ongoing selection and
mutation, and if there is a limit, what determines it. Here, the dsDNA
bacteriophage SP6, a virus of Salmonella, was adapted to Escherichia coli K-12.
From an isolate capable of modest growth on E. coli, four lines were adapted for 
rapid growth by protocols differing in use of mutagen, propagation method, and
duration, but using the same media, temperature, and a continual excess of the
novel host. Nucleotide changes underlying those adaptations differed greatly in
number and identity, but the four lines achieved similar absolute fitness at the 
end, an increase of more than 4000-fold phage descendants per hour. Thus, the
fitness landscape allows multiple genetic paths to the same approximate fitness
limit. The existence and causes of fitness limits have ramifications to genome
engineering, vaccine design, and "lethal mutagenesis" treatments to cure viral
infections.

© 2011 The Author(s). Evolution© 2011 The Society for the Study of Evolution.

PMCID: PMC3377685
PMID: 22276534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Altern Complement Med. 2011 Dec;17(12):1141-7. doi: 10.1089/acm.2010.0589. Epub
2011 Nov 14.

The efficacy of acupressure at the Sanyinjiao point in the improvement of women's
general health.

Kashefi F(1), Khajehei M, Ashraf AR, Jafari P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Midwifery, Northern Khorasan University of Medical Science,
Bojnoord, Iran. kashefif85@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: This study's objective was to examine the effectiveness of Sanyinjiao
point (SP6) acupressure on women's general health.
DESIGN: This was a randomized, single-blind clinical trial.
SETTING: The setting for this trial was at Medical University, Bojnoord
University of Medical Science, Bojnoord, Iran.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighty-six (86) university students were recruited for
this study. Their demographic characteristics were gathered before the
intervention commenced. Participants completed General Health Questionnaires
(GHQ) prior to participation. Next, they were randomly assigned to either the
acupressure-receiving group or the sham-pressure-receiving group. The study group
received acupressure at the Sanyinjiao point, while the control group received
sham pressure.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Both groups completed GHQ after both the first and second
months of intervention. Data analysis was carried out using SPSS version 13.5 for
Windows.
RESULTS: The mean age of those who completed the study was 20.84±1.64 years. Mean
scores of GHQs were similar between groups before intervention (p>0.05). The
general health of participants in both groups improved after intervention, and
the amelioration in four domains was significant in the groups (p<0.05 within
group). It was found that acupressure was more effective than sham pressure. In
addition, there was a statistically significant difference between the two groups
in the four domains of their general heath after the first month of the
intervention (p<0.0001). Furthermore, the general health status of the
participants changed much more after the second month in both the acupressure
intervention and the sham pressure groups; nevertheless, acupressure was more
effective than sham pressure (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Both acupressure and sham pressure were effective in promoting
women's general health; nevertheless, the efficacy of acupressure was more than
that of sham pressure. SP6 acupressure could be regarded as a self-manageable
approach to improve women's general health.

PMCID: PMC3239320
PMID: 22082432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Peptides. 2011 Dec;32(12):2394-9. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2011.10.019. Epub 2011 
Oct 25.

Arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus is involved in mediating the satiety effect of
electroacupuncture in obese rats.

Fei Wang(1), Tian de R, Tso P, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Peking University, Beijing 100083, PR China.

Obesity is a major health problem in the world. Since effective remedies are
rare, researchers are trying to discover new therapies for obesity, and
acupuncture is among the most popular alternative approaches. This study
investigated the anti-obesity mechanisms of EA, using a rat model of diet-induced
obesity. After feeding with a high-fat diet for 9 weeks, a number of rats who
gained weight that surpassed the maximal body weight of rats in the chow-fed
group were considered obese and employed in the study. A 2 Hz EA treatment at the
acupoints ST36/SP6 with the intensity increasing stepwise from 0.5-1-1.5 mA was
given once a day for 30 min. Rats treated with EA showed significantly decreased 
food intake and reduced body weight compared with the rats in DIO and restraint
group. EA treatment increased peptide levels of a-MSH and mRNA levels of its
precursor POMC in the arcuate nuclear of hypothalamus (ARH) neurons. In addition,
the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) content of a-MSH was elevated by EA application. 
ARH lesions by monosodium glutamate abolished the inhibition effect of EA on food
intake and body weight. A non-acupoint stimulation did not show the benefit
effect on food intake inhibition and body weight reduction compared with
restraint and ST36/SP6 EA treatment. We concluded that EA treatment at ST36/SP6
acted through ARH to significantly inhibit food intake and body weight gain when 
fed a high-fat diet and that the stimulation of a-MSH expression and release
might be involved in the mechanism.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22064014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:320987. doi: 10.1155/2011/320987. Epub 2011 Oct
20.

Possible linkage of SP6 transcriptional activity with amelogenesis by protein
stabilization.

Utami TW(1), Miyoshi K, Hagita H, Yanuaryska RD, Horiguchi T, Noma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8504,
Japan.

Ameloblasts produce enamel matrix proteins such as amelogenin, ameloblastin, and 
amelotin during tooth development. The molecular mechanisms of ameloblast
differentiation (amelogenesis) are currently not well understood. SP6 is a
transcription factor of the Sp/KLF family that was recently found to regulate
cell proliferation in a cell-type-specific manner. Sp6-deficient mice demonstrate
characteristic tooth anomalies such as delayed eruption of the incisors and
supernumerary teeth with disorganized amelogenesis. However, it remains unclear
how Sp6 controls amelogenesis. In this study, we used SP6 high producer cells to 
identify SP6 target genes. Based on the observations that long-term culture of
SP6 high producer cells reduced SP6 protein expression but not Sp6 mRNA
expression, we found that SP6 is short lived and specifically degraded through a 
proteasome pathway. We established an in vitro inducible SP6 expression system
coupled with siRNA knockdown and found a possible linkage between SP6 and
amelogenesis through the regulation of amelotin and Rock1 gene expression by
microarray analysis. Our findings suggest that the regulation of SP6 protein
stability is one of the crucial steps in amelogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3199210
PMID: 22046099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Acupunct Med. 2011 Dec;29(4):304-6. doi: 10.1136/acupmed.2011.010081. Epub 2011
Oct 20.

Acupuncture might have contributed to improving amenorrhoea in a top athlete.

Donoyama N(1), Hotoge S, Ohkoshi N.

Author information: 
(1)Course of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Department of Health, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Tsukuba University of Technology, 4-12-7 Kasuga, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8521, Japan. donoyama@k.tsukuba-tech.ac.jp

A 26-year-old top female athlete (height 157 cm), who took part in competitive
sport similar to middle- and long-distance running, became amenorrhoeic in
February 2009. In late May 2009, athletic amenorrhoea was diagnosed and a
norgestrel-ethinyl estradiol combination (norgestrel 0.5 mg and ethinyl estradiol
0.05 mg three times daily) was prescribed for 2 weeks. She experienced menstrual 
bleeding on one occasion for 4 days in mid-June before becoming amenorrhoeic
again. The athlete visited our centre to try acupuncture treatment. Forty-six
acupuncture sessions were given between 1 October 2009 and 2 November 2010.
Acupuncture point selection was based on classical acupuncture medicine and
included points long used for gynaecological disorders in Japan--namely, CV6,
CV12, LR3, LR14, BL17, BL18, BL23, SP6 and SP10. On 7 May 2010, owing to lack of 
regular normal vaginal bleeding, she again consulted her gynaecologist and was
prescribed the same hormone preparation as used previously. She took it for 2
weeks in conjunction with acupuncture treatment. From July, the amount and
duration of menstrual flow increased at regular intervals. Throughout July, a
biphasic pattern in basal body temperature (BBT) was gradually established. In
conclusion, the single hormone replacement therapy in May 2009 without
acupuncture treatment was not effective for the amenorrhoea, nor was the single
acupuncture treatment between October 2009 and May 2010. However, after hormone
replacement therapy was started in May 2010 in conjunction with regular
acupuncture treatment, menstrual blood flow restarted and BBT moved close to the 
biphasic pattern.

PMID: 22015932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2011 Dec;71(8):701-4. doi: 10.3109/00365513.2011.619564.
Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Improved efficacy by using the pTnT-rhtTG plasmid for the detection of celiac
disease specific tissue transglutaminase autoantibodies in radioligand binding
assays.

Kjellerås J(1), Vaziri-Sani F, Agardh D.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Diabetes and Celiac Disease, Department of Clinical Sciences,
University Hospital MAS, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
jennifer.kjelleras@med.lu.se

BACKGROUND: Tissue transglutaminase (tTG) autoantibodies are serological markers 
for celiac disease. The aim was to study the efficacy of the pTnT-rhtTG plasmid
and subsequent diagnostic accuracy of tTG autoantibodies for childhood celiac
disease using radioligand binding assays.
METHODS: Coupled in vitro transcription and translation of tTG were performed by 
pTnT-rhtTG as well as by the pGEMt Easy-rhtTG vectors using the TNT SP6 Coupled
Reticulocyte Lysate System in the presence of [³5S] methionine. Sera from 190
celiac disease children and 74 controls were measured for tTG autoantibodies in
two separate radioligand binding assays using anti-human IgA agarose and protein 
A sepharose beads for the detection of IgA-tTG and IgG-tTG, respectively.
RESULTS: Median incorporation of [³5S] methionine into the pTnT-rhtTG was 26%
compared to 16% for the pGEMt Easy-rhtTG plasmid (p = 0.0016). Using pTnT-rhtTG
(as compared to pGEMt Easy-rhtTG), sensitivities were IgA-tTG = 96.3% (95.7%) and
IgG-tTG = 95.8% (97.3%) and specificities were IgA-tTG = 91.9% (90.5%) and
IgG-tTG = 94.6% (98.4%). According to receiver operator characteristics for the
pTnT (pGEMt Easy) assays, area under the curves were IgA-tTG = 98.4% (98.4%) and 
IgG-tTG = 97.7% (97.2%), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The pTnT-rhtTG plasmid increased the efficacy of tTG antigen usage
without reducing the diagnostic accuracy of IgA-tTG and IgG-tTG for childhood
celiac disease. The pTnT-rhtTG plasmid is therefore recommended over the pGEMt
Easy-rhtTG for the assessment of IgA-tTG and IgG-tTG using radioligand binding
assays.

PMID: 21961813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Iran J Nurs Midwifery Res. 2011 Fall;16(4):309-17.

The effect of acupressure at the Sanyinjiao point (SP6) on primary dysmenorrhea
in students resident in dormitories of Tabriz.

Charandabi SM(1), Nashtaei MS, Kamali S, Majlesi R.

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Midwifery, School of Nursing and Midwifery,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: There are two types of primary dysmenorrhea (spasmodic and
congestive) which differ from each other in terms of the occurrence time in
menstrual cycle, pain quality and other symptoms. The present study aimed to
determine the effect of acupressure at the Sanyinjiao point (SP-6) on severity of
menstrual symptoms (primary outcome) and the duration of resting time as well as 
the number of ibuprofen consumption (secondary outcome) in the two types of
primary dysmenorrhea.
METHODS: This was a clustered randomized controlled trial on 72 eligible students
residing in dormitories of public universities of Tabriz, Iran. Determining the
type of primary dysmenorrhea using a Menstrual symptoms questionnaire (MSQ), 36
participants which suffered from each type of dysmenorrhea were enrolled from the
four dormitories. The dormitories were randomly divided into intervention and
control groups. No intervention was carried out at the first cycle. During the
two next cycles, Sanyinjiao point of the subjects in the intervention group was
pressed for twenty minutes at the time of pain. The subjects in both groups were 
allowed to consume ibuprofen, if needed. During these three cycles, the
participants recorded and reported menstrual symptoms severity, duration of
resting time and the number of the used ibuprofen.
RESULTS: The severity of menstrual symptoms and duration of resting time in the
2(nd) and 3(rd) cycles were significantly reduced more than control groups for
both spasmodic and congestive types of primary dysmenorrhea. In addition, the
aver-age numbers of ibuprofen pills taken by both intervention groups was
significantly less than the control groups. There was no significant difference
between the two intervention groups in terms of any of the outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Acupressure is effective on lowering the symptoms of dysmenorrhea
and duration of resting time almost equally in both spasmodic and congestive
types. Therefore, using this method either alone or along with other methods is
recommended to treat dysmenorrhea.

PMCID: PMC3583102
PMID: 23450186  [PubMed]


179. Methods Enzymol. 2011;500:165-95. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385118-5.00010-4.

Systems biology of recombinant protein production using Bacillus megaterium.

Biedendieck R(1), Borgmeier C, Bunk B, Stammen S, Scherling C, Meinhardt F,
Wittmann C, Jahn D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Technische Universität Braunschweig,
Spielmannstrasse 7, Braunschweig, Germany.

The Gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli is the most widely used production
host for recombinant proteins in both academia and industry. The Gram-positive
bacterium Bacillus megaterium represents an increasingly used alternative for
high yield intra- and extracellular protein synthesis. During the past two
decades, multiple tools including gene expression plasmids and production strains
have been developed. Introduction of free replicating and integrative plasmids
into B. megaterium is possible via protoplasts transformation or
transconjugation. Using His(6)- and StrepII affinity tags, the intra- or
extracellular produced proteins can easily be purified in one-step procedures.
Different gene expression systems based on the xylose controlled promoter P(xylA)
and various phage RNA polymerase (T7, SP6, K1E) driven systems enable B.
megaterium to produce up to 1.25g of recombinant protein per liter. Biomass
concentrations of up to 80g/l can be achieved by high cell density cultivations
in bioreactors. Gene knockouts and gene replacements in B. megaterium are
possible via an optimized gene disruption system. For a safe application in
industry, sporulation and protease-deficient as well as UV-sensitive mutants are 
available. With the help of the recently published B. megaterium genome sequence,
it is possible to characterize bottle necks in the protein production process via
systems biology approaches based on transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, and
fluxome data. The bioinformatical platform (Megabac, http://www.megabac.tu-bs.de)
integrates obtained theoretical and experimental data.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21943898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Virol Methods. 2011 Dec;178(1-2):87-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.08.018.
Epub 2011 Aug 24.

A DNA-based West Nile virus replicon elicits humoral and cellular immune
responses in mice.

Cao F(1), Li XF, Yu XD, Deng YQ, Jiang T, Zhu QY, Qin ED, Qin CF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Epidemiology and Microbiology, 20 Dongda Street, Fengtai District, Beijing
100071, China.

While self-replicating, non-infectious subgenomic flavivirus replicons have been 
described, most of them are RNA transcripts under the control of an Sp6 or T7
promoter. In this study, using West Nile virus (WNV) as a model, a series of
DNA-based reporter replicons under the control of a minimal cytomegalovirus (CMV)
immediate-early promoter were constructed, and functional analysis showed that
these reporter replicons replicate efficiently in mammalian cells. When the
DNA-based WNV replicon was used to immunize mice, NS1-specific IgG antibodies and
anti-WNV neutralizing antibodies were both induced. Additionally, immunization
with this DNA-based WNV replicon induced high levels of lymphocyte proliferation 
and enhanced the secretion of IFN-<U+03B3>. These results suggest that this type of
DNA-based replicon can induce humoral and cellular immune responses in mice,
indicating that this type of DNA-based replicon may serve as a useful platform
for vaccine development and protein expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21893098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Acupunct Med. 2011 Sep;29(3):230-3. doi: 10.1136/acupmed.2011.010025.

Evaluation of acupuncture in the management of chemotherapy-induced peripheral
neuropathy.

Donald GK(1), Tobin I, Stringer J.

Author information: 
(1)Complementary Therapy Service, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. graeme.donald@christie.nhs.uk

AIM: To clinically evaluate the effectiveness of acupuncture when used in the
management of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (PN).
BACKGROUND: During cancer treatment, certain chemotherapies can cause varying
degrees of PN. Patients' quality of life can be seriously impaired through loss
of sensation, pain or mobility problems. Conventional medications routinely used 
to manage neuropathic symptoms have poor side-effect profiles and there is little
or no evidence justifying their use to treat chemotherapy-related
neurotoxicities. There are studies suggesting that acupuncture may be an
effective therapy in treating PN across a number of different aetiologies. Design
A retrospective service evaluation.
METHOD: Patients (n=18) were referred for acupuncture by the medical staff
and/ornurse specialists or they self-referred for treatment. A course of six
weekly acupuncture sessions was offered to them, and their details were recorded 
on an evaluation form prior to session one. Points were selected by
acupuncturists, based on patient presentation, and needles remained in situ for
30-45 min. Treatments took place in outpatient clinics, chemotherapy day case
ward or a drop-in clinic based in a physiotherapy gym. The evaluation form was
completed at the end of session 6 by a therapist who had not been involved in
patient care.
RESULTS: 82% (n=14) of patients reported an improvement in symptoms following
their course of acupuncture; one patient with advanced disease died during the 6 
weeks. Some patients derived additional benefits from the treatment including a
reduction in analgesic use and improved sleeping patterns. The most common
acupoints used were SP6 (n=18), ST36 (n=18) and LV3 (n=14).
CONCLUSION: Although these results are encouraging, they are uncontrolled. They
suggest that acupuncture could be an option for these patients and controlled
trials using validated patient-reported outcome measures are justified.

PMID: 21875929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002226. Epub 2011 
Aug 11.

dlx and sp6-9 Control optic cup regeneration in a prototypic eye.

Lapan SW(1), Reddien PW.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.

Optic cups are a structural feature of diverse eyes, from simple pit eyes to
camera eyes of vertebrates and cephalopods. We used the planarian prototypic eye 
as a model to study the genetic control of optic cup formation and regeneration. 
We identified two genes encoding transcription factors, sp6-9 and dlx, that were 
expressed in the eye specifically in the optic cup and not the photoreceptor
neurons. RNAi of these genes prevented formation of visible optic cups during
regeneration. Planarian regeneration requires an adult proliferative cell
population with stem cell-like properties called the neoblasts. We found that
optic cup formation occurred only after migration of progressively
differentiating progenitor cells from the neoblast population. The eye
regeneration defect caused by dlx and sp6-9 RNAi can be explained by a failure to
generate these early optic cup progenitors. Dlx and Sp6-9 genes function as a
module during the development of diverse animal appendages, including vertebrate 
and insect limbs. Our work reveals a novel function for this gene pair in the
development of a fundamental eye component, and it utilizes these genes to
demonstrate a mechanism for total organ regeneration in which extensive cell
movement separates new cell specification from organ morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3154955
PMID: 21852957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 13;193:370-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.076.
Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Manual acupuncture inhibits mechanical hypersensitivity induced by spinal nerve
ligation in rats.

Cidral-Filho FJ(1), da Silva MD, Moré AO, Córdova MM, Werner MF, Santos AR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Neurobiologia da Dor e Inflamação, Departamento de Ciências
Fisiológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina, Florianópolis, SC, Brasil.

Manual acupuncture (MA) has presented analgesic activity against neuropathic pain
in patients and animal models, yet a series of questions remain: Is MA
effectiveness dependent of acupoint selection or combination? Is it equally
efficient when treatment starts on the initial (acute) or sub-chronic phase of
spinal nerve ligation (SNL)-induced neuropathy? Is MA effect related to the
release of endogenous opioids? Does MA produce similar effects to gabapentin? To 
answer these questions rats submitted to the L5/L6 SNL injury were treated with
unilateral MA (ST36 (Zusanli), SP6 (Sanyingjiao) or ST36+SP6 acupoint
stimulation); or with gabapentin (30 mg/kg i.p., used as positive control). Both 
acupoints have been demonstrated to present analgesic activity and are used in
clinical practice and basic science research. In addition, we investigated the
influence of naloxone (1 mg/kg i.p., a nonselective opioid receptor antagonist)
on MA treatment and also the effect of unilateral ST36+SP6 MA treatment beginning
acutely (5 days) or sub-chronically (14 days) after SNL. Our results demonstrate 
that single or combined unilateral stimulation was able to reduce mechanical
hypersensitivity with treatment beginning in both acute and sub-chronic phases of
SNL-induced neuropathy; MA effect was blocked by naloxone, and finally; SP6+ST36 
MA presented similar effect to gabapentin (30 mg/kg). In conclusion, our results 
demonstrate, for the first time, that unilateral MA (ST36, SP6 or ST36+SP6)
reduces hypersensitivity induced by the SNL with effect dependent of the opioid
system and comparable with the one obtained with gabapentin (used as positive
control).

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Chin J Integr Med. 2011 Nov;17(11):860-3. doi: 10.1007/s11655-011-0800-5. Epub
2011 Aug 1.

Clinical observation on the acupuncture treatment in patients with urinary
retention after radical hysterectomy.

Yi WM(1), Pan AZ, Li JJ, Luo DF, Huang QH.

Author information: 
(1)Traditional Chinese Medicine and Acupuncture Department, Sun Yat-sen Memorial 
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the acupuncture therapy effect on the urinary retention
after radical: hysterectomy. METHODS METHODS: Eighty cases of urinary retention
after radical hysterectomy were randomly assigned to: the treatment group and
control group according to the random number table method, 40 cases in each
group. From the 15th day post operation, the patients in the two groups started
to be treated and 7 days as a course with 5 days treatment and 2 days interval.
The treatment group applied acupuncture with modalities of common needling on
Zusanli (ST36) bilaterally, electroacupuncture on Sanyinjiao (SP6), Shuidao
(ST28), and Scalp Reproduction Area bilaterally, moxibustion on Shenque (CV8).
The control group applied acupoint injection with vitamin B B12 12, and
Sanyinjiao and Zusanli were selected. Take turns on both sides. The courses for
the recovery, of bladder function and residual urine volume for those who had
voluntary micturition more than 200 mL after the first and second course of
treatment were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: Within 1 course and 2: courses of treatment, the patients with bladder
function recovery in the treatment group were 21 (21/40) and 36 (36/40), and
those in the control group were 12 (12/40) and 29 (29/40), both with a
significant difference (P<0.05). After the first course and second course,
residual urine volume for those who had voluntary micturition more than 200 mL in
the treatment group was 91.7 ± 17.5 mL and 93.5 ± 15.5 mL, in the control group
102.4 ± 13.7 mL and 102.5 ± 15.7 mL, both with a significant difference (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Combination of acupuncture: modalities was better than acupoint
injection for the recovery of bladder function in urinary retention after radical
hysterectomy. It would shorten the course of treatment and get a better recovery,
decrease urinary retention cases of refractoriness, and extending the treatment
could raise the healing rate of urinary retention.

PMID: 21809126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Proteome Res. 2011 Oct 7;10(10):4597-612. doi: 10.1021/pr200414g. Epub 2011 Sep
8.

Proteomic analysis of insecticide triazophos-induced mating-responsive proteins
of Nilaparvata lugens Stål (Hemiptera: Delphacidae).

Ge LQ(1), Cheng Y, Wu JC, Jahn GC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Plant Protection, Yangzhou University , Yangzhou 225009, PR China.

The brown planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens (Stål) (Hemiptera: Delphacidae), is a
classic example of a resurgent pest induced by insecticides. It has been
demonstrated that triazophos treatment causes an increase in the content of male 
accessory gland proteins (Acps) that can be transferred to females via mating,
influencing female reproduction. However, the mechanism of this type of
insecticide-induced Acps in males and the subsequent stimulation of reproduction 
in females are not well understood. To identify changes in the types of Acps and 
reproductive proteins in mated females, we conducted a comparative proteomic
analysis. Six samples were categorized into four different groups: (1) untreated 
unmated males compared to treated unmated males (UUM vs TUM); (2) treated unmated
males compared to treated mated males (TUM vs TMM); (3) untreated unmated females
compared to treated unmated females (UUF vs TUF); (4) treated unmated females
compared to treated mated females (TUF vs TMF). Protein expression changes among 
the four different groups were examined by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
(2-DE) and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Of the
500-600 reproducibly detected protein spots on each gel, 107 protein spots were
differentially expressed between the four different groups. Of the 63 proteins
identified by LC-MS/MS analysis, 38 were up-regulated and 25 were down-regulated 
in the four different groups. Some novel proteins related to fecundity were
observed including spermatogenesis-associated protein 5, testis development
protein NYD-SP6, arginine kinase, actin-5C, vitellogenin, and ovarian serine
protease nudel. The elevated expression of novel fecundity proteins in six
samples of N. lugens females and males due to exposure to triazophos was
confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). The results suggest that these
proteins may participate in the reproductive process of N. lugens adult females
and males. Our findings fill a gap in understanding the relationship between
insecticide-treated males and the stimulated reproduction of N. lugens females.

PMID: 21800909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2011;2011:217946. doi: 10.1093/ecam/neq036.
Epub 2011 Jun 5.

Involvement of Interleukin-10 in the Anti-Inflammatory Effect of Sanyinjiao (SP6)
Acupuncture in a Mouse Model of Peritonitis.

da Silva MD(1), Guginski G, Werner MF, Baggio CH, Marcon R, Santos AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,
Campus Universitário, Trindade, 88040-900, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil.

In this study, we determined the anti-inflammatory effect of manual acupuncture
at the Sanyinjiao or Spleen 6 (SP6) point on carrageenan-induced peritonitis in
mice and investigated mechanisms that may underlie this effect. In the first set 
of experiments, male Swiss mice were allocated into five groups: the control
(sterile saline), dexamethasone (DEXA), invasive sham-acupuncture (non-acupoint),
SP6 acupuncture and carrageenan-treated groups. Ten minutes after needle
retention or 30<U+2009>min after DEXA treatment, mice received an intraperitoneal
injection of carrageenan (750<U+2009>µg/mouse). After 4<U+2009>h, total leukocyte and
differential cell counts (neutrophils and mononuclear), myeloperoxidase (MPO)
activity, vascular permeability and cytokine levels were evaluated. In another
set of experiments, adrenalectomized (ADX) mice were used to study the
involvement of the adrenal gland on the therapeutic effects of acupuncture. Mice 
were allocated into two groups: the ADX and sham-operated animals (Sham ADX) that
were subdivided into four subgroups each: the control (sterile saline), DEXA, SP6
acupuncture and carrageenan-treated groups. The SP6 and DEXA treatments inhibited
the inflammatory cell infiltration, vascular permeability and MPO activity in
carrageenan-injected mice. In addition, the SP6 treatment also increased
interleukin (IL)-10 levels. In contrast, when the animals were adrenalectomized, 
the SP6 treatment failed to reduce total leukocyte and the plasma extravasation. 
In conclusion, this study clearly demonstrates the anti-inflammatory effect of
SP6 acupuncture in a model of carrageenan-induced peritonitis. Our results
demonstrated that SP6 acupuncture depends of the adrenal glands and increased
IL-10 levels to produce its anti-inflammatory action.

PMCID: PMC3135881
PMID: 21799673  [PubMed]


187. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2011 Jun;36(3):220-3.

[Effects of different frequencies of electroacupuncture on blood glucose level in
impaired glucose tolerance patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Meng H(1), Hao JD, Wang HC, Zhao JY, Zhao CL, Zhai X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acumoxibustion, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100700, China. menghong2000@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To Investigate the clinical efficacy of electroacupuncture (EA) at
different frequencies for patients with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT).
METHODS: A total of 120 IGT outpatients were randomly divided into control, EA-5 
Hz, EA-50 Hz, and EA-100 Hz groups (n = 30/group). EA (1 mA) was applied to
bilateral Pishu (BL 20), Shenshu (BL23), Zusanli (ST 36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) for
20 min, once daily for 60 sessions. Body mass index (BMI), fasting blood glucose 
(FBG) and 2-hour post-prandial blood glucose (2 h PBG) contents were detected by 
using BAYER Blood Sugar Analyzer and glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) content was
detected by enzymatic assay.
RESULTS: Following the treatment, both HbA1c and 2 h PBG levels in the EA-5 Hz
group were significantly lower than those of the control group and those of
pre-treatment in the same one group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). No significant
differences were found between the EA-5 Hz and control groups, between
pre-treatment and post-treatment in the EA-5 Hz group in BMI and FBG levels;
between the EA-50 Hz and control groups, between the EA-100 Hz and control
groups, and between pre-treatment and post-treatment in the EA-50 Hz and EA-100
Hz groups in BMI, FBG,2 h PBG and HbA1c levels (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Lower frequency EA of BL 20, BL 23, ST 36 and SP 9 can reduce HbA1c
and 2 h PBG levels in IGT patients, suggesting a helpful effect of EA in
controlling the development of diabetes.

PMID: 21793389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1794-805. Epub 2011 Jul 2.

Cell proliferation in human epiretinal membranes: characterization of cell types 
and correlation with disease condition and duration.

Oberstein SY(1), Byun J, Herrera D, Chapin EA, Fisher SK, Lewis GP.

Author information: 
(1)The Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: To quantify the extent of cellular proliferation and
immunohistochemically characterize the proliferating cell types in epiretinal
membranes (ERMS) from four different conditions: proliferative vitreoretinopathy 
(PVR), proliferative diabetic retinopathy, post-retinal detachment, and
idiopathic ERM.
METHODS: Forty-six ERMs were removed from patients undergoing vitrectomy and
immediately fixed in paraformaldehyde. The membranes were processed whole and
immunolabeled with either anti-MIB-1 or anti-SP6 to detect the K(i)-67 protein in
proliferating cells, in combination with anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein or 
anti-vimentin to identify glia, anti-ezrin to identify retinal pigment epithelial
cells, Ricinus communis to identify immune cells, and Hoechst to label nuclei.
Digital images were collected using a laser scanning confocal microscope. The
cell types were identified, their combined proliferative indices were tabulated
as the average number of anti-K(i)-67-positive cells/mm(2) of tissue, and the
number of dividing cells was related to the specific ocular condition and
estimated disease duration.
RESULTS: ERMs of all four types were shown to be highly cellular and contained
proliferating cells identified as glia, retinal pigment epithelium, and of immune
origin. In general, membranes identified as PVR had many more K(i)-67-positive
cells in comparison to those in the other three categories, with the average
number of K(i)-67-positive cells identified per mm(2) of tissue being 20.9 for
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, 138.3 for PVR, 12.2 for post-retinal
detachment, and 19.3 for idiopathic ERM. While all membrane types had dividing
cells, their number was a relatively small fraction of the total number of cells 
present.
CONCLUSIONS: The four ERM types studied demonstrated different cell types
actively dividing at the time of removal, confirming that proliferation is a
common event and does continue over many months. The low number of dividing cells
at the time of removal in comparison to the total number of cells present,
however, is an indicator that proliferation alone may not be responsible for the 
problems observed with the ERMs. Treatment strategies may need to take into
consideration the timing of drug administration, as well as the contractile and
possibly the inflammatory characteristics of the membranes to prevent the ensuing
effects on the retina.

© 2011 Molecular Vision

PMCID: PMC3133557
PMID: 21750605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Clin Oral Investig. 2012 Jun;16(3):935-43. doi: 10.1007/s00784-011-0589-9. Epub
2011 Jul 8.

Two-body wear of dental porcelain and substructure oxide ceramics.

Rosentritt M(1), Preis V, Behr M, Hahnel S, Handel G, Kolbeck C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Regensburg University Medical Center,
93042 Regensburg, Germany. martin.rosentritt@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

The aim of this in vitro study was to investigate the two-body wear of different 
ceramics. Two-body wear tests were performed in a chewing simulator with steatite
and enamel antagonists, respectively. Specimens were loaded in a pin-on-block
design with a vertical load of 50 N for 1.2 × 10(5) cycles; (f = 1.6 Hz; lateral 
movement, 1 mm; mouth opening: 2 mm). Human enamel was used as a reference. Three
zirconia ceramics, three veneering porcelains, two glass-infiltrated and one
lithium disilicate ceramic were investigated. Veneering and lithium disilicate
ceramics were glazed before testing. Surface roughness Ra (SP6, Perthen-Feinprüf,
G) and wear depth were determined using a 3D scanner (Laserscan 3D, Willytec, G).
SEM (Quanta FEG 400, FEI, USA) pictures of the worn specimens and antagonists
were made for evaluating wear performance. Veneering porcelain provided wear
traces between 71.2 and 124.1 µm (enamel antagonist) and 117.4 and 274.1 µm
(steatite). Wear of the steatite antagonists varied between 0.618 and 2.85 mm².
No wear was found for zirconia and glass-infiltrated substructure ceramics. Also,
no wear was found for the corresponding antagonists. Wear of specimens and
antagonists was strongly material dependent. No visible wear was found on
zirconia and glass-infiltrated ceramics. Porcelain and lithium disilicate ceramic
showed a comparable or lower wear than the enamel reference. Antagonist wear was 
found to be lower when specimens were made of substructure oxide ceramics instead
of veneering porcelain. From the point of wear testing, zirconia may be used for 
the fabrication of fixed dental prosthesis without veneering.

PMID: 21739199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Microbiol. 2011 Jun;49(3):516-23. doi: 10.1007/s12275-011-1280-1. Epub 2011 Jun
30.

Packaging of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus replicon RNA by 
a stable cell line expressing its nucleocapsid protein.

Song BH(1), Kim JM, Kim JK, Jang HS, Yun GN, Choi EJ, Song JY, Yun SI, Lee YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine and Medical Research
Institute, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, 361-763, Republic of Korea.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV), a member of the
Arteriviridae family, is one of the most common and economically important swine 
pathogens. Although both live-attenuated and killed-inactivated vaccines against 
the virus have been available for a decade, PRRSV is still a major problem in the
swine industry worldwide. To explore the possibility of producing single-round
infectious PRRSV replicon particles as a potential vaccine strategy, we have now 
generated two necessary components: 1) a stable cell line (BHK/Sinrepl9/PRRSV-N) 
that constitutively expresses the viral nucleocapsid (N) protein localized to the
cytoplasm and the nucleolus and 2) a PRRSV replicon vector
(pBAC/PRRSV/Replicon-AN) with a 177-nucleotide deletion, removing the 3'-half
portion of ORF7 in the viral genome, from which the self-replicating
propagation-defective replicon RNAs were synthesized in vitro by SP6 polymerase
run-off transcription. Transfection of this replicon RNA into N
protein-expressing BHK-21 cells led to the secretion of infectious particles that
packaged the replicon RNA, albeit with a low production efficiency of 0.4 × 10(2)
to 1.1 × 10(2) infectious units/ml; the produced particles had only single-round 
infectivity with no cell-to-cell spread. This trans-complementation system for
PRRSV provides a useful platform for studies to define the packaging signals and 
motifs present within the viral genome and N protein, respectively, and to
develop viral replicon-based antiviral vaccines that will stop the infection and 
spread of this pathogen.

PMID: 21717343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Dec;92(6):1151-60. doi:
10.1007/s00253-011-3412-2. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Peptide derived from anti-idiotypic single-chain antibody is a potent antifungal 
agent compared to its parent fungicide HM-1 killer toxin peptide.

Kabir ME(1), Karim N, Krishnaswamy S, Selvakumar D, Miyamoto M, Furuichi Y,
Komiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Niigata
University of Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences, Japan.

Based on anti-idiotypic network theory in light of the need for new antifungal
drugs, we attempted to identify biologically active fragments from HM-1 yeast
killer toxin and its anti-idiotypic antibody and to compare their potency as an
antifungal agent. Thirteen overlapping peptides from HM-1 killer toxin and six
peptides from its anti-idiotypic single-chain variable fragment (scFv) antibodies
representing the complementarity determining regions were synthesized. The
binding affinities of these peptides were investigated and measured by Dot blot
and surface plasmon resonance analysis and finally their antifungal activities
were investigated by inhibition of growth, colony forming unit assay. Peptide P6,
containing the potential active site of HM-1 was highly capable of inhibiting the
growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae but was less effective on pathogenic fungi.
However, peptide fragments derived from scFv antibody exerted remarkable
inhibitory effect on the growth of pathogenic strains of Candida and Cryptococcus
species in vitro. One scFv-derived decapeptide (SP6) was selected as the
strongest killer peptide for its high binding affinity and antifungal abilities
on both Candida and Cryptococcus species with IC(50) values from 2.33<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7) M 
to 36.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7) M. SP6 peptide activity was neutralized by laminarin, a
ß-1,3-glucan molecule, indicating this peptide derived from scFv anti-idiotypic
antibody retains antifungal activity through interaction with cell wall ß-glucan 
of their target fungal cells. Experimental evidence strongly suggested the
possibility of development of anti-idiotypic scFv peptide-based antifungal agents
which may lead to improve therapeutics for the management of varieties of fungal 
infections.

PMID: 21691785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Sep-Oct;4(5):799-803. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.504. Epub 2011 Jun 
7.

Differential expression of Mart-1 in human uveal melanoma cells.

Wang J(1), Jia R, Yao Y, Cun B, Huang X, Gu P, Ge S, Fan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, P.R. China.

Uveal melanoma (UM) is one of the most common primary intraocular malignant
tumors in adults. Melanoma antigen recognized by T cell-1 (Mart-1), one of the
melanosome-specific proteins, has been widely studied as a marker recognized by
cytotoxicity T lymphocytes. Mart-1 is considered to play a critical role in the
immunotherapy for melanoma. Additionally, as a biomarker, Mart-1 is often used
with other tumor-associated antigens for antidiastole in cutaneous melanoma (CM),
uveal melanoma (UM) and nevus. In this study, the differential expression of
Mart-1 was investigated in four human UM cells (SP6.5, VUP, OCM-1 and OM431) on
three levels of analysis: messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), protein and,
eventually, morphology. The results revealed that SP6.5 cells had high Mart-1
protein expression while VUP cells had almost none. OCM-1 and OM431 cells
produced less Mart-1 than SP6.5 cells according to Western blot analysis,
although OM431 cells had the highest expression of Mart-1 mRNA according to
real-time PCR. The results indicate the potential use of Mart-1 in the
development of therapy for UM.

PMID: 21667026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Chin J Integr Med. 2011 Jun;17(6):464-6. doi: 10.1007/s11655-011-0631-4. Epub
2011 Jun 10.

Effect of acupoint Sanyinjiao (SP6) moxibustion on the first stage of labor and
uterine contractive pain in primiparae.

Cui JM(1), Yang XX, Jin ZH, Ma SX, Dong LH, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hebei United University, Tangshan,
Hebei Province, China. cjm2188@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of acupoint Sanyinjiao (SP6) moxibustion (S-Mox)
on the duration of the first labor stage and uterine contractive pain in
primiparae.
METHODS: Sixty primipara women in labor were equally assigned according to their 
choice to three groups: women in the S-Mox group received bilateral S-Mox for 30 
min, women in the non-acupoint group received moxibustion (Mox) applied on
non-acupoints for 30 min, and those in the control group did not receive Mox
intervention. The duration of the first labor stage was recorded and the degree
of labor pain was estimated by a visual analogue scale (VAS) before and after
Mox.
RESULTS: The duration of the first stage active phase in the S-Mox group was
significantly shorter than that in the other two groups (P<0.05, P<0.01); the VAS
score after Mox was lower in the S-Mox group, showing a statistical difference in
comparison with the control group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Applying S-Mox could markedly shorten the active phase of the first 
stage of labor and lower the VAS score of uterine contractive pain, which means
alleviating the pain caused by vaginal delivery. Its mechanism is worthy of
further study.

PMID: 21660681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019790. Epub 2011 May 23.

The antioxidative effect of electro-acupuncture in a mouse model of Parkinson's
disease.

Wang H(1), Pan Y, Xue B, Wang X, Zhao F, Jia J, Liang X, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Peking University, Beijing, People's Republic
of China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that oxidative stress plays a critical role in
Parkinson's disease (PD). Our previous work has shown that 100 Hz
electro-acupuncture (EA) stimulation at ZUSANLI (ST36) and SANYINJIAO (SP6)
protects neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta from
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) toxicity in male C57BL/6
mice, a model of PD. In the present study we administered 100 Hz EA stimulation
at the two acupoints to MPTP-lesioned mice for 12 sessions starting from the day 
prior to the first MPTP injection. We found that in the striatum of MPTP treated 
mice 100 Hz EA stimulation effectively inhibited the production of hydrogen
peroxide and malonaldehyde, and increased glutathione concentration and total
superoxide dismutase activity through biochemical methods. However, it decreased 
glutathione peroxidase activity via biochemical analysis and did not affect the
level of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium in the striatum revealed by high performance
liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection. These data suggest that 100 Hz 
EA stimulation at ST36 and SP6 has antioxidative effects in the MPTP model of PD.
This data, along with our previous work, indicates that 100 Hz EA stimulation at 
ST36 and SP6 protects the nigrostriatal system by multiple mechanisms including
antioxidation and antiapoptosis, and suggests that EA stimulation is a promising 
therapy for treating PD.

PMCID: PMC3100295
PMID: 21625423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Apr;7(4):e1001333. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001333. Epub 2011
Apr 14.

A new model to produce infectious hepatitis C virus without the replication
requirement.

Triyatni M(1), Berger EA, Saunier B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure Section, Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Numerous constraints significantly hamper the experimental study of hepatitis C
virus (HCV). Robust replication in cell culture occurs with only a few strains,
and is invariably accompanied by adaptive mutations that impair in vivo
infectivity/replication. This problem complicates the production and study of
authentic HCV, including the most prevalent and clinically important genotype 1
(subtypes 1a and 1b). Here we describe a novel cell culture approach to generate 
infectious HCV virions without the HCV replication requirement and the associated
cell-adaptive mutations. The system is based on our finding that the
intracellular environment generated by a West-Nile virus (WNV) subgenomic
replicon rendered a mammalian cell line permissive for assembly and release of
infectious HCV particles, wherein the HCV RNA with correct 5' and 3' termini was 
produced in the cytoplasm by a plasmid-driven dual bacteriophage RNA
polymerase-based transcription/amplification system. The released particles
preferentially contained the HCV-based RNA compared to the WNV subgenomic RNA.
Several variations of this system are described with different HCV-based RNAs:
(i) HCV bicistronic particles (HCVbp) containing RNA encoding the HCV structural 
genes upstream of a cell-adapted subgenomic replicon, (ii) HCV reporter particles
(HCVrp) containing RNA encoding the bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase in place of 
HCV nonstructural genes, and (iii) HCV wild-type particles (HCVwt) containing
unmodified RNA genomes of diverse genotypes (1a, strain H77; 1b, strain Con1; 2a,
strain JFH-1). Infectivity was assessed based on the signals generated by the HCV
RNA molecules introduced into the cytoplasm of target cells upon virus entry,
i.e. HCV RNA replication and protein production for HCVbp in Huh-7.5 cells as
well as for HCVwt in HepG2-CD81 cells and human liver slices, and SP6 RNA
polymerase-driven firefly luciferase for HCVrp in target cells displaying
candidate HCV surface receptors. HCV infectivity was inhibited by pre-incubation 
of the particles with anti-HCV antibodies and by a treatment of the target cells 
with leukocyte interferon plus ribavirin. The production of authentic infectious 
HCV particles of virtually any genotype without the adaptive mutations associated
with in vitro HCV replication represents a new paradigm to decipher the
requirements for HCV assembly, release, and entry, amenable to analyses of wild
type and genetically modified viruses of the most clinically significant HCV
genotypes.

PMCID: PMC3077361
PMID: 21533214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Dent Mater. 2011 Aug;27(8):796-804. doi: 10.1016/j.dental.2011.04.001. Epub 2011 
Apr 27.

Wear performance of substructure ceramics and veneering porcelains.

Preis V(1), Behr M, Kolbeck C, Hahnel S, Handel G, Rosentritt M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Regensburg University Medical Center,
D-93042, Germany.

AIM: The aim of this in vitro study was to compare the two-body wear resistance
of substructure zirconia and veneering porcelain versus steatite and human enamel
antagonists, respectively.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two-body wear tests were performed in a chewing simulator 
with steatite and enamel antagonists (enamel cusps). A pin-on-block design with a
vertical load of 50 N for 1.2 × 10(5) cycles; (f=1.6 Hz; lateral movement: 1mm,
mouth opening: 2mm) was used for the wear test. For quantification of the wear
resistance, wear tests were performed with standardized steatite spheres. Human
enamel was used as a reference. Five zirconia ceramics and four veneering
porcelains were investigated. One zirconia ceramic was tested with superficial
glaze, which was applied after polishing or sandblasting, respectively. Surface
roughness R(a) (SP6, Perthen-Feinprüf, G) and wear depth were determined using a 
3D-Profilometer (Laserscan 3D, Willytec, G). SEM (Quanta FEG 400, FEI, USA)
pictures were used for evaluating wear performance of both, ceramics and
antagonists.
RESULTS: No wear was found for zirconia substructures. Veneering porcelain
provided wear traces between 186.1±33.2 µm and 232.9±66.9 µm (steatite
antagonist) and 90.6±3.5 µm and 123.9±50.7 µm (enamel). Wear of the steatite
antagonists varied between 0.812±0.256 mm(2) and 1.360±0.321 mm(2) for zirconia
and 1.708±0.275 mm(2) and 2.568±0.827 mm(2) for porcelain. Enamel generally
showed wear, cracks or even fractures at the ridge, regardless whether opposed by
zirconia or porcelain/glaze. Enamel was polished, when opposed to zirconia, or
plowed, provoked and grinded, when opposed to porcelain/glaze.
CONCLUSION: The results of the wear test with steatite or enamel antagonists
indicated no measurable wear on zirconia surfaces. Porcelain showed higher wear
than zirconia, but comparable or lower wear than an enamel reference.
Antagonistic wear against zirconia was found to be lower than wear against
porcelain.

Copyright © 2011 Academy of Dental Materials. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21524788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2011 Jun 15;47(1):46-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2011.03.009.
Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Lack of iron-related phenotype in Sp6 intestinal knockout mice.

Matak P(1), Deschemin JC, Peyssonnaux C, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Based on a microarray study, which demonstrated the upregulation of Sp6
transcriptional factor in iron deficient rat duodenum, we reasoned that SP6 could
regulate iron absorption by controlling the expression of iron absorption genes
(Collins,2006). For that, we generated Sp6 specific intestinal knockout mice. Our
data suggest a lack of transcriptional upregulation of Sp6 in mice in conditions 
where iron absorption is promoted (phlebotomy, iron deficiency, hpx mouse), and
an absence of iron-related phenotype in Sp6 intestinal knockout model. We propose
that other Sp6 orthologues may be involved in the genetic response to increase
iron absorption, possibly in co-operation with hypoxia inducible factor 2 alpha
(HIF-2a)-a newly discovered regulator of iron absorption.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21514188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Diagn Pathol. 2011 Mar 30;6 Suppl 1:S7. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-6-S1-S7.

Proliferative activity in human breast cancer: Ki-67 automated evaluation and the
influence of different Ki-67 equivalent antibodies.

Fasanella S(1), Leonardi E, Cantaloni C, Eccher C, Bazzanella I, Aldovini D,
Bragantini E, Morelli L, Cuorvo LV, Ferro A, Gasperetti F, Berlanda G, Dalla
Palma P, Barbareschi M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Surgical Pathology, S, Chiara Hospital, Trento, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Ki67 labeling index (Ki67 LI), the percentage Ki67 immunoreactive
cells, is a measure of tumor proliferation, with important clinical relevance in 
breast cancer, and it is extremely important to standardize its evaluation.
AIM: To test the efficacy of computer assisted image analysis (CAIA) applied to
completely digitized slides and to assess its feasibility in routine practice and
compare the results obtained using two different Ki67 monoclonal antibodies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 315 consecutive breast cancer routinely immunostained for 
Ki-67 (223 with SP6 and 92 with MM1 antibodies previously examined by an
experienced pathologist, have been re-evaluated using Aperio Scanscope Xs.
RESULTS: Mean human Ki67 LI values were 36%± 14.% and 28% ± 18% respectively for 
SP6 and MM1 antibodies; mean CAM Ki67 LI values were 31%± 19% and 22% ± 18%
respectively for SP6 and MM1. Human and CAIA evaluation are statistically highly 
correlated (Pearson: 0.859, p<0.0001), although human LI are systematically
higher. An interobserver variation study on CAIA performed on 84 cases showed
that the correlation between the two evaluations was linear to an excellent
degree.
DISCUSSION: Our study shows that a) CAIA can be easily adopted in routine
practice, b) human and CAIA Ki67 LI are highly correlated, although human LI are 
systematically higher, c) Ki67 LI using different evaluation methods and
different antibodies shows important differences in cut-off values.

PMCID: PMC3073225
PMID: 21489202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Am J Chin Med. 2011;39(2):243-9.

Effect of acupuncture on heart rate variability in primary dysmenorrheic women.

Kim E(1), Cho JH, Jung WS, Lee S, Pak SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, South Korea.

Primary dysmenorrhea is a common gynecological complaint among young women that
is related to an autonomic nervous system (ANS) disturbance. Acupuncture is one
of several therapeutic approaches for primary dysmenorrhea, since it can modulate
ANS function. The heart rate variability (HRV) parameters such as high frequency 
(HF), low frequency (LF) and LF/HF ratio are generally accepted tools to assess
ANS activity. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of
acupuncture applied at Hegu (LI4) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) points on HRV of women
with primary dysmenorrhea during the late luteal phase. The experimental design
was a crossover and patient-blinded procedure. All subjects participated in Sham 
(SA) and Real Acupuncture (RA) procedure, separated by one month, in a crossover 
sequence. The participants included 38 women (mean age 22.3 years; weight 53.8
kg; height 162.6 cm). HRV measurement was 15 min before and 15 min after an
acupuncture procedure. The RA procedure was performed at two bilateral acupoints,
but needles were inserted subcutaneously to the acupuncture points for the SA
procedure. The RA induced a significant decrease in LF/HF ratio and a significant
increase in the HF power, while SA treatment caused a significant increase only
in the HF power. Manual acupuncture at bilateral acupoints of LI4 and SP6 may
play a role in dysmenorrhea treatment with autonomic nervous system involvement.

PMID: 21476202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Jan-Feb;4(1):163-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2010.397. Epub 2010 Nov
17.

Functional significance of B7-H1 expressed by human uveal melanoma cells.

Jia R(1), Jiao Z, Xu X, Wang J, Zhou Y, Song X, Ge S, Fan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, PR China.

B7-H1, a recently described B7 family member, has been reported to negatively
regulate T-cell function in most cancer cells. In this study, we sought to
investigate B7-H1 expression in four uveal melanoma (UM) cells (OCM1, SP6.5,
OM431 and VUP) to determine the functional significance of B7-H1 expression in
T-cell immune response. Using flow cytometry (FCM), we demonstrated that SP6.5
cells had high B7-H1 protein expression, while the other three UM cell lines had 
none. However, all four UM cell lines expressed B7-H1 mRNA, as confirmed by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In co-culture experiments using 
B7-H1-expressing UM cells with T-cells, FCM to determine CD69 expression in
T-cells revealed that SP6.5 cell-related B7-H1 inhibited T-cell activation. This 
effect was eliminated by B7-H1-targeted RNA interference. An Annexin V/PI double 
staining assay further showed that B7-H1 expressed by SP6.5 cells did not
increase the apoptosis of T-cells, though it was found in a variety of other
solid tumors. In conclusion, all the UM cell lines constitutively expressed B7-H1
mRNA, while B7-H1 protein was expressed at different levels. UM-related B7-H1
expression negatively regulated T-cell immune response through the inhibition of 
T-cell activation, and not through the promotion of T-cell apoptosis. This
provides new insight into anti-tumor immunity against B7-H1-expressing UM cells.

PMID: 21461580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2011;2011:157090. doi: 10.1155/2011/157090.
Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Short-term effects of acupuncture on open-angle glaucoma in retrobulbar
circulation: additional therapy to standard medication.

Takayama S(1), Seki T, Nakazawa T, Aizawa N, Takahashi S, Watanabe M, Izumi M,
Kaneko S, Kamiya T, Matsuda A, Kikuchi A, Yambe T, Yoshizawa M, Nitta S, Yaegashi
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Asian Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku 
University, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8574, Japan.

Background. The relation between glaucoma and retrobulbar circulation in the
prognosis has been indicated. Purpose. To investigate the effects of acupuncture 
on retrobulbar circulation in open-angle glaucoma (OAG) patients. Methods. Eleven
OAG patients (20 eyes with OAG) who were treated by topical antiglaucoma
medications for at least 3 months were enrolled. Acupuncture was performed once
at acupoints BL2, M-HN9, ST2, ST36, SP6, KI3, LR3, GB20, BL18, and BL23
bilaterally. Retrobulbar circulation was measured with color Doppler imaging, and
intraocular pressure (IOP) was also measured at rest and one hour after rest or
before and after acupuncture. Results. The <U+0394> value of the resistive index in the 
short posterior ciliary artery (P < .01) and the <U+0394> value of IOP (P < .01) were
decreased significantly by acupuncture compared with no acupuncture treatment.
Conclusions. Acupuncture can improve the retrobulbar circulation and IOP, which
may indicate the efficacy of acupuncture for OAG.

PMCID: PMC3062145
PMID: 21437193  [PubMed]


202. Anal Quant Cytol Histol. 2010 Aug;32(4):192-200.

Image cytometric validation of breast carcinoma markers (ER, HER2 and MIB-1)
using tissue microarrays: rabbit monoclonal vs. FDA-approved antibodies.

Nassar A(1), Norton CM, Lawson D, Cohen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55902, USA.
nassar.aziza@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To use the ACIS III (Dako, Carpinteria, California, U.S.A.) with
tissue microarrays (TMAs) to compare rabbit monoclonal antibodies (RMab) for ER, 
HER2, and MIB-1 with FDA-approved monoclonal (FMab) and polyclonal (FPab)
antibodies.
STUDY DESIGN: TMAs of 43 breast cancers were used. Immunohistochemistry was
performed using RMab (LabVision, Fremont, California, U.S.A.): ER (SP1; 1/100),
HER2 (SP3; 1/100), and MIB-1 (SP6; 1/200). FMPab (Dako) used: ER (1D5; 1/50),
HercepTest kit and MIB-1 (MIB-1; 1/160). The stained TMAs were quantitated
visually and by image cytometry (ACIS III).
RESULTS: The overall agreement between RMab and FMab for ER using visual (98.45%)
and image analysis (97.56%) was excellent, with a kappa level of 0.89 and 0.94,
respectively. For HER2, the overall agreement between RMab and FPab was fair for 
visual (67.44%) and substantial (87.50%) for image analysis, with a kappa level
of 0.32 and 0.72, respectively. For MIB-1, there was fair (64.29%) to poor
(43.33%) agreement between MIB-1 RMab and FMab using visual and image analysis,
with a kappa level of 0.47 and 0.16, respectively.
CONCLUSION: RMabs for ER (SP1) and HER2 (SP3) are almost comparable to their
counterpart, FDA antibodies; however, MIB-1 RMab (SP6) shows poor concordance
with FMab in TMA. Image analysis shows a better concordance than visual
quantitation assessment specifically for ER and HER2.

PMID: 21434519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Toxicon. 2011 May;57(6):851-60. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2011.02.024. Epub 2011 Mar
2.

Umbelliferone induces changes in the structure and pharmacological activities of 
Bn IV, a phospholipase A(2) isoform isolated from Bothrops neuwiedi.

Toyama Dde O(1), Diz Filho EB, Cavada BS, da Rocha BA, de Oliveira SC, Cotrim CA,
Soares VC, Delatorre P, Marangoni S, Toyama MH.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde, Universidade Presbiteriana
Mackenzie, São Paulo, Brazil. mhtjpn@yahoo.com

In this paper was demonstrated that umbelliferone induces changes in structure
and pharmacological activities of Bn IV, a lysine 49 secretory phospholipase A(2)
(sPLA2) from Bothrops neuwiedi. Incubation of Bn IV with umbelliferone virtually 
abolished platelet aggregation, edema, and myotoxicity induced by native Bn IV.
The amino acid sequence of Bn IV showed high sequence similarities with other
Lys49 sPLA2s from B. jararacussu (BthTx-I), B. pirajai (PrTx-I), and B. neuwiedi 
pauloensis (Bn SP6 and Bn SP7). This sPLA2 also has a highly conserved C-terminal
amino acid sequence, which has been shown as important for the pharmacological
activities of Lys49 sPLA2. Sequencing of Bn IV previously treated with
umbelliferone revealed modification of S(1) and S(20). Fluorescent spectral
analysis and circular dichroism (CD) studies showed that umbelliferone modified
the secondary structure of this protein. Moreover, the pharmacological activity
of Bn IV is driven by synergism of the C-terminal region with the a-helix motifs,
which are involved in substrate binding of the Asp49 and Lys49 residues of sPLA2 
and have a direct effect on the Ca(2+)-independent membrane damage of some
secretory snake venom PLA2. For Bn IV, these interactions are potentially
important for triggering the pharmacological activity of this sPLA2.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21376071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Forsch Komplementmed. 2011;18(1):10-4. doi: 10.1159/000323566. Epub 2011 Jan 31.

The effects of so-called 'forbidden acupuncture points' on pregnancy outcome in
wistar rats.

Guerreiro da Silva AV(1), Nakamura MU, Cordeiro JA, Guerreiro da Silva JB, Mendes
GE, Burdmann EA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: This study sought to determine if acupuncture in LI4 and SP6, or in
sacral points could harm the pregnancy outcome in Wistar rats as is believed
according to traditional knowledge.
METHODS: 48 pregnant Wistar rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: total
control where the rats were left in cages without manipulation; anesthetized
control where the rats were manipulated and anesthetized but did not received
electroacupuncture; peripheral points and sacral points were the rats were
anesthetized and received 4 acupuncture points - LI4-SP6 and BL27-28,
respectively. The primary end point was embryonic loss after implantation,
defined as (number of implantations - number of embryos in development) × 100 /
number of implantations. Other evaluated parameters were fetal death, abortions, 
number of fetuses, and resorptions, resorption index (number of resorptions /
total of implantations), maternal weight gain, and fetal weight.
RESULTS: There were no differences in embryonic loss after implantation (p =
0.45), fetal death (p = 1), abortions (p = 1), number of fetuses (p = 0.79),
resorptions (p = 0.3), and resorption index (p = 0.45). There were differences in
maternal weight gain and fetal weight, but they seemed unrelated to the
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence that acupuncture in LI4-SP6 and sacral points
could be harmful to the pregnancy outcome in Wistar rats.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21372582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Clin J Pain. 2011 Mar-Apr;27(3):258-61. doi: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181fb27ae.

Effects of acupuncture at Sanyinjiao (SP6) on prostaglandin levels in primary
dysmenorrhea patients.

Shi GX(1), Liu CZ, Zhu J, Guan LP, Wang DJ, Wu MM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the physiologic mechanism of immediate analgesic effect of 
acupuncture in primary dysmenorrhea patients.
METHODS: Forty primary dysmenorrhea patients were randomized into the Sanyinjiao 
(SP6) acupuncture group, Xuanzhong (GB39) control group, nonacupoint control
group, or no acupuncture group. Patients in the 3 acupuncture groups were treated
with electroacupuncture at assigned points lasting 30 minutes, whereas patients
in no acupuncture group did not receive any acupuncture intervention. Before and 
after acupuncture, visual analogue scale (VAS) scores were recorded and blood
samples were taken for the measurement of the plasma levels of 4 principal
prostaglandins (PGE(2), PGF(2a), TXB(2), and 6-keto PGF(1a)).
RESULTS: The VAS scores for pain intensity significant decreased in patients who 
received acupuncture compared with those had no acupuncture intervention.
However, there were no significant differences among patients in the 3
acupuncture groups after acupuncture. In addition, no statistically significant
differences were observed in the plasma PGE(2), PGF(2a), TXB(2), or 6-keto
PGF(1a) levels and the ratios of PGF(2a)/PGE(2), and TXB(2)/6-keto PGF(1a) after 
acupuncture at SP6.
CONCLUSIONS: The immediate analgesic effect of SP6 might not be mediated by
changes in the prostaglandin levels.

PMID: 21358291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Acupunct Med. 2011 Mar;29(1):40-6. doi: 10.1136/aim.2010.003137. Epub 2011 Jan
18.

Validation of a sham acupuncture procedure in a randomised, controlled clinical
trial of chronic pelvic pain treatment.

Lee SW(1), Liong ML, Yuen KH, Leong WS, Khan NK, Krieger JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urological Surgery, University of Washington, 1660 S Columbian
Way, Seattle, WA 98108, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acupuncture is an attractive treatment option for chronic
prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CP/CPPS) that has proved refractory to 
conventional medical treatments. Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine the 
benefit of acupuncture because few studies have employed controls or had
physiological outcome measures.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the feasibility of a sham, or minimally invasive,
acupuncture as a control for studies evaluating the efficacy of acupuncture
treatment for chronic pelvic pain.
METHODS: Participants were recruited from a double-blind randomised trial
comparing acupuncture with a sham procedure for patients with CP/CPPS.
Acupuncture or sham procedures were performed over a 10-week period. Sham
acupuncture involved placement of short needles at sites 0.5 cm away from true
acupuncture points (CV1, CV4, SP6 and SP9). Participants were asked to determine 
their procedure allocation at the end of treatment. A total of 35 participants
also agreed to have blood analyses for cortisol, ß-endorphin and
leucine-enkephalin.
RESULTS: Thirty-five (78%) of the 45 participants randomised to the sham
treatment thought they had received acupuncture compared with 27 (61%) of the 44 
participants randomised to acupuncture (p=0.11). Biochemical data showed no
differences between the groups immediately after treatment. Thirty-two (73%) of
44 acupuncture participants met the predefined clinical response criterion
compared with 21 (47%) of 45 sham acupuncture participants (p=0.017, relative
risk 1.81, 95% CI 1.3 to 3.1). At the end of the study, ß-endorphin and
leucine-enkephalin levels were both higher in the acupuncture group (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Minimally penetrating acupuncture was found to be a valid sham
control and may prove useful for evaluating the efficacy of acupuncture for other
conditions.

PMID: 21245238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2011 Jan;9(1):91-9.

[Effects of electroacupuncture at points of a traditional acupuncture formula
that induces labor with different parameters on uterine contractility in
late-stage pregnant rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YR(1), Yuan HW, Shu FZ, Ren XX, Ma LX, Liu RQ, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture-Moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing 100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To select the most effective parameters of electroacupuncture (EA) at 
Hegu (LI4) and Sanyinjiao (SP6), a traditional acupuncture formula that induces
labor, by comparing its effects on uterine contraction in late-stage pregnant
rats, so as to improve the effects of acupuncture on induction of labor and its
clinical maneuverability and provide the basis for further mechanism research.
METHODS: One hundred and eight female healthy adult Wistar rats were randomly
divided into eight groups including one non-pregnancy control group (normal
control group) and seven pregnant groups. Pregnant rats were prepared by free
mating and vaginal plugs observation method and were randomly divided into six EA
groups and one no EA group (model group) according to the requirements of a 2×3
factorial design. EA parameters included 2 types of waves (continuous wave and
sparse-dense wave) and 3 types of frequency (15, 30 and 50 Hz). Rats in treatment
groups received EA on bilateral LI4 for 20 min and then bilateral SP6 for 5 min
with certain parameters accordingly. Each acupoint and a nearby non-acupoint at
the proximal end (2 to 3 mm from the acupoint) were connected with two leads of
one EA line. The current intensity of EA was 0.2 to 0.3 mA. A muscle tension
transducer and the BL-420 Biological Experimental System were placed on the lower
uterine segment of rats for detecting contractility, frequency and lasting-time
of contraction wave.
RESULTS: Compared with non-pregnancy control group, the amplitude, frequency and 
lasting time of contraction waves of uterine contraction in all EA groups and
model group were significantly increased. Compared with control group, amplitudes
of contraction waves of uterine contraction of both EA1 group (15 Hz continuous
wave) and EA6 group (2/50 Hz sparse-dense wave) were significantly increased
(P<0.01 or P<0.05); frequency of contraction waves of uterine contraction of EA6 
group was significantly increased (P<0.01 or P<0.05); lasting time of contraction
waves of uterine contraction of EA1 group, EA5 group (2/30 Hz sparse-dense wave) 
and EA6 group were significantly increased (P<0.01 or P<0.05). Comparisons
between EA6 group and the other EA groups showed that, EA6 group had
significantly higher levels of amplitude and frequency of contraction waves of
uterine contraction than the other EA groups (P<0.01 or P<0.05) except EA1 group,
there was no significant difference between EA1 group and EA6 group (P>0.05), but
the mean value of EA6 group was higher than that of EA1 group; EA6 group had
significantly higher levels of lasting time of contraction waves of uterine
contraction than the other EA groups (P<0.01 or P<0.05) except EA1 group and EA5 
group, there was no significant difference between EA6 group and EA1 group or EA5
group (P>0.05), but the mean value of EA6 group was higher than EA1 group and EA5
group.
CONCLUSION: EA with sparse-dense wave (2 Hz sparse wave and 50 Hz dense wave,
alternately) at LI4 and SP6 was more effective than other EA parameters for
increasing uterine contraction amplitude, frequency, and lasting-time of
contraction waves in late-stage pregnant rats. This combination of electric wave 
and frequency for EA at LI4 and SP6, a traditional acupuncture formula for
inducing labor, is recommended to be applied in clinical practice for parturition
as well as for treatment of uterine atony.

PMID: 21227039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2011 Jun;164(4):497-513. doi: 10.1007/s12010-010-9152-4.
Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Early in vitro transcription termination in human H5 influenza viral RNA
synthesis.

Kerby MB(1), Sarma AA, Patel MS, Artenstein AW, Opal SM, Tripathi A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Division of Biology and Medicine, Biomedical
Engineering, Center for Biomedical Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI 
02912, USA.

Rapid diagnostic identification of the human H5 influenza virus is a strategic
cornerstone for outbreak prevention. We recently reported a method for direct
detection of viral RNA from a highly pathogenic human H5 influenza strain
(A/Hanoi/30408/2005(H5N1)), which necessarily was transcribed in vitro from
non-viral sources. This article provides an in-depth analysis of the reaction
conditions for in vitro transcription (IVT) of full-length influenza H5 RNA,
which is needed for diagnostic RNA production, for the T7 and SP6 phage promoter 
systems. Gel analysis of RNA transcribed from plasmids containing the H5 sequence
between a 5' SP6 promoter and 3' restriction site (BsmBI) showed that three
sequence-verified bands at 1,776, 784, and 591 bases were consistently produced, 
whereas only one 1,776-base band was expected. These fragments were not observed 
in H1 or H3 influenza RNA transcribed under similar conditions. A reverse
complement of the sequence produced only a single band at 1,776 bases, which
suggested either self-cleavage or early termination. Aliquots of the IVT reaction
were quenched with EDTA to track the generation of the bands over time, which
maintained a constant concentration ratio. The H5 sequence was cloned with T7 and
SP6 RNA polymerase promoters to allow transcription in either direction with
either polymerase. The T7 transcription product from purified, restricted
plasmids in the vRNA direction only produced the 1,776-base full-length sequence 
and the 784-base fragment, instead of the three bands generated by the SP6
system, suggesting an early termination mechanism. Additionally, the T7 system
produced a higher fraction of full-length vRNA transcripts than the SP6 system
did under similar reaction conditions. By sequencing we identified a type II RNA 
hairpin loop terminator, which forms in a transcription direction-dependent
fashion. Variation of the magnesium concentration produced the greatest impact on
termination profiles, where some reaction mixtures were unable to produce
full-length transcripts. Optimized conditions are presented for the T7 and SP6
phage polymerase systems to minimize these early termination events during in
vitro transcription of H5 influenza vRNA.

PMID: 21207185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Pain Med. 2010 Oct;11(10):1564-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4637.2010.00949.x. Epub
2010 Sep 7.

A comparative study on the immediate effects of electroacupuncture at Sanyinjiao 
(SP6), Xuanzhong (GB39) and a non-meridian point, on menstrual pain and uterine
arterial blood flow, in primary dysmenorrhea patients.

Ma YX(1), Ma LX, Liu XL, Ma YX, Lv K, Wang D, Liu JP, Xing JM, Cao HJ, Gao SZ,
Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare the effects of Sanyinjiao
(SP6), Xuanzhong (GB39), and an adjacent non-meridian point on menstrual pain and
uterine arterial blood flow in primary dysmenorrhea patients.
DESIGN: The design of the study was a prospective, randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: The setting of the study was the Shandong Institute of Medical Imaging, 
Jinan, China.
PATIENTS: The patients were 52 women with primary dysmenorrhea.
INTERVENTIONS: Women received electroacupuncture (EA) at SP6 (n=13), GB39 (n=14),
and an adjacent non-meridian point (n=12), respectively, for 10 minutes when
scored =40 on a 100-mm visual analog scale (VAS), and for 30 minutes on the next 
2 days. There was no EA in the waiting list group (n=13).
OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcomes were menstrual pain, resistance index (RI),
and the ratio between peak systolic to end-diastolic flow velocity (S/D) in
uterine arteries. Secondary outcomes included verbal rating scale (VRS) and
retrospective symptom scale (RSS).
RESULTS: The SP6 group had a highly significant reduction in VAS scores compared 
with the waiting list group (-23.19mm, 95% confidence interval [CI]-32.06 to
-14.33, P<0.0001), GB39 group (-18.58mm, 95% CI -27.29 to -9.88, P<0.0001) and
the non-meridian point group (-20.78mm, 95% CI -29.82 to -11.73, P<0.0001),
respectively. A significant reduction in VRS scores was found in the SP6 group
compared with the GB39 group (P=0.034) and the non-meridian point group
(P=0.038). There were no significant differences of RI, S/D-values and RSS scores
among the four groups (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EA at SP6 can immediately relieve menstrual pain and minimize the
influence of pain on daily life compared with GB39 and an adjacent non-meridian
point. The data preliminarily show the specificity of SP6 for the immediate pain 
relief of primary dysmenorrhea.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21199306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Complement Ther Med. 2011 Jan;19 Suppl 1:S13-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2010.09.001. 
Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Effects of Sanyinjiao (SP6) with electroacupuncture on labour pain in women
during labour.

Ma W(1), Bai W, Lin C, Zhou P, Xia L, Zhao C, Hao Y, Ma H, Liu X, Wang J, Yuan H,
Xie Y, Lu A.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing University of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100029, China.
mawenzhu@163bj.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of Sanyinjiao (SP6) with electroacupuncture on
labour pain in women during the labour process.
METHODS: A total of 350 women in labour from three centres were randomly divided 
into the electroacupuncture group (acupuncture group), the sham
electroacupuncture group (sham group) and the control group. Women in labour in
the electroacupuncture group received the electroacupuncture on the point
Sanyinjiao (SP6). The analgesic effect was self-rated by women in labour, using
visual analogue scale (VAS). The duration and paralysis time of uterine
contraction, uterine contraction regularity, degree of cervical extension,
presentation of foetal descent, the condition of intra-partum haemorrhage and
postpartum haemorrhage, labour manner, lochia, involution of uterus, milk
secretion, neonate Apgar Score and neonate body height and weight were also
measured. All data were analysed with Statistical Package for Social Sciences
(SPSS) 12.0.
RESULTS: Labour pain scores from women in the acupuncture group were less than in
the control group at needle retaining at 30min, 2 and 4h after needle withdrawal.
Other evaluated indices did not show significant differences among the three
groups. No adverse events were observed during the labour process.
CONCLUSION: SP6 with electroacupuncture could be an effective way for decreasing 
labour pain.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Bull Group Int Rech Sci Stomatol Odontol. 2011 Apr 11;49(3):102-3.

P9-reduced expression of tight junction proteins ZO-1 and Claudin-1 in
ameloblasts and odontoblasts of Epiprofin/Sp6 deficient mice.

Jiménez L(1), Aurrekoetxea M, Ibarretxe G, Garcia P, de-Vega S, Unda FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Life Science Faculty, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

PMID: 22750379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2011 Feb;17(1):33-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2010.06.005.
Epub 2010 Jul 10.

The effects of acupressure on primary dysmenorrhea: a randomized controlled
trial.

Mirbagher-Ajorpaz N(1), Adib-Hajbaghery M, Mosaebi F.

Author information: 
(1)Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Medical Surgical Nursing Department,
Kashan, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: The current study was conducted to evaluate the effect of acupressure 
on primary dysmenorrhea in Iranian medical sciences students.
DESIGN: A randomized controlled pre and post-test design was employed to verify
the effects of SP6 acupressure on dysmenorrhea.
SETTING: A total of 30 young college female students with primary dysmenorrhea
were randomly allocated to intervention (n = 15) and control (n = 15) groups.
INTERVENTION: The intervention group received SP6 acupressure during menstruation
cycle and the control group received light touch on the SP6 acupoint. Using a
Visual Analog Scale, the severity of dysmenorrhea was assessed prior to and
immediately, 30 min, 1, 2, and 3 h following treatment.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Data were analyzed using X(2), t-test and ANOVA
statistical tests.
RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in the scores of dysmenorrhea
between the two groups immediately after (3.50 ± 1.42 vs. 5.06 ± 1.43, p = 0.004)
and also 3 h after treatment (1.66 ± 1.98 vs. 4.80 ± 1.37, p = 0.000).
CONCLUSIONS: Acupressure on the SP6 meridian can be an effective non-invasive
nursing intervention for alleviating primary dysmenorrhea and its effects last
for 3 h post-treatment.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21168112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Virus Res. 2011 Feb;155(2):487-94. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.12.004. Epub 2010
Dec 16.

Development of infectious transcripts from full-length and GFP-tagged cDNA clones
of Pepper mottle virus and stable systemic expression of GFP in tobacco and
pepper.

Lee MY(1), Song YS, Ryu KH.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Virus GenBank, Department of Horticulture, Biotechnology & Landscape
Architecture, Seoul Women's University, Seoul 139-774, Republic of Korea.

A full-length cDNA clone (pSP6PepMoV-Vb1) of the genomic RNA of a Korean isolate 
of Pepper mottle virus (PepMoV-Vb1) was constructed downstream of a bacteriophage
SP6 RNA polymerase promoter in the plasmid. In vitro RNA transcripts generated
from pSP6PepMoV-Vb1 corresponded to PepMoV-Vb1 RNA (9641nt) with an extra
guanosine residue at the 5' terminus and a 15-nt, poly (A) tract at the 3' end.
The RNAs synthesized from the pSP6PepMoV-Vb1 clone, by in vitro run-off
transcription in the presence of the 5' cap analog m(7)GpppG, were highly
infectious in Nicotiana benthamiana and Capsicum annuum cv. Early Calwonder.
Visible symptoms appeared at 4-5 days post-inoculation, at essentially the same
time as occurred on these host plant species inoculated with wild-type PepMoV-Vb.
Symptoms induced by progeny virus of the transcripts were indistinguishable from 
wild-type PepMoV-Vb on their experimental and natural hosts. The gene encoding
the green fluorescent protein (GFP), turboGFP, was inserted between the coding
regions for NIb and CP in the pSP6PepMoV-Vb1 clone. RNA transcripts of the
resulting GFP-tagged clone, designated SP6PepMoV-Vb1/GFP, were highly infectious 
and symptoms were not different from those induced by either transcripts of
pSP6PepMoV-Vb1 or wild-type PepMoV-Vb. However, GFP expression could be detected 
earlier than virus-induced symptom in plants infected by SP6PepMoV-Vb1/GFP. This 
study is the first report of the construction of a biologically active,
full-length cDNA copy of the Pepper mottle virus RNA genome and the stable
expression of a foreign gene within the modified virus.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Pain Med. 2011 Feb;12(2):300-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4637.2010.01017.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 17.

Immediate analgesia effect of single point acupuncture in primary dysmenorrhea: a
randomized controlled trial.

Liu CZ(1), Xie JP, Wang LP, Zheng YY, Ma ZB, Yang H, Chen X, Shi GX, Li SL, Zhao 
JP, Han JX, Li JD, Wang YX, Tang L, Xue XO, Li M, Wang Y, Sun AP, Xing JM, Cao
HJ, Zhu J, Liu JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing, China. lcz623780@126.com

Erratum in
    Pain Med. 2011 Apr;12(4):685.

BACKGROUND: Acupuncture is often used for primary dysmenorrhea.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of a single point of acupuncture in the
management of primary dysmenorrhea compared with sham acupuncture and no
acupuncture.
METHODOLOGY: Patients with primary dysmenorrhea were randomly assigned to
acupoint group (n=50), unrelated acupoint group (n=50), nonacupoint group (n=46),
or no acupuncture group (n=48). Acupuncture and sham acupuncture were
administered once-daily for 3 days with electro-acupuncture at Sanyinjiao (SP6)
that was specifically designed to treat primary dysmenorrhea, or an unrelated
acupoint (Xuanzhong, GB39), or nonacupoint location. The primary outcome was pain
intensity as measured by a 100-mm visual analog scale (VAS) at baseline; 5, 10,
30, and 60 minutes following the start of the first intervention. Cox
retrospective symptom scale (RSS), verbal rating scale (VRS), pain total time,
and proportion of participants using analgesics were also recorded during three
menstrual cycles.
RESULTS: The primary comparison of VAS scores demonstrated that patients
receiving acupuncture (-15.56 mm, 95% CI -22.16 to -8.95, P<0.001), unrelated
acupoint (-18.14 mm, 95% CI -24.81 to -11.47, P<0.001), and nonacupoint (-10.96
mm, 95% CI -17.62 to -4.30, P=0.001) treatment presented significant improvements
compared with no acupuncture group. There were no significant differences among
the four groups with respect to secondary outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture was better than no acupuncture for relieving the pain of 
dysmenorrhea following a single point of acupuncture, but no differences were
detected between acupoint acupuncture and unrelated acupoint acupuncture,
acupoint acupuncture and nonacupoint acupuncture.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21166767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;28(4):252-6.

[Study on molecular phylogeny of Schistosoma bovis based on mitochondrial DNA
sequence and gene order].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao JY(1), Cai LS, Mitsuru N, Shinji T, Jarilla Blanca R, Masaaki S, Blair D,
Takeshi A.

Author information: 
(1)Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Kochi 783-5805, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the nucleotide sequence of the partial mitochondrial (mt)
genome and the order of the mitochondrial protein-coding genes for Schistosoma
bovis for analysis of possible phylogenetic position of this species in the genus
Schistosoma.
METHODS: The genomic DNA of adult worms were extracted by the GNT-K method. The
target regions were amplified by PCR using a degenerated primer and specific
primer. The PCR products were purified before ligating into the pGEM1 T-vector
system. Recombinant plasmids were amplified in Escherichia coli, extracted and
purified using routine methods. The nucleotide sequences were determined with an 
ABI PRISM 3100-Avant DNA sequencer using a BigDye Terminators v3.1 Cycle
Sequencing Kit (Applied Bio-systems, CA, U.S.A.) with two T-vector specific
primers (T7 and SP6). Positive colonies were sequenced with two internal specific
primers to obtain the full sequence of each fragment on both strands by means of 
primer walking. Sequences of related schistosomes were retrieved from GenBank and
aligned with our data. Gene trees were constructed using neighbor joining
methods.
RESULTS: The nucleotide sequence was determined and the gene order of this region
in S. bovis was found as follows: NADHdehydrogenase4 (nad4)-trnQ
(Gln)-trnK(Lys)-NADH dehydrogenase 3(nad3)-trnD (Asp)-NADH dehydrogenase 1(nad1).
The gene order covering such region of S. bovis was similar to that of the
African Schistosoma species, but strikingly different from the Asian species.
Phylogenetic trees inferred from the alignment including partial nad4, nad3,
partial nad1 and partial nad4+nad3+nad1 sequence for other 8 Schistosoma spp.,
respectively, revealed that S. bovis is placed proximally to S. haematobium in
the African sub-group, which is identical with those placed by gene order in the 
African clade.
CONCLUSION: The mtDNA analysis based on mitochondrial DNA sequence and the gene
order strongly support the hypothesis that S. bovis belongs to the African
schistosome clade rather than the Asian Schistosoma species.

PMID: 21137306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2010 Nov;29(11):821-30. doi:
10.1080/15257770.2010.529860.

Synthesis and substrate validation of cap analogs containing 7-deazaguanosine
moiety by RNA polymerase.

Kore AR(1), Shanmugasundaram M, Barta TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Life Technologies Corporation, Bioorganic Chemistry Division, 2130 Woodward
Street, Austin, TX 78744-1832, USA. anil.kore@lifetech.com

An efficient synthesis of new cap analogs containing 7-deazaguanosine moiety such
as m(7)G[5']ppp[5'](7-deaza)G and m2(7,3'O)G[5']ppp[5'](7-deaza)G is described.
The biological substrate validation of these new cap analogs is evaluated with
respect to its capping efficiency and in vitro T7 RNA polymerase transcription
using standard cap m7G[5']ppp[5']G as a control. The capping efficiency and HPLC 
data reveal that these new analogs are not the substrate for T7 RNA polymerase or
SP6 RNA polymerase. The present study highlights the importance of the presence
of nitrogen atom at N7-position of the guanosine moiety for the polymerase
recognition.

PMID: 21128169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Chin J Integr Med. 2010 Dec;16(6):498-503. doi: 10.1007/s11655-010-0574-1. Epub
2010 Nov 26.

Effect of acupoint catgut-embedding on the quality of life, reproductive
endocrine and bone metabolism of postmenopausal women.

Chen GZ(1), Xu YX, Zhang JW, Liu SH, Guo ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Second School of Clinic Medicine, Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou 510405, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the influence of acupoint catgut-embedding therapy on the
quality of life (QOL), the reproductive endocrine and bone metabolism of
postmenopausal women.
METHODS: A total A total of 65 women with climacteric syndrome were enrolled and 
randomly assigned to two groups, thirty-three in the treatment group on whom
acupoint catgut-embedding was performed with Shenshu (BL23), Sanyinjiao (SP6) and
Guanyuan (CV4) as main acupoints, and thirty-two in the control group who were
only medicated with Fufuchun Capsule (<U+5987><U+590D><U+6625><U+80F6><U+56CA>). The treatment course for both
groups was 3 months. Before and after Before and after treatment, the clinical
symptoms, the QOL score, serum follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing
hormone (LH), estradiol (E(2)), testosterone (T), osteocalcin (BGP), parathyroid 
hormone (PTH), calcitonin (CT) and alkaline phosphatase (AKP) were measured. In
addition, another 28 women with childbearing potential and normal regular
menstrual cycle were selected and the reproductive endocrine hormone were tested 
in the ovulatory period as controls.
RESULTS: The levels of serum FSH and LH of postmenopausal women were higher, and 
serum E(2) and T were lower than those of normal women (P<0.01). After treatment,
the levels of serum E(2) In both groups and T in the treatment group were
increased, while in the control group the serum E(2) increase was more
significant than that in the treatment group (P<0.05), and serum T showed no
statistical difference. The levels of serum FSH, LH, BGP, CT, PTH and AKP were
reduced significantly in both groups after treatment (P<0.05). The QOL scores
were Increased remarkably in both groups on physiological functioning, bodily
pain, general health, vitality, and mental health after treatment (P<0.05),but
the improvement of bodily pain and mental health in the treatment group were
better than those in the control group (P<0.01). There was no significant
difference in the therapeutic effect between the two groups after treatment
(P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Acupoint catgut-embedding showed an obvious effect on climacteric
syndrome, and enhanced the QOL in postmenopausal women. The therapy could
regulate the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis to raise the serum E(2) level
which may be significant in preventing and curing the osteoporosis in
postmenopausal women.

PMID: 21110174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2010 Aug;35(4):255-60.

[Effects of acupoint-injection of Lentinan on the immunologic funtion in rabbits 
with spleen-qi deficiency].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin JY(1), Xu YL, Yao X, Hu XL, Feng N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drugs, Fujian Institute of Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, China.
ljy7716@tom.com

To observe the effect of Spleen-Meridian-acupoint injection of Lentinan on the
immunologic function in spleen-deficiency rabbits.METHODS: A total of 54
Newzealand rabbits were randomly divided into normal (n = 10), model (n = 8),
intramuscular injection (n = 10), Sanyinjiao (SP6, n = 10), Diji (SP8, n = 8) and
Xuehai (SP 12, n = 8) groups. Spleen-qi deficiency model was established by
intragastric administration of 100% crude Radix et Rhizoma Rhei decoction (15
mL/kg/day x 10 d), and then Lentinan (LNT, 0.025 mg/kg/2 day x 5) was injected
into the aforementioned acupoints of the Spleen Meridian. The erythrocyte
immunologic function (RBC-C3 bR, RBC-IC), hemolysin (lgM) and changes of physical
signs of the rabbits were observed.
RESULTS: In comparison with the control group, the rabbits' body weight, rectal
temperature, RBC-C3 bR% and serum IgM level were decreased significantly in model
group (P < 0.05); while in comparison with the model group, the body weight in SP
8 group,retal temperature in SP 9 and SP 8 groups, RBC-C3 bR% in SP 9 and SP 12
groups, and serum IgM levels in SP 9, SP 8 and SP 12 groups increased
considerably (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Comparison among the 4 treatment groups showed
that the effect of SP 12 was superior to that of intramuscular injection group in
upregulaing RBC-C3 bR%, and the effects of SP 9, SP 8 and SP 12 groups were
significantly superior to those of intramuscular injection group in upregulating 
serum IgM level (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Spleen-Meridian-acupoint injection of LNT is superior to that of 
intramuscular injection of LNT in improving the spleen-qi deficiency rabbits'
symptoms and immunologic function.

PMID: 21090326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Am J Chin Med. 2010;38(6):1131-42.

Arsenic trioxide induces apoptosis in uveal melanoma cells through the
mitochondrial pathway.

Chen MJ(1), Yang PY, Ye YZ, Hu DN, Chen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua,
Taiwan.

Uveal melanoma, the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults, is
highly resistant to most chemotherapeutic drugs. Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is known 
to inhibit ocular melanoma cell growth. However, the effects of ATO on human
uveal melanoma cells are poorly understood. Therefore, this study evaluated the
mechanisms of ATO and its inhibiting effects on a human uveal melanoma cell line 
(SP6.5). An MTT assay indicated that, compared to human fibroblasts, ATO had a
stronger inhibiting effect on SP6.5 cell proliferation in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. The apoptosis ratio in SP6.5 cells, which was indicated by
cell DNA fragmentation, was 4.1- to 7.7-fold higher after ATO-treatment. The ATO 
treatment substantially increased the activities of caspase-3 and caspase-9, but 
not of caspase-8. These findings were consistent with the protein expression
observed by Western blots. ATO also significantly enhanced expression of Bax and 
cytochrome c proteins but suppressed those of Bcl-2. Therefore, ATO-induced
apoptosis in uveal melanoma cells occurs mainly through the mitochondrial pathway
rather than through the death receptor pathway. This report is the first to
evaluate the complete mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway of ATO in uveal
melanoma cells. These results can be used to improve the clinical effectiveness
of ATO treatment for uveal melanoma.

PMID: 21061466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Learn Motiv. 2010 Nov;41(4):252-272.

Concurrent Cognitive Processes in Rat Serial Pattern Learning: Item Memory,
Serial Position, and Pattern Structure.

Muller MD(1), Fountain SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Mount Union, Alliance, OH 44601-3993, 
USA.

Three experiments examined the processes mediating rat serial pattern learning
for rule-consistent versus rule-violating pattern elements ("violation
elements"). In all three experiments, rats were trained to press retractable
levers in a circular array in a specific sequence for brain stimulation reward
(BSR). Experiment 1 examined the role of lever location (L) and element serial
position (SP) cues in rats' ability to learn to anticipate a violation element
positioned at the end of a 24-element serial pattern. Rats with L cues either
alone or in combination with SP cues learned to anticipate the violation element,
whereas those with SP cues alone did not. Rats in groups L and L+SP underwent a
series of transfers designed to remove various cues that might have controlled
their performance on the violation element. Results indicated that intra-chamber 
lever location cues mediated performance on the violation element whereas
performance on rule-consistent elements within pattern chunks was mediated by an 
internal mnemonic representation that was insensitive to changes in lever
location cues. Experiment 2 examined whether rats could learn to use SP cues
alone to anticipate a violation element if it was positioned earlier in a serial 
pattern. Rats learned to anticipate the violation element based on SP cues alone 
when it was located in SP6 in a 24-element pattern, but not when it was in SP12. 
Experiment 3 examined whether or not rats spontaneously encode information about 
chunk length and the serial position of phrasing cues in serial patterns. Rats
were trained to a high criterion on the serial pattern used in Experiment 1, then
were challenged with three probe patterns that manipulated both chunk length and 
overall pattern length. Results indicated that rats spontaneously encoded
information regarding the serial position of phrasing cues in relation to chunk
length. Thus, rats appear to use at least three cognitive processes concurrently 
in serial pattern learning tasks, namely, item memory involving external
discriminative cues, counting- or timing-like processes for encoding serial
position, and rule abstraction for encoding an internal representation of pattern
structure.

PMCID: PMC3437332
PMID: 22969166  [PubMed]


221. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2011 Jun;28(6):420-6. doi: 10.1097/EJA.0b013e32833fad52.

Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation on ST36 and SP6 acupoints prevents
hyperglycaemic response during anaesthesia: a randomised controlled trial.

Man KM(1), Man SS, Shen JL, Law KS, Chen SL, Liaw WJ, Lee CT, Lee YJ, Liao WL,
Chang TM, Yu DX, Chen DC, Chen YH, Chen WC, Chang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Tungs' Taichung
Metroharbor Hospital, Taichung Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Hyperglycaemia is a common result of stress signals
caused by pain and surgical procedure. Volatile anaesthetics also directly
manipulate glucose homeostasis by affecting pancreatic insulin release and induce
hyperglycaemia without surgical stress. We determined the preoperative
application of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) to the Chinese 
acupoints ST36 (Zusanli) and SP6 (Sanyinjiao) as a complementary therapy for
controlling plasma glucose and improving insulin resistance during anaesthesia.
METHODS: We designed a single-blind, randomised controlled clinical study of
female patients, scheduled for elective hysterectomy. The 52 patients consented
to enrolment and were assigned to receive either TENS (n = 26) on bilateral ST36 
and SP6 acupoints with continuous mode at a frequency of 15 Hz and the intensity 
of 10 mA synchronously for 30 min or non-stimulation (placebo group, n = 26)
preoperatively. Haemodynamics, blood glucose and plasma insulin were measured
during general anaesthesia.
RESULTS: At baseline, there was no significant difference between the TENS group 
and the placebo group in plasma glucose and insulin levels as well as homeostasis
model assessment (HOMA) index. In the placebo group, plasma glucose, insulin and 
HOMA index increased during induction of general anaesthesia, surgical incision, 
and throughout the operation. Plasma glucose and insulin levels as well as HOMA
index were significantly lower in the TENS group as compared to the placebo group
at different time points after discontinuation of TENS application. These results
indicate the positive effect of prevention of hyperglycaemia and the increased
sensitivity of plasma insulin in the TENS group.
CONCLUSION: We found TENS at bilateral ST36 and SP6 acupoints to be an
alternative means of managing the plasma glucose level and improving insulin
resistance perioperatively.

PMID: 20962656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Altern Complement Med. 2010 Oct;16(10):1073-8. doi: 10.1089/acm.2009.0326. Epub
2010 Oct 9.

Immediate effect of acupuncture at Sanyinjiao (SP6) and Xuanzhong (GB39) on
uterine arterial blood flow in primary dysmenorrhea.

Yu YP(1), Ma LX, Ma YX, Ma YX, Liu YQ, Liu CZ, Xie JP, Gao SZ, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Shandong University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare immediate effect of
acupuncture at SP6 on uterine arterial blood flow in primary dysmenorrhea with
that of GB39.
DESIGN: This was a prospective, randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: Sixty-six (66) patients with primary dysmenorrhea from the Affiliated
Hospital of Shangdong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine were recruited.
INTERVENTIONS: The SP6 group (n =32) was treated with manual acupuncture at
bilateral SP6 for 5 minutes after obtaining needling sensation (de qi) during the
period of menstrual pain, whereas the control group (n = 34) was needled at GB39 
of both sides for 5 minutes when they suffered menstrual pain.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Differences in pulsatility index (PI), resistance index
(RI), and ratio of systolic peak and diastolic peak (A/B) in uterine arteries
were the main outcome measures.
RESULTS: Highly significant reductions were observed in the SP6 treatment group 5
minutes after treatment in menstrual pain scores (8.17 ± 1.90 versus 11.20 ±
2.66; p < 0.001), values of PI (1.75 ± 0.48 versus 2.32 ± 0.70; p < 0.001), RI
(0.72 ± 0.11 versus 0.78 ± 0.07; p < 0.001), and A/B (4.33 ± 1.37 versus 5.23 ±
1.67; p < 0.001). Compared with the GB39 control group, patients in the SP6
treatment group showed significant reductions in 5 minutes after treatment in the
changes of menstrual pain scores (3.03 ± 2.36 versus 0.00 ± 0.29; p < 0.001),
values of PI (0.57 ± 0.42 versus -0.10 ± 0.58; p < 0.001), RI (0.06 ± 0.08 versus
-0.03 ± 0.15; p < 0.01), and A/B (0.90 ± 0.87 versus 0.23 ± 1.02; p < 0.01).
There were no significant changes in menstrual pain scores, values of PI, RI, or 
A/B before and after treatment in the GB39 control group (p > 0.05). No adverse
events from treatment were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that needling at SP6 can immediately improve
uterine arterial blood flow of patients with primary dysmenorrhea, while GB39
does not have these effects.

PMID: 20932189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):39339-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147587. Epub
2010 Oct 6.

Structure-based catalytic optimization of a type III Rubisco from a
hyperthermophile.

Nishitani Y(1), Yoshida S, Fujihashi M, Kitagawa K, Doi T, Atomi H, Imanaka T,
Miki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

The Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle is responsible for carbon dioxide fixation in all
plants, algae, and cyanobacteria. The enzyme that catalyzes the carbon
dioxide-fixing reaction is ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(Rubisco). Rubisco from a hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus kodakarensis
(Tk-Rubisco) belongs to the type III group, and shows high activity at high
temperatures. We have previously found that replacement of the entire a-helix 6
of Tk-Rubisco with the corresponding region of the spinach enzyme (SP6 mutant)
results in an improvement of catalytic performance at mesophilic temperatures,
both in vivo and in vitro, whereas the former and latter half-replacements of the
a-helix 6 (SP4 and SP5 mutants) do not yield such improvement. We report here the
crystal structures of the wild-type Tk-Rubisco and the mutants SP4 and SP6, and
discuss the relationships between their structures and enzymatic activities. A
comparison among these structures shows the movement and the increase of
temperature factors of a-helix 6 induced by four essential factors. We thus
supposed that an increase in the flexibility of the a-helix 6 and loop 6 regions 
was important to increase the catalytic activity of Tk-Rubisco at ambient
temperatures. Based on this structural information, we constructed a new mutant, 
SP5-V330T, which was designed to have significantly greater flexibility in the
above region, and it proved to exhibit the highest activity among all mutants
examined to date. The thermostability of the SP5-V330T mutant was lower than that
of wild-type Tk-Rubisco, providing further support on the relationship between
flexibility and activity at ambient temperatures.

PMCID: PMC2998091
PMID: 20926376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Oral Pathol Med. 2011 Mar;40(3):227-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2010.00950.x. 
Epub 2010 Oct 4.

Establishment of human dental epithelial cell lines expressing ameloblastin and
enamelin by transfection of hTERT and cdk4 cDNAs.

Hatakeyama S(1), Mizusawa N, Tsutsumi R, Yoshimoto K, Mizuki H, Yasumoto S, Sato 
S, Takeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenesis and Control of Oral Diseases, School of Dentistry, 
Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Japan. hsetsuko11@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: An in vitro cell culture system of dental epithelium is useful for
the investigations of cellular differentiation and function of ameloblast in
amelogenesis and of regenerative therapy in human tooth. However, there have been
no immortalized human dental epithelial ameloblastic-lineage cell lines, which
proliferate indefinitely and additionally produce enamel matrix proteins.
METHODS: We transfected two retroviral constructs of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) cDNA and mouse cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (cdk4) cDNA into
the primary ameloblastoma cells and isolated immortalized human dental epithelial
cell lines of HAM1, HAM2 and HAM3. The three cell lines were examined by electron
microscopy, assay of senescence-associated ß-galactosidase activity, mRNA
expression and immuno-reactivity of dental epithelial marker cell molecules and
enamel matrix proteins.
RESULTS: They showed undifferentiated phenotypes in monolayer culture and did not
have any ß-galactosidase activity. The transcripts of dental epithelial cell
markers of Msx2, Jagged1, Notch1, Sp3, Sp6, keratin 14 and keratin 18 were
confirmed. In addition, mRNA and protein expression of ameloblastin and enamelin 
were also detected in three cell lines. All cells in the three cell lines were
keratin 14- and 18-positive and some elongated cells were Jagged1-positive.
Msx2-positive nuclei were noted in only HAM2 cells.
CONCLUSION: We established three cell lines by transfection of hTERT and cdk4
cDNAs, which were characterized as dental epithelial progenitor cells containing 
ameloblast-lineage cell phenotype.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20923449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Histol Histopathol. 2010 Dec;25(12):1621-30.

Epiprofin/Sp6: a new player in the regulation of tooth development.

Jimenez-Rojo L(1), Ibarretxe G, Aurrekoetxea M, de Vega S, Nakamura T, Yamada Y, 
Unda F.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), ISREC-Swiss Institute for
Experimental Cancer Research, NCCR Molecular Oncology, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Odontogenesis is governed by a complex network of intercellular signaling events 
between the dental epithelium and mesenchyme. This network leads to the
progressive determination of tooth shape, and to the differentiation of these
tissues into enamel-producing ameloblasts and dentin-producing odontoblasts
respectively. Among the main signaling pathways involved in the regulation of
tooth development, Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP), Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Wingless-type MMTV integration site (Wnt) pathways have been reported to play
significant roles. Recently, the phenotype of mice deficient in Epiprofin/Sp6
(Epfn) has been found to present striking dental abnormalities, including a
complete lack of differentiated ameloblasts and consequently no enamel, highly
altered molar cusp patterns and the formation of multiple supernumerary teeth. In
this article, we review the interaction of Epfn with the BMP, Shh and Wnt
pathways in the regulation of tooth development, based on the data obtained from 
the study of several genetically modified mice.

PMID: 20886441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2010 Nov;89(11):1453-9. doi:
10.3109/00016349.2010.514323. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Acupressure to reduce labor pain: a randomized controlled trial.

Hjelmstedt A(1), Shenoy ST, Stener-Victorin E, Lekander M, Bhat M, Balakumaran L,
Waldenström U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. anna.hjelmstedt@ki.se

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of acupressure administered during the active
phase of labor on nulliparous women's ratings of labor pain.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Public hospital in India.
SAMPLE: Seventy-one women randomized to receive acupressure at acupuncture point 
spleen 6 (SP6) on both legs during contractions over a 30-minute period
(acupressure group), 71 women to receive light touch at SP6 on both legs during
the same period of time (touch group) and 70 women to receive standard care
(standard care group).
METHODS: Experience of in-labor pain was assessed by visual analog scale at
baseline before treatment, immediately after treatment, and at 30, 60 and 120
minutes after treatment.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Labor pain intensity at different time intervals after
treatment compared with before treatment.
RESULTS: A reduction of in-labor pain was found in the acupressure group and was 
most noticeable immediately after treatment (acupressure group vs. standard care 
group p < 0.001; acupressure group vs. touch group p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Acupressure seems to reduce pain during the active phase of labor in 
nulliparous women giving birth in a context in which social support and epidural 
analgesia are not available. However, the treatment effect is small which
suggests that acupressure may be most effective during the initial phase of
labor.

PMID: 20822474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Oct 22;484(1):47-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.016. Epub 
2010 Aug 13.

Acupuncture is effective to attenuate stress and stimulate lymphocyte
proliferation in the elderly.

Pavão TS(1), Vianna P, Pillat MM, Machado AB, Bauer ME.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biomedical
Research, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto
Alegre (RS), Brazil.

Acupuncture has increasingly been used to treat many conditions, including
psychiatric disorders and immunological-related disorders. However, the effects
of acupuncture as stress management and immune functions in the elderly are
largely unclear. Here we investigated the effects of acupuncture on
stress-related psychological symptoms and cellular immunity in young adults and
elderly subjects. The acupuncture treatment consisted of six sessions and the
procedures included the insertion of needles at bilateral acupoints LI4, SP6 and 
ST36. Psychological variables (depression, anxiety and stress) were investigated 
by means of self-assessment inventories. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were 
isolated and cultured in vitro to measure mitogen-induced T-cell proliferation as
well as cellular sensitivity to dexamethasone. All data were assessed before and 
after the intervention. Acupuncture was able to significantly reduce depression
(p<0.001), anxiety (p<0.001) and stress (p<0.001) scores. The intervention also
increased T-cell proliferation, with greater intensity in the elderly group
(p=0.004). No changes in cellular sensitivity to dexamethasone were observed
following acupuncture. We conclude that acupuncture was efficient to attenuate
the psychological distress as well as to increase an important feature of
cellular immunosenescence.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20709154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Chin J Integr Med. 2010 Aug;16(4):298-303. doi: 10.1007/s11655-010-0516-y. Epub
2010 Aug 10.

Clinical study on the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux by acupuncture.

Zhang CX(1), Qin YM, Guo BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, First Hospital Affiliated to Xinxiang Medical 
College, Henan 453100, China. nn21882001@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinical efficacy and safety of acupuncture in treating
gastroesophageal reflux (GER).
METHODS: Sixty patients with confirmed diagnosis of GER were randomly assigned to
two groups. The 30 patients in the treatment group were treated with acupuncture 
at acupoints Zhongwan (CV 12), bilateral Zusanli (ST36), Sanyinjiao (SP6), and
Neiguan (PC6), once a day, for 1 week as a therapeutic course, with interval of
2-3 days between courses; the 30 patients in the control group were administered 
orally with omeprazole 20 mg twice a day and 20 mg mosapride thrice a day. The
treatment in both group lasted 6 weeks. Patients' symptoms and times of reflux
attacking were recorded, the 24-h intraesophageal acid/bile reflux were
monitored, and the endoscopic feature of esophageal mucous membrane was graded
and scored at three time points, i.e., pre-treatment (T0), immediately after
ending the treatment course (T1) and 4 weeks after it (T2). Besides, the adverse 
reactions were also observed.
RESULTS: Compared with those detected at T0, 24-h intraesophageal pH and bile
reflux, endoscopic grading score and symptom score were all decreased
significantly at T1 in both groups similarly (P<0.01), showing insignificant
difference between groups (P>0.05). These indices were reversed at T2 to high
level in the control group (P<0.05), but the reversion did not occur in the
treatment group (P>0.05). No serious adverse reaction was found during the
therapeutic period.
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture can effectively inhibit the intraesophageal acid and bile
reflux in GER patients to alleviate patients' symptoms with good safety and is
well accepted by patients.

PMID: 20697939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Clin Pathol. 2010 Sep;63(9):800-4. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.077578. Epub 2010 Jul 
29.

Comparative validation of the SP6 antibody to Ki67 in breast cancer.

Zabaglo L(1), Salter J, Anderson H, Quinn E, Hills M, Detre S, A'Hern R, Dowsett 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
lila.zabaglo@icr.ac.uk

AIM: To compare SP6 and MIB1 antibodies for Ki67 staining in breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Immunohistochemical detection of Ki67 has been widely used to assess 
the proliferative fraction in breast cancer. Ki67 is used prognostically and is
the primary end-point for some presurgical trials. MIB1 has been the preferred
antibody, but SP6 has become available, with apparently improved performance. The
importance of Ki67 led us to systematically compare SP6 with MIB1.
METHODS: Two sets of tissue microarrays were used. These were constructed from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast cancers: (i) 177 cancers with data on
response to an aromatase inhibitor for advanced disease (cohort 1); (ii) 200
mainly oestrogen-receptor-positive cancers without response data (cohort 2).
Twenty-eight pairs of core-cut biopsies taken before and after aromatase
inhibitor treatment were also assessed (cohort 3). Stained sections were examined
either visually or by using an image analysis system (Ariol).
RESULTS: There was a strong correlation between the two antibodies in all cohorts
of samples scored visually (cohort 1: n=161, r=0.93, p<0.0001; cohort 2: n=194,
r=0.84, p<0.0001; cohort 3: n=54, r=0.89, p<0.0001). Correlation between visual
and Ariol scores was markedly better with the SP6 antibody (r=0.71 and r=0.88 for
MIB1 and SP6, respectively). Ki67 related similarly with time-to-treatment
failure with the two antibodies (cohort 1). Changes in Ki67 values with the two
antibodies after 2 weeks of aromatase inhibitor treatment also correlated
strongly.
CONCLUSIONS: SP6 and MIB1 provide highly comparable measures of Ki67 that predict
progression of advanced disease similarly. SP6 is substantially better suited
than MIB1 to image analysis.

PMID: 20671052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Neuroscience. 2010 Oct 13;170(2):655-61. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.07.031.
Epub 2010 Jul 25.

Electroacupuncture versus celecoxib for neuropathic pain in rat SNL model.

Lau WK(1), Lau YM, Zhang HQ, Wong SC, Bian ZX.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, PR
China.

Though acupuncture has long been used to treat various kinds of pain, its
mechanisms remain partly understood. Our recent study has shown that it may
inhibit cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in the spinal dorsal horn where COX-2 is
upregulated after the development of neuropathic pain following spinal nerve
ligation (SNL). The current study directly compared the effect of acupuncture
with COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib in the spinal cord after SNL in rats. After L5
SNL, the rats were treated either with acupuncture applied to Zusanli (ST36) and 
Sanyinjiao (SP6) bilaterally with or without electrical stimulation (2 Hz,
0.5-1-2 mA) four times over 22 days, and/or celecoxib fed daily.
Paw-withdrawal-threshold to mechanical stimulation and paw-withdrawal-latency to 
thermal test were tested for neuropathic pain at four intervals following the
treatments in comparison with the pre-treatment and non-treatment controls. The
results demonstrate that electroacupuncture (EA) had a long lasting and better
analgesic effect than celecoxib in reducing neuropathic hypersensitivity. Though 
COX-2 expression in the spinal L4-L6 dorsal horn by immunostaining was
significantly reduced by acupuncture just as well as by celecoxib, the superior
analgesic mechanism of acupuncture appears well beyond COX-2 inhibition alone.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20654703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Microb Ecol. 2010 Nov;60(4):915-27. doi: 10.1007/s00248-010-9713-7. Epub 2010 Jul
15.

Growth of quailbush in acidic, metalliferous desert mine tailings: effect of
Azospirillum brasilense Sp6 on biomass production and rhizosphere community
structure.

de-Bashan LE(1), Hernandez JP, Nelson KN, Bashan Y, Maier RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil, Water and Environmental Science, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721-0038, USA.

Mine tailing deposits in semiarid and arid environments frequently remain devoid 
of vegetation due to the toxicity of the substrate and the absence of a diverse
soil microbial community capable of supporting seed germination and plant growth.
The contribution of the plant growth promoting bacterium (PGPB) Azospirillum
brasilense Sp6 to the growth of quailbush in compost-amended, moderately acidic, 
high-metal content mine tailings using an irrigation-based reclamation strategy
was examined along with its influence on the rhizosphere bacterial community. Sp6
inoculation resulted in a significant (2.2-fold) increase in plant biomass
production. The data suggest that the inoculum successfully colonized the root
surface and persisted throughout the 60-day experiment in both the rhizosphere,
as demonstrated by excision and sequencing of the appropriate denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE) band, and the rhizoplane, as indicated by fluorescent 
in situ hybridization of root surfaces. Changes in rhizosphere community
structure in response to Sp6 inoculation were evaluated after 15, 30, and 60 days
using DGGE analysis of 16S rRNA polymerase chain reaction amplicons. A comparison
of DGGE profiles using canonical correspondence analysis revealed a significant
treatment effect (Sp6-inoculated vs. uninoculated plants vs. unplanted) on
bacterial community structure at 15, 30, and 60 days (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). These data
indicate that in an extremely stressed environment such as acid mine tailings, an
inoculated plant growth promoting bacterium not only can persist and stimulate
plant growth but also can directly or indirectly influence rhizobacterial
community development.

PMCID: PMC2974781
PMID: 20632001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Am J Chin Med. 2010;38(4):683-94.

Electrical acupoint stimulation changes body composition and the meridian systems
in postmenopausal women with obesity.

Lin CH(1), Lin YM, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Ching Kuo Institute of Management and Health, Keelung, 
Taiwan.

This study evaluates the effects of electrical stimulation on body composition
and the meridian system in postmenopausal women with obesity. Forty-one
postmenopausal women were recruited in Taiwan. The body composition was used as a
screening test for obesity (percentage of body fat: > 30%, waist circumference: >
80 cm). The experimental group (EG, n = 20) received modulated middle-frequency
electrical stimulation treatment for 20 min twice a week for 12 consecutive weeks
at the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) acupoints. The control group (CG, n = 
21) did not receive any intervention. The measurements of body composition and
the meridian system were recorded for both groups in the pre- and post-study. The
results showed that the data of body composition (weight, waist and hip
circumference, percentage of body fat, and percentage of lean muscle mass)
changed considerably in the EG (p < 0.05); however, no significant difference was
observed in the CG. The left triple burner meridian changed notably in both EG
and CG throughout the study (p < 0.05), however there was no difference between
the two groups in the overall mean value, up-down ratio, qi and blood ratio, and 
yin-yang ratio. Our findings suggest that modulated middle-frequency electrical
stimulation could help to improve body composition in postmenopausal women with
obesity, potentially providing them with better care and health by integrating
Western medicine and traditional Chinese medicine.

PMID: 20626054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Sep;88(2):529-39. doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-2732-y.
Epub 2010 Jul 2.

Application of Escherichia coli phage K1E DNA-dependent RNA polymerase for in
vitro RNA synthesis and in vivo protein production in Bacillus megaterium.

Stammen S(1), Schuller F, Dietrich S, Gamer M, Biedendieck R, Jahn D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany.

Gene "7" of Escherichia coli phage K1E was proposed to encode a novel
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNAP). The corresponding protein was produced
recombinantly, purified to apparent homogeneity via affinity chromatography, and 
successfully employed for in vitro RNA synthesis. Optimal assay conditions (pH 8,
37 degrees C, 10 mM magnesium chloride and 1.3 mM spermidine) were established.
The corresponding promoter regions were identified on the phage genome and
summarized in a sequence logo. Surprisingly, next to K1E promoters, the SP6
promoter was also recognized efficiently in vitro by K1E RNAP, while the T7 RNAP 
promoter was not recognized at all. Based on these results, a system for
high-yield in vitro RNA synthesis using K1E RNAP was established. The template
plasmid is a pUC18 derivative, which enables blue/white screening for positive
cloning of the target DNA. Production of more than 5 microg of purified RNA per
microgram plasmid DNA was achieved. Finally, in vivo protein production systems
for Bacillus megaterium were established based on K1E and SP6 phage RNAP
transcription. Up to 61.4 mg g (CDW) (-1) (K1E RNAP) of the reporter protein Gfp 
was produced in shaking flask cultures of B. megaterium.

PMID: 20596705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2010 Sep;11(3):201-9. doi: 10.1007/s10969-010-9093-8.
Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Engineering of a wheat germ expression system to provide compatibility with a
high throughput pET-based cloning platform.

Zhao L(1), Zhao KQ, Hurst R, Slater MR, Acton TB, Swapna GV, Shastry R, Kornhaber
GJ, Montelione GT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, 08854, USA.

Wheat germ cell-free methods provide an important approach for the production of 
eukaryotic proteins. We have developed a protein expression vector for the
TNT((R)) SP6 High-Yield Wheat Germ Cell-Free (TNT WGCF) expression system
(Promega) that is also compatible with our T7-based Escherichia coli
intracellular expression vector pET15_NESG. This allows cloning of the same PCR
product into either one of several pET_NESG vectors and this modified WGCF vector
(pWGHisAmp) by In-Fusion LIC cloning (Zhu et al. in Biotechniques 43:354-359,
2007). Integration of these two vector systems allowed us to explore the efficacy
of the TNT WGCF system by comparing the expression and solubility characteristics
of 59 human protein constructs in both WGCF and pET15_NESG E. coli intracellular 
expression. While only 30% of these human proteins could be produced in soluble
form using the pET15_NESG based system, some 70% could be produced in soluble
form using the TNT WGCF system. This high success rate underscores the importance
of eukaryotic expression host systems like the TNT WGCF system for eukaryotic
protein production in a structural genomics sample production pipeline. To
further demonstrate the value of this WGCF system in producing protein suitable
for structural studies, we scaled up, purified, and analyzed by 2D NMR two
(15)N-, (13)C-enriched human proteins. The results of this study indicate that
the TNT WGCF system is a successful salvage pathway for producing samples of
difficult-to-express small human proteins for NMR studies, providing an important
complementary pathway for eukaryotic sample production in the NESG NMR structure 
production pipeline.

PMCID: PMC2921493
PMID: 20574660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. BJOG. 2010 Sep;117(10):1255-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2010.02647.x. Epub 2010 
Jun 24.

Acupuncture for the induction of labour: a double-blind randomised controlled
study.

Modlock J(1), Nielsen BB, Uldbjerg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Herning Regional Hospital, Herning, 
Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether acupuncture is effective for the induction of
labour in post-term pregnancies.
DESIGN: A double-blind multicentre randomised controlled study.
SETTINGS: Aarhus University Hospital and Herning Regional Hospital, Denmark.
POPULATION: One hundred and twenty-five healthy women with uneventful pregnancies
at gestational week 41(+6) were randomised into two groups.
METHODS: The intervention group was given acupuncture twice on the same day at
acupuncture point GV20 and bilaterally at points BL67, LI4 and SP6. The control
group received sham acupuncture at the same points.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: At effect evaluation, which was carried out 24 hours after
randomisation, the primary endpoint was labour or delivery.
RESULTS: The primary endpoint was achieved in seven women (12%) in the
acupuncture group and eight women (14%) in the control group (P = 0.79).
Stratification for parity and fetal gender did not alter the results.
CONCLUSION: Under the treatment regimen investigated in this study, acupuncture
for the induction of labour in post-term women at gestational age 41(+6) weeks
may not be effective.

PMCID: PMC2955967
PMID: 20573151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2010 Oct;23(5):661-74. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2010.00729.x. Epub 2010 Jul 13.

Radiation-inducible human tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) gene therapy: a novel treatment for radioresistant uveal melanoma.

Zhou Y(1), Song X, Jia R, Wang H, Dai L, Xu X, Gu P, Ge S, Fan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Uveal melanoma (UM) is one of the most therapy-resistant cancers. Radiotherapy is
the preferred treatment for most cases of UM. However, some UM cells, such as the
SP6.5 or OM431 cell lines, are relatively radioresistant. In this study, we
attempted to improve the current UM therapy using an adenovirus radio-inducible
gene therapy system. The antitumor adenovirus was constructed by inclusion of the
radiation-inducible early growth response gene 1 (EGR1) promoter and the
anticancer tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) gene. 
We demonstrated that the UM SP6.5 and OM431 cell lines were susceptible to the
TRAIL-induced antitumor effect. TRAIL expression was enhanced in the adenovirus
containing EGR1/TRAIL (Ad-ET) treatment group by radiotherapy, whereas Ad-ET
significantly increased cell death and apoptosis caused by radiotherapy. In mice 
bearing xenograft tumors, apoptotic cells were detected in pathological tumor
sections. Adenovirus Ad-ET combined with radiation therapy significantly
inhibited tumor growth compared with the other treatment groups (P < 0.01). Our
findings indicate that radioresponsive gene therapy has the potential to be a
more effective and specific therapy for UM because the therapeutic gene can be
spatially or temporally controlled by exogenous radiation.

PMID: 20546535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Virol J. 2010 Jun 4;7:116. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-116.

Producing infectious enterovirus type 71 in a rapid strategy.

Han JF(1), Cao RY, Tian X, Yu M, Qin ED, Qin CF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is an etiologic agent of hand-foot-and-mouth
disease (HFMD), and recent HFMD epidemics worldwide have been associated with a
severe form of brainstem encephalitis associated with pulmonary edema and high
case-fatality rates. EV71 contains a positive-sense single-stranded genome RNA of
approximately 7400 bp in length which encodes a polyprotein with a single open
reading frame (ORF), which is flanked by untranslated regions at both the 5' and 
3' ends.
RESULTS: A long distance RT-PCR assay was developed to amplify the full length
genome cDNA of EV71 by using specific primes carrying a SP6 promoter. Then the in
vitro synthesized RNA transcripts from the RT-PCR amplicons were then transfected
into RD cells to produce the rescued virus. The rescued virus was further
characterized by RT-PCR and indirect fluorescent-antibody (IFA) assay in
comparison with the wild type virus. The rescued viruses were infectious on RD
cells and neurovirulent when intracerebrally injected into suckling mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we established a rapid method to produce the infectious full
length cDNA of EV71 directly from RNA preparations and specific mutations can be 
easily engineered into the rescued enterovirus genome by this method.

PMCID: PMC2892457
PMID: 20525351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2010 May;30(5):969-72.

[Preparation of RNA probe for cd99l2 gene of zebrafish labeled with
digoxingenin-UTP].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen ZH(1), Zhang Y, Wu ZQ, Zhou XH, Han XQ, Zhang WQ, Zhao T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China. wenzonghua@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression pattern of cd99l2 gene during zebrafish
development, the RNA probes for whole-mount in situ hybridization were prepared
in this study.
METHODS: The cd99l2 fragment obtained by RT-PCR was cloned into pGM-T Easy, then 
the plasmids were linearized with the restriction enzymes SacII or SalI. Using
Sp6 or T(7) RNA polymerase, the digoxingenin-labeled antisense and sense probes
were synthesized and confirmed by whole-mount in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: The plasmid cd99l2/pGM-T was constructed. cd99l2 gene expression pattern
during embryogenesis of zebrafish was examined using the antisense probe, and
intense expression was detected in the central nervous system during zebrafish
development.
CONCLUSION: The antisense probe can be used for study of the spatial and temporal
distribution of cd99l2 during zebrafish development using the sense probe as
control.

PMID: 20501370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;30(2):150-2.

[Effect of combined electroacupuncture and epidural anesthesia in gynecological
operation evaluated by bispectral index].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng XM(1), Li J, Wu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Wuhan First Hospital.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of combined electroacupuncture (EA) and
epidural anesthesia in gynecological operation by bispectral index (BIS).
METHODS: Sixty patients of ASA grade I-II, 20-60 years old, being scheduled to
receive gynecological operation with epidural anesthesia were randomly assigned
to 3 groups equally. Group A was anesthetized with epidural infusion of midazolam
in dosage of 0.04 mg/kg, Group B with continuous EA in 30-100 Hz on Zusanli
(ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) acupoints, and Group C with both epidural infusion
and EA same as those applied in Groups A and B. BIS, blood pressure (BP), heart
rate (HR), and blood oxygen saturation (SPO2) were monitored during
peri-operative stage, and the post-operation visual analogue scores (VAS) was
measured as well.
RESULTS: BIS decreased after operation in all groups (P < 0.05), the highest
value was shown in Group B (P < 0.05) and the lowest was seen in group C at time 
of skin incising; while at time of gauze plugging, it was higher in Group B than 
in other two groups (P < 0.05). Besides, VAS in Group A at 8 h and 24 h after
operation was higher than that in the other two groups respectively (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: BIS can be taken as an index for objectively evaluating the effect of
combined EA and epidural anesthesia in gynecological operation. EA anesthesia has
certain analgesic and sedative effects, could effectively release postoperative
pain.

PMID: 20462041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Immunol. 2010 May 15;184(10):5678-85. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903854. Epub 2010 
Apr 16.

CpG inhibits pro-B cell expansion through a cathepsin B-dependent mechanism.

Lalanne AI(1), Moraga I, Hao Y, Pereira JP, Alves NL, Huntington ND, Freitas AA, 
Cumano A, Vieira P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité du Développement des Lymphocytes, Département d'Immunologie, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

TLR9 is expressed in cells of the innate immune system, as well as in B
lymphocytes and their progenitors. We investigated the effect of the TLR9 ligand 
CpG DNA on the proliferation of pro-B cells. CpG DNA inhibits the proliferation
of pro-B, but not pre-B, cells by inducing caspase-independent cell death through
a pathway that requires the expression of cathepsin B. This pathway is operative 
in Rag-deficient mice carrying an SP6 transgene, in which B lymphopoiesis is
compromised, to reduce the size of the B lymphocyte precursor compartments in the
bone marrow. Thus, TLR9 signals can regulate B lymphopoiesis in vivo.

PMID: 20400700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Curr Eye Res. 2010 Apr;35(4):352-60. doi: 10.3109/02713680903521944.

Curcumin induces cell death in human uveal melanoma cells through mitochondrial
pathway.

Lu C(1), Song E, Hu DN, Chen M, Xue C, Rosen R, McCormick SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.

PURPOSE: To study the cytotoxic effects and related signaling pathways of
curcumin on human uveal melanoma cells in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two human uveal melanoma cell lines (M21 and SP6.5),
scleral fibroblasts, and choroidal melanocytes were treated with curcumin. The
effects of curcumin on cell viability were assessed by using the MTT
(3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay. Cytosol
cytochrome c levels and the activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3 were measured
by using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Curcumin induced cell death of cultured human uveal melanoma cells in a 
dose-dependent manner (10, 30, and 100 microM) and time-dependent manner (3-48
hr), with IC50 at 19.05 microM and 22.39 microM in M21 and SP6.5 cell lines,
respectively. Curcumin at lower concentrations (10-30 microM) selectively reduced
the cell viability of uveal melanoma cells, without affecting cell viability of
fibroblasts and choroidal melanocytes. Curcumin significantly increased the level
of cytosol cytochrome c (2-fold greater than the controls after 2 hr treatment), 
caspase-9 and caspase-3 activities (approximately 4.5- and 6-fold greater than
the controls after 2-6 hr treatment, respectively) in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Curcumin has selectively potent cytotoxic effects on cultured human 
uveal melanoma cells. This effect is associated with the release of cytochrome c 
from the mitochondria and the activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3 in uveal
melanoma cells after treatment with curcumin.

PMID: 20373902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Vet Rec. 2010 Mar 27;166(13):398-401. doi: 10.1136/vr.b4804.

Effects of plastic bits on the condition and behaviour of captive-reared
pheasants.

Butler DA(1), Davis C.

Author information: 
(1)The Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF.

Between 2005 and 2007, data were collected from game farms across England and
Wales to examine the effects of the use of bits on the physiological condition
and behaviour of pheasants. On each site, two pheasant pens kept in the same
conditions were randomly allocated to either use bits or not. The behaviour and
physiological conditions of pheasants in each treatment pen were assessed on the 
day of bitting and weekly thereafter until release. Detailed records of feed
usage, medications and mortality were also kept. Bits halved the number of acts
of bird-on-bird pecking, but they doubled the incidence of headshaking and
scratching. Bits caused nostril inflammation and bill deformities in some birds, 
particularly after seven weeks of age. In all weeks after bitting, feather
condition was poorer in non-bitted pheasants than in those fitted with bits. Less
than 3 per cent of bitted birds had damaged skin, but in the non-bitted pens this
figure increased over time to 23 per cent four weeks later. Feed use and
mortality did not differ between bitted and non-bitted birds.

PMID: 20348469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2010 May;16(2):64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2009.10.002.
Epub 2009 Nov 14.

Effects of SP6 acupressure on pain and menstrual distress in young women with
dysmenorrhea.

Wong CL(1), Lai KY, Tse HM.

Author information: 
(1)Room 621, Esther Lee Building, The Nethersole School of Nursing, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong SAR. jojowong@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to evaluate the effects of Sanyinjiao (SP6)
acupressure in reducing the pain level and menstrual distress resulting from
dysmenorrhea.
METHODS: Forty participants with dysmenorrhea were assigned to either the
acupressure group (n = 19) or the control group (n = 21). The acupressure group
received 20 min of SP6 acupressure during the initial intervention session and
was taught to perform the technique for them to do twice a day from the first to 
third days of their menstrual cycle, 3 months subsequent to the first session. In
contrast, the control group was only told to rest. Outcomes were measured through
(1) the Pain Visual Analogue Scale (PVAS), (2) the Short-Form McGill Pain
Questionnaire (SF-MPQ), and (3) the Short-Form Menstrual Distress Questionnaire
(SF-MDQ).
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant decrease in pain score for PVAS (p
= 0.003) and SF-MPQ (p = 0.02) immediately after the 20 min of SP6 acupressure.
In the self-care periods, significant reduction of PVAS (p = 0.008), SF-MPQ (p = 
0.012), and SF-MDQ (p = 0.024) scores was noted in the third month of
post-intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: SP6 acupressure has an immediate pain-relieving effect for
dysmenorrhea. Moreover, acupressure applied to the SP6 acupoint for 3 consecutive
months was effective in relieving both the pain and menstrual distress level
resulting from dysmenorrhea.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20347835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2009 Nov;29(11):997-1000.

[Influences of acupuncture on infertility of rats with polycystic ovarian
syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang WY(1), Huang GY, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Tongfi
Hospital, Tongii Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect and mechanism of acupuncture on infertility of
rats with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
METHODS: PCOS rat model was induced by subcutaneous injection of oil solution of 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in immature (24-day-old) female rats for continuous
20 days. Rats for control were given with same dose of oil for instead. PCOS rats
were randomly divided into the model group untreated and the acupuncture group
treated by needling acupoints of Guanyuan (CV4), Zhongji (CV3), Sanyin-jiao (SP6)
and Zigong (CX-CA1), 15 min once a day for 5 continuous days, starting from the
80th day after birth. All rats were sacrificed at terminal of the treatment,
their uterus and bilateral ovaries were dissected for observation and blood
levels of sex hormones were measured.
RESULTS: compared with the model group, the number of implanted blastocyte and
blastocyte implantation rate were higher and the blood levels of testosterone (T)
and estradiol (E2) were lower in the acupuncture group (P < 0.05); but the
difference between groups in serum levels of follicular stimulating hormone,
luteinizing hormone and progesterone were of statistical insignificance (P >
0.05). Moreover, the wet weight of ovary was lower and the equipotent diameter
and area of glandular organ and cavity, area ratio of gland and the stroma, and
mean thickness of endometria were higher in the acupuncture group than those in
the control group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture can conspicuously downregulate the expressions of serum
levels of T and E2, improve the development of ovaries and uterus, promote
ovulation, enhance endometrial receptivity, and advance blastocyte implantation.

PMID: 20329610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2009 Jul-Sep;113(3):788-94.

[The electroacupuncture in patients recently operated for peripheral arterial
disease. A comparative study of the two electrostimulation techniques].

[Article in Romanian]

Sîntean ME(1), Deutsch PM, Lascu A, Focsa M, Ionac M.

Author information: 
(1)Institutul de Boli Cardiovasculare Timisoara.

Possible hemodynamic effects of electro acupuncture (A), by two electro
stimulation techniques, were studied at patients with femuro - popliteal bypass
revascularization. MMATERIAL AND METHOD:In a prospective study, we evaluated two 
EA techniques, by calculating the ankle-brachial index (ABI) and by estimating
the pain with Numeric Rating Scale (NRS: 0 - 10). The patients were grouped in
lot A (30 patients) and B (50 patients) according with the EA technique used. In 
both lots were used the same acupuncture points (acupoint): Pc6, P9, St36 and
Sp6. These acupoints are adjacent to peripheral nerves median, radial, peroneal
and safenous nerve. Needles, after insertion, were kept in place for 30 minutes. 
The electro stimulation (2 Hz) was only for 2 minutes in the lot A and for 30
minutes in the lot B.RESULTS: The blood pressure data and ABI shows a significant
increase of ABI (between 0.033 and 0.052) after EA at 5 minutes in the both lots 
(p < 0.05). At 30 minutes, ABI is increased in lot B, but in the lot A the ABI is
elevated only at the non surgical leg (p < 0.05). The decrease of pain post EA is
better in the lot B (NRS: initially 2.48--post EA pain decreased to 1.46 and
remained 1.66 at 2 hours; p < 0.001), than lot A.
CONCLUSIONS: The electro stimulation of certain acupoints, at the operated
peripheral arterial disease patients, interfere with tissular perfusion and
increase temporally ABI. The pain is diminished more significantly by the 30
minutes electro stimulating technique.

PMID: 20191833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2009 Jan;2009(1):pdb.prot5130. doi:
10.1101/pdb.prot5130.

In situ hybridization of labeled RNA probes to fixed Parhyale hawaiensis embryos.

Rehm EJ(1), Hannibal RL, Chaw RC, Vargas-Vila MA, Patel NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720-3140, USA.

The great diversity of arthropod body plans, together with our detailed
understanding of fruit fly development, makes arthropods a premier taxon for
examining the evolutionary diversification of developmental patterns and hence
the diversity of extant life. Crustaceans, in particular, show a remarkable range
of morphologies and provide a useful outgroup to the insects. The amphipod
crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis is becoming established as a model organism for
developmental studies within the arthropods. This protocol describes in situ
hybridization of fluorescein- or digoxigenin (DIG)-labeled RNA probes to fixed P.
hawaiensis embryos. Standard techniques of molecular biology should be used to
produce an appropriate template for generation of antisense RNA probes.
RNA-labeling mixes designed to produce fluorescein- or DIG-labeled RNA probes
using T3, T7, or SP6 RNA polymerases are commercially available. Probes should be
purified using QIAGEN RNeasy columns or similar means. Considerations for
double-labeling experiments using both fluorescein- and DIG-labeled RNA probes
are included.

PMID: 20147025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Neurol Res. 2010 Feb;32 Suppl 1:64-8. doi: 10.1179/016164109X12537002794084.

Spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity in response to electroacupuncture
stimulation in the rodent primary somatosensory cortex.

Chae Y(1), Park HJ, Hahm DH, Lee BH, Park HK, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture and Meridian Science Research Center, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 
130-701, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Optical imaging technique enables the recording of cortical
activities in multiple sites of the primary somatosensory cortex in real time.
The present study was aimed to visualize neural activity in response to the
acupuncture stimulation in the rodent primary somatosensory cortex by a
high-resolution optical imaging system using voltage-sensitive dyes.
METHODS: Optical imaging was exploited to examine the temporal-spatial
characteristic of rat primary somatosensory cortex during electroacupuncture
stimulation (6 mA intensity and 2 ms duration) at two pairs of acupuncture points
(ST36-SP6 or GB34-BL57).
RESULTS: In terms of magnitude and duration of the optical response, there was no
difference between ST36-SP6 and GB34-BL57 stimulations. Maximally activated sites
by electroacupuncture stimulation to the different acupuncture points were
spatially differentiated in rat primary somatosensory cortex.
DISCUSSION: The results indicate that neuronal responses to electroacupuncture
stimulation can be visualized in rat primary somatosensory cortex using an
optical imaging system. The topographical mapping of acupuncture points in
primary somatosensory cortex will make a significant contribution to the
understanding of neural mechanisms of the acupuncture treatment and Meridian
phenomena.

PMID: 20034448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Ugeskr Laeger. 2010 Jan 25;172(4):289-93.

[Use of acupuncture for labour augmentation].

[Article in Danish]

Lyngsø CE(1), Lorentzen IP, Lauszus F.

Author information: 
(1)Hospitalsenhed Vest, Obstetrisk og Gynaekologisk Afdeling, Denmark.
ccccc@city.dk

Comment in
    Ugeskr Laeger. 2010 Feb 15;172(7):565; author reply 565.

INTRODUCTION: In Denmark, 45% of all primiparas and 12% of multiparas with
uneventful pregnancies are augmented in order to treat dystocia. Augmentation
using oxytocin is associated with uterine hyperstimulation, uterine rupture and
foetal death. Currently, no studies show that acupuncture is effective for
augmentation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A single-blinded randomized controlled trial with women
diagnosed with dystocia. In the acupuncture group, the women had acupuncture in
SP6, KI3, KI6, BL60, LI4 and acupressure on BL67. The control group received no
treatment. The primary outcome was progression in cervical dilatation within two 
hours. The secondary outcomes were length of labour, length of second stage, use 
of augmentation, use of analgesia, caesarean section rate and number of
instrumental deliveries.
RESULTS: A total of 84 women were randomised. There was no significant difference
between the groups with regard to dilatation from randomization to effect
assessment (p = 0.54). In the acupuncture group, the mean difference was 1.3 cm
(0.69-1.91). In the control group, the mean difference was 1.56 (0.6-2.52). 27%
of the women with dystocia delivered spontaneously without augmentation. No major
side effects of acupuncture treatment were reported.
CONCLUSION: This study showed no effect of acupuncture treatment for primary or
secondary inertia.

PMID: 20105396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Virus Res. 2010 Feb;147(2):159-65. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.10.014. Epub 2009
Nov 15.

Generation of infectious and pathogenic duck hepatitis virus type 1 from cloned
full-length cDNA.

Yun T(1), Ni Z, Liu GQ, Yu B, Chen L, Huang JG, Zhang YM, Chen JP.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, People's Republic of China.

A full-length cDNA clone of duck hepatitis virus type 1 (DHV-1) isolated from
duck was assembled in the plasmid vector pBluescript II SK+. RNA synthesized in
vitro by means of a Sp6 promoter inserted in front of the cDNA produced
infectious particles after transfection of BHK-21 cells, as shown by the
appearance of cytopathic effect. The rescued virus was also found to be highly
pathogenic to young ducks by intradermal injection and resulted in a fatal
disease indistinguishable from that of wild-type virus. The availability of the
first cDNA clone of DHV-1 will allow examination of the molecular mechanisms
behind DHV-1 virulence and attenuation, which could in turn lead to the
production of second-generation, genetically engineered DHV-1 vaccines.

(c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19919844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 15;337(2):363-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.11.007. Epub 2009 
Nov 10.

Role of Epiprofin, a zinc-finger transcription factor, in limb development.

Talamillo A(1), Delgado I, Nakamura T, de-Vega S, Yoshitomi Y, Unda F, Birchmeier
W, Yamada Y, Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular. Facultad de Medicina. Universidad
de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.

The formation and maintenance of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is critical
for the outgrowth and patterning of the vertebrate limb. In the present work, we 
have investigated the role of Epiprofin (Epfn/Sp6), a member of the SP/KLF
transcription factor family that is expressed in the limb ectoderm and the AER,
during limb development. Epfn mutant mice have a defective autopod that shows
mesoaxial syndactyly in the forelimb and synostosis (bony fusion) in the hindlimb
and partial bidorsal digital tips. Epfn mutants also show a defect in the
maturation of the AER that appears flat and broad, with a double ridge phenotype.
By genetic analysis, we also show that Epfn is controlled by WNT/b-CATENIN
signaling in the limb ectoderm. Since the less severe phenotypes of the
conditional removal of b-catenin in the limb ectoderm strongly resemble the limb 
phenotype of Epfn mutants, we propose that EPFN very likely functions as a
modulator of WNT signaling in the limb ectoderm.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3538143
PMID: 19913006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Chin Med. 2009;37(5):837-42.

The effect on serotonin and MDA levels in depressed patients with insomnia when
far-infrared rays are applied to acupoints.

Chang Y(1), Liu YP, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Jenteh Junior College of Medicine and Nursing Management, Miaoli, Taiwan.

Little is known about the effect of far-infrared rays (FIR) on serotonin and
malondialdehyde levels in depressed patients with insomnia. The purpose of this
study is to assess the effect of far-infrared rays on depressed people with
insomnia. A randomized design was used to determine this effect. A total of 70
inpatients were recruited with the clinical diagnosis of depression with sleep
disturbance. In the experimental group, FIR was applied to three chosen
acupuncture points by a patch-like sticker for a period of 15 minutes twice a
week. The three acupuncture points are Nei-Kuan (PC6), Shenmen (HT7) and
Sanyinjiao (SP6). The total duration of experiment was four weeks. For both
experimental and control groups, serum levels of serotonin (5HT) and
malondialdehyde (MDA) were examined before and after the introduction of FIR. The
experimental group revealed disparate changes over different dependent variables,
in which serotonin increased but MDA decreased after the introduction of FIR.
These observations indicate that the serotonin pathway is involved in the
pathophysiological mechanism responsible for the damaging effects of MDA on
depressed patients with insomnia.

PMID: 19885944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Yi Chuan. 2009 Sep;31(9):936-40.

[Expression of cyclin-dependent kinase 2-associated protein 1 in chicken embryos 
of different sexes].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Y(1), Feng YP, Gong P, Huang P, Li SJ, Peng XL, Gong YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry
of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
yang007yu@yahoo.com.cn

To investigate the expression and functions of cyclin-dependent kinase
2-associated protein 1 (cdk2ap1) screened by suppression subtractive
hybridization in chicken embryo development, a pair of primers was designed to
amplify the cdk2ap1 fragment by RT-PCR and subsequently the fragment obtained was
cloned into the plasmid pGEM-T. Sense and antisense probes labeled with
digoxigenin were generated using SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases, respectively, and
used to examine cdk2ap1 expression in chicken embryos of both sexes by
whole-mount in situ hybridization. In both sexes, cdk2ap1 was expressed in the
head mesenchyme, rhombencephalon, optic vesicles, spinal neural tube, and
forelimb of 4.0-day-old embryos and the expression in males was significantly
higher than that in females. In addition, in the genital ridge and hindlimb of
the 4.0-day-old chicken embryo, cdk2ap1 was obviously expressed in the males but 
not in females. It is supposed that cdk2ap1 may play a role in the sexual
differentiation and development of gonad of chicken embryo.

PMID: 19819846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Aug 5;122(15):1743-8.

Effects of acupuncture on post-cesarean section pain.

Wu HC(1), Liu YC, Ou KL, Chang YH, Hsieh CL, Tsai AH, Tsai HT, Chiu TH, Hung CJ, 
Lee CC, Lin JG.

Author information: 
(1)College of Dental Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Taiwan, China.

BACKGROUND: Post-operation pain is a very subjective phenomenon. The aim of this 
study was to find out the effects of acupuncture or electro-acupuncture on
post-cesarean pain.
METHODS: Sixty women, who had had spinal anesthesia during cesarean section at
the Department of Obstetrics of China Medical University Hospital, were randomly 
assigned to the control group, the acupuncture group, and the electro-acupuncture
group. After the operation, we applied subjects with acupuncture or
electro-acupuncture on the bilateral acupuncture point, San Yin Jiao (Sp6), and
the patient controlled analgesia (PCA). The first time of requesting morphine,
the frequency of PCA demands in 24 hours, and the doses of PCA used were recorded
double blindly. In addition, monitoring the subjects' vital signs, the
opioid-related side effects, and the pain scores was done.
RESULTS: The results showed that the acupuncture group and the
electro-acupuncture group could delay the time of requesting morphine up to 10 - 
11 minutes when compared with the control group. The total dose of PCA used
within the first 24 hours was 30% - 35% less in the acupuncture group and the
electro-acupuncture group when compared with the control group, which was
indicated in statistical significance. However, there was no significant
difference between the acupuncture group and the electro-acupuncture group. The
electro-acupuncture group's and the acupuncture group's pain scores were lower
than the control group's within the first 2 hours. Both were statistically
significant. However, two hours later, there were no significant differences of
the visual analogue scale (VAS) scores between either of the treatment groups and
the control group. Finally, the incidence of opioid-related side effects, such as
dizziness, was less in the acupuncture group and electro-acupuncture group than
in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that the application of acupuncture and
electro-acupuncture could definitely delay the time of requesting pain relief
medication after cesarean section and decrease the PCA doses used within the
first 24 hours.

PMID: 19781318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2009 Sep 15:1-4. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of acupressure at the Sanyinjiao point (SP6) on the process of active
phase of labor in nulliparas women.

Kashanian M(1), Shahali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

Introduction. The reduction of the duration and pain of the active phase of labor
is a very important issue and therefore always under serious investigation.
Objective. The purpose of the present study is to evaluate the effect of
acupressure at the Sanyinjiao point (SP6) on the duration and pain of the active 
phase of labor in nulliparas women. Method. A single blind randomized clinical
trial was performed on 120 eligible nulliparas women who were at the beginning of
active phase of labor (3-4 cm dilatation of cervix plus proper uterine
contractions). The women were randomly assigned into two groups. The case group
(n = 60), received acupressure at Sanyinjiao point (above the ankle), for 30 min 
during contractions. In the control group (n = 60), simply a touch at this point 
without massage was performed. Two hours later a second pelvic examination was
performed and in the absence of good forceful contractions oxytocin in the
classical form was infused. Finally, duration of active phase, severity of pain
(using the Visual Analogue Scale), the amount of necessary oxytocin and necessity
to administer oxytocin and the route of delivery were compared between the two
groups and statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 15. Results. The mean
duration of active phase was shorter in the case group (252.37 +/- 108.50 min vs.
441.38 +/- 155.88, p = 0.0001). Six patients (10%) in the case group and 25
patients (41.7%) in the control group delivered via cesarean section (p =
0.0001). The severity of pain in the case group was less than the control group
(5.87 +/- 1.77 vs. 6.79 +/- 1.52, p = 0.003). Twenty-five women (41.7%) in the
case group and 38 women (63.3%) in the control group needed oxytocin (p = 0.017) 
The amount of necessary oxytocin in the case group was less than the control
group (73.33 +/- 97.19 ml vs. 126.6 +/- 97.19 ml, p = 0.003). Conclusion.
Acupressure at Sanyinjiao point (SP6) reduced the duration and severity of pain
of the active phase of labor, cesarean section rates, and necessity and amount of
oxytocin.

PMID: 19757334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


255. Acupunct Med. 2009 Sep;27(3):101-8. doi: 10.1136/aim.2009.000612.

The acupuncture treatment for postmenopausal hot flushes (Acuflash) study:
traditional Chinese medicine diagnoses and acupuncture points used, and their
relation to the treatment response.

Borud EK(1), Alræk T, White A, Grimsgaard S.

Author information: 
(1)The National Research Center in Complementary and Alternative Medicine,
University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. einar.borud@uit.no

INTRODUCTION: the multicentre, pragmatic, randomised controlled Acuflash study
evaluated the effect of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) acupuncture on
postmenopausal vasomotor symptoms and health-related quality of life. It
concluded that use of acupuncture in addition to self-care can contribute to a
clinically relevant reduction of hot flushes and increased health-related quality
of life. This article reports on the TCM syndrome diagnoses and acupuncture
points used and their relation to the treatment response, and on treatment
reactions and adverse events.
METHODS: the acupuncture group (n = 134) received 10 acupuncture treatment
sessions and advice on self-care; the control group (n = 133) received advice on 
self-care only. The study acupuncturists met the current membership criteria of
the Norwegian Acupuncture Society, and had at least 3 years' experience of
practising TCM acupuncture. They were free to diagnose and select acupuncture
points for each participant, after initial discussion.
RESULTS: fifty per cent of the participants in the acupuncture group were
diagnosed with Kidney Yin Xu as their primary TCM syndrome diagnosis. No
statistically significant differences were demonstrated between the syndrome
groups regarding the distribution of responders and non-responders, nor regarding
the change in health-related quality of life scores. A core of common acupuncture
points (SP6, HT6, KI7, KI6, CV4, LU7, LI4, and LR3) were used in all the
syndromes, and in addition multiple idiosyncratic points. Core point selection
and frequency of use did not differ between responders and non-responders. No
serious adverse events were reported.
CONCLUSION: factors other than the TCM syndrome diagnoses and the point selection
may be of importance regarding the outcome of the treatment.

PMID: 19734379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Jun 18;41(3):376-9.

Electroacupuncture analgesia is enhanced in transgenic nociceptin/orphanin FQ
knock-out mice.

Wan Y(1), Han JS, Pintar JE.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Neuroscience Research Institute, Beijing 100191, China.
ywan@hsc.pku.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: The modulatory effects of nociceptin/orphanin FQ (OFQ) on acupuncture 
(EA, a modern version of acupuncture)-induced analgesia are still controversial. 
Transgenic OFQ knock-out mice provide us a useful tool to investigate the role of
endogenous OFQ in EA analgesia. The present study aims to investigate the role of
OFQ in the EA-induced analgesia with OFQ knock-out mice.
METHODS: Acupoints were selected as "Zusanli" (ST36) and "Sanyinjiao" (SP6), EA
parameters were as follows: constant current output, rectangular (square) wave
pulses, increased intensities of 0.5, 0.7, 0.9 mA with stepwise fashion, 10 min
for each intensity, frequency of 100 Hz (with 0.2 ms as pulse width) or 2 Hz
(with 0.6 ms as pulse width). Tail flick latency (TFL) evoked by radiant heat was
used to evaluate the change of pain threshold before, during and after EA
application. The knock-out mice were divided randomly into 3 groups: needling
control, EA at 100 Hz and 2 Hz. Wild-type mice of littermates of were used as
Control.
RESULTS: It was found that OFQ knock -out mice had a longer basal thermal
threshold; EA had enhanced analgesic effect in the knock-out mice than in
wild-type Control mice.
CONCLUSION: Endogenous OFQ might be algesic in basal condition and antagonize EA 
analgesia.

PMID: 19727226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000529. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000529. Epub 2009
Jul 31.

Comprehensive identification of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium genes
required for infection of BALB/c mice.

Chaudhuri RR(1), Peters SE, Pleasance SJ, Northen H, Willers C, Paterson GK, Cone
DB, Allen AG, Owen PJ, Shalom G, Stekel DJ, Charles IG, Maskell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Genes required for infection of mice by Salmonella Typhimurium can be identified 
by the interrogation of random transposon mutant libraries for mutants that
cannot survive in vivo. Inactivation of such genes produces attenuated S.
Typhimurium strains that have potential for use as live attenuated vaccines. A
quantitative screen, Transposon Mediated Differential Hybridisation (TMDH), has
been developed that identifies those members of a large library of transposon
mutants that are attenuated. TMDH employs custom transposons with outward-facing 
T7 and SP6 promoters. Fluorescently-labelled transcripts from the promoters are
hybridised to whole-genome tiling microarrays, to allow the position of the
transposon insertions to be determined. Comparison of microarray data from the
mutant library grown in vitro (input) with equivalent data produced after passage
of the library through mice (output) enables an attenuation score to be
determined for each transposon mutant. These scores are significantly correlated 
with bacterial counts obtained during infection of mice using mutants with
individual defined deletions of the same genes. Defined deletion mutants of
several novel targets identified in the TMDH screen are effective live vaccines.

PMCID: PMC2712085
PMID: 19649318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Eur J Pain. 2010 Mar;14(3):249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpain.2009.05.007. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

The integrity of the anterior pretectal nucleus and dorsolateral funiculus is
necessary for electroacupuncture-induced analgesia in the rat tail-flick test.

Silva ML(1), Silva JR, Prado WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto-USP, Av.
Bandeirantes 3900, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Previous studies have indicated that the anterior pretectal nucleus (APtN) is
implicated in pathways that descend through the dorsolateral funiculus (DLF) to
modulate nociceptive inputs in the spinal dorsal horn. The activation of
descending inhibitory mechanisms also seems to be involved in electroacupuncture 
(EA)-induced analgesia. This study utilized the tail-flick test to examine the
changes produced by DLF lesion or injection of 2% lidocaine into the APtN in the 
analgesia induced by 2 or 100 Hz EA applied to the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao 
(SP6) acupoints in lightly anesthetized rats. Tail-flick latency was
significantly increased by EA, the effect of 2 Hz EA lasting longer than that
produced by 100 Hz EA. The effect of either 2 or 100 Hz EA did not occur in DLF
lesion rats. The effect of 2 Hz EA did not occur in rats with neural block of the
whole or dorsal APtN. In contrast, the effect of 100 Hz EA was reduced in rats
with neural block of the whole APtN, but remained unchanged in rats with neural
block of the dorsal APtN. We thus conclude that the integrity of the APtN and DLF
is necessary for EA-induced analgesia in the rat tail-flick test. In addition,
the integrity of the dorsal APtN is necessary for the analgesic effect of 2 but
not 100 Hz EA.

Copyright 2009 European Federation of International Association for the Study of 
Pain Chapters. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19560380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2009 Feb;34(1):3-8.

[Study on the underlying mechanism of acupuncture in regulating neuroendocrine
activity in dysmenorrhea rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu F(1), Xiong J, Huang GY, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrated Chinese & Western Medicine, Tongji Hospital Affiliated
to Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China. lilyliufang@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To observe the influence of acupuncture on neuroendocrine in rats with
primary dysmenorrhea, so as to explore its underlying mechanism in relieving
dysmenorrhea.
METHODS: Forty female Wistar rats were equal randomized into control, model,
acupuncture and Extractum Leonuri Inspissatum (ELI) groups, with 10 cases in
each. Primary dysmenorrhea model was established by intragastric perfusion of
diethylstilbestrol (3 mg/kg), once daily for 12 days. "Guanyuan" (CV 4),
bilateral "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) and "Diji" (SP 8) were punctured once daily for 7
days. ELI (80 g/kg) was given to rats of ELI group via gastrogavage, once daily
for 7 days. On the 12th day, the rats of 4 groups were given with oxytocin (14
U/kg, i.p.) for inducing dysmenorrhea. The latency and incidence rate of writhing
within 30 min were observed. The serum levels of follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol (E2), and progesterone (P) were
detected by radioimmunoassay, and the expression of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) mRNA in hypothalamus and ovary, GnRH receptor (GnRH-R) mRNA in
pituitary, estrodiol receptor (ER) mRNA and progesterone receptor (PR) mRNA in
uterus were determined using RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After modeling, the writhing latency shortened considerably and the
writhing times, serum FSH, LH and E2 levels increased apparently, and serum P
content decreased markedly (P<0.05). Compared with model group, the writhing
times, serum FSH, LH, and E2 contents in acupuncture and ELI groups reduced
significantly (P<0.05), while the writhing latency and serum P contents in
acupuncture and ELI groups increased remarkably (P<0.05). Compared with control
group, hypothalamic GnRH mRNA, ovary GnRH mRNA, pituitary GnRH-R mRNA and uterus 
ER mRNA expressions in model group were up-regulated significantly, while uterus 
PR mRNA was down-regulated markedly in model group (P<0.05). In comparison with
model group, hypothalamic GnRH mRNA, ovary GnRH mRNA, pituitary GnRH-R mRNA and
uterus ER mRNA expressions in acupuncture and ELI groups were suppressed
significantly (P<0.05), while uterus PR mRNA expressions in the later two groups 
were up-regulated obviously (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture of CV4, SP6 and SP8 can effectively relieve dysmenorrhea 
in the rat, which may be closely related to its effects in regulating
neuroendocrine activities and the related receptor expression of
hypothalamus-pituitary-ovary axis.

PMID: 19526799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2009 Oct;22(10):843-8. doi:
10.1080/14767050902906386.

Acupuncture to initiate labor (Acumoms 2): a randomized, sham-controlled clinical
trial.

Asher GN(1), Coeytaux RR, Chen W, Reilly AC, Loh YL, Harper TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of acupuncture for labor stimulation.
METHODS: Nulliparous women at 38 weeks or greater were randomized to traditional 
Chinese medicine (TCM) acupuncture, sham acupuncture, or usual care only groups. 
Acupuncture points LI4, SP6, BL32, and BL54 were needled bilaterally. The primary
outcome was time from enrollment to delivery. Secondary outcomes included rates
of spontaneous labor and cesarean delivery. Medical records were abstracted for
maternal demographic, medical, and delivery outcome data. ANOVA, Student's
t-test, Chi-square, and Kaplan-Meier statistics were used to compare groups.
RESULTS: Eighty-nine women were enrolled and randomized. Maternal age,
gestational age, prior acupuncture experience, tobacco, alcohol and drug use,
gravida, and history of gynecological surgery were similar among the groups.
There were no statistically significant differences among groups for time from
enrollment to delivery (p=0.20), rates of spontaneous labor (p=0.66), or rates of
cesarean delivery (p=0.37). Rates of maternal and neonatal outcomes were not
significantly different.
CONCLUSION: TCM acupuncture was not effective in initiating spontaneous labor or 
reducing the rate of cesarean delivery compared with sham acupuncture or usual
medical care.

PMCID: PMC2919333
PMID: 19526433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Vestn Oftalmol. 2009 Mar-Apr;125(2):3-7.

[Morphological features of regenerative-reparative processes in the cornea
exposed to synthetic analogues of endogenous peptide fragments of protein S100b
in an experiment].

[Article in Russian]

Olinevich VB, Ziangirova GG, Mamikonian VR, Gruden' MA, Sherstnev VV.

The effects of two 5-membered (SP5, SP6) endogenous synthetic peptide fragments
of protein S100b on the course of regenerative-reparative processes in the
corneas of Wistar rats were morphologically studied after making a graduated
injury. Conjunctival or endonasal injection of the peptides was made at two
concentrations of 10(-6) and 10(-8) M. The study peptides were found to have a
modulating effect on regenerative-reparative processes regardless of the route of
administration and to induce accelerated and qualitative corneal wound healing as
compared with the controls. The specific feature of SP5 was the formation of a
fibroblastic membrane. When SP5 was injected at a concentration of 10(-6) M, the 
membrane was more pronounced and occupied the whole area of keratectomy whereas
when this peptide was administered at a concentration of 10(-8) M, its formation 
was observed in the deep and middle corneal layers. The most marked effect of SP6
revealed during the study was the formation of newly-formed vessels over the
entire wound surface independently of the concentration of the injected
substance. Of the two study peptide fragments, SP5 is, in the authors' opinion,
promising for clinical application. Significant keratocytic proliferation noted
in the use of SP5 at a concentration of 10(-6) M may be used to accelerate
scarring when the sclera and cutaneous covering are damaged. The effects detected
with administration of SP6 at two concentrations were regarded as negative as
they did not answer the purpose set during the study performed.

PMID: 19517821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Vet Rec. 2009 Jun 6;164(23):715-8.

Long-term changes in the prevalences of caecal nematodes and histomonosis in
gamebirds in the UK and the interaction with poultry.

Potts GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF.
twyneham1@binternet.com

From 1912 to 2003, 12,056 grey and red-legged partridges and pheasants found dead
in the UK were examined. The trends in their infection rates with Heterakis
species and histomonosis were strongly correlated among wild, pen-reared, young
and adult partridges and young pen-reared pheasants but not adult pheasants.
Except among the adult pheasants, the prevalence of Heterakis declined by 91 per 
cent to 100 per cent from 1952 to 1991. Heterakis isolonche was found
predominantly in pheasants but only until the 1960s. Histomonosis declined
relative to Heterakis species infections after the introduction of dimetridazole.
There was a long-term change in the prevalence of Heterakis, with changes in
domestic fowl husbandry being suggested as the cause.

PMID: 19502627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Cell Probes. 2009 Jun-Aug;23(3-4):195-200.

Molecular identification of (bla)SHV, (bla)LEN and (bla)OKP beta-lactamase genes 
in Klebsiella pneumoniae by bi-directional sequencing of universal SP6- and
T7-sequence-tagged (bla)SHV-PCR amplicons.

Tärnberg M(1), Nilsson LE, Monstein HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Linköping University, S-58185 Linköping, Sweden.

Plasmid encoded (bla)SHV enzymes represent an important sub-group of class A
beta-lactamases causing an ESBL-phenotype which is increasingly found in
Enterobacteriaceae including Klebsiella pneumoniae. The chromosomally encoded
beta-lactamase (bla)LEN and (bla)OKP enzymes, which so far only have been found
in K. pneumoniae, do not hydrolyse extended-spectrum cephalosporins. In the
present study, multiple displacement amplified DNA derived from 20 K. pneumoniae 
clinical isolates with a (bla)SHV-like genotype was used in a universal SHV PCR
assay using SP6- (forward) and T7- (reverse) sequence-tagged primers.
Identification and differentiation of (bla)SHV, (bla)LEN and (bla)OKP genes was
obtained by bi-directional amplicon sequencing using SP6- and T7-specific
primers. Three well characterised K. pneumoniae strains having a SHV-genotype
were included in the study. The bi-directional amplicon sequencing, covering
approximately 800 bp (approximately 93%) of the (bla)SHV, (bla)LEN and (bla)OKP
enzyme encoding sequences, allowed for an unequivocal discrimination of SHV, LEN 
and OKP genes. Moreover, sequencing revealed the presence of (bla)SHV allelic
variants in six K. pneumoniae isolates in which the amplicons had to be cloned
accordingly. Based on deduced amino-acid sequences, a dendrogram was constructed.
Seventeen out of 20 K. pneumoniae isolates with an ESBL-phenotype formed a
SHV-like cluster, two were LEN-like, and one isolate was OKP-like. The PCR-based 
molecular typing method described here enables a rapid, reliable and
cost-effective identification and differentiation of (bla)SHV, (bla)OKP and
(bla)LEN genes.

PMID: 19496249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2011 Jun;59(3):142-5. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2009.03.009.
Epub 2009 May 26.

[Use of the recombinant baculovirus BacVP6C for the construction of an internal
positive control of rotavirus C].

[Article in French]

Abid-Ayadi I(1), Guix S, Pintó RM, Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de recherche de virus entériques, département de microbiologie,
université de Barcelone, avenue Diagonal 645, 08028 Barcelone, Espagne.
islem_a@hotmail.com

AIMS: Unlike group A, a few studies have interested other groups of the
rotavirus, especially in Tunisia. The role of rotavirus C (RVC) infection is
underestimated because of its sporadic nature. The aim of our study was to
develop rapid diagnostic procedures of RVC by using an internal positive control 
of reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR).
METHODS: The internal positive control (386pb) was designed from the recombinant 
baculovirus BacVP6C containing the full length cDNA of the Cowden strain gene 5
(1353pb). A fragment of 596pb was amplified by PCR using the BacVP6C DNA ds as
template. Then, a central part of 210pb was deleted and the remaining fragment
(386pb) was cloned into pGEM-3Zf(+) plasmid between SP6 and T7 RNA polymerase
promoters.
RESULTS: The obtained recombinant plasmid "pIAM1" was then used for the
generation of the internal positive control by in vitro transcription. The
sensibility of the RT-PCR was about 3.66×10(5) molecules of RNA/µl.
CONCLUSION: The use of a shorter positive control, as compared to the wild type, 
allows increased specificity of the RT-PCR reaction, and could be used for
efficient diagnostic and surveillance of RVC-caused diseases.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19473784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Altern Complement Med. 2009 May;15(5):495-500. doi: 10.1089/acm.2008.0331.

Characteristics of electrical skin resistance at acupuncture points in healthy
humans.

Kramer S(1), Winterhalter K, Schober G, Becker U, Wiegele B, Kutz DF, Kolb FP,
Zaps D, Lang PM, Irnich D.

Author information: 
(1)Multidisciplinary Pain Centre, Department of Anaesthesiology, University of
Munich, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    J Altern Complement Med. 2009 Oct;15(10):1059.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the phenomenon of electrical
skin resistance (ESR) changes at different acupuncture points (APs).
SETTING: This single-blinded study was performed at the hospital of the
University of Munich.
DESIGN: Six common APs were measured (TE5, PC6, LU6, ST36, SP6, GB39) in 53
subjects. Subgroups were formed with varying time intervals for follow-ups (1
minute, 1 hour, 1 week) and a varying grade of reduction of the stratum corneum.
METHODS: Electrical skin resistance measurements (ESRMs) were taken from a skin
area of 6 x 6 cm using an array consisting of 64 (8 x 8) electrodes. The
electrodes corresponding to the AP were located and the ESRM results were
compared to those of the surrounding electrodes. The methodological setting made 
it possible to minimize major influence factors on electrical skin impedance
measurements.
RESULTS: A total of 631 ESRMs was evaluated: In 62.8% of the measured APs, no
significant ESR difference was found. In 234 (37.2%) of the ESRMs, the ESR at the
AP was significantly different from the surrounding skin area, with 163 (25.9%)
points showing a lower and 71 (11.3%) points showing a higher ESR.
Reproducibility was extremely high after 1 minute but was low after 1 hour and 1 
week.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that electrical skin resistance at APs can either
be lower or higher compared to the surrounding area. The phenomenon is
characterized by high short-term and low long-term reproducibility. Therefore, we
conclude that APs might possess specific transient electrical properties.
However, as the majority of the measured APs did not show a changed ESR, it
cannot be concluded from our data that electrical skin resistance measurements
can be used for acupuncture point localization or diagnostic/therapeutic
purposes.

PMID: 19422323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Forsch Komplementmed. 2009 Feb;16(1):6-12. doi: 10.1159/000193294. Epub 2009 Feb 
4.

[Laser needle acupuncture in women with dysmenorrhoea: a randomised controlled
double blind pilot trial].

[Article in German]

Kempf D(1), Berger D, Ausfeld-Hafter B.

Author information: 
(1)Kollegiale Instanz für Komplementärmedizin KIKOM, Universität Bern,
Imhoof-Pavillon, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Dysmenorrhoea is a common gynaecological disorder.It is treated
symptomatically if it is not caused by any underlying disease. Acupuncture is
successfully used for menstrual disorders but is associated with certain side
effects such as pain. Laser needle acupuncture is a new, non-invasive procedure
that might mimic the effects of acupuncture.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to investigate whether the effect of active
laser needle acupuncture is superior to the effect of placebo laser needle
acupuncture in women with dysmenorrhoea.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Women aged 18-50 years and with a minimum menstrual pain of
4 out of 10 points on a visual analogue scale (VAS) were included in this
randomised double blind trial and treated with laser needle acupuncture
(Laserneedle Computer-System). Every woman was treated with the same 8
acupuncture points (SP6, LV3 and LI4 bilateral; CV3 and ST36 on the right) in 8
sessions of 20 min each, over a period of 3 menstrual cycles. The primary
endpoint was successful pain reduction, defined as a 50% reduction of the mean
menstrual pain between baseline and end of the study (calculated from those 2
menstrual days with the worst pain levels on the VAS). We compared real laser
acupuncture with placebo laser acupuncture (no laser activity).
RESULTS: 48 women, mean age 29.6 +/- 7.5 years, were included in the study (30
women in the placebo group, 18 in the verum group). In the real acupuncture
group, the success rate was 16.7% (3/18), in the placebo group 20% (6/30).
CONCLUSIONS: We could not find a significant advantage of laser needle
acupuncture compared to placebo laser needle acupuncture treatment. Further
investigations are recommended because laser needle treatment is non-invasive and
allows double blind acupuncture studies.

Copyright (c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19295224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Avian Dis. 2008 Dec;52(4):599-607.

Using bacteriophages to modulate Salmonella colonization of the chicken's
gastrointestinal tract: lessons learned from in silico and in vivo modeling.

Hurley A(1), Maurer JJ, Lee MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health, Poultry Diagnostic and Research Center,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

An increasing prevalence of antibiotic-resistant foodborne infections has
resulted in considerable concern about how antimicrobials are used in meat and
poultry production. Because many foodborne bacterial pathogens are commonly found
among the intestinal bacterial community of poultry, new methods of prevention
are being considered. Bacteriophage therapy is one such alternative method that
has not been well developed in the United States; however, bacteriophages have
been shown to be effective in modulating bacterial numbers in acute infection
models. In this study we evaluated whether bacteriophages could theoretically
reduce Salmonella colonization of the gastrointestinal tract of chickens. Using
computer simulations, we studied bacteriophage and bacterial replication dynamics
in a mathematical model based on parameters expected to occur in the intestinal
environment. In addition, we performed in vivo experiments by administering SP6
bacteriophage and Salmonella orally to young chickens and compared the levels of 
phage and Salmonella shed in the feces to the models of replication dynamics. SP6
is an ideal candidate bacteriophage because its genome and target receptor are
known. Although SP6 did not reduce the levels of Salmonella shed by treated
birds, most of the isolates recovered from treated birds were not resistant to
the bacteriophage. These results suggest that phage resistance may not be the
primary limiting parameter of phage prophylaxis for modulating colonization of
the intestine. Our findings that this phage could be replicated in vivo supports 
the attractiveness of phage use, because unlike antibiotics they may be amplified
in vivo if given a suitable host on which to replicate. If successful, this
approach to modulating bacterial colonization of the intestinal tract could have 
a tremendous effect on the meat and poultry industry by reducing the use of
antimicrobial drugs and increasing the use of biological therapeutics.

PMID: 19166050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 15;22(24):3422-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.1720008.

The Iws1:Spt6:CTD complex controls cotranscriptional mRNA biosynthesis and
HYPB/Setd2-mediated histone H3K36 methylation.

Yoh SM(1), Lucas JS, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Many steps in gene expression and mRNA biosynthesis are coupled to transcription 
elongation and organized through the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit
of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). We showed recently that Spt6, a transcription
elongation factor and histone H3 chaperone, binds to the Ser2P CTD and recruits
Iws1 and the REF1/Aly mRNA export adaptor to facilitate mRNA export. Here we show
that Iws1 also recruits the HYPB/Setd2 histone methyltransferase to the RNAPII
elongation complex and is required for H3K36 trimethylation (H3K36me3) across the
transcribed region of the c-Myc, HIV-1, and PABPC1 genes in vivo. Interestingly, 
knockdown of either Iws1 or HYPB/Setd2 also enhanced H3K27me3 at the 5' end of
the PABPC1 gene, and depletion of Iws1, but not HYPB/Setd2, increased histone
acetylation across the coding regions at the HIV-1 and PABPC1 genes in vivo.
Knockdown of HYPB/Setd2, like Iws1, induced bulk HeLa poly(A)+ mRNAs to
accumulate in the nucleus. In vitro, recombinant Spt6 binds selectively to a
stretch of uninterrupted consensus repeats located in the N-terminal half of the 
CTD and recruits Iws1. Thus Iws1 connects two distinct CTD-binding proteins, Spt6
and HYPB/Setd2, in a megacomplex that affects mRNA export as well as the histone 
modification state of active genes.

PMCID: PMC2607075
PMID: 19141475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2008 Oct;28(10):886-9.

[Visualized study on acupuncture treatment of children autism using single photon
emission computed tomography].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia SW(1), Sun TT, Fan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Shenzhen Hospital, Peking University,
Guangdong. jiashaowei2003@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To provide the molecular iconographic evidence for acupuncture
treatment of children autism (CA).
METHODS: Electric acupuncture (EA) was applied on acupoints of bilateral Hegu
(LI4), Quchi (LI11), Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) in 34 CA patients' with 
ABC scale > 57 scores. Using SIEMENS ECAM / ICON double head system, single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) brain perfusion imaging were
performed before and during EA with 99mTc-ECD. Then SPECT images were analyzed
visually and quantitatively.
RESULTS: Visual analysis showed that 114 foci of low cerebral perfusion and
function were found in 34 CA patients before EA, 28 cases (82.35%) of them with
abnormalities in left (or both) front lobes, left Broca area and left Wernicke
area. During EA, the affected areas improved to different extent. Quantitative
analysis showed that significant difference existed between pre-EA focal Ff and
mirror-side Ff, pre-EA Ff and mid-EA Fe, focal BFCR% and mirror-side BFCR % (all 
P < 0.01). The improving analysis of cerebral perfusion and function showed that 
the efficacy of EA was 78.95%.
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture was proved preliminarily effective in treating children
autism.

PMID: 19123323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2008 Oct;33(5):316-20.

[Effects of acupuncture at "open" or "close" time and in "host" or "guest"
sequence on uterine contraction in late pregnancy rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Kim LW(1), Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Acu-moxibustion, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing
100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of acupuncture at "open" or "close" time and in 
"host" or "guest" sequence on uterine contraction in late pregnancy rats so as to
explore the regularities of acupoint application.
METHODS: A total of 32 pregnant rats were divided into "open/host-guest" (OHG)
group, "open/guest-host" (OGH) group, "close/host-guest" (CHG) group and
pregnancy group, with 8 cases in each. Eight normal rats were made up of normal
control group. According to Ling Gui Ba Fa (Eight Laws of Spirit Turtle),
acupuncture was given to "Zhaohai" (KI 6), "Lieque" (LU 7), "Hegu" (LI 4) and
"Sanyin-jiao" (SP 6) first or later separately. For example, in OHG group, KI6
(host point, being in opening time) was punctured first with the acupuncture
needle manipulated for 5 min, then, LU7 (guest point) punctured and stimulated
for 5 min, LI4 (corresponding point of KI6) for 20 min, and then, SP6 (another
corresponding point) was punctured and stimulated for 5 min in order. In CHG
group, KI6 (being in closing time) was needled for 5 min first, followed by
puncturing LU7, LI4 and SP6 for 5 min, 20 min, and 5 min separately in sequence. 
The uterine tension and uterine contraction frequency were measured by using a
tension transducer.
RESULTS: In comparison with normal control group, uterine smooth muscular tension
and contraction frequency increased significantly in model group, and after
acupuncture stimulation in OHG, OGH and CHG groups (P < 0.01, P < 0.05). Compared
with model group, uterine tension of CHG group was significantly lower in the 8th
time course after acupuncture (15-20 min after removing acupuncture needle, P <
0.05). No significant differences were found among model, OHG and OGH groups, and
among OHG, OGH and CHG groups in uterine tension and contraction frequency (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: "Close-host-guest needling" can reduce uterine tension, which is
likely to have significance in maintaining a stable environment of the uterus
during pregnancy.

PMID: 19097503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Mar;50(3):1047-57. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2378.
Epub 2008 Nov 21.

Activation of the FGF2/FGFR1 autocrine loop for cell proliferation and survival
in uveal melanoma cells.

Lefèvre G(1), Babchia N, Calipel A, Mouriaux F, Faussat AM, Mrzyk S, Mascarelli
F.

Author information: 
(1)Cordeliers Research Center, Pierre et Marie Curie University, Paris France.

PURPOSE: Constitutive activation of ERK1/2 controls proliferation of uveal
melanoma cells. Because an autocrine fibroblast growth factor (FGF) activation
loop controls ERK1/2 activation in many cancers, this study was conducted to
examine the role of the FGF/FGF receptor autocrine loop in the ERK1/2-dependent
proliferation and survival of uveal melanoma cells.
METHODS: Primary tumors and cell lines (OCM-1, MKT-BR, SP6.5, Mel270 and 92.1)
were used to define the role of the FGF/FGFR system in human uveal melanoma. Cell
proliferation was assessed by MTT-staining, and apoptosis was quantified by flow 
cytometry. Specific pharmacologic inhibitors of ERK1/2 and FGFR1, an anti-FGF2
neutralizing antibody and an antisense oligonucleotide directed against FGF2 were
used to analyze signaling in the FGF/FGFR autocrine loop.
RESULTS: FGF1, FGF2, and their FGFR1 receptor were strongly expressed in the
primary uveal melanomas. All five uveal melanoma cell lines expressed and
secreted FGF2. They also expressed FGFR1. Cell proliferation was strongly reduced
by the antisense oligonucleotide-mediated depletion of endogenous FGF2,
immunoneutralization of secreted FGF2, and pharmacologic inhibition of FGFR1. The
FGF2/FGFR1-mediated signaling pathway was identified by showing that inhibition
of either FGF2 or FGFR1 reduced ERK1/2 activation, cell proliferation, and
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The FGF/FGFR/ERK signaling pathway may be a target for therapeutic
strategies against uveal melanoma.

PMID: 19029025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Microbiol. 2008 Oct;46(5):502-7. doi: 10.1007/s12275-008-0078-2. Epub 2008 Oct 
31.

Generation of infectious transcripts from Korean strain and mild mottle strain of
potato virus X.

Choi SH(1), Ryu KH.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Virus GenBank, Division of Environmental and Life Sciences, Seoul
Women's University, Seoul, 139-774, Republic of Korea.

Full-length cDNAs of two different strains of Potato virus X (PVX-Kr and PVX-Mo) 
have been directly amplified by long template reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) using the 5'-end primer containing a SP6 or T7 RNA
promoter sequence and the virus-specific 3'-end primer, and then constructed in
plasmid vectors. Capped in vitro transcripts from cloned full-length cDNAs as
well as those RT-PCR amplicons proved to be infectious systemically on tobacco
plants. Symptom expression on tobacco plants from PVX-Mo transcripts was faster
and severer than that from PVX-Kr. In replication stability test of transcripts
derived from PVX clones, progeny viruses showed stable replication according to
sequencing through passages. This highly infectious transcript system from the
full-length cDNA clones for PVX can be useful for recombinant molecules for
functional analysis of viral proteins in plant-virus interaction study as well as
for expression of foreign protein in planta.

PMID: 18974949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2008 Oct;Chapter 3:Unit3.8. doi:
10.1002/0471142727.mb0308s84.

RNA polymerases.

Paschal BM, McReynolds LA, Noren CJ, Nichols NM.

This unit describes DNA-dependent, RNA-dependent, and template-independent RNA
polymerases. DNA-dependent RNA polymerases include the related bacteriophage T7, 
T3, and SP6 polymerases, the most commonly used RNA polymerases for in vitro
transcription reactions. Reaction conditions to produce preparative quantities of
transcribed RNA and labeled RNA probes are covered, as are the major applications
of these reactions. Limitations of the E. coli RNA polymerase for these
applications are also presented. The properties of the phi6 RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RdRp) and its use in RNAi experiments are also introduced. Poly(A)
polymerase, a template-independent polymerase, catalyzes the incorporation of AMP
residues onto the free 3'-hydroxyl terminus of RNA, utilizing ATP as a precursor.
Specific reaction conditions of poly(A) polymerase, as well as applications
including RNA tailing and 3' end labeling, are discussed.

(c) 2008 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 18972390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Phytopathology. 1999 Dec;89(12):1182-5. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO.1999.89.12.1182.

Fully biologically active in vitro transcripts of the eriophyid mite-transmitted 
wheat streak mosaic tritimovirus.

Choi IR, French R, Hein GL, Stenger DC.

ABSTRACT Infectious RNA of wheat streak mosaic virus (WSMV) has been produced
using a full-length cDNA clone as a template for in vitro transcription with SP6 
RNA polymerase. Infectivity was dependent on the use of template plasmid DNA that
had not undergone spontaneous rearrangement during amplification in Escherichia
coli. The presence of WSMV in systemically infected wheat plants inoculated with 
in vitro transcripts was confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction of the WSMV P3 gene and by accumulation of WSMV coat protein as detected
by immunoblotting. Maintenance of the full-length WSMV cDNA in the high copy
number plasmid pUC18 was problematic because of spontaneous rearrangement of WSMV
sequences during growth in liquid media for more than 8 h or if the clone was
subcultured. Stability of the WSMV cDNA clone was improved by the use of the low 
copy number plasmid pACYC177, and it could be grown in large scale volumes (up to
1 liter) of liquid culture for 14 h without noticeable rearrangements. Both the
original WSMV culture and the progeny virus derived from infectious in vitro
transcripts were efficiently transmitted by the natural eriophyid mite vector
Aceria tosichella. This is the first report of infectious in vitro transcripts
for any eriophyid mite-transmitted plant virus and represents the only
monopartite member of the family Potyviridae infecting monocotyledonous hosts for
which infectious in vitro transcripts are available.

PMID: 18944643  [PubMed]


275. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2008 Aug;33(4):245-9.

[Effects of electroacupuncture of "Zusanli" (ST 36), "Hegu" (LI 4) and/or
"Sanyinjiao" (SP 9) on immunofunction in gastric carcinectomy rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Lai M(1), Wang SM, Wang Y, Tang CL, Kong LW, Xu XY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chinese Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 401331,
China. cqzyjwk@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) of "Zusanli" (ST 36),
"Hegu" (LI 4) and/or "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) on immune functions in gastric carcinoma
rats after operation.
METHODS: Wistar rats were randomly divided into normal control, ST36, L14, SP6,
ST36 + LI4, ST36 + SP6, LI4 + SP6, ST36 + LI4 + SP6, non-acupoint (about 10 mm
lateral to ST36) and model groups, with 6 cases in each. Gastric carcinoma model 
was made by intraperitoneal injection of Walker-256 cloned strain (0.1 ml, 2 x
10(7) cells). EA (2-100 Hz, 1-3 mA) was applied to these acupoints for 30 min,
once daily for 7 days. Serum IgG, IgM, IgA, C3 and C4 contents were detected with
simple immunodiffusion method; and CD4+ and CD8+ levels were measured by flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: In comparison with normal control group, serum IgG, IgM, IgA, C3, C4 and
CD8+ contents, and CD4+/CD8+ in model group decreased significantly (P < 0.05,
0.01); while CD8+ content in model group increased remarkably (P < 0.01).
Compared with model group, serum IgG, IgM, IgA, C3, C4, CD4+, CD8+ and CD4+/CD8+ 
in non-acupoint group had no significant changes (P > 0.05), while most of these 
indexes in EA groups (ST36, LI4, SP6, ST36+ LI4, ST36 + SP6, LI4 + SP6, ST36 +
LI4 + SP6) increased considerably (P < 0.05, 0.01) except CD8+ level (decreased
significantly, P < 0.05, 0.01). No significant differences were found among 7 EA 
groups (P > 0.05), but the effects of ST36 + LI4 + SP6 group were slightly better
than those of the other 6 EA groups.
CONCLUSION: EA of "Zusanli" (ST 36), "Hegu" (LI 4) or "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) or two 
of them or these 3 acupoints can obviously enhance the immune function of
post-surgery rats with gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 18928116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Braz J Biol. 2008 Aug;68(3):519-28.

Patterns of prey selection of Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) lactitarse Saussure
(Hymenoptera: Crabronidae) in southern Brazil.

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

This study was carried out in the Parque Municipal das Araucárias, in the
municipality of Guarapuava, southern Brazil. A total of 449 T. lactitarse nests
were collected using trap-nests of different diameters. Fifty three species of
spiders belonging to 7 families were captured by T. lactitarse. Araneidae was the
most captured family and has been strongly represented by the genus Eustala.
Through Bray-Curtis's coefficient and the unweighted pair group method average
(UPGMA), the spiders species can be divided into 3 groups: the smaller group
includes the most abundant species (Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Acacesia
villalobosi, Alpaida sp1 and Araneus corporosus), the second group includes
species with intermediate abundance (Wagneriana iguape, Araneus omnicolor,
Eustala sp4, Alpaida grayi, Eustala sp3, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1 and
Wagneriana iguape), and the third and largest group includes the least abundant
species (Aysha gr. brevimana 1, Eustala sp5, Wagneriana eupalaestra, Alpaida
scriba, Alpaida veniliae, Araneus aff. omnicolor, Araneus sicki, Eustala sp8,
Mangora sp2, Mangora sp3, Wagneriana juquia, Alpaida sp2, Araneus blumenau,
Eustala sp6, Eustala sp7 and Ocrepeira galianoae). Of 2,029 identified spiders,
1,171 were captured in the Araucaria forest, 612 in grassland areas and 246 in
the swamp. Grassland and swamp areas evidenced greater similarity between them
than to the Araucaria Forest, regarding presence-absence of spider species in T. 
lactitarse's diet, as well as regarding species abundance in these habitats. The 
juvenile number (56%) was significantly higher than the female (38%) and male
(6%) percentages.

PMID: 18833472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Altern Complement Med. 2008 Sep;14(7):847-53. doi: 10.1089/acm.2007.0780.

Effect of acupuncture in a patient with 7-year-history of Bell's palsy.

Wong CL(1), Wong VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong. miss_mcdull@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: To demonstrate the effect of acupuncture in a child with chronic
Bell's palsy of 7 years duration.
SUBJECT: A 15-year-old girl had Bell's palsy for 7 years and did not respond to
steroid treatment in the acute phase. On examination, her eyes were asymmetric,
with the right eye smaller. Muscle contracture was noted around the right
nasalis. She had synkinesis (i.e., when she blinked, there was involuntary
twitching of her mouth at the right side). She showed marked facial distortion
when puffing out cheeks, smiling, and raising her eyebrows. The tip of her tongue
was swollen with red spikes. House-Brackmann facial nerve grading system (HBS)
before treatment was grade 4.
TREATMENT: Patient was given 25 acupuncture treatment sessions in 2 months. Local
acupuncture points used were: LI20, ST2, ST3, ST4, ST6, ST7, SI18, BL2, TE17,
TE23, GB14, GV26, CV24, EX-HN5, and EX-HN16; distant points used were: LI11,
ST36, ST40, SP6, SP10, HT8, SI3, BL67, PC8, TE5, and LR3. About 10 points were
selected from the above set in each session with needles inserted to elicit the
de qi response. The patient was asked to report any change in muscle strength or 
any differences noted after each acupuncture session. Photographs and videos were
taken for blind assessors to comment on.
RESULT: The patient rated an overall improvement of 60-70%. Self-perceived muscle
strength when smiling and puffing out cheeks increased from 20% of normal
strength to 65%, and the strength when raising eyebrows increased from 10% to
70%. Synkinesis was attenuated. Photographs and videos showed improvement in
facial asymmetry. HBS changed to grade 3 after treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that acupuncture can be effective in improving
functional and cosmetic outcome even for chronic Bell's palsy.

PMID: 18721078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2008 Aug 20;11(4):505-8. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2008.04.018.

[Silencing effect study of Akt2-siRNA aimed at lung cancer cell NCI-H446.].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao T(1), Zhang M, Zhao G, Lu B, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)The 5th Department of Health Care, the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is one of the most frequent malignant tumors and at the
first place of mortality in today's world, It becomes more and more clear that
the initiation and development of lung cancer is multistep processes involved in 
many genes. RNAi gets more and more attention in gene therapy because of its high
efficiency and specificity. With RNAi technology, eukaryotic expression vectors
aimed at AKT2 siRNA was designed and constructed, which is transfected into human
small lung cancer cell line NCI-H446. The silencing effect was observed.
METHODS: Using the known sequence of AKT2's mRNA (M95936), we designed two
oligonucleotides that have short hairpin configuration and one oligonucleotide as
control. DNA double strands was annealed, and cloned into vectorpGEM-T. Then,
blue-white selection and T7/SP6 PCR was used to screen the positive clones, the
target DNA and the express vector pRNAT-U6.2 were cut down by BamHI and XhoI
restriction enzyme, and linked with each other; use PCR test to filtrate the
positive clones and sequenced the target DNA, then transfected it into human
small lung cancer cell line (NCI-H446), cultured and screened by G418, RT-PCR was
used to detect the expression level of AKT2 mRNA in NCI-H446.
RESULTS: validate the positive sequence by PCR and, transfect them to lung cancer
cell line (NCI-H446), AKT2-mRNA's expression was evidently declined.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression vector pRNAT-U6.2-AKT2 was constructed successfully
and the expression of Akt2 mRNA in small lung cancer cell line (NCI-H446) was
obviously silenced after transfection.

PMID: 20735958  [PubMed]


279. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2008 Aug 25;60(4):525-34.

Blockade of the human ether-a-go-go-related gene potassium channel by ketanserin.

Tu DN(1), Zou AR, Liao YH, Du YM, Wang XP, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Ion Channelopathy, Department of Cardiology, Institute of
Cardiovascular Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

In the present study, we investigated the inhibitory action of ketanserin on
wild-type (WT) and Y652 mutant human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG) potassium 
channels expressed in Xenopus oocytes and the effects of changing the channel
molecular determinants characteristics on the blockade with and without
ketanserin intervention using standard two-microelectrode voltage-clamp
techniques. Point mutations were introduced into HERG gene (Y652A and Y652R) and 
subcloned into the pSP64 plasmid expression vector. Complementary RNAs for
injection into oocytes were prepared with SP6 Cap-Scribe after linearization of
the expression construct with EcoR I. Clampfit 9.2 software was employed for data
collection and analysis. Origin 6.0 software was used to fit the data, calculate 
time constants and plot histograms. The results showed that ketanserin blocked WT
HERG currents in voltage- and concentration-dependent manner and showed minimal
tonic blockade of HERG current evaluated by the envelope of tails test. The IC50 
value was (0.38+/-0.04) micromol/L for WT HERG potassium channel. The peaks of
the I-V relationship for HERG channel suggested a negative shift in the
voltage-dependence of activation after using ketanserin, whose midpoint of
activation values (V1/2) were (-16.59+/-1.01) mV (control) vs (-20.59+/-0.87) mV 
(ketanserin) at 0.1 micromol/L, (-22.39+/-0.94) mV at 1 micromol/L,
(-23.51+/-0.91) mV at 10 micromol/L, respectively (P<0.05, n=6). Characteristics 
of blockade were consistent with an open-state channel blockade, because the
extent and rate of onset of blockade was voltage-dependent, increasing at more
potentials even in the condition of leftward shift of activation curve.
Meanwhile, in the different depolarization duration, the fractional blockade of
end-pulse step current and peak tail current at 100 ms duration was significantly
lower than that at 400 ms and 700 ms, which indicated that following the channel 
activation fractional blockade was enhanced by the activated channels. Ketanserin
could also modulate the inactivation of HERG channel, which shifted the
voltage-dependence of WT HERG channel inactivation curve from (-51.71+/-2.15) mV 
to (-80.76+/-14.98) mV (P<0.05, n=4). The S6 mutation, Y652A and Y652R,
significantly attenuated the blockade by ketanserin. The IC50 value were
(27.13+/-9.40) micromol/L and (20.20+/-2.80) micromol/L, respectively, increased 
by approximately 72-fold for Y652A and 53-fold for Y652R compared to that of WT
HERG channel blockade [(0.38+/-0.04) micromol/L]. However, between the inhibitory
effects of Y652A and Y652R, there was no significant difference. In conclusion,
ketanserin blocks WT HERG currents in voltage- and concentration-dependent manner
and preferentially blocks open-state HERG channels. Tyr-652 is one of the
critical residues in the ketanserin-binding sites.

PMID: 18690396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2008 Apr;33(2):88-92.

[Effects of electroacupuncture of different acupoints on cardiac function in
acute myocardial ischemia rabbits].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu L(1), Cai RL, Wu ZJ, Zhou YP, Wang KM, Li M, Tang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acu-moxibustion and Meridian, Anhui College of Chinese Medicine, 
Anhui Key Laboratory of Foundation and Technology of Acu-moxibustion, Hefei
230038, China. hulingtcm@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of electroacupuncture (EA) of "Neiguan" (PC 6),
"Shenmen" (HT 7), "Taiyuan" (LU 9), "Zhizheng" (SI 7) and "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) on 
cardiac function in acute myocardial ischemia (AMI) rabbits.
METHODS: A total of 60 rabbits were randomly divided into normal control, model, 
EA-PC6, EA-HT7, EA-LU9, EA-S17 and EA-SP6 groups. AMI model was established by
intravenous administration of pituitrin. ECG, maximal ascending rate ( + dp/dt
max) and maximal descending rate (- dp/dt max) of the left ventricular pressure, 
and left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP) were recorded.
RESULTS: The heart rate (HR), +dp/dt max, -dp/dt max and LVSP decreased
significantly after AMI (P<0.01). Compared with model group, the 4 indexes of
EA-PC6, EA-HT7 and EA-S17 groups increased considerably (P<0.05, 0.01) at most
time-points after AMI, and the effects of EA-PC6 and EA-HT7 were markedly better 
than those of EA-SI7, EA-LU9 and EA-SP6 (P<0.05, 0.01). No significant
differences were found among model group, EA-LU9 and EA-SP6 groups in HR, + dp/dt
max, -dp/dt max and LVSP at most time-points after AMI.
CONCLUSION: EA of PC6, HT7 and SI7 has a good effect in improving ischemic
cardiac performance, and the effect of PC6 and HT7 is markedly better than that
of SI7. The effect of EA of SP6 and LU9 is poorer on ischemic cardiac function.

PMID: 18630582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Jul 4;439(1):18-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.04.100. Epub
2008 May 4.

Effects of acupuncture on abdominal leak point pressure and c-Fos expression in
the brain of rats with stress urinary incontinence.

Chung IM(1), Kim YS, Sung YH, Kim SE, Ko IG, Shin MS, Park HJ, Ham DH, Lee HJ,
Kim KJ, Lee SW, Jee YS, Kim KH, Kim CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy-Meridian, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyungwon
University, Seongnam 461-701, South Korea.

Stress urinary incontinence leads to the involuntary loss of urine during
abdominal strain caused by sneezing, laughing, and coughing. Acupuncture has been
widely used for the treatment and prevention of a variety of diseases in
traditional medicine. Acupuncture has also been used to relieve the symptoms of
functional disorders of the lower urinary tract. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of acupuncture at the Sanyinjiao (SP6) acupoint on stress
urinary incontinence in rats. The present results showed that abdominal leak
point pressure was decreased in rats with stress urinary incontinence, while
acupuncture at the SP6 acupoint significantly enhanced the abdominal leak point
pressure. The expression of c-Fos in the pontine micturition center (PMC),
ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (vlPAG), and medial preoptic nucleus (MPA)
regions was increased by the induction of stress urinary incontinence, and
acupuncture at the SP6 acupoint significantly decreased c-Fos expression in these
areas. In the present study, we showed that acupuncture has therapeutic effect on
the symptoms of stress urinary incontinence, and this effect of acupuncture is
associated with modulation of c-Fos expression in the brain.

PMID: 18502581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. BMC Biotechnol. 2008 Mar 27;8:32. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-8-32.

A set of ligation-independent in vitro translation vectors for eukaryotic protein
production.

Bardóczy V(1), Géczi V, Sawasaki T, Endo Y, Mészáros T.

Author information: 
(1)Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Department of Applied
Biotechnology and Food Science, 1111 Budapest, Mûegyetem rkp. 3., Hungary.
bardoczy@mail.bme.hu

BACKGROUND: The last decade has brought the renaissance of protein studies and
accelerated the development of high-throughput methods in all aspects of
proteomics. Presently, most protein synthesis systems exploit the capacity of
living cells to translate proteins, but their application is limited by several
factors. A more flexible alternative protein production method is the cell-free
in vitro protein translation. Currently available in vitro translation systems
are suitable for high-throughput robotic protein production, fulfilling the
requirements of proteomics studies. Wheat germ extract based in vitro translation
system is likely the most promising method, since numerous eukaryotic proteins
can be cost-efficiently synthesized in their native folded form. Although
currently available vectors for wheat embryo in vitro translation systems ensure 
high productivity, they do not meet the requirements of state-of-the-art
proteomics. Target genes have to be inserted using restriction endonucleases and 
the plasmids do not encode cleavable affinity purification tags.
RESULTS: We designed four ligation independent cloning (LIC) vectors for wheat
germ extract based in vitro protein translation. In these constructs, the RNA
transcription is driven by T7 or SP6 phage polymerase and two TEV protease
cleavable affinity tags can be added to aid protein purification. To evaluate our
improved vectors, a plant mitogen activated protein kinase was cloned in all four
constructs. Purification of this eukaryotic protein kinase demonstrated that all 
constructs functioned as intended: insertion of PCR fragment by LIC worked
efficiently, affinity purification of translated proteins by GST-Sepharose or
MagneHis particles resulted in high purity kinase, and the affinity tags could
efficiently be removed under different reaction conditions. Furthermore, high in 
vitro kinase activity testified of proper folding of the purified protein.
CONCLUSION: Four newly designed in vitro translation vectors have been
constructed which allow fast and parallel cloning and protein purification, thus 
representing useful molecular tools for high-throughput production of eukaryotic 
proteins.

PMCID: PMC2311287
PMID: 18371187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Methods Mol Biol. 2007;394:133-75. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-512-1_9.

Salmonella phages and prophages--genomics and practical aspects.

Kropinski AM(1), Sulakvelidze A, Konczy P, Poppe C.

Author information: 
(1)Host and Pathogen Determinants, Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonoses, Public
Health Agency of Canada, Guelph, Ontario.

Numerous bacteriophages specific to Salmonella have been isolated or identified
as part of host genome sequencing projects. Phylogenetic analysis of the
sequenced phages, based on related protein content using CoreGenes, reveals that 
these viruses fall into five groupings (P27-like, P2-like, lambdoid, P22-like,
and T7-like) and three outliers (epsilon15, KS7, and Felix O1). The P27 group is 
only represented by ST64B; the P2 group contains Fels-2, SopEphi, and PSP3; the
lambdoid Salmonella phages include Gifsy-1, Gifsy-2, and Fels-1. The P22-like
viruses include epsilon34, ES18, P22, ST104, and ST64T. The only member of the
T7-like group is SP6. The properties of each of these phages are discussed, along
with their role as agents of genetic exchange and as therapeutic agents and their
involvement in phage typing.

PMID: 18363236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Yi Chuan. 2008 Mar;30(3):347-51.

[Cloning of gene fragment of estrogen receptor-beta and its expression in mouse
embryo].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang ZF(1), Fan SH, Lu J, Wu DM, Shan Q, Hu B, Li F, Zheng YL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Xuzhou Normal University, Xuzhou 221116, China.
zhangzifengsuper@xznu.edu.cn

In order to study the expression and regulation effects of estrogen receptor-beta
(ERbeta) in the development of mouse embryo, the primer of ERbeta was designed,
the ERbeta fragment was first obtained by RT-PCR and subcloned into plasmids
pGEM- 3Z, then the recombinant plasmids were linearized with the restriction
enzymes of EcoRand Hind. Using Sp6 and T7 RNA polymerase, the digoxigenin(dig)
labeled sense and anti-sense probes were transcriped in vitro, respectively. Then
the expression of ERbeta in mouse embryo was examined with the probes by
whole-mount in situ hybridization. The results indicated that ERbeta is expressed
in the brain, spinal neural tube, genital ridge, pericardium, limb bud and
mandibular arch of 10.5 dpc embryo, and is also expressed in the telencephalon,
mesencephalon, medulla oblongata, spinal cord and limb bud of 13.5 dpc embryo.
These results suggest that ERbeta maybe play a role of regulation in sexual
differentiation, primal differentiation of neural tube, further differentiation
of three primary cerebral vesicles and spinal cord, generation and
differentiation of bone and cartilage of limb bud, development of pericardium and
configuration differentiation of mandibular in mouse embryo.

PMID: 18332005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Med Invest. 2008 Feb;55(1-2):87-98.

Sp6 downregulation of follistatin gene expression in ameloblasts.

Ruspita I(1), Miyoshi K, Muto T, Abe K, Horiguchi T, Noma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Med Invest. 2008 Aug;55(3-4):303.

Sp6 is a member of the Sp family of transcription factors that regulate a wide
range of cellular functions, such as cell growth and differentiation. Sp6, also
called epiprofin, is specifically expressed in tooth germ, limb bud, and hair
follicle, but there is little information on its function.To investigate the
possible role of Sp6 in tooth development, first we established an
Sp6-overproducing clone, CHA9, and analyzed the features of the cell, including
cell proliferation and gene expression. The parental cells of CHA9 are the
ameloblast-lineage G5 cells that we previously established from rat dental
epithelia of lower incisor. Sp6 overproduction accelerated cell proliferation and
induced the expression of ameloblastin mRNA, a marker of ameloblast
differentiation. Second, we performed genome-wide screening of Sp6 target genes
by microarray analysis. Out of a total 20,450 genes, 448 genes were up-regulated 
and 500 genes were down-regulated by Sp6. We found the expression of follistatin,
a BMP antagonist, to be 22.4-fold lower in CHA9 than in control cells.
Transfection of the Sp6-antisense construct into CHA9 cells restored follistatin 
expression back to equivalent levels seen in control cells, indicating that Sp6
regulates follistatin gene expression in ameloblasts. Our findings demonstrate
that the follistatin gene is one of the Sp6 target genes in ameloblasts and
suggest that Sp6 promotes amelogenesis through inhibition of follistatin gene
expression.

PMID: 18319550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Dev Dyn. 2008 Apr;237(4):883-92. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21355.

The development of several organs and appendages is impaired in mice lacking Sp6.

Hertveldt V(1), Louryan S, van Reeth T, Drèze P, van Vooren P, Szpirer J, Szpirer
C.

Author information: 
(1)Université libre de Bruxelles, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires, Rue Profs Jeener & Brachet, 12, B-6041 Gosselies (Charleroi),
Belgium.

SP6 belongs to the SP/KLF family of transcription factors, characterized by a
DNA-binding domain composed of three zinc fingers of the C(2)H(2) type. The Sp6
gene generates two different transcripts, termed Sp6 and epiprofin, which differ 
in the first exon and encode the same SP6 protein. These transcripts are mainly
expressed in the skin, the teeth, and the limb buds of embryos and also in the
adult lungs. To gain insight into the biological function of the SP6 protein, we 
knocked out the gene by eliminating the full coding region. The resulting Sp6
null mice are nude, lack functional teeth, and present limb and lung
malformations. We also showed that the identified abnormalities are associated
with apoptotic misregulations. In conclusion, this work indicates that Sp6 plays 
a critical role in the development of several epithelium-containing organs or
appendages, possibly by regulating apoptosis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18297738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2001 May;Chapter 3:Unit3.8. doi:
10.1002/0471142727.mb0308s13.

DNA-dependent RNA Polymerases.

Tabor S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

There are two types of DNA-dependent RNA polymerases commonly used for nucleic
acid research: E. coli RNA polymerase and the bacteriophage T7, T3, and SP6 RNA
polymerases. This unit describes the uses and limitations of each class of RNA
polymerase along with specific reaction conditions and applications.

PMID: 18265234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2001 May;Chapter 12:Unit 12.9. doi:
10.1002/0471142727.mb1209s24.

Analysis of DNA-protein interactions using proteins synthesized in vitro from
cloned genes.

Struhl K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

To detect DNA binding activity, radiolabeled protein is incubated with specific
DNA fragments, and protein-DNA complexes are separated from free protein by
electrophoresis in native acrylamide gels. Unlike the more conventional mobility 
shift assay which utilizes (32)P-labeled DNA and unlabeled protein, the assay
described here generally utilizes (35)S-labeled protein and unlabeled DNA. Major 
advantages of this method are that any desired mutant protein can be tested for
its DNA-binding properties simply by altering the DNA template, and the subunit
structure (e.g., dimer, tetramer) can be determined.

PMID: 18265092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Tradit Chin Med. 2007 Dec;27(4):299-306.

Effects of electroacupuncture at different acupoints on changes of uterine
myoelectricity induced by oxytocin and progesterone in pregnant rats.

Chen S(1), Liu J, Gao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acupuncture & Moxibustion, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100700, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of electroacupuncture (EA) at different
acupoints on abnormal changes of uterine myoelectric activities in pregnant rats 
so as to analyze the specificity of regulative effects of the acupoint.
METHODS: Forty-eight pregnant (18-20 days) Wistar rats were randomly divided into
control group (n=10), "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) group (n=9), "Neiguan" (PC 6) group
(n=10), "Hegu" (LI 4) group (n=8), and "Sanyinjiao plus Hegu" group (n= 11).
These rats were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of a mixture solution
of 1.5% chloralose (50mg/kg) and 25% urethane (420mg/kg). Electrohysterogram
(EHG) was recorded by using a pair of stainless steel electrodes inserted into
the subserous layer of the left mid part of the uterus. The reference electrode
was placed in the adjoining subcutaneous tissue of the incision. Oxytocin and
progesterone were given to the local uterus nearby the recording electrode to
induce excitement and suppression of myoelectric activities of the uterus
respectively. EA (2mA, 5/15Hz) was carried out at the above-mentioned acupoints
separately for 20 min, and the influence of EA on changes (amplitude and
frequency) of fast waves and slow waves of the uterine myoelectric activity was
analyzed.
RESULTS: As compared with control group, EA at SP6 plus LI4 and at SP6 alone had 
a significantly inhibitory effect on oxytocin-induced increase in the frequency
and amplitude of both fast and slow waves (P<0.05); and EA at LI4 had a markedly 
inhibitory effect on the amplitude of fast waves (P<0.05). EA at PC6 had no any
marked effect on both frequency and amplitude of fast and slow waves of EHG
(P>0.05). Compared with control group, EA at SP6 plus LI4 and at SP6 alone could 
relieve or significantly relieve progesterone-induced suppression of the
frequency and amplitude of both fast and slow waves (P<0.05); and the effects of 
EA at SP6 plus LI4 appeared earlier and lasted longer than those of EA at SP6;
while EA at LI4 and PC6 had no obvious effect on progesterone-induced changes of 
the frequency and amplitude of both fast and slow waves (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: EA at SP6 plus LI4 and at SP6 alone has a dual-directional regulative
effect on abnormal EHG, the effect of EA at SP6 plus LI4 is the strongest, EA at 
SP6 the secondary, EA at LI4 the weakest, and EA at PC6 shows no effect. In
short, EA at different acupoints have their own relative specificity in
regulating abnormal uterine myoelectric activities.

PMID: 18246690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Vis. 2008 Jan 10;14:50-5.

Immunomagnetic isolation and in vitro expansion of human uveal melanoma cell
lines.

Cools-Lartigue JJ(1), McCauley CS, Marshall JC, Di Cesare S, Gregoire F, Antecka 
E, Logan P, Burnier MN.

Author information: 
(1)The Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory and Registry, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
jonathan.cools-lartigue@mail.mcgill.ca

PURPOSE: Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common intra-ocular tumor in adults.
Despite advances in diagnosis and treatment, the survival rate of UM has not
increased in the last several decades. Approximately 50% of patients will die as 
a consequence of metastatic disease with the majority of metastases localized to 
the liver. Due to the lack of lymphatics in the eye, hematogenous dissemination
is the predominant means by which UM cells escape the primary site. Our
laboratory has recently demonstrated the presence of circulating malignant cells 
(CMCs) in the blood using both animal models and clinical trails involving UM
patients. Current data suggests that all UM patients will be positive for CMCs
after diagnosis. Furthermore, some of the phenotypic changes that are necessary
for metastatic growth may occur while the cells are circulating in the blood. In 
this study, we evaluated the efficiency of a panel of antibodies to
immunomagnetically isolate CMCs for the purpose of in vitro expansion and
genetic, immunological, and phenotypic characterization.
METHODS: In this study, five human uveal melanoma cell lines (92.1, MKT-BR,
OCM-1, SP6.5, and UW-1) were immunostained with a panel of antibodies against
known melanoma cell surface markers. Staining with monoclonal antibodies PAL M2, 
NKI C3, NKI/Beteb, and 9.2.27 permitted the generation of a cell surface
expression profile in these cell lines. The five human UM cell lines and 92.1
transfected with GFP were subsequently spiked into human blood at concentrations 
ranging from 1x10(6) cells/ml to 10 cells/ml. Cells were immuno-magnetically
isolated at concentrations as low as 10 cells/ml.
RESULTS: Immunomagnetic isolation of all five human UM cell lines tested at
concentrations down to 10 cells/ml human blood was achieved only when antibodies 
were used in combination. Individually, the antibodies did not permit isolation
of cells at physiologically relevant concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunomagnetic isolation method presented in this study can be
used to isolate CMCs at physiologically relevant concentrations and at
sensitivities comparable to those seen in polymerase chain reactions (PCR). In
addition, our data suggests that our method is more efficient and reliable for
the isolation of CMCs in UM than the methods currently used.

PMCID: PMC2263013
PMID: 18246031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;14(3):847-55. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-0926.

Immune expression and inhibition of heat shock protein 90 in uveal melanoma.

Faingold D(1), Marshall JC, Antecka E, Di Cesare S, Odashiro AN, Bakalian S,
Fernandes BF, Burnier MN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Pathology, The McGill University Health Center
and Henry C. Witelson Ocular Pathology Laboratory, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
faingolddana@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: To examine the immunohistochemical profile of heat shock protein 90
(Hsp90) in uveal melanoma and the cytotoxicity of an Hsp90 inhibitor,
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG), in uveal melanoma cell lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Hsp90 expression was determined by immunohistochemistry in
44 paraffin-embedded sections of primary human uveal melanoma and in five uveal
melanoma cell lines (92.1, OCM-1, MKT-BR, SP6.5, and UW-1). Sulforhodamine
B-based proliferation assay was used to compare uveal melanoma cell growth with a
range of concentrations of 17-AAG. Changes in cell migration, invasion, cell
cycle fractions, and apoptotic activity were also evaluated. Expression of
intracellular proteins was determined by Western blot analysis after 17-AAG
exposure.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical expression of Hsp90 was identified in 68% of the
paraffin-embedded sections and significantly associated with largest tumor
dimension (P = 0.03). 17-AAG significantly reduced the proliferation rates of
uveal melanoma cell lines, with concentrations of 100 to 0.1 micromol/L. 17-AAG
also significantly reduced the migratory and invasive capabilities of uveal
melanoma cell lines. Cell cycle analysis showed that 17-AAG induced accumulations
of cells in G(1). Caspase-3 protease activity analysis, a marker for apoptosis,
showed a significant increase after drug exposure. The cytotoxic effect of 17-AAG
was associated with decreased levels of phosphorylated Akt and cyclin-dependent
kinase 4.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunohistochemical expression of Hsp90 in uveal melanoma
indicates worse prognosis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report
showing the inhibitory effect on uveal melanoma cells using 17-AAG to target
Hsp90. Therefore, Hsp90 may be used as a potential target for treatment of
patients with uveal melanoma.

PMID: 18245548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Eye (Lond). 2008 May;22(5):707-11. doi: 10.1038/sj.eye.6703090. Epub 2008 Jan 25.

Expression of the metastasis suppressor gene KISS1 in uveal melanoma.

Martins CM(1), Fernandes BF, Antecka E, Di Cesare S, Mansure JJ, Marshall JC,
Burnier MN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. claudia.martins@mail.mcgill.ca

PURPOSE: Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary malignant intraocular
tumour in adults. Forty-five percent of UM patients develop metastasis within 15 
years of initial diagnosis. KISS1, a human metastasis suppressor gene, has been
reported to play a role in various human malignancies. The purpose of this study 
was to investigate the expression of KISS1 in UM and its potential value as a
prognostic marker.
METHODS: Thirty-seven cases of paraffin-embedded human UM specimens were
immunostained with a KISS1 antibody. Clinical-pathological data were obtained.
The relationship between the clinical-pathological data and the expression of
KISS1 was evaluated. Moreover, the survival rates of the patients were also
assessed. Five UM cell lines (92.1, OCM-1, MKTBR, UW1 and SP6.5) were assayed for
KISS1 expression. In addition, real-time PCR was used to determine mRNA levels of
KISS1and its receptor GPR54in these cell lines.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemical results of KISS1 expression displayed
cytoplasmic staining in 84% of UM specimens. Low KISS1 expression was associated 
with a higher risk of metastatic disease (P<0.05). Furthermore, we found that
KISS1 was expressed in all five UM cells lines. Real-time PCR analysis confirmed 
the presence of both KISS1and its receptor GPR54in all five human UM cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that KISS1has
been characterized in UM. The correlation between KISS1 expression and UM
survival rate suggests an important role for KISS1as a prognostic marker in this 
particular tumour.

PMID: 18219339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Chin Med. 2007;35(6):977-86.

Acupuncture stimulation at Sanyinjiao: effect on the sodium pertechnetate
bioavailability in rats.

de Souza DE(1), Senna-Fernandes V, de Carvalho Brito L, de Souza RS, França D,
Manoel CV, de Almeida MC, Bernardo-Filho M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Radiofarmácia Experimental, Departamento de Biofísica e
Biometria, Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcantara Gomes, Universidade do Estado 
do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. deise_desouza@yahoo.com.br

In clinical acupuncture, when acupuncture points are stimulated, several types of
reflex responses can be evoked. Consequently, different categories of
physiological responses are induced, which include changes in the activities of
internal organs and tissues. The acupuncture point Sanyinjiao (SP6) has been used
successfully to treat different human gastrointestinal conditions. The aim of
this work was to investigate the effects of end-organ response induced by
acupuncture point SP6 on the bioavailability of the radiopharmaceutical sodium
pertechnetate (Na99mTcO4) in Wistar rats. Healthy rats were allocated into 2
groups, control-CG and treated-TG. TG was bilaterally stimulated at acupuncture
point SP6 with stainless steel needles. Ocular plexus administration of Na99mTcO4
(3.7MBq) was carried out 10 min after every needle insertion in all animals. Ten 
minutes later, the animals were killed, the organs were isolated, the
radioactivity was determined in a well gamma counter, and the percentage of
injected dose per gram of tissue (%ID/g) was determined for each organ. The %ID/g
was significantly altered (p < 0.05) in the small intestine of TG (0.56 +/- 0.09)
when compared to CG (0.82 +/- 0.18). These results may suggest that this
stimulation might induce physiological responses capable of altering the
bioavailability of the radiopharmaceutical sodium pertechnetate. These findings
aid in providing a better understanding of acupuncture and its effects on various
organs and tissues.

PMID: 18186584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Chin J Integr Med. 2007 Dec;13(4):264-8. doi: 10.1007/s11655-007-0264-9.

Effect of Jin-3-needling therapy on plasma corticosteroid, adrenocorticotrophic
hormone and platelet 5-HT levels in patients with generalized anxiety disorder.

Yuan Q(1), Li JN, Liu B, Wu ZF, Jin R.

Author information: 
(1)College of Acupuncture and Massage, Guangzhou Traditional Chinese Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510405, China. yuanqing1005@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the therapeutic efficacy of Jin-3-needling therapy (J3N) on
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) through clinical global impression scale
(CGI), and to explore the mechanism by measuring the plasma levels of
corticosteroid (CS), adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), and platelet
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) before and after treatment.
METHODS: Eighty-six GAD patients with the diagnosis agreeing with the inclusion
criteria were assigned, according to the sequence of visiting time, to three
groups. The 29 patients in the Western medicine group were treated mainly with
fluoxetine or paroxetine, Alprazolam might be given additionally in severe
conditions if necessary; the 29 patients in the needling group received J3N
therapy with Sishenzhen, Dingshenzhen, Neiguan (PC6), Shenmen (HT7) and
Sanyinjiao (SP6) as the chief acupoints selected; and the 28 patients in the
combined treatment group were treated with both drugs and needling in the same
way as applied in the above two groups. The therapeutic course for all was 6
weeks. Conditions of patients were evaluated before and after treatment with CGI,
and levels of CS, ACTH as well as 5-HT were measured by high performance liquid
chromatography-electrochemistry.
RESULTS: By CGI scoring, the scores of severity index and the general index were 
not different significantly in the three groups, but the efficacy index proved to
be the highest in the needling group, the second in the combined trentment group,
and the lowest in the drug group. Plasma level of ACTH and platelet content of
5-HT were lowered in all the three groups after treatment, showing statistical
significance (P<0.05), but no significant change was found in CS level (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: The therapeutic efficacy of J3N in treating GAD is equivalent to, but
with the efficacy index significantly higher than, that of conventional
treatment. Moreover, when combined with drugs, needling might effectively prevent
the side effect of the routinely used Western drugs. The regulatory action of
needling on platelet 5-HT and plasma ACTH is probably one of the acting pathways 
for J3N treatment on GAD.

PMID: 18180890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):4825-33. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Transcription factor epiprofin is essential for tooth morphogenesis by regulating
epithelial cell fate and tooth number.

Nakamura T(1), de Vega S, Fukumoto S, Jimenez L, Unda F, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4370, USA.

In tooth morphogenesis, the dental epithelium and mesenchyme interact
reciprocally for growth and differentiation to form the proper number and shapes 
of teeth. We previously identified epiprofin (Epfn), a gene preferentially
expressed in dental epithelia, differentiated ameloblasts, and certain ectodermal
organs. To identify the role of Epfn in tooth development, we created
Epfn-deficient mice (Epfn-/-). Epfn-/- mice developed an excess number of teeth, 
enamel deficiency, defects in cusp and root formation, and abnormal dentin
structure. Mutant tooth germs formed multiple dental epithelial buds into the
mesenchyme. In Epfn-/- molars, rapid proliferation and differentiation of the
inner dental epithelium were inhibited, and the dental epithelium retained the
progenitor phenotype. Formation of the enamel knot, a signaling center for cusps,
whose cells differentiate from the dental epithelium, was also inhibited.
However, multiple premature nonproliferating enamel knot-like structures were
formed ectopically. These dental epithelial abnormalities were accompanied by
dysregulation of Lef-1, which is required for the normal transition from the bud 
to cap stage. Transfection of an Epfn vector promoted dental epithelial cell
differentiation into ameloblasts and activated promoter activity of the enamel
matrix ameloblastin gene. Our results suggest that in Epfn-deficient teeth,
ectopic nonproliferating regions likely bud off from the self-renewable dental
epithelium, form multiple branches, and eventually develop into supernumerary
teeth. Thus, Epfn has multiple functions for cell fate determination of the
dental epithelium by regulating both proliferation and differentiation,
preventing continuous tooth budding and generation.

PMID: 18156176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. BMC Biotechnol. 2007 Nov 30;7:85.

A new generation of pPRIG-based retroviral vectors.

Albagli-Curiel O(1), Lécluse Y, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE, Martin P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U790 and IFR54, Institut Gustave Roussy, PR1, 39 Rue Camille
Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France. oalbagli@igr.fr

BACKGROUND: Retroviral vectors are valuable tools for gene transfer. Particularly
convenient are IRES-containing retroviral vectors expressing both the protein of 
interest and a marker protein from a single bicistronic mRNA. This coupled
expression increases the relevance of tracking and/or selection of transduced
cells based on the detection of a marker protein. pAP2 is a retroviral vector
containing eGFP downstream of a modified IRES element of EMCV origin, and a CMV
enhancer-promoter instead of the U3 region of the 5'LTR, which increases its
efficiency in transient transfection. However, pAP2 contains a limited
multicloning site (MCS) and shows weak eGFP expression, which previously led us
to engineer an improved version, termed pPRIG, harboring: i) the wild-type ECMV
IRES sequence, thereby restoring its full activity; ii) an optimized MCS flanked 
by T7 and SP6 sequences; and iii) a HA tag encoding sequence 5' of the MCS (pPRIG
HAa/b/c).
RESULTS: The convenience of pPRIG makes it a good basic vector to generate
additional derivatives for an extended range of use. Here we present several
novel pPRIG-based vectors (collectively referred to as PRIGs) in which : i) the
HA tag sequence was inserted in the three reading frames 3' of the MCS (3'HA
PRIGs); ii) a functional domain (ER, VP16 or KRAB) was inserted either 5' or 3'
of the MCS (<< modular >> PRIGs); iii) eGFP was replaced by either eCFP, eYFP,
mCherry or puro-R (<< single color/resistance >> PRIGs); and iv) mCherry, eYFP or
eGFP was inserted 5' of the MCS of the IRES-eGFP, IRES-eCFP or IRES-Puro-R
containing PRIGs, respectively (<< dual color/selection >> PRIGs). Additionally, 
some of these PRIGs were also constructed in a pMigR MSCV background which has
been widely used in pluripotent cells.
CONCLUSION: These novel vectors allow for straightforward detection of any
expressed protein (3'HA PRIGs), for functional studies of chimeric proteins (<<
modular >> PRIGs), for multiple transductions and fluorescence analyses of
transduced cells (<< single color/resistance >> PRIGs), or for quantitative
detection of studied proteins in independently identified/selected transduced
cells (<< dual color/selection >> PRIGs). They maintain the original advantages
of pPRIG and provide suitable tools for either transient or stable expression and
functional studies in a large range of experimental settings.

PMCID: PMC2241607
PMID: 18053131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2007 Oct;32(5):342-6.

[Randomized controlled study on the analgesic effect of superficial needling plus
electrostimulation of sanyinjiao (SP6) for primary dysmenorrhea].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhi LX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eye-Ear-Nose-Throat Hospital of Jiaozuo Coal Corporation, Jiaozuo 454000,
China. lxzh1988@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the analgesic and therapeutic effects of
electro-superficial-acupuncture (ESA) of Sanyinjiao (SP6) for treating primary
dysmenorrhea (PD).
METHODS: A total of 171 patients were randomly divided into ESA (n=57),
superficial acupuncture (SA) (n=57) and medication (n=57) groups. For patients in
SA group, bilateral SP6 were punctured superficially with special single-use
needles, and for those in ESA group, after puncturing, electric stimulation (60
Hz, 2-3 V) was applied to SP6 for 30 min. Patients of medication group were
ordered to take Brufen sustained-release capsules (0.3 mg, b. i. d., for 3 days),
then, take it again from the 3rd day on before the onset of menstruation to the
2nd day after the onset. The cumulative score of clinical symptoms were evaluated
before and after the treatment.
RESULTS: Comparison among 3 groups showed that the difference values of score
(pre-treatment--post-treatment) of both ESA and SA groups were significantly
bigger than that of medication group (P<0.001). After the treatment from 1 min to
30 min, patients with complete relief of dysmenorrhea of ESA group were
significantly more than those of SA group during the 1st menstrual cycle
(P<0.05). Results of intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis showed that of the three
57 cases in ESA, SA and medication groups, the cured cases were 40, 38 and 10,
the markedly effective were 9, 10 and 27, the effective were 5, 4 and 7, and the 
failed were 3, 5 and 13, with the total effective rates being 94.74%, 91.23% and 
77.19% respectively. The effective rates of ESA and SA groups were significantly 
higher than that of medication group (P<0.01), and the results of per-protocol
analysis (PP) were similar to those of ITT analysis.
CONCLUSION: The analgesic effect of both ESA and SA at SP6 for PD patients is
significantly better than that of oral administration of Brufen.

PMID: 18050629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Eye (Lond). 2008 May;22(5):701-6. Epub 2007 Nov 30.

Amfenac increases the radiosensitivity of uveal melanoma cell lines.

Fernandes BF(1), Marshall JC, Di Cesare S, Logan P, Maloney S, Burnier MN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Pathology, The McGill University Health
Center, Montreal, Canada. bruno.mtl@gmail.com

PURPOSE: To evaluate the proliferation rates of five human uveal melanoma (UM)
cell lines after treatment with amfenac, a cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor, and 
subsequent radiation exposure.
METHODS: Five human UM cell lines (92.1, SP6.5, MKT-BR, OCM-1, and UW-1) and one 
human fibroblast cell line (BJ) were incubated with amfenac. Treated and
non-treated cell lines were then exposed to various doses of gammaradiation: 0,
2, 4, 6, and 8 Gy. Sulphorhodamine-B assay was used to assess proliferation rates
48 h post-radiation.
RESULTS: Treatment of UM cell lines with amfenac prior to radiation led to a
marked reduction in proliferation rates. This difference was statistically
significant in all cell lines at every radiation dose (P<0.005), with the
exception of 92.1 at 2 Gy (P=0.157). Fibroblasts treated with amfenac showed
significantly higher proliferation rates after 2 and 8 Gy, with no significant
differences at 0, 4, and 6 Gy.
CONCLUSIONS: The radiosensitivity of UM cell lines was increased by the
administration of amfenac, the active metabolite of nepafenac. There appears to
be a radioprotective effect of amfenac on human fibroblasts. The topical
administration of nepafenac may decrease tumour recurrence and radiation-induced 
complications while broadening the indications for radiotherapy by treating
larger tumours.

PMID: 18049486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. BMC Genomics. 2007 Nov 15;8:420.

Promoter analysis of intestinal genes induced during iron-deprivation reveals
enrichment of conserved SP1-like binding sites.

Collins JF(1), Hu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, University at Buffalo, the
State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA. jfc8@buffalo.edu

BACKGROUND: Iron-deficiency leads to the induction of genes related to intestinal
iron absorption and homeostasis. By analyzing a large GeneChip dataset from the
rat intestine, we identified a large cluster of 228 genes that was induced by
iron-deprivation. Only 2 of these genes contained 3' iron-response elements,
suggesting that other regulation including transcriptional may be involved. We
therefore utilized computational methods to test the hypothesis that some of the 
genes within this large up-regulated cluster are co-ordinately regulated by
common transcriptional mechanisms. We thus identified promoters from the
up-regulated gene cluster from rat, mouse and human, and performed enrichment
analyses with the Clover program and the TRANSFAC database.
RESULTS: Surprisingly, we found a strong statistical enrichment for SP1 binding
sites in our experimental promoters as compared to background sequences. As the
TRANSFAC database cannot distinguish among SP/KLF family members, many of which
bind similar GC-rich DNA sequences, we surmise that SP1 or an SP1-like factor
could be involved in this response. In fact, we detected induction of SP6/KLF14
in the GeneChip studies, and confirmed it by real-time PCR. Additional
computational analyses suggested that an SP1-like factor may function
synergistically with a FOX TF to regulate a subset of these genes. Furthermore,
analysis of promoter sequences identified many genes with multiple, conserved SP1
and FOX binding sites, the relative location of which within orthologous
promoters was highly conserved.
CONCLUSION: SP1 or a closely related factor may play a primary role in the
genetic response to iron-deficiency in the mammalian intestine.

PMCID: PMC2220005
PMID: 18005439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2007 Aug;32(4):237-42.

[Effect of electroacupuncture of different acupoints on myoelectrical activities 
of the uterus in rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu JL(1), Chen SP, Gao YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acu-moxiguxtion, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100700, China. jlliu2765@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) of different
acupoints on electrical activities of the uterus in rats.
METHODS: A total of 79 Wistar rats anesthetized with mixture solution of 1.5%
chloralose (50 mg/kg) and 25% urethrane (420 mg/kg, i.p.). In the first part of
this study, 40 non-pregnant rats were randomized into control, "Neiguan" (PC 6), 
"Hegu" (LI 4) and "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) groups, with 10 cases in each group. In the
second part of this study, 39 pregnant rats were evenly randomized into control, 
"Neiguan" (PC 6) and "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) groups, with 13 cases in each group.
Electrohysterogram was recorded by using a bipolar stainless steel electrode
inserted in the sub-perimetrium layer of the mid part of the uterus. EA (2 mA,
5/15 Hz) was respectively applied to bilateral P, L4, and SP6 for 20 min.
RESULTS: (1)In nonpregnant rats, compared with control group, the amplitude and
frequency of fast waves (burst action potentials) and the amplitude of slow waves
in SP6 increased significantly (P < 0.05), and EA of LI4 had a similar effect in 
increasing the frequency of fast waves; while following EA of PA6, both frequency
and amplitude of fast waves nd the frequency of slow waves decreased
significantly (P < 0.05). In comparison with PC6 group, most indexes of SP6 and
LI4 groups during EA and 0-5 min after EA presented significant differences (P < 
0.05, 0.001). (2) In pregnant rats, compared with control group, both the
amplitude and frequency of fast waves and the amplitude of slow waves of the
electrohysterogram in SP6 group increased significantly (P < 0.05) and lasted a
longer time; while the frequency of both fast and slow waves decreased
considerably in PC6 group (P < 0.05). Comparison between SP6 and PC6 groups
showed significant differences in the frequency and amplitude of fast waves and
the frequency of slow waves during EA and after EA (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: EA of SP6 and LI4 can activate the myoelectrical activities of the
uterine in both non-pregnant and pregnant rats, and the effect of EA of SP6 is
stronger, whereas EA of PC6 can inhibit the myoelectrical activities of the
uterine. Different acupoints have their relatively specific effect.

PMID: 17907385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 9;373(5):1098-112. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Rz/Rz1 lysis gene equivalents in phages of Gram-negative hosts.

Summer EJ(1), Berry J, Tran TA, Niu L, Struck DK, Young R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 2128 TAMU, Texas A and M
University, College Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

Under usual laboratory conditions, lysis by bacteriophage lambda requires only
the holin and endolysin genes, but not the Rz and Rz1 genes, of the lysis
cassette. Defects in Rz or Rz1 block lysis only in the presence of high
concentrations of divalent cations. The lambda Rz and Rz1 lysis genes are
remarkable in that Rz1, encoding an outer membrane lipoprotein, is completely
embedded in the +1 register within Rz, which itself encodes an integral inner
membrane protein. While Rz and Rz1 equivalents have been identified in T7 and P2,
most phages, including such well-studied classic phages as T4, P1, T1, Mu and
SP6, lack annotated Rz/Rz1 equivalents. Here we report that a search strategy
based primarily on gene arrangement and membrane localization signals rather than
sequence similarity has revealed that Rz/Rz1 equivalents are nearly ubiquitous
among phages of Gram-negative hosts, with 120 of 137 phages possessing genes that
fit the search criteria. In the case of T4, a deletion of a non-overlapping gene 
pair pseT.2 and pseT.3 identified as Rz/Rz1 equivalents resulted in the same
divalent cation-dependent lysis phenotype. Remarkably, in T1 and six other
phages, Rz/Rz1 pairs were not found but a single gene encoding an outer membrane 
lipoprotein with a C-terminal transmembrane domain capable of integration into
the inner membrane was identified. These proteins were named "spanins," since
their protein products are predicted to span the periplasm providing a physical
connection between the inner and outer membranes. The T1 spanin gene was shown to
complement the lambda Rz-Rz1- lysis defect, indicating that spanins function as
Rz/Rz1 equivalents. The widespread presence of Rz/Rz1 or their spanin equivalents
in phages of Gram-negative hosts suggests a strong selective advantage and that
their role in the ecology of these phages is greater than that inferred from the 
mild laboratory phenotype.

PMID: 17900620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Dec;77(3):589-95. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Differential expression of cellulases and xylanases by Cellulomonas flavigena
grown on different carbon sources.

Sánchez-Herrera LM(1), Ramos-Valdivia AC, de la Torre M, Salgado LM, Ponce-Noyola
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, CINVESTAV-IPN, Av. IPN 2508,
San Pedro Zacatenco, 07300, DF, México.

The diversity of cellulases and xylanases secreted by Cellulomonas flavigena
cultured on sugar cane bagasse, Solka-floc, xylan, or glucose was explored by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. C. flavigena produced the largest variety of
cellulases and xylanases on sugar cane bagasse. Multiple extracellular proteins
were expressed with these growth substrates, and a limited set of them coincided 
in all substrates. Thirteen proteins with carboxymethyl cellulase or xylanase
activity were liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry sequenced. Proteins SP4 and
SP18 were identified as products of celA and celB genes, respectively, while SP20
and SP33 were isoforms of the bifunctional cellulase/xylanase Cxo recently
sequenced and characterized in C. flavigena. The rest of the detected proteins
were unknown enzymes with either carboxymethyl cellulase or xylanase activities. 
All proteins aligned with glycosyl hydrolases listed in National Center for
Biotechnology Information database, mainly with cellulase and xylanase enzymes.
One of these unknown enzymes, protein SP6, was cross-induced by sugar cane
bagasse, Solka-floc, and xylan. The differences in the expression maps of the
presently induced cultures revealed that C. flavigena produces and secretes
multiple enzymes to use a wide range of lignocellulosic substrates as carbon
sources. The expression of these proteins depends on the nature of the cellulosic
substrate.

PMID: 17899068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genetics. 2007 Oct;177(2):949-58. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Effects of recombination on hitchhiking diversity in the Brassica
self-incompatibility locus complex.

Takuno S(1), Fujimoto R, Sugimura T, Sato K, Okamoto S, Zhang SL, Nishio T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Graduate School of Agricultural
Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi 981-8555, Japan.

In self-incompatibility, a number of S haplotypes are maintained by
frequency-dependent selection, which results in trans-specific S haplotypes. The 
region of several kilobases (approximately 40-60 kb) from SP6 to SP2, including
self-incompatibility-related genes and some adjacent genes in Brassica rapa, has 
high nucleotide diversity due to the hitchhiking effect, and therefore we call
this region the "S-locus complex." Recombination in the S-locus complex is
considered to be suppressed. We sequenced regions of >50 kb of the S-locus
complex of three S haplotypes in B. rapa and found higher nucleotide diversity in
intergenic regions than in coding regions. Two highly similar regions of >10 kb
were found between BrS-8 and BrS-46. Phylogenetic analysis using trans-specific S
haplotypes (called interspecific pairs) of B. rapa and B. oleracea suggested that
recombination reduced the nucleotide diversity in these two regions and that the 
genes not involved in self-incompatibility in the S-locus complex and the kinase 
domain, but not the S domain, of SRK have also experienced recombination.
Recombination may reduce hitchhiking diversity in the S-locus complex, whereas
the region from the S domain to SP11 would disfavor recombination.

PMCID: PMC2034657
PMID: 17720932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Oct;73(19):6254-61. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Engineering of a type III rubisco from a hyperthermophilic archaeon in order to
enhance catalytic performance in mesophilic host cells.

Yoshida S(1), Atomi H, Imanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

The hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus kodakaraensis harbors a type III
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rbc(Tk)). It has previously been
shown that Rbc(Tk) is capable of supporting photoautotrophic and
photoheterotrophic growth in a mesophilic host cell, Rhodopseudomonas palustris
Delta3, whose three native Rubisco genes had been disrupted. Here, we have
examined the enzymatic properties of Rbc(Tk) at 25 degrees C and have constructed
mutant proteins in order to enhance its performance in mesophilic host cells.
Initial sites for mutagenesis were selected by focusing on sequence differences
in the loop 6 and alpha-helix 6 regions among Rbc(Tk) and the enzymes from
spinach (mutant proteins SP1 to SP7), Galdieria partita (GP1 and GP2), and
Rhodospirillum rubrum (RR1). Loop 6 of Rbc(Tk) is one residue longer than those
found in the spinach and G. partita enzymes, and replacing Rbc(Tk) loop 6 with
these regions led to dramatic decreases in activity. Six mutant enzymes retaining
significant levels of Rubisco activity were selected, and their genes were
introduced into R. palustris Delta3. Cells harboring mutant protein SP6 displayed
a 31% increase in the specific growth rate under photoheterotrophic conditions
compared to cells harboring wild-type Rbc(Tk). SP6 corresponds to a complete
substitution of the original alpha-helix 6 of Rbc(Tk) with that of the spinach
enzyme. Compared to wild-type Rbc(Tk), the purified SP6 mutant protein exhibited 
a 30% increase in turnover number (k(cat)) of the carboxylase activity and a 17% 
increase in the k(cat)/K(m) value. Based on these results, seven further mutant
proteins were designed and examined. The results confirmed the importance of the 
length of loop 6 in Rbc(Tk) and also led to the identification of specific
residue changes that resulted in an increase in the turnover number of Rbc(Tk) at
ambient temperatures.

PMCID: PMC2075004
PMID: 17675435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2007 Apr;32(2):132-5.

[Effect of acupuncture on bladder function in patients with radical
hysterectomy].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acu-moxibustion, General Hospital of the People's Liberation
Army, Beijing 100853, China. wxy821@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of acupuncture on the urodynamics of bladder
dysfunction in patients with radial hysterectomy.
METHODS: A total of 64 cases of bladder dysfunction patients with radial
hysterectomy were divided into urinary canal indwelling group (control group, 19 
cases), Sanyinjiao (SP 6) group (23 cases) and Baliao (bilateral BL 31, BL 32, BL
33 and BL 34) group (22 cases). EA (4 Hz, 4-6 V) was applied to the
abovementioned acupoints for 30 min, once daily. Catheters were replaced on the
7th day after surgical operation in all the patients and then removed after 5
days' treatment. Postvoid residual urine volume (PVR), maximum cystometric
capacity (MCC), and average flow rate (Q(ave)) of urine were detected after seven
days' treatment.
RESULTS: On the 7th day after operation, no significant differences were found
among 3 groups in PVR, MCC and Q(ave). On the 12th day, PVR of 3 groups decreased
significantly (P < 0.05) and Q(ave) of SP6 and Baliao groups increased
considerably (P < 0.05). In comparison with control group, PVR of SP6 and Baliao 
groups decreased considerably, while Q(ave) of the two acupuncture groups
increased significantly (P < 0.05), and the therapeutic effects of Baliao group
were obviously superior to those of SP6 group (P < 0.05). Of the 19, 23 and 22
patients with urinary canal indwelling in control, SP6 and Baliao groups, 16
(84.21%), 18 (78.26%) and 7 (31.82%) had no marked improvement in the bladder
function on the 12th day after operation. On the 7th and 12th day after
operation, the urinary tract infection was found in 1 and 10 cases in control
group, 2 and 8 cases in SP6 group, and 2 and 6 cases in Baliao group
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture has a good therapeutic effect in improving the
urodynamics of the bladder in radial hysterectomy patients, and the action of
Baliao is the best.

PMID: 17650660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biochimie. 2007 Nov;89(11):1381-7. Epub 2007 Jun 3.

The Sp6 locus uses several promoters and generates sense and antisense
transcripts.

Hertveldt V(1), De Mees C, Scohy S, Van Vooren P, Szpirer J, Szpirer C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Rue Profs Jeener & Brachet, 12, B-6041, Gosselies (Charleroi),
Belgium.

The SP/KLF transcription factor family contains over 25 members sharing a
DNA-binding domain composed of three zinc fingers of the C(2)H(2) type. We
previously identified the sixth member of the SP subfamily (Sp6). The 5' end of
the Sp6 transcript was not cloned and was predicted bioinformatically. A mouse
molar tooth cDNA was then isolated differing from the Sp6 sequence by its 5' end,
and was named epiprofin. Sp6 and epiprofin are currently used as synonyms. Here, 
we show that the Sp6 transcript possesses a first exon distinct from the
epiprofin one: the Sp6 gene thus uses two promoters, generating two transcript
variants which differ in their first exon. Furthermore, we identified an Sp6
opposite strand transcript (Sp6os) and examined, by quantitative RT-PCR
experiments, the presence and the abundance of these two transcripts in mouse
tissues. We also mapped the mouse locus by FISH to chromosome 11D.

PMID: 17624655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Jun;32(3):437-42.

[Dicer efficiently converts large dsRNAs into siRNAs suitable for COX-2 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo H(1), Hu DX, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China. luohong1003@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To report the use of Dicer to cleave double-stranded RNA (dsRNAs) into
small interference RNAs (D-siRNAs) that can target multiple sites within an mRNA,
and to acquire an new method to cure inflammation of the airway and tumor.
METHODS: Using RiboMAX Large Scale RNA Production Systems-SP6 and T7 kit were
used to transcribe A549 cell COX-2 DNA into RNA (dsRNAs). We mixed dsRNAs with
Dicer in the reaction buffer. We recovered siRNAs using RNA Purification Column.
RESULTS: Dicer efficiently converted double-stranded RNA of COX-2 into small
interference RNAs of 21 approximately 23 bp.
CONCLUSION: Dicer efficiently converts double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) into small
interference RNAs (D-siRNAs of 21 approximately 23 bp).

PMID: 17611321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Yi Chuan. 2007 Apr;29(4):483-9.

[Identification and analysis of differentially expressed genes during wood
formation in Chinese fir by SSH].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang GF(1), Gao Y, Yang LW, Shi JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Gene Engineering, Nanjing Forestry
University, Nanjing 210037, China.

Wood is an important raw material for the global industry with rapidly increasing
demand. To isolate the differentially expressed genes in xylogenesis of Chinese
fir [Cunninghamia lanceolata (Lamb.) Hook], a forward subtractive cDNA library
was constructed using suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) method, which
was performed using the cDNA from the mutant Dugansha clone as the tester and the
cDNA from the normal Jurong 0 clone as the driver. Six hundred and eighteen
clones were obtained. Recombinants were identified using PCR with universal T7
and SP6 primers and using EcoR digestion. To further eliminate false positive,
dot hybridization was used with four DIG-labeled probes (FSP, RSP, UTP, and UDP).
Real-time PCR was performed to confirm the results. A total of 260 unique ESTs
were obtained, 60% of the ESTs exhibiting homologies with proteins of known
function fell into 4 major classes: metabolism, cell wall biogenesis and
remodeling, signal transduction and stress. The systematic analysis of genes
involved in wood formation in Chinese fir provides valuable insights into the
molecular mechanisms involved in xylem differentiation, is important resources
for forest research directed toward understanding the genetic control of wood
formation and future endeavors to modify wood and fiber properties for industrial
use.

PMID: 17548313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007 Aug;100(6):693-700. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Effect of transcutaneous electrical acupoint stimulation on fatigue recovery of
the quadriceps.

So RC(1), Ng JK, Ng GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
and Sports Science Deparment, Hong Kong Sports Institute, 25 Yuen Wo Road,
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China. raymonds@hksi.org.hk

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of transcutaneous electrical
acupoint stimulation (TEAS) at selected acupoints on enhancing the rate of muscle
force recovery after strenuous knee extension/flexion exercise. Ten male and
seven female healthy young adults participated in this study in which they
performed isokinetic knee fatigue exercise on the Biodex System 3 ergometer on
three separate days. After the familiarization trial on day 1, subjects underwent
15 min of either TEAS or pseudo-TEAS recovery treatment after the isokinetic
exercise in the following two trials on days 2 and 3, respectively. The TEAS
treatment was applied on four selected acupoints [Zusanli (ST36), Chenshan
(BL57), Yanglingquan (GB34) and Sanyinjiao (SP6)] while the pseudo-TEAS treatment
was applied to the points away from the true acupoints. Isometric knee extension 
peak torque was measured before and immediately after the test exercise, and
again during the 15-min recovery period at 5-min intervals. Blood lactate and
median power frequency (MF) of the vastus medialis, vastus lateralis and rectus
femoris were also measured at the same time points. The results indicated that
the TEAS treatment was significantly more effective than the pseudo-TEAS
treatment in enhancing the rate of muscle force recovery (knee extension peak
torque recovery after 15 min, from 155 to 195 Nm in TEAS group and from 155 to
182 Nm in the pseudo-TEAS group), but had no effect on lactate removal and MF
restitution rate. It is proposed that pain control is a plausible mechanism to
explain the benefit of TEAS treatment. As TEAS is a non-invasive and simple
treatment, it is feasible to apply it during and immediately after training.

PMID: 17546460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS Genet. 2007 May 4;3(5):e65. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Identification of the imprinted KLF14 transcription factor undergoing
human-specific accelerated evolution.

Parker-Katiraee L(1), Carson AR, Yamada T, Arnaud P, Feil R, Abu-Amero SN, Moore 
GE, Kaneda M, Perry GH, Stone AC, Lee C, Meguro-Horike M, Sasaki H, Kobayashi K, 
Nakabayashi K, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Imprinted genes are expressed in a parent-of-origin manner and are located in
clusters throughout the genome. Aberrations in the expression of imprinted genes 
on human Chromosome 7 have been suggested to play a role in the etiologies of
Russell-Silver Syndrome and autism. We describe the imprinting of KLF14, an
intronless member of the Krüppel-like family of transcription factors located at 
Chromosome 7q32. We show that it has monoallelic maternal expression in all
embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues studied, in both human and mouse. We
examine epigenetic modifications in the KLF14 CpG island in both species and find
this region to be hypomethylated. In addition, we perform chromatin
immunoprecipitation and find that the murine Klf14 CpG island lacks
allele-specific histone modifications. Despite the absence of these defining
features, our analysis of Klf14 in offspring from DNA methyltransferase 3a
conditional knockout mice reveals that the gene's expression is dependent upon a 
maternally methylated region. Due to the intronless nature of Klf14 and its
homology to Klf16, we suggest that the gene is an ancient retrotransposed copy of
Klf16. By sequence analysis of numerous species, we place the timing of this
event after the divergence of Marsupialia, yet prior to the divergence of the
Xenarthra superclade. We identify a large number of sequence variants in KLF14
and, using several measures of diversity, we determine that there is greater
variability in the human lineage with a significantly increased number of
nonsynonymous changes, suggesting human-specific accelerated evolution. Thus,
KLF14 may be the first example of an imprinted transcript undergoing accelerated 
evolution in the human lineage.

PMCID: PMC1865561
PMID: 17480121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Physiol Sci. 2007 Apr;57(2):115-9. Epub 2007 Mar 24.

The alteration of pain sensitivity at disease-specific acupuncture points in
premenstrual syndrome.

Chae Y(1), Kim HY, Lee HJ, Park HJ, Hahm DH, An K, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture and Meridian Science Research Center (AMSRC), Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Acupuncture points (APs) are well known to be small regions of local or referred 
pain that are more sensitive than surrounding tissue. Based on bibliographical
and clinical data, specific conditions are commonly believed to change the pain
sensitivity at corresponding APs. The aim of the present study was to investigate
whether the pressure pain threshold (PPT) of specific APs is associated with the 
severity of premenstrual syndrome. The 46 participants were female students
attending a middle school. Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) was measured using a
structured questionnaire, the menstruation distress questionnaire (MDQ). High PMS
(HP) and low PMS (LP) groups were divided based on their MDQ scores. The PPTs at 
sites in the leg (the APs SP6, GB39, and LR3 and a non-AP 2-cm anterior to SP6)
and in the arm (the APs PC6, TE5, and LI4 and a non-AP 2-cm proximal to PC6) were
measured using an algometer. The PPT of the HP group at SP6 was significantly
lower than that of the LP group (13.50 +/- 0.73 vs. 16.30 +/- 0.66 kilopascals, P
< 0.05), but not at other APs or at non-APs. The findings of our study support
the hypothesis that the alteration of pain threshold at specific APs is
associated with the severity of corresponding diseases. Further studies are
needed to determine whether an observation of pain sensitivity at the APs could
be used as an adjunctive tool for the diagnosis of a clinical problem.

PMID: 17378970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Apr 4;129(13):3857-62. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

Quasi chiral phase separation in a two-dimensional orientationally disordered
system: 6-nitrospiropyran on Au(111).

Huang T(1), Hu Z, Zhao A, Wang H, Wang B, Yang J, Hou JG.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, People's Republic of China.

The adsorption and chiral expression of 6-nitrospiropyran (SP6) molecules on a
Au(111) surface are studied by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) in combination
with density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Both the chirality and the
adsorption orientation of each adsorbed SP6 molecule are determined. The racemic 
mixture of SP6 enantiomers forms two-dimensional (2D) domains with same close
packed positional orders but different internal orientational structures due to
the random distribution of two adsorption orientations in each domain. However,
all these orientationally disordered 2D domains undergo spontaneous quasi chiral 
phase separation; the 2D SP6 domains separate into 1D homochiral chains in which 
the SP6 molecules adopt two orientations randomly. This novel phenomenon is
attributed to the preferential formation of the energetic favorable
configurations with both the C-H...O weak hydrogen bonds and the pi-stacking of
the two moieties of each SP6 molecule.

PMID: 17346042  [PubMed]


313. Gynecol Oncol. 2007 May;105(2):291-8. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Efficacy of anti-death receptor 5 (DR5) antibody (TRA-8) against primary human
ovarian carcinoma using a novel ex vivo tissue slice model.

Estes JM(1), Oliver PG, Straughn JM Jr, Zhou T, Wang W, Grizzle WE, Alvarez RD,
Stockard CR, LoBuglio AF, Buchsbaum DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 619
19th Street South, OHB 538, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA. jmestes21@mac.com

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the cytotoxicity of a death
receptor 5 (DR5) targeting monoclonal antibody (TRA-8) in primary ovarian cancer 
specimens utilizing a tissue slice technique that allows for assessment of
anti-tumor activity in a three-dimensional ex vivo model.
METHODS: Nineteen primary ovarian tumor specimens were obtained at the time of
cytoreductive surgery and tumor slices were prepared with the Krumdieck tissue
slicer. Tumor slices were incubated with TRA-8 for 24 h and a dose-response curve
was established for each specimen using non-linear modeling, with IC50 values
used as the parameter of TRA-8 sensitivity. In parallel with ATP viability
assays, TRA-8 treated and untreated tumor slices were assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and western blot analysis to confirm apoptosis
induction.
RESULTS: Incubation with 0-1000 ng/ml TRA-8 resulted in a dose response with
maximum killing observed at 1000 ng/ml compared to untreated control slices. IC50
values of 6.0 to >1000 ng/ml were calculated for individual tumor specimens. H&E,
IHC, and western blot specimens demonstrated TRA-8-induced cellular death in a
dose-dependent fashion via apoptosis and activation of caspases 3, 8, and 9. The 
apoptosis produced by varying concentrations of TRA-8 was confirmed using the
TUNEL technique. Treatment with TRA-8 markedly reduced proliferation in the
ovarian cancer cells as measured by expression of Ki-67/SP6.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that targeting DR5 with TRA-8 decreases
cellular proliferation, increases caspase activation, and induces apoptosis in
this novel three-dimensional ex vivo model of primary ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17303227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Carcinog. 2007 Jan 29;6:2.

Expression and migratory analysis of 5 human uveal melanoma cell lines for
CXCL12, CXCL8, CXCL1, and HGF.

Di Cesare S(1), Marshall JC, Logan P, Antecka E, Faingold D, Maloney SC, Burnier 
MN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)The Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory and Registry, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, PQ, Canada. sebastian.dicesare@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to characterize the presence and roles of
CXCL12, CXCL8, CXCL1, and HGF in five human uveal melanoma cell lines, using
different methods, in order to ascertain their significance in this disease.
METHODS: Five human uveal melanoma cell lines (92.1, SP6.5, MKT-BR, OCM-1, and
UW-1) of known proliferative, invasive, and metastatic potential were used in
this experiment. A migration assay was used in order to assess the responsiveness
of each cell line towards the four chosen chemotactic factors.
Immunohistochemistry was then performed for all five cell lines (cytospins) using
antibodies directed toward CXCL1, CXCL8 and their receptors CXCR2 and CXCR1
respectively. Quantitative real-time PCR was then performed on all five cell
lines in order to establish the presence of these four chemotactic factors.
RESULTS: All five human uveal melanoma cell lines migrated towards the four
chosen chemotactic factors at a level greater than that of the negative control. 
Chemokines CXCL1 and CXCL8 resulted in the greatest number of migrating cells in 
all five of our cell lines. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the expression of
CXCL1, CXCL8, and their receptors CXCR2 and CXCR1 in all five of the cell lines. 
Quantitative real-time PCR results established expression of CXCL8, CXCL1, and
HGF in all 5 cell lines tested. CXCL1 and CXCL8 are highly expressed in SP6.5 and
UW-1. None of the five cell lines expressed any detectable levels of CXCL12.
CONCLUSION: The migratory ability of the 5 human uveal melanoma cell lines was
positively influenced by the four chemotactic factors tested, namely CXCL12,
CXCL8, CXCL1, and HGF. Self-expression of chemotactic factors CXCL8, CXCL1, and
HGF may indicate an autocrine system, which perhaps contributes to the cells'
metastatic ability in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1790892
PMID: 17261188  [PubMed]


315. Surg Today. 2007;37(2):103-8. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Effects of acupressure on lower limb blood flow for the treatment of peripheral
arterial occlusive diseases.

Li X(1), Hirokawa M, Inoue Y, Sugano N, Qian S, Iwai T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of acupressure on lower limb blood flow for
the treatment of peripheral arterial occlusive diseases (PAOD).
METHODS: From February 2004 to February 2005, 30 patients with stage II PAOD
underwent measurements of the lower limb blood flow. Six patients (group A) were 
assigned as controls without any acupoint stimulation, while 24 (group B)
underwent stimulation at acupoints by acupressure. The acupoints Yanglingquan
(GB34), Zusanli (ST36), Yinlingquan (SP9), and Sanyinjiao (SP6) of the
symptomatic lower limbs were stimulated for 3 min. Transcutaneous oximetry
(tcPO2) was used to determine the blood flow of the chest wall, bilateral distal 
crura, and bilateral dorsa of the foot before and during the stimulations at the 
acupoints.
RESULTS: Group A showed no significant change in the lower limb blood flow. In
group B, the tcPO2 values of chest wall, bilateral distal crura, and the dorsum
of foot of the stimulated lower limb increased significantly during acupressure
(P < 0.01), whereas no significant change was shown in the dorsum of the foot of 
the non-stimulated lower limb. Moreover, the blood flow of the lower limbs that
had undergone an ipsilateral sympathectomy increased significantly (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Acupressure was found to cause significant increases in the lower
limb blood flow of stage II PAOD patients. This treatment modality may therefore 
be effective for improving the symptoms of such patients.

PMID: 17243026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. CSH Protoc. 2007 Aug 1;2007:pdb.prot4778. doi: 10.1101/pdb.prot4778.

Synthesis and purification of digoxigenin-labeled RNA probes for in situ
hybridization.

Sive HL, Grainger RM, Harland RM.

INTRODUCTIONIn situ hybridization is the most versatile method for determining
when and where embryonic transcripts are expressed. Although a detailed analysis 
of gene expression often requires analysis of sectioned material, the whole-mount
approach is invariably the first method used to localize gene expression.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization has also become an invaluable tool for
analyzing experimentally manipulated embryos and explants. The information gained
using this technique is similar to that obtained from immunohistochemistry and
includes not only the location of expression but a semiquantitative estimate of
the relative levels of gene expression in different parts of the embryo. Because 
most genes are first analyzed as genomic or cDNA clones, it is straightforward to
derive specific probes from these sequences. In this protocol, standard RNA
synthesis using a bacteriophage polymerase is carried out incorporating a
digoxigenin-substituted ribonucleotide, dig-UTP. In vitro transcription in the
direction opposite to in vivo transcription of the mRNA makes an antisense RNA
that is complementary to the mRNA. The ratio of dig-UTP to UTP has been optimized
to give efficient synthesis and efficient detection of the probe. The three
commercially available bacteriophage polymerases (SP6, T7, and T3) all
incorporate the substituted nucleotide with equivalent efficiencies, and thus
there is a wide choice of plasmid vectors to prepare the template.

PMID: 21357143  [PubMed]


317. CSH Protoc. 2007 Nov 1;2007:pdb.prot4822. doi: 10.1101/pdb.prot4822.

In situ hybridization of whole-mount mouse embryos with RNA probes: preparation
of embryos and probes.

Lufkin T.

INTRODUCTIONThis is the first of two protocols describing how to perform in situ 
hybridization on whole mouse embryos. Here we describe how to fix and
permeabilize embryos with detergent and how to synthesize single-stranded RNA
probes (riboprobes) in vitro using UTP labeled with the plant steroid digoxigenin
(DIG-11-UTP). Antisense digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes are synthesized as run-off
transcripts from linearized plasmid templates using bacteriophage RNA polymerases
(T3, T7, SP6) under standard conditions. The probe is precipitated with ethanol
in the presence of NaCl, and after resuspension in DEPC-treated H(2)O is stable
at -20°C for many months. Probes ranging from 250 to 1500 bp have been used
successfully. The optimal probe concentration is in the 100 ng to 1 µg/mL range
and should be determined empirically.

PMID: 21356975  [PubMed]


318. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2006 Nov;26(11):965-8.

[Study on brain response to acupuncture by functional magnetic resonance
imaging--observation on 14 healthy subjects].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang SH(1), Zhang SZ, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Sir Run Shaw Hospital Affiliated to College of Medical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou. fangsonghua@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the signal changes of brain functional area during needling
Sanyinjiao (ST36), Zusanli (SP6) and Yanglingquan (GB34), the three acupoints in 
three different meridians, in human by functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), in order to preliminary explore the neural mechanism of acupuncture.
METHODS: Needling was complemented with 30 s of maneuver applying followed by 30 
s of rest as a circle on an acupoint, and at the same time, fMRI was performed
once 5 min and 12 s. Then the same program was repeated with the same mode on
another acupoint, until ending the experiment.
RESULTS: The commonly activated regions were postcentral gyrus and right inferior
frontal gyrus when needling at ST36 and SP6, and the different activated areas
included left inferior frontal gyrus, left insula, left inferior parietal lobule,
left culmen, left middle temporal gyrus and left middle frontal gyrus, while no
cortical signal enhanced region was found when needling at GB34. Signal weakened 
regions could be found when needling at all the three points, the commonly
activated regions were bilateral parahippocampal, hippocampal, callosal gyrus,
bilateral praecuneus and cerebellum.
CONCLUSION: Brain response in special regions could be obtained by needling at
different acupoints.

PMID: 17186721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser (Oxf). 2004;(48):221-2.

Real time monitoring of the interaction of T7 RNA polymerase with
azobenzene-tethered T7 promoter by biosensor.

Liu M(1), Asanuma H, Komiyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

We have already reported that transcription reaction by phage T7 or SP6 RNA
polymerase (RNAP) can be reversibly photo-regulated with azobenzene-tethered
promoter. Transcription reaction proceeded faster by UV irradiation than visible 
light irradiation. In the present study, binding of T7 RNAP to its
azobenzene-tethered promoter was directly monitored by use of affinity biosensor.
When azobenzene-tethered T7 promoter was immobilized on the sensor surface,
response based on the binding of RNAP increased by UV light irradiation rather
than by visible light irradiation. Thus, photo-regulation of transcription
reaction by azobenzene-tethered promoter was attributed to the change of binding 
property of RNAP to the promoter by trans-cis isomerization of azobenzene.

PMID: 17150558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Melanoma Res. 2006 Dec;16(6):537-41.

The effect of blue light exposure and use of intraocular lenses on human uveal
melanoma cell lines.

Marshall JC(1), Gordon KD, McCauley CS, de Souza Filho JP, Burnier MN.

Author information: 
(1)Henry C Witelson Ocular Pathology Laboratory and Registry, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. jeanclaude.marshall@gmail.com

Little is known about the effect of blue light on inducing melanocytic malignant 
transformation. We chose to investigate the effect of blue light (475 nm
wavelength) on the proliferation rates of uveal melanoma cells. In addition, we
tested two different intraocular lenses to determine the possible effects of
ultraviolet absorbing and blue light filtering intraocular lenses on the changes 
in proliferation. Four human uveal melanoma cell lines (92.1, MKT-BR, OCM-1,
SP6.5) were exposed to blue light with and without the presence of ultraviolet
absorbing and blue light filtering intraocular lenses. Cells covered by aluminum 
foil were used as a control. The proliferation rate of the cells compared with
the control was then assessed using the Sulforhodamine-B proliferation assay.
Cells exposed to blue light showed a statistically significant (P<0.05) increase 
in proliferation. Those exposed to blue light through a standard ultraviolet
absorbing intraocular lens showed a smaller increase in proliferation, whereas
those exposed with a blue light filtering intraocular lens showed no increase in 
proliferation than the control in all four cell lines. The exposure of cells to
blue light led to an increase in proliferation in all cell lines compared with
the control. The use of blue light filtering intraocular lenses abolished these
increases in proliferation in the four cell lines. These results indicate that
blue light filtering intraocular lenses may have a protective effect on the
proliferation rates of uveal melanoma cells exposed to blue light.

PMID: 17119455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2006 Sep;35(5):540-2.

[Construction of thr461 --> Asn461 and Ile462 --> Val462 mutation vector of
P4501A1 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei Q(1), Liu YM, Wang H, Zhao XL, Ren TL, Xiao YM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Sun Yatsen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct Thr461 --> Asn461 and Ile462 --> Val462 mutation vector
of P4501A1 gene and to provide scientific base for deeply researching on the
function of cytochrome 1A1 gene (CYP1A1) and the mechanism of carcinogenesis.
METHODS: According to cDNA sequence of human CYP1A1 gene, universal primers
(Pm3/Pm4) and mutant primers (Pt15/Pt16 and Pt17/Pt18) containing restriction
enzyme site and mutation site were designed. The first set of primers involving
Pm3/Pt16 and Pm3/Pt18 amplified a forward 1.5kb fragment from pGEM-T-CYP1A1
plasmid. The second set of primers involving Pt15/Pm4 and Pt17/Pm4 amplified a
reverse 177-bp fragment from 10ng pGEM-T-CYP1A1 plasmid. The third set of primers
involving Pm3/Pm4 amplified a 1.5kb fragment from the fomer PCR amplifications.
The third PCR products were separated, purified and recovered from 1% agarose
gel, then inserted into pMD-T vector. Subsequently the conjunct products were
transformed into E. coil strain DH-5alpha., then the single clone was screened
out and plasmids were extracted from such clone finally verified by restriction
endonuclease analysis and sequencing.
RESULTS: A 1.5kb fragment of tricycle PCR amplifications were digested by
restriction endonucleases (BamHI and SailI) and sequenced bidirectionally by
universal primers(T7p and SP6). The results verified that the cloned fragment
including Asn461 and Val462 mutant site had 99.9% homology with the human cDNA of
CYP1A1 gene in Genebank.
CONCLUSION: The objective fragment containing Asn461 and Va462 mutant site with
cDNA of the CYP1A1 gene has been successfully constructed in this experiment.

PMID: 17086697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Insect Mol Biol. 2006 Oct;15(5):603-14.

Comparative analysis of serine protease-related genes in the honey bee genome:
possible involvement in embryonic development and innate immunity.

Zou Z(1), Lopez DL, Kanost MR, Evans JD, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, USA.

We have identified 44 serine protease (SP) and 13 serine protease homolog (SPH)
genes in the genome of Apis mellifera. Most of these genes encode putative
secreted proteins, but four SPs and three SPHs may associate with the plasma
membrane via a transmembrane region. Clip domains represent the most abundant
non-catalytic structural units in these SP-like proteins -12 SPs and six SPHs
contain at least one clip domain. Some of the family members contain other
modules for protein-protein interactions, including disulphide-stabilized
structures (LDL(r)A, SRCR, frizzled, kringle, Sushi, Wonton and Pan/apple),
carbohydrate-recognition domains (C-type lectin and chitin-binding), and other
modules (such as zinc finger, CUB, coiled coil and Sina). Comparison of the
sequences with those from Drosophila led to a proposed SP pathway for
establishing the dorsoventral axis of honey bee embryos. Multiple sequence
alignments revealed evolutionary relationships of honey bee SPs and SPHs with
those in Drosophila melanogaster, Anopheles gambiae, and Manduca sexta. We
identified homologs of D. melanogaster persephone, M. sexta HP14, PAP-1 and
SPH-1. A. mellifera genome includes at least five genes for potential SP
inhibitors (serpin-1 through -5) and three genes of SP putative substrates
(prophenoloxidase, spätzle-1 and spätzle-2). Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed 
an elevation in the mRNA levels of SP2, SP3, SP9, SP10, SPH41, SPH42, SP49,
serpin-2, serpin-4, serpin-5, and spätzle-2 in adults after a microbial
challenge. The SP41 and SP6 transcripts significantly increased after an
injection of Paenibacillus larva, but there was no such increase after injection 
of saline or Escherichia coli. mRNA levels of most SPs and serpins significantly 
increased by 48 h after the pathogen infection in 1st instar larvae. On the
contrary, SP1, SP3, SP19 and serpin-5 transcript levels reduced. These results,
taken together, provide a framework for designing experimental studies of the
roles of SPs and related proteins in embryonic development and immune responses
of A. mellifera.

PMCID: PMC1761132
PMID: 17069636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2006 Sep;26(9):799-802.

[Effects of acupuncture for dispersing fei, invigorating pi and reinforcing shen 
on heart rate variability and pulmonary function in bronchial asthma patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang WP(1).

Author information: 
(1)China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing. 168zhwp@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the acting mechanism of acupuncture treatment for
dispersing Fei, invigorating Pi and reinforcing Shen (DFIPRS) on bronchial
asthma.
METHODS: Seventy-one chronic asthma patients in persistent or remission period
were randomly assigned to two groups with stratified method, the treated group
(40 cases) and the control group (31 cases). Anti-asthmatic medicine were given
to both groups and acupuncture therapy to the treated group additionally on the
acupoints for DFIPRS including Quchi (Lt11), Lieque (LU7), Yuji (Lu10), Neiguan
(P6), Zusanli (ST36), Sanyinjiao (Sp6) and Taixi (K13) using uniform
reinforcing-reducing manipulation. The changes of heart rate variability (HRV)
frequency-domain index and the pulmonary function were observed before and after 
treatment, and the immediate effect before and after the first needling of
acupuncture was also observed in 17 patients.
RESULTS: After acupuncture treatment, the indices of pulmonary function improved 
significantly and the function of vegetative nervous system, showed by HRV, were 
also elevated in the treated group (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01) and significantly
superior to that in the control group after treatment (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01 ).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture therapy could significantly improve pulmonary function of
asthma patients, its mechanism may be related to the regulation of vegetative
nerve function.

PMID: 17058829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2006 Aug;19(8):465-70.

A randomized controlled trial of acupuncture for initiation of labor in
nulliparous women.

Harper TC(1), Coeytaux RR, Chen W, Campbell K, Kaufman JS, Moise KJ, Thorp JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of North Carolina, NC,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the utility of outpatient acupuncture for labor
stimulation.
METHODS: Nulliparous women at 39 4/7 weeks or greater with a singleton gestation 
and Bishop score of less than 7 were randomized to usual medical care (control
group) versus usual care and three outpatient acupuncture treatments (acupuncture
group). Each treatment consisted of eight needles applied to bilateral points
LI4, SP6, UB31, and UB32. The primary outcome was time elapsed from the time of
randomization to delivery. Secondary outcomes included rates of cesarean section 
and induction of labor. Medical records were abstracted for maternal demographic,
medical, and delivery outcome data. A priori sample size calculation revealed
that 56 women were required to detect a 72-hour difference in delivery time with 
a power of 83% and an alpha of 0.05. Student's t-test, Chi-square, and
Kaplan-Meier statistics were used to compare groups.
RESULTS: Fifty-six women were randomized and completed the study procedures.
Race, age, gestational age, and cervical Bishop score were similar in both
groups. Mean time to delivery occurred 21 hours sooner in the acupuncture group, 
but this difference did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.36). Compared
to controls, women in the acupuncture group tended to be more likely to labor
spontaneously (70% vs. 50%, p = 0.12) and less likely to deliver by cesarean
section (39% vs. 17%, p = 0.07). Of women who were not induced, those in the
acupuncture group were more likely to be delivered than the controls at any point
after enrollment (p = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture is well tolerated among term nulliparous women and holds 
promise in reducing interventions that occur in post-term pregnancies.

PMID: 16966110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Aug 30;128(34):11188-98.

Manganese oxides: parallels between abiotic and biotic structures.

Saratovsky I(1), Wightman PG, Pastén PA, Gaillard JF, Poeppelmeier KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208,
USA.

A large number of microorganisms are responsible for the oxidation of
Mn(2+)((aq)) to insoluble Mn(3+/4+) oxides (MnO(x)()) in natural aquatic systems.
This paper reports the structure of the biogenic MnO(x)(), including a
quantitative analysis of cation vacancies, formed by the freshwater bacterium
Leptothrix discophora SP6 (SP6-MnO(x)()). The structure and the morphology of
SP6-MnO(x)() were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray 
absorption spectroscopy (XAS), including full multiple-scattering analysis, and
powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). The biogenic precipitate consists of
nanoparticles that are approximately 10 nm by 100 nm in dimension with a
fibrillar morphology that resembles twisted sheets. The results dem-onstrate that
this biogenic MnO(x)() is composed of sheets of edge-sharing of Mn(4+)O(6)
octahedra that form layers. The detailed analysis of the EXAFS spectra indicate
that 12 +/- 4% of the Mn(4+) layer cation sites in SP6-MnO(x)() are vacant,
whereas the analysis of the XANES suggests that the average oxidation state of Mn
is 3.8 +/- 0.3. Therefore, the average chemical formula of SP6-MnO(x)() is
M(n)()(+)(y)()Mn(3+)(0.12)[ square(0.12)Mn(4+)(0.88)]O(2).zH(2)O, where
M(n)()(+)(y)() represents hydrated interlayer cations, square(0.12) represents
Mn(4+) cation vacancies within the layer, and Mn(3+)(0.12) represents hydrated
cations that occupy sites above/below these cation vacancies.

PMID: 16925437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Nurs Stud. 2007 Aug;44(6):973-81. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Effects of acupressure on dysmenorrhea and skin temperature changes in college
students: a non-randomized controlled trial.

Jun EM(1), Chang S, Kang DH, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, College of Natural Science, Dong-eui University,
Kaya-dong, Pusan, Republic of Korea. charminggold@hanmail.net
<charminggold@hanmail.net>

BACKGROUND: Complementary and alternative therapies may be adopted as nursing
interventions to alleviate dysmenorrhea and improve productivity, creativity,
work performance, and quality of life.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of San Yin Jiao (SP6)
acupressure as a non-pharmacologic nursing intervention for dysmenorrhea and
identify its effects on temperature changes in two related acupoints as an
explanatory mechanism of chi circulation.
DESIGN: A non-equivalent control group pre and post-test design was employed to
verify the effects of SP6 acupressure on skin temperature and dysmenorrhea.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Young college women with primary dysmenorrhea were
recruited from classrooms at two universities in Korea and 58 eligible
participants were allotted to either a SP6 acupressure group or placebo group
that received light touch on the SP6 acupoint.
METHODS: The experimental group received acupressure treatment within the first
8h of menstruation, and severity of dysmenorrhea and skin temperature changes in 
the Zhongwan (CV2) and Qugu (CV12) acupoints were assessed prior to and 30 min,
1, 2, and 3h following treatment.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in severity of dysmenorrhea between
the two groups immediately after (F=18.50, p=0.000) and for up to 2h (F=8.04,
p=0.032) post treatment. Skin temperature was significantly elevated at 30 min
after acupressure at the suprapubic CV2 acupoint in the experimental group
compared to the control group. Temperature elevation was also noted at the
epigastric CV12 acupoint post treatment but group differences were not
significant, indicating that SP6 acupressure relieves dysmenorrhea primarily by
temperature elevation in the CV2 pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Acupressure to the SP6 meridian can be an effective non-invasive
nursing intervention for alleviation of primary dysmenorrhea, with effects
lasting 2h post treatment.

PMID: 16782102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2006 May;22(3):492-8.

[Construction of recombinant yellow fever virus 17D containing 2A fragment as a
vaccine vector].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiaowu P(1), Fu WC, Guo YH, Zhang LS, Xie TP, Xinbin G.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Oriental Tengen Tech Development Co., Ltd., Beijing 100078, China.

The Yellow Fever (YF) vaccine, an attenuated yellow fever 17D (YF-17D) live
vaccine, is one of the most effective and safest vaccines in the world and is
regarded as one of the best candidates for viral expression vector. We here first
reported in China the construction and characterization of the recombinant
expression vector of yellow fever 17D which contained the proteinase 2A fragment 
of foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV). Three cDNA fragments representing the
full-length YF-17D genome, named 5'-end cDNA (A), 3'-end cDNA (B) and middle cDNA
(C), were obtained by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR),
together with the introduction of SP6 enhancer, necessary restriction sites and
overlaps for homologous recombination in yeast. Fragment A and B were then
introduced into pRS424 in turn by DNA recombination, followed by transfection of 
fragment C and the recombinant pRS424 containing A and B (pRS-A-B) into yeast. A 
recombinant vector containing full length cDNA of YF-17D (pRS-YF) was obtained by
screening on medium lack of tryptophan and uracil. A recombinant YF-17D
expression vector containing FMDV-2A gene fragment (pRS-YF-2A1) was then
constructed by methods of DNA recombination and homologous recombination in yeast
described above. In vitro transcription of the recombinant vector pRS-YF-2A1 was 
then carried out and introduced into BHK-21 cells by electroporation. Results of 
indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) and titer determination showed a stable
infectious recombinant virus was gotten, whose features such as growth curve were
similar to those of the parental YF-17D. The results suggest that the recombinant
vector pRS-YF-2A1, by introduction of heterogenous genes via 2A region, is
potential to be an effective live vaccine expression vector.

PMID: 16755933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Tradit Chin Med. 2006 Mar;26(1):22-3.

Acupuncture plus point-injection for 32 cases of obstinate urticaria.

Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second People's Hospital of Foshan, Guangdong 528000, China.

In order to observe the therapeutic effects of acupuncture plus point-injection
for obstinate urticaria, 64 cases of obstinate urticaria were randomly divided
into the following two groups. 32 cases in the treatment group were treated with 
acupuncture at the points of Quchi (LI11), Xuehai (SP10), Zusanli (ST 36),
Sanyinjiao (SP6) and Fengchi (GB20) plus point-injection at the points of Zusanli
(ST36) and Quchi (LI11). 32 cases in the control group were treated with
antihistamines (such as Acrivastine, Cinnarizine or Ranitidine). The results
showed that the therapeutic effect in the treatment group was obviously better
than that in the control group (P < 0.05), with a much lower relapse rate in the 
former than that in the latter (P < 0.01).

PMID: 16705847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Jun;60(5):1123-35.

Evolution of bacteriophages infecting encapsulated bacteria: lessons from
Escherichia coli K1-specific phages.

Stummeyer K(1), Schwarzer D, Claus H, Vogel U, Gerardy-Schahn R, Mühlenhoff M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Zelluläre Chemie, Zentrum Biochemie, Medizinische Hochschule
Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Street 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Bacterial capsules are not only important virulence factors, but also provide
attachment sites for bacteriophages that possess capsule degrading enzymes as
tailspike proteins. To gain insight into the evolution of these specialized
viruses, we studied a panel of tailed phages specific for Escherichia coli K1, a 
neuroinvasive pathogen with a polysialic acid capsule. Genome sequencing of two
lytic K1-phages and comparative analyses including a K1-prophage revealed that
K1-phages did not evolve from a common ancestor. By contrast, each phage is
related to a different progenitor type, namely T7-, SP6-, and P22-like phages,
and gained new host specificity by horizontal uptake of an endosialidase gene.
The new tailspikes emerged by combining endosialidase domains with the capsid
binding module of the respective ancestor. For SP6-like phages, we identified a
degenerated tailspike protein which now acts as versatile adaptor protein
interconnecting tail and newly acquired tailspikes and demonstrate that this
adapter utilizes an N-terminal undecapeptide interface to bind otherwise
unrelated tailspikes. Combining biochemical and sequence analyses with available 
structural data, we provide new molecular insight into basic mechanisms that
allow changes in host specificity while a conserved head and tail architecture is
maintained. Thereby, the present study contributes not only to an improved
understanding of phage evolution and host-range extension but may also facilitate
the on purpose design of therapeutic phages based on well-characterized template 
phages.

PMID: 16689790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Int J Cancer. 2006 Sep 1;119(5):1014-22.

The characterization of the invasion phenotype of uveal melanoma tumour cells
shows the presence of MUC18 and HMG-1 metastasis markers and leads to the
identification of DJ-1 as a potential serum biomarker.

Pardo M(1), García A, Thomas B, Piñeiro A, Akoulitchev A, Dwek RA, Zitzmann N.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Glycobiology Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Oxford, UK. maruxapardo@hotmail.com

Uveal malignant melanoma (UM) is the most frequent primary intraocular tumour in 
adult humans. Because the survival rate of patients with UM has changed little in
the past few decades, a better understanding of the molecular events governing UM
development and the identification of markers indicating the potential for
metastasis at the time of diagnosis are necessary to design improved and more
specific treatments. In this study, we investigated UM tumour development by
comparing two recently established UM cultures with different invasion potential 
by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Protein features expressed differentially
were identified by mass spectrometric analysis. Potential markers were assayed in
both cultures and in long-term established UM cell lines (UW-1, OCM-1, SP6.5 and 
92.1) by Western blotting and their role in invasion analysed using Matrigel
membranes. Comparative analysis revealed that UM cultures with low- and
high-grade invasion potential differ in their cellular metabolism and, more
interestingly, in several cancer-associated proteins, including those implicated 
in cell adhesion and migration, proliferation and various oncogenes. Our data
indicate a correlation between MUC18 and HMG-1 expression and the invasiveness of
UM cells. We also demonstrate the expression and secretion of DJ-1 oncoprotein by
UM cells. We suggest a possible role for MUC18 and HMG-1 proteins in UM cell
invasion. The secretion of DJ-1 by UM cells, and the ability to detect this
protein in UM patients' sera implicate it as a potential noninvasive biomarker
for this malignancy.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16570276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;26(2):119-22.

[Research on effect of acupuncture at Sanyinjiao on brain function by means of
positron emission tomographic imaging].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong P(1), Zhang MM, Jiang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Intergrated Traditional CHinese and Western Medicine , Tongji
Hospital Affiliated to Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the mechanism of puncturing at Sanyinjiao (SP6) on
modulatory function of central nerve system.
METHODS: Positron emission tomography (PET) was performed, using 18F-FDG as
contrast medium, in six healthy female volunteers before and after puncturing
right SP6 to detect the cerebral districts with changed glucose metabolism, using
statistical parametric mapping (SPM) analysis.
RESULTS: Glucose metabolism was increased in contralateral primary somatosensory 
cortex, primary somatic motor cortex, pre-supplementary motor cortex (BA8), and
medial prefrontal cortex (BA10), bilateral supplementary motor cortex (BA6),
anterior cingulate gyrus (BA24, BA32), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA9), 
while glucose metabolism was decreased in lingual gyrus (BA17,18), hippocampus
and parahippocampal gyrus (BA28, BA35, BA30).
CONCLUSION: Functions of cerebral districts with changed glucose metabolism after
puncturing SP6 was well parallels to the clinical effect of puncturing SP6,
illustrating the brain plays a great role in the body regulation of acupuncture
at SP6, which possibly was the central foundation of acupuncture therapy.

PMID: 16548350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Acupunct Med. 2005 Dec;23(4):171-80.

Acupuncture and self acupuncture for long-term treatment of vasomotor symptoms in
cancer patients--audit and treatment algorithm.

Filshie J(1), Bolton T, Browne D, Ashley S.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London and Surrey, UK.
jacqueline.filshie@btinternet.com

Comment in
    Acupunct Med. 2006 Jun;24(2):92-4; author reply 94-5; discussion 95-6.

INTRODUCTION: Since hormone replacement therapy given for long periods is now
recognised to produce serious side effects, patients with troublesome vasomotor
symptoms are increasingly using non-hormonal treatment including acupuncture.
Several randomised controlled trials have shown that acupuncture reduces
menopausal symptoms in patients experiencing the normal climacteric. It may have 
this effect by raising serotonin levels which alter the temperature set point in 
the hypothalamus. Vasomotor symptoms can be extreme in breast cancer patients and
patients with prostate cancer who are undergoing anticancer therapy. The safety
of some herbal medicines and phytoestrogens has been questioned, as they could
potentially interfere adversely with the bioavailability of tumouricidal drugs. A
previous study reports short term benefit from acupuncture, and the aim of this
report is to describe our approach to long term treatment.
ACUPUNCTURE APPROACH: After piloting several approaches, six weekly treatments
were given initially at LI4, TE5, LR3 and SP6 and two upper sternal points, but
avoiding any limb with existing lymphoedema or prone to developing it. If there
were no contraindications, patients were given clear instructions on how to
perform self acupuncture using either semi-permanent needles or conventional
needling at SP6, weekly for up to six years, for long term maintenance.
AUDIT METHODS AND RESULTS: A retrospective audit of electronic records was
carried out by a doctor not involved in treatment. A total of 194 patients were
treated, predominantly with breast and prostate cancer. One hundred and eighty
two patients were female. The number of pre-treatment hot flushes per day was
estimated by the patient: in the 159 cases providing adequate records, the mean
was 16 flushes per day. Following treatment, 114 (79%) gained a 50% or greater
reduction in hot flushes and 30 (21%) a less than 50% reduction. Treatment was
abandoned in those who responded poorly or not at all. The duration of treatment 
varied from one month to over six years with a mean duration of nine months.
Seventeen patients (9%) experienced minor side effects over the six year period, 
mostly minor rashes; one patient described leg swelling but this was likely to be
due to a concurrent fracture.
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture including self acupuncture is associated with long-term
relief of vasomotor symptoms in cancer patients. Treatment is safe and costs
appear to be low. An algorithm is presented to guide clinical use. We recommend
the use of self acupuncture with needles at SP6 in preference to semi-permanent
needles in the first instance, but poor responders use indwelling studs if they
fail to respond adequately to self acupuncture with regular needles. Point
location may be of less importance than the overall 'dose', and an appropriate
minimum dose may be required to initiate the effect.

PMID: 16430125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Acupunct Med. 2005 Dec;23(4):157-65.

The acupuncture randomised trial (ART) for tension-type headache--details of the 
treatment.

Melchart D(1), Streng A, Hoppe A, Brinkhaus B, Becker-Witt C, Hammes M, Irnich D,
Hummelsberger J, Willich SN, Linde K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Complementary Medicine Research, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Acupunct Med. 2006 Mar;24(1):38; author reply 38.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this paper is to describe the characteristics of
physicians and their interventions in a large, multicentre randomised trial of
acupuncture for tension-type headache known as ART TTH, in order to enable
acupuncturists to assess the study interventions.
METHODS: Participating physicians were recruited whose qualifications met or
surpassed those of physicians currently accredited for providing acupuncture by
state health funding agencies in Germany. Semi-standardised treatment strategies 
for acupuncture and minimal acupuncture were developed in a consensus process
with acupuncture experts. A total of 270 patients suffering from episodic or
chronic tension-type headache were randomised to 12 sessions of semi-standardised
acupuncture (three predefined 'basic' points, recommendations for additional
points given, but individual choice of additional points possible), standardised 
minimal acupuncture (superficial needling of at least 5 of 10 predefined,
bilateral, distant non-acupuncture points) or a waiting list. Forty two
physicians, trained and experienced in acupuncture, from 28 centres in Germany
participated in the trial.
RESULTS: The median duration of acupuncture training of trial physicians was 500 
hours (range 140 to 1350 hours). Physicians had 10 (< 1 to 25) years acupuncture 
experience. The three 'basic' points (GB20, GB21 and LR3) were treated in 96%,
82% and 97% of sessions, respectively. Frequently treated optional points
included LI4 (67%), SP6 (50%) and ST36 (46%). Ten of the 42 physicians stated
that they would have treated patients differently outside the trial. The trial
found a significant effect of acupuncture over waiting list but not over minimal 
acupuncture.
CONCLUSIONS: In general, trial physicians complied well with the predefined
interventions. A relevant minority of participating trial physicians stated that 
they would have treated patients differently outside the trial.

PMID: 16430123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. CSH Protoc. 2006 Sep 1;2006(4). pii: pdb.prot4503. doi: 10.1101/pdb.prot4503.

Production of dsRNA for RNAi in Avian Embryos.

Stoeckli ET.

INTRODUCTIONThis protocol describes the production of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
from fragments of cDNAs of candidate genes. The cDNA fragments must be cloned in 
plasmids with a flanking SP6 and T7 promoter (e.g., pSP72 or pCRII). The plasmid 
is linearized and sense and antisense RNAs are produced separately by in vitro
transcription. After purification, the RNA strands are annealed to yield a dsRNA 
molecule suitable for RNAi in avian embryos.

PMID: 22485897  [PubMed]


335. Mol Vis. 2005 Dec 14;11:1101-11.

MMP-2 expression in uveal melanoma: differential activation status dictated by
the cellular environment.

Bérubé M(1), Deschambeault A, Boucher M, Germain L, Petitclerc E, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Center Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, Québec, PQ, Canada.

PURPOSE: MMPs are recognized to play a major role in tumor progression and
metastasis of many forms of cancers. The purpose of this study was to compare the
expression and activity of MMP-2 in uveal melanoma cell lines grown either in
vitro on plastic culture plates or in vivo as tumors produced in chick embryos.
METHODS: The chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model was used to evaluate the 
tumorigenic potential of uveal melanoma cell lines derived either from the
primary uveal melanoma tumor isolated from three different patients (cell lines
SP6.5, SP8.0, and TP31) or from a metastatic lesion derived from the liver of a
patient diagnosed with uveal melanoma (cell line H79). The presence of MMP-2 in
the vicinity of the tumor cells was determined by immunofluorescence analyses.
Gelatin zymography was used for the detection of latent and activated forms of
MMP-2 in uveal melanoma cell lines when grown in vitro on plastic, or in the
solid tumors these cell lines produced in vivo on the CAM of the chick embryo.
The gelatinase activity was quantified by densitometric analyses and the
active/(active+pro-form) ratio was calculated as the MMP-2 activation ratio.
Western blot analyses were performed to confirm the zymographic profile.
RESULTS: Only the inactive form of MMP-2 was expressed and secreted in vitro by
all uveal melanoma cell lines, higher levels being found for the liver-derived
H79 cell line whereas SP8.0 only expressed MMP-2 to a very low level. On the
other hand, all solid tumors produced in the CAM from these cell lines expressed 
and secreted, although to varying levels (SP6.5 and SP8.0, TP31 and H79),
primarily the active form of MMP-2. Gelatinolytic activities of active MMP-2 were
significantly higher in uveal melanoma tissues than in the non-neoplastic CAM, as
revealed by the measurement of the activation ratio. The immunolocalization of
MMP-2 revealed that all cell lines were MMP-2-positive although a reduced and
more diffuse staining was observed for H79 and SP6.5 than in SP8.0 and TP31
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest the activation of proMMP-2 as an important
event in the process of uveal melanoma progression. An elevated active to
inactive MMP-2 ratio in the tumor environment of uveal melanoma suggests that a
potential MMP-2 activity could be related to the progression of this type of
cancer.

PMID: 16379022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Virol. 2006 Jan;80(2):723-36.

Identification of 5' and 3' cis-acting elements of the porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus: acquisition of novel 5' AU-rich sequences restored
replication of a 5'-proximal 7-nucleotide deletion mutant.

Choi YJ(1), Yun SI, Kang SY, Lee YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine and Medical Research
Institute, Chungbuk National University, 12 Gaeshin-Dong, Heungduk-Ku, Cheongju, 
Korea.

We here demonstrate the successful engineering of the RNA genome of porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) by using an infectious cDNA
as a bacterial artificial chromosome. Runoff transcription from this cDNA by SP6 
polymerase resulted in capped synthetic RNAs bearing authentic 5' and 3' ends of 
the viral genome that had specific infectivities of >5 x 10(5) PFU/microg of RNA.
The synthetic viruses recovered from the transfected cells were genotypically and
phenotypically indistinguishable from the parental virus. Using our system, a
series of genomic RNAs with nucleotide deletions in their 5' ends produced
viruses with decreased or no infectivity. Various pseudorevertants were isolated,
and acquisition of novel 5' sequences of various sizes, composed predominantly of
A and U bases, restored their infectivities, providing a novel insight into
functional elements of the 5' end of the PRRSV genome. In addition, our system
was further engineered to generate a panel of self-replicating, self-limiting,
luciferase-expressing PRRSV viral replicons bearing various deletions. Analysis
of these replicons revealed the presence and location of a 3' cis-acting element 
in the genome that was required for replication. Moreover, we produced enhanced
green fluorescent protein-expressing infectious viruses, which indicates that the
PRRSV cDNA/viral replicon/recombinant virus can be developed as a vector for the 
expression of a variety of heterologous genes. Thus, our PRRSV reverse genetics
system not only offers a means of directly investigating the molecular mechanisms
of PRRSV replication and pathogenesis but also can be used to generate new
heterologous gene expression vectors and genetically defined antiviral vaccines.

PMCID: PMC1346850
PMID: 16378975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Chin Med. 2005;33(6):887-96.

Acupuncture reduces alcohol withdrawal syndrome and c-Fos expression in rat
brain.

Kim JH(1), Chung JY, Kwon YK, Kim KJ, Yang CH, Hahm DH, Lee HJ, Pyun KH, Shim I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Acupuncture as a therapeutic intervention is widely practiced in the treatment of
many functional disorders including alcohol abuse. In the present study, the
effects of acupuncture on alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS) and Fos-like
immunoreactivity (FLI) in the striatum and the nucleus accumbens (NAC) of rats
were investigated. During 3 days of cessation following chronic administration of
ethanol (3 g/kg, i.p. for 3 weeks), rats showed a significant increase in AWS,
such as hypermotility, tail rigidity, grooming and tremor, and an increase in FLI
in the dopamine terminal areas of the brain. Treatment with acupuncture at
zusanli (ST36) or sanyinjiao (SP6) during the withdrawal period inhibited both
AWS and FLI of rats undergoing ethanol injection. These results suggest that
acupuncture may be useful in the treatment of alcoholism by modulating
post-synaptic neural activation in the striatum and NAC.

PMID: 16355445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Vet Rec. 2005 Nov 19;157(21):661-2.

Incidence of lead shot ingestion in red-legged partridges (Alectoris rufa) in
Great Britain.

Butler DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Game Conservancy Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF.

PMID: 16299369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2005 Sep;21(5):713-8.

[Construction of DNA and RNA based on bifunctional replicon vector derived from
Semliki Forest virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu YZ(1), Sun ZW, Yu WY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing
100071, China.

DNA-based replicon expression vector pSMCTA and helper vector pSHCTA were
constructed by replacing the SP6 promoter used in the original system pSFV1 and
pSFV-helper2 derived from Semliki Forest virus (SFV) with the RNA polymerase II
-dependent cytomegalovirus immediate early (CMV IE) enhancer/promoter and T7
promoter, and inserting BGH transcription termination and polyadenylation signal 
downstream 3'-untranslated region (UTR). The RNA polymerase II -dependent
cytomegalovirus immediate early (CMV IE) enhancer/promoter and T7 promoter in
pSMCTA and pSHCTA could drive transcription to produce replicon RNA in vivo and
ex vivo. High level expression of foreign genes (GFP and LacZ) could be
demonstrated by transfecting BHK21 cells with the new replicon expression vectors
based on both DNA and RNA, and recombinant virus particles (RVP) be prepared by
cotranfecting the expression vectors with the helper vectors. Foreign genes were 
also highly expressed in cells (BHK21) which were infected with RVP activated by 
alpha-chymotrypsin. The bifunctional replicon vectors can be used in highly
efficient expression of foreign genes and preparation of RVP ex vivo, also in
development of replicon vaccines and gene therapy vectors in vivo.

PMID: 16285510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Oct 31;33(19):6172-87. Print 2005.

Information theory based T7-like promoter models: classification of
bacteriophages and differential evolution of promoters and their polymerases.

Chen Z(1), Schneider TD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research Nanobiology Program, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, PO Box B, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

Molecular information theory was used to create sequence logos and promoter
models for eight phages of the T7 group: T7, phiA1122, T3, phiYeO3-12, SP6, K1-5,
gh-1 and K11. When these models were used to scan the corresponding genomes, a
significant gap in the individual information distribution was observed between
functional promoter sites and other sequences, suggesting that the models can be 
used to identify new T7-like promoters. When a combined 76-site model was used to
scan the eight phages, 108 of the total 109 promoters were found, while none were
found for other T7-like phages, phiKMV, P60, VpV262, SIO1, PaP3, Xp10, P-SSP7 and
Ppu40, indicating that these phages do not belong to the T7 group. We propose
that the T7-like transcription system, which consists of a phage-specific RNA
polymerase and a set of conserved T7-like promoters, is a hallmark feature of the
T7 group and can be used to classify T7-like phages. Phylogenetic trees of the
T7-like promoter models and their corresponding RNA polymerases are similar,
suggesting that the eight phages of the T7 group can be classified into five
subgroups. However the SP6-like polymerases have apparently diverged from other
polymerases more than their promoters have diverged from other promoters.

PMCID: PMC1275584
PMID: 16260472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Chin J Integr Med. 2005 Sep;11(3):209-16.

[The more efficacious acupoints of Zusanli and Sanyinjiao than that of
non-acupoints on bone mass in osteopenic ovariectomized rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang WP(1), Kanehara M, Zhang YJ, Yu ZF, Zhang GX, Yang YX, Sun YM, Zhang JM,
Ishida T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Suzuka University of Medical
Science, Mie, Japan. zhang_wenping@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To clarify whether the acupoints of Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao
(SP6) have specific actions other than non-acupoints to bone.
METHODS: Forty Sprague-Dawley female rats were divided into five groups: Sham
operated (sham) group; Ovariectomized (OVX, model) group; non-acupuncture group; 
OVX, needling on Zusanli and Sanyinjiao (Acp-A) group; OVX, needling on the
reverse sides of Zusanli and Sanyinjiao (Acp-B) group; OVX, periostineal
stimulation on the same height as points of Zusanli and Sanyinjiao (Acp-C) group.
The experiment was continued for 23 weeks and then all animals were sacrificed.
RESULTS: OVX had a significantly higher body weight and lower bone mineral
density (BMD) on the lumbar vertebrae, total femora and tibiae than sham rats,
however, Acp-A showed a higher BMD compared with the other OVX groups. On the
other hand, bone weights, bone strength and bone morphometry such as trabecular
volume, trabecular separation, labeled width and bone formation rate also showed 
the same improvements in Acp-A as compared to the other OVX rats.
CONCLUSION: The stimulation on Zusanli and Sanyinjiao specifically prevented the 
development of osteopenic rats compared with non-acupoints.

PMID: 16181537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Sep;71(9):5254-9.

Impact of phages on two-species bacterial communities.

Harcombe WR(1), Bull JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Biology, University of Texas CO930, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
harcombe@mail.utexas.edu

A long history of experimental work has shown that addition of bacteriophages to 
a monoculture of bacteria leads to only a temporary depression of bacterial
levels. Resistant bacteria usually become abundant, despite reduced growth rates 
relative to those of phage-sensitive bacteria. This restoration of high bacterial
density occurs even if the phages evolve to overcome bacterial resistance. We
believe that the generality of this result may be limited to monocultures, in
which the resistant bacteria do not face competition from bacterial species
unaffected by the phage. As a simple case, we investigated the impact of phages
attacking one species in a two-species culture of bacteria. In the absence of
phages, Escherichia coli B and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium were
stably maintained during daily serial passage in glucose minimal medium (M9).
When either of two E. coli-specific phages (T7 or T5) was added to the mixed
culture, E. coli became extinct or was maintained at densities that were orders
of magnitude lower than those before phage introduction, even though the E. coli 
densities with phage reached high levels when Salmonella was absent. In contrast,
the addition of a phage that attacked only Salmonella (SP6) led to transient
decreases in the bacterial number whether E. coli was absent or present. These
results suggest that phages can sometimes, although not always, provide long-term
suppression of target bacteria.

PMCID: PMC1214695
PMID: 16151111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Plant Physiol. 2005 Aug;138(4):2260-8. Epub 2005 Jul 22.

Structure-based in vitro engineering of the anthranilate synthase, a metabolic
key enzyme in the plant tryptophan pathway.

Kanno T(1), Komatsu A, Kasai K, Dubouzet JG, Sakurai M, Ikejiri-Kanno Y, Wakasa
K, Tozawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cell-Free Science and Technology Research Center, and Venture Business
Laboratory, Ehime University, Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.

Rice (Oryza sativa) anthranilate synthase alpha-subunit, OASA2, was modified by
in vitro mutagenesis based on structural information from bacterial homologs.
Twenty-four amino acid residues, predicted as putative tryptophan binding sites
or their proximal regions in the OASA2 sequence, were selected and 36 mutant
OASA2 genes were constructed by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis.
Corresponding mutant proteins were synthesized in a combination of two in vitro
systems, transcription with a bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase and translation
with a wheat-embryo cell-free system. Enzymatic functions of the mutant proteins 
were simultaneously examined, and we found six mutants with elevated catalytic
activity and five mutants with enhanced tolerance to feedback inhibition by
tryptophan. Moreover, we observed that some sets of specific combinations of the 
novel mutations additively conferred both characteristics to the mutant enzymes. 
The functions of the mutant enzymes were confirmed in vivo. The free tryptophan
content of mutant rice calli expressing OASA2 enzyme with a double mutation was
30-fold of that of untransformed calli. Thus, our in vitro approach utilizing
structural information of bacterial homologs is a potent technique to generate
designer enzymes with predefined functions.

PMCID: PMC1183412
PMID: 16040654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Growth Differ. 2005 Jun;47(5):323-31.

Efficient RNA interference in zebrafish embryos using siRNA synthesized with SP6 
RNA polymerase.

Liu WY(1), Wang Y, Sun YH, Wang Y, Wang YP, Chen SP, Zhu ZY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) has been shown to be a useful tool for silencing
genes in zebrafish (Danio rerio), while the blocking specificity of dsRNA is
still of major concern for application. It was reported that siRNA (small
interfering RNA) prepared by endoribonuclease digestion (esiRNA) could
efficiently silence endogenous gene expression in mammalian embryos. To test
whether esiRNA could work in zebrafish, we utilized Escherichia coli RNaseIII to 
digest dsRNA of zebrafish no tail (ntl), a mesoderm determinant in zebrafish and 
found that esi-ntl could lead to developmental defects, however, the effective
dose was so close to the toxic dose that esi-ntl often led to non-specific
developmental defects. Consequently, we utilized SP6 RNA polymerase to produce
si-ntl, siRNA designed against ntl, by in vitro transcription. By injecting in
vitro synthesized si-ntl into zebrafish zygotes, we obtained specific phenocopies
of reported mutants of ntl. We achieved up to a 59%no tail phenotype when the
injection concentration was as high as 4 microg/microL. Quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and whole-mount in situ
hybridization analysis showed that si-ntl could largely and specifically reduce
mRNA levels of the ntl gene. As a result, our data indicate that esiRNA is unable
to cause specific developmental defects in zebrafish, while siRNA should be an
alternative for downregulation of specific gene expression in zebrafish in cases 
where RNAi techniques are applied to zebrafish reverse genetics.

PMID: 16026540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 5;333(3):664-70.

Dimethyl sulfoxide targets phage RNA polymerases to promote transcription.

Chen Z(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Department of Biotechnology, College of
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.

Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is a "universal" solvent in pharmaceutical sciences and
cell biology. DMSO was previously reported to facilitate in vitro transcription
of chromatin and supercoiled plasmid, with the underlying mechanism being
attributed to the alteration of the template structure. Here, we demonstrated
that low concentrations of DMSO significantly increase the phage
polymerase-catalyzed RNA synthesis when the naked and short PCR products were
used as templates, suggesting that DMSO promotes transcription through additional
mechanism(s). Interestingly, SP6 RNA polymerase was more sensitive to the DMSO
stimulation than T7 RNA polymerase, suggesting that the polymerase is an
important target for DMSO stimulation of RNA synthesis. Consistent with this
finding, we also showed that DMSO dramatically elevated the RNA polymerase
activity. This elevated activity is explained by altered polymerase structure as 
reflected by a change in intrinsic fluorescence. Furthermore, DMSO was shown to
simultaneously accumulate both the abortive and full-length transcripts, leading 
us to conclude that the DMSO-altered polymerase structure primarily encodes an
enhanced activity at the stage of transcription initiation. DMSO-induced
alteration of the polymerase structure and function highlights a potentially
generalized mechanism in interpreting the molecular action of this popular
solvent.

PMID: 15975554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Virol Methods. 2005 Sep;128(1-2):135-42.

Modification of a viral envelope glycoprotein cell-cell fusion assay by utilizing
plasmid encoded bacteriophage RNA polymerase.

Lin G(1), Murphy SL, Gaulton GN, Hoxie JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology-Oncology Division, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. lin@bmi-md.com

Many viruses enter cells via an interaction of the viral envelope glycoprotein
(Env) with receptor inducing fusion of viral and cellular membranes. These
interactions are often evaluated in cell-cell fusion, gene-reporting systems with
effector cells expressing Env and target cells expressing receptors. A common
system utilizes vaccinia virus encoding T7 RNA polymerase (RNAP) in effector
cells and a T7 promoted reporter plasmid in target cells. Fusion is quantified
with expression of the reporter plasmid. However, direct activation of reporter
plasmid from vaccinia virus can occur increasing background activity. We report
here a modification of this assay in which T7 RNAP is expressed from a plasmid
rather than vaccinia. This modification increased sensitivity with a ten-fold
reduction in background. A novel dual T7/SP6 RNAP fusion assay was also developed
to allow rapid screening for functional Env clones. Using these assays, we show
that Envs from two CD4-independent HIV-2 isolates (VCP and ROD/B), which are able
to fuse with chemokine receptor CXCR4 in a CD4-independent manner, are also able 
to fuse with alternative coreceptors GPR1 and GPR15 in the absence of CD4. The
assay could also detect fusion of murine leukemia virus on target cells
expressing the ecotropic MCAT-1 receptor showing its broad utility in other viral
systems.

PMID: 15941597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Microbiol Methods. 2006 Jan;64(1):17-26. Epub 2005 May 31.

Alternative methods to limit extracellular bacterial activity for enumeration of 
intracellular bacteria.

Kim HJ(1), Kim EY, Hong Y, Rhee JH, Choy HE.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center for Enteropathogenic Bacteria and Research Institute of
Vibrio Infection, South Korea.

The gentamicin survival assay, a method routinely used to estimate bacterial
infection of eukaryotic host cells, depends on the presumed limited penetration
of gentamicin across the eukaryotic cell membrane. However, some studies have
suggested that gentamicin may in fact enter eukaryotic cells and kill
intracellular bacteria. In this study we devised alternative methods to enumerate
intracellular Salmonellae using a lytic bacteriophage, SP6, and an amino acid
auxotroph, Pro- mutant, which replicates selectively within host cells in the
presence of its uptake inhibitor, 3,4-dehydro-L-proline. The conventional
gentamicin survival assay was systematically compared with the alternative
methods for the enumeration of intracellular Salmonellae. We found that
gentamicin decreases the survival of intracellular Salmonellae when added to
extracellular media at concentrations above 20 microg/ml. The alternative methods
do not suffer from this disadvantage, suggesting that they should be used to
replace the gentamicin survival assay. In addition, the proline auxotroph method 
could be applied to detect bacterial release from host cells.

PMID: 15927288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Protein Expr Purif. 2005 Jul;42(1):78-84. Epub 2005 Apr 19.

Cloning and expression of Klebsiella phage K11 lysozyme gene.

Junn HJ(1), Youn J, Suh KH, Lee SS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Bio-Medicinal Resources, Department of Life Science and
Technology, Pai-Chai University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Previously, the lysozyme gene of the Klebsiella phage K11 was partially sequenced
in our lab. Using the sequence information the lysozyme gene of the Klebsiella
phage K11 was amplified and cloned using the polymerase chain reaction of the pfu
DNA polymerase. The nucleotide sequence of phage K11 lysozyme gene was
determined. The open reading frame corresponds to a polypeptide with 151 amino
acids and molecular weight of 16,932 Da. The deduced amino acid sequence of this 
polypeptide shows 74-75% homologies to the T7 and T3 phage lysozymes. Although
the gene was efficiently expressed under the control of tac promoter in
Escherichia coli XL1-blue cells at 37 degrees C, most of the K11 lysozyme
produced was insoluble. When the temperature of cell growth was lowered, however,
solubility of the K11 lysozyme was increased gradually. The insoluble protein
expressed at 37 degrees C was solubilized in 5 M guanidine-HCl and refolded in
the presence of oxido-shuffling agent (GSH/GSSG). Through the refolding process
the recombinant lysozyme was solubilized and purified. The purified K11 lysozyme 
showed transcription inhibition of K11 RNA polymerase as well as amidase
activity. These results showed that the lysozyme of bacteriophage K11 is a
bifunctional protein that cuts a bond in the bacterial cell wall and selectively 
inhibits K11 phage RNA polymerase. Also, transcription inhibition ability of K11 
lysozyme with T7 or SP6 phage RNA polymerase was measured. T7 RNA polymerase was 
less inhibited than K11 RNA polymerase by K11 lysozyme. But SP6 RNA polymerase
was not nearly inhibited by K11 lysozyme.

PMID: 15882950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Arch Virol. 2005 Sep;150(9):1813-31. Epub 2005 May 2.

Identification of previously unknown antigenic epitopes on the S and N proteins
of avian infectious bronchitis virus.

Ignjatovic J(1), Sapats S.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong,
Vic., Australia. Jagoda.Ignjatovic@csiro.au

This paper describes mapping of antigenic and host-protective epitopes of
infectious bronchitis virus proteins by assessing the ability of defined peptide 
regions within the S1, S2 and N proteins to elicit humoral, cell-mediated and
protective immune responses. Peptides corresponding to six regions in the S1
(Sp1-Sp6), one in the S2 (Sp7) and four in the N protein (Np1-Np4) were
synthesized and coupled to either diphtheria toxoid (dt) or biotin (bt).
Bt-peptides were used to assess if selected regions were antigenic and contained 
B- or T-cell epitopes and dt-peptides if regions induced an antibody response and
protection against virulent challenge. All S1 and S2 peptides were antigenic,
being recognised by IBV immune sera and also induced an antibody response
following inoculation into chicks. Three S1-and one S2-bt peptides also induced a
delayed type hypersensitivity response indicating the presence of T-cell
epitopes. The S2 peptide Sp7 (amino acid position 566-584) previously identified 
as an immundominant region, was the most antigenic of all peptides used in this
study. Two S1 (Sp4 and Sp6) and one S2 peptide (Sp7), protected kidney tissue
against virulent challenge. From four N peptides located in the amino-terminal
part of the N protein, only one, Np2 (amino acid position 72-86), was antigenic
and also induced a delayed type hypersensitivity response. None of the N peptides
induced protection against virulent challenge. The results suggest that the S1
glycoprotein carries additional antigenic regions to those previously identified 
and that two regions located in the S1 and one in the S2 at amino acid positions 
294-316 (Sp4), 532-537 (Sp6) and 566-584 (Sp7) may have a role in protection.

PMID: 15868095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Rev Cubana Med Trop. 2004 May-Aug;56(2):111-6.

[Determination of glutathione-S-transferase activity in Culex quinquefaciatus
strains in Cuba and other Latin American countries].

[Article in Spanish]

Díaz C(1), Rodríguez MM, Fresneda M, Bisset JA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Tropical "Pedro Kouri" Ciudad de La Habana, Cuba.
ciipk@ipk.sld.cu

In the present paper, we standardized a microtitration assay for the
determination of specific activity of glutathione-S-transferase using a Culex
quinquefasciatus strain selected in lab with pyrethroid insecticide
lambdacyhalothrin for 6 generations (SP6). The saturation values for reduced
glutathione and 1-chlorine 2,4-dinitrobenzene were 15 mM and 40 mM, respectively;
we also estimated that 3 minutes was the optimal time in order to differentiate
resistant strain SP6 from the susceptible reference strain S-Lab (p>0.05).
Additionally, the optimized microtitration method allowed testing 4 Culex strains
from Cuba (SANTIAGO DE CUBA, SD4, QUIBU AND SP6), one from Venezuela (MIRANDA),
one from Colombia (MEDELLIN) and the other from Brazil (RIO DE JANEIRO) for
glutathione-S-transferase activity. MIRANDA showed the highest activity for this 
detoxifying enzyme. However, the mechanism of detoxyfication in all the strains
was very unfrequent, which indicates that its role in resistance to insecticide
for all the studied strains is not so important. Glutathione-S-transferase values
were compared with non-specific esterase and altered acetylcholinesterase
frequencies for each of the studied strains.

PMID: 15846907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Jan;21(1):40-3.

[The expression of tenascin-C mRNA in keloids and hypertrophic scars].

[Article in Chinese]

Han CM(1), He XJ, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou
310009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of Tenascin-C mRNA in keloids and
hypertrophic Total RNA was isolated from normal adult skin. A cDNA fragment (base
5941-6481bp) of the scars.
METHODS: full-length human Tenascin-C cDNA was synthesized by polymerase chain
reaction and subcloned in pGEM-T-easy. Dioxygen-labeled anti-sense and sense
probes were synthesized by using a Sp6/T7 RNA synthesis kit in the present of
Dig-UTP in vitro. The samples were taken from keloids in 10, hypertrophic scars
in 10 and normal adult skin in 5. The hybridization was performed with 4%
paraformaldehyde-fixed and wax-embedded sections to detect the Tenascin-C mRNA.
RESULTS: The Tenascin-C mRNA was negative in the normal adult epidermis and
weakly located in the fibroblasts of the papillary dermis and the epidermal
adnexa. In all of the 10 keloid specimens, the Tenascin-C mRNA was positive
throughout the epidermis and widely distributed in the dermis included in the
fibroblasts, endothelial cells and epidermal adnexa. In the specimens of the 3
hypertrophic scars,the Tenascin-C mRNA was also positive in the epidermis, but in
the other 7 cases, it became negative. In the dermis of the hypertrophic scar,the
Tenascin-C mRNA was weaker than that in the keloid, but stronger than that in the
normal skin.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of Tenascin-C mRNA is markedly enhanced in the
keloids.

PMID: 15844597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biotechniques. 2005 Mar;38(3):451-8.

CDNA library construction from a small amount of RNA: adaptor-ligation approach
for two-round cRNA amplification using T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases.

Ohara R(1), Kikuno RF, Kitamura H, Ohara O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Gene Research, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu,
Chiba, Japan. ohreiko@kazusa.or.jp

In this study, we developed a method that allows cDNA library construction from a
small amount of RNA without causing serious size bias in the resulting cDNA
population. For this purpose, we adopted two-round cRNA amplification by T7 and
SP6 RNA polymerases. The first-round cDNAs, flanked by the promoter sequences of 
T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases, were synthesized from 1 microg total RNA and then
subjected to two rounds of cRNA amplification. Comparison of the sizes of the
first-round and the second-round cRNAs indicated that the size-bias effect of the
second-round cRNA synthesis was not serious. The resultant double-stranded cDNAs 
were cloned into a plasmid by in vitro lambda phage recombination with an
efficiency of 1.2 x 10(11) colony-forming unit/microgram of starting total RNA.
Characterization of the resultant cDNA library in terms of the insert size, clone
redundancy, and integrity of 3' ends of cDNAs indicated that the amplified
library was comparable to a library constructed by a conventional method,
although large cDNAs tend to be slightly truncated in the amplified library. This
method enables the construction of a library from a small amount of RNA, and
calculations suggest that the strategy would be efficient enough to use even a
single cell as starting material.

PMID: 15786810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Altern Complement Med. 2004 Dec;10(6):959-65.

Effects of SP6 acupressure on labor pain and length of delivery time in women
during labor.

Lee MK(1), Chang SB, Kang DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Dankook University, San #29 Anseo-dong, Cheonan-si,
Chungnam, Korea 330-714. maternity99@hanmail.net

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of SP6
acupressure on labor pain and delivery time in women in labor.
DESIGN: Randomized clinical trial.
SETTING/LOCATION: Delivery room in a university hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: Seventy-five (75) women in labor were randomly assigned to either
the SP6 acupressure (n = 36) or SP6 touch control (n = 39) group. The
participants were matched according to parity, cervical dilation, labor stage,
rupture of amniotic membrane, and husband's presence during labor. There were no 
additional oxytocin augmentation or administration of analgesics during the study
period.
INTERVENTION: The 30-minute acupressure or touch on SP6 acupoint was performed.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Labor pain was measured four times using a structured
questionnaire, a subjective labor pain scale (visual-analogue scale [VAS]):
before intervention, immediately after the intervention, and 30 and 60 minutes
after the intervention. Length of delivery time was calculated in two stages:
from 3 cm cervical dilation to full cervical dilatation, and full cervical
dilatation to the delivery.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the groups in subjective
labor pain scores at all time points following the intervention: immediately
after the intervention (p = 0.012); 30 minutes after the intervention (p =
0.021); and 60 minutes after the intervention (p = 0.012). The total labor time
(3 cm dilatation to delivery) was significantly shorter in the SP6 acupressure
intervention group than in the control group (p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings showed that SP6 acupressure was effective for
decreasing labor pain and shortening the length of delivery time. SP6 acupressure
can be an effective nursing management for women in labor.

PMID: 15673989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Anesth Analg. 2005 Feb;100(2):387-92.

The timing of acupuncture stimulation does not influence anesthetic requirement.

Chernyak G(1), Sengupta P, Lenhardt R, Liem E, Doufas AG, Sessler DI, Akça O.

Author information: 
(1)Outcomes Research Institute, 501 East Broadway, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Comment in
    Anesth Analg. 2005 Sep;101(3):927; author reply 927-8.

Studies suggest that acupuncture is more effective when induced before the
induction of general anesthesia than afterwards. We tested the hypothesis that
electro-acupuncture initiated 30 min before the induction reduces anesthetic
requirement more than acupuncture initiated after the induction. Seven volunteers
were each anesthetized with desflurane on 3 study days. Needles were inserted
percutaneously at four acupuncture points thought to produce analgesia in the
upper abdominal area and provide generalized sedative and analgesic effects:
Zusanli (St36), Sanyinjiao (Sp6), Liangqiu (Sp34), and Hegu (LI4). Needles were
stimulated at 2 Hz and 10 Hz, with frequencies alternating at 2-s intervals. On
Preinduction day, electro-acupuncture was started 30 min before the induction of 
anesthesia and maintained throughout the study. On At-induction day, needles were
positioned before the induction of anesthesia, but electro-acupuncture
stimulation was not initiated until after the induction. On Control day,
electrodes were positioned near the acupoints, but needles were not inserted.
Noxious electrical stimulation was administered via 25-gauge needles on the upper
abdomen (70 mA; 100 Hz; 10 s). The desflurane concentration was increased 0.5%
when movement occurred and decreased 0.5% when it did not. These up-and-down
sequences continued until volunteers crossed from movement to no movement four
times. The P(50) of logistic regression identified desflurane requirement.
Desflurane requirement was similar on the Control (mean +/- sd; 5.2% +/- 0.6%),
Preinduction (5.0% +/- 0.8%), and At-induction (4.7% +/- 0.3%; P = 0.125) days.
This type of acupuncture is thus unlikely to facilitate general anesthesia or
decrease the requirement for anesthetic drugs.

PMCID: PMC1360236
PMID: 15673863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Int J Oncol. 2005 Feb;26(2):405-13.

Role of the extracellular matrix proteins in the resistance of SP6.5 uveal
melanoma cells toward cisplatin.

Bérubé M(1), Talbot M, Collin C, Paquet-Bouchard C, Germain L, Guérin SL,
Petitclerc E.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec and Laval University, Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Uveal melanoma is the most frequent primary intraocular tumor in the adult
population. This malignancy has a high mortality rate and responds poorly to
existing chemotherapy. Recently, the tumor environment has been found to exert a 
profound influence on drug response through cell interaction with components from
the extracellular matrix (ECM). In the present study, we investigated whether
individual components from the ECM may affect cell survival and/or cell death
induced by the cytotoxic agent cisplatin on the SP6.5 uveal melanoma cell line.
Tumor cells were shown by immunofluorescence analyses to be surrounded by the ECM
proteins fibronectin (FN), type IV collagen (CIV) and laminin (LM), both at the
primary and metastatic sites. Binding of SP6.5 cells to FN, LM and CIV is
primarily dictated by the expression of membrane bound integrins from the beta1
family as revealed by cell adhesion assays conducted on ECM-coated culture
plates. Analysis of cell death by flow cytometry demonstrated that culturing
SP6.5 cells in the presence of FN, CIV and LM, substantially reduced the
percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis after cisplatin treatment when compared 
with those seeded on a non-permissive matrix. These results suggest that adhesion
of the SP6.5 uveal melanoma cells to the ECM proteins FN, CIV and LM might
therefore confer resistance to the chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin. The cellular
resistance induced by the ECM proteins toward cisplatin could explain in part the
local recurrence of metastasis derived from uveal melanoma often observed
clinically after chemotherapy.

PMID: 15645125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 15;174(2):702-9.

Differential activation of anti-erythrocyte and anti-DNA autoreactive B
lymphocytes by the Yaa mutation.

Moll T(1), Martinez-Soria E, Santiago-Raber ML, Amano H, Pihlgren-Bosch M,
Marinkovic D, Izui S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Centre Médical Universitaire, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

An as-yet-unidentified mutation, Y-linked autoimmune acceleration (Yaa), is
responsible for the accelerated development of lupus-like autoimmune syndrome in 
mice. In view of a possible role for Yaa as a positive regulator of BCR
signaling, we have explored whether the expression of the Yaa mutation affects
the development and activation of transgenic autoreactive B cells expressing
either 4C8 IgM anti-RBC or Sp6 IgM anti-DNA. In this study, we show that the
expression of the Yaa mutation induced a lethal form of autoimmune hemolytic
anemia in 4C8 transgenic C57BL/6 mice, likely as a result of activation of 4C8
anti-RBC autoreactive B cells early in life. This was further supported, although
indirectly, by increased T cell-independent IgM production in spleens of
nontransgenic C57BL/6 mice bearing the Yaa mutation. In contrast, Yaa failed to
induce activation of Sp6 anti-DNA autoreactive B cells, consistent with a lack of
increased IgM anti-DNA production in nontransgenic C57BL/6 Yaa mice. Our results 
suggest that Yaa can activate autoreactive B cells in a BCR-dependent manner,
related to differences in the form and nature of autoantigens.

PMID: 15634889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Virus Genes. 2004 Dec;29(3):297-301.

The gene product specified by a double stranded RNA in the flax rust (Melampsora 
lini) is expressed during rust growth.

Zhang R(1), Dickminson MJ, Pryor AJ.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO, Division of Plant Industry, GPO Box 1600 Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.
rzhang@uow.edu.au

Strain SP6 of the flax rust (Melampsora lini) contains 11 double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNAs) of unknown function. A large open-reading frame (B3ORF1 in dsRNA B3
encodes a polypeptide of 614 amino acids, and using an antiserum raised against
the B3ORF1-glutathione S-transferase fusion protein prepared from a bacterial
expression system, we have detected the presence of a 67 kDa polypeptide in rust 
urediospores. This polypeptide, identical in size to that of the predicted
translation product of B3ORF1 , was not detected in spores from either a fungal
strain lacking the B3 dsRNA or an isogenic strain containing no dsRNA. These data
indicate that B3ORF1 present in the flax rust B3 dsRNA is expressed in vivo which
warrants farther investigation in search for its function during rust
development.

PMID: 15550768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Urol. 2004 Nov;172(5 Pt 1):1880-3.

Transdermal posterior tibial nerve laser therapy is not effective in women with
interstitial cystitis.

O'Reilly BA(1), Dwyer PL, Hawthorne G, Cleaver S, Thomas E, Rosamilia A, Fynes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urogynaecology, Mercy Hospital for Women, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. bor91@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: Interstitial cystitis (IC) is a debilitating condition which causes
irritative bladder symptoms, pain and a decrease in health status. The
pathophysiology is poorly understood so therapeutic options are diverse.
Percutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation is an effective treatment and
pulsed transdermal laser stimulation is an established technique for pain
management. We evaluated the efficacy of transdermal laser stimulation of the
posterior tibial nerve for patients with IC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Women meeting the National Institutes of Health National
Institute for Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases criteria for IC were
prospectively recruited and randomized to treatment (29) or placebo (27) cohorts 
in a double-blind trial. At home the patient performed laser therapy daily for 30
seconds over the SP6 acupuncture point for 12 weeks. Measures at baseline and at 
84-day followup included the 7-day voiding diary, the Interstitial Cystitis
Problem Index, Interstitial Cystitis Symptom Index and RAND 36-Item Health Survey
questionnaires.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the treatment and control 
cohorts on any of the measures. However, there was a significant decrease between
baseline and 12-week followup in the amount voided, symptom problems and
severity, and on all 8 SF-36 scales. There was no significant effect of fluid
intake.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated no difference between the active and sham
device. However, it is interesting that treatment and control cohorts experienced
similar improvements, suggesting that the control cohort improvements may have
been due to participants' belief that they were receiving active treatment from
the stimulator. These findings provide support for investigating placebo effects 
in randomized trials.

PMID: 15540744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. RNA. 2004 Nov;10(11):1820-30. Epub 2004 Sep 23.

Template-dependent incorporation of 8-N3AMP into RNA with bacteriophage T7 RNA
polymerase.

Gopalakrishna S(1), Gusti V, Nair S, Sahar S, Gaur RK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
1450 E. Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

UV-induced photochemical crosslinking is a powerful approach that can be used for
the identification of specific interactions involving nucleic acid-protein and
nucleic acid-nucleic acid complexes. 8-AzidoATP (8-N(3)ATP) is a
photoaffinity-labeling agent which has been widely used to elucidate the ATP
binding site of a variety of proteins. However, its true potential as a
photoactivatable nucleotide analog could not be exploited due to the lack of
8-azidoadenosine phosphoramidite, a monomer used in the synthesis of RNA, and the
inability of 8-N(3)ATP to serve as an efficient substrate for bacteriophage RNA
polymerase. In this study, we explored the ability of SP6, T3, and T7 RNA
polymerases and metal ion cofactors to catalyze the incorporation of 8-N(3)AMP
into RNA. Whereas transcription buffer containing 2.0-2.5 mM Mn(2+) supports T7
RNA polymerase-mediated insertion of 8-N(3)AMP into RNA, a mixture of 2.5 mM
Mn(2+) and 2.5 mM Mg(2+) further improves the yield of 8-N(3)AMP-containing
transcript. In addition, both RNA transcription and reverse transcription proceed
with high fidelity for the incorporation of 8-N(3)AMP and complementary residue, 
respectively. Finally, we show that a high-affinity MS2 coat protein binding
sequence, in which adenosine residues were replaced by 8-azidoadenosine,
crosslinks to the coat protein of the Escherichia coli phage MS2.

PMCID: PMC1370669
PMID: 15388871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Bull Entomol Res. 2004 Oct;94(5):419-31.

The spatial dynamics of crop and ground active predatory arthropods and their
aphid prey in winter wheat.

Holland JM(1), Winder L, Woolley C, Alexander CJ, Perry JN.

Author information: 
(1)The Game Conservancy Trust, Fordingbridge, Hants, SP6 1EF, UK.
jholland@gct.org.uk

The distribution of aphid predators within arable fields has been previously
examined using pitfall traps. With this technique predominantly larger
invertebrate species are captured, especially Carabidae, but the technique
provides no estimate of density unless mark-recapture is used. However, many
other numerically important aphid predators occur in arable fields and relatively
little is known about their distribution patterns nor whether they exhibit a
density-dependent response to patches of cereal aphids. Identification of the
most effective predators can allow management practices to be developed
accordingly. In this study, the distribution of cereal aphids and their predators
was examined by suction sampling within a field of winter wheat in Devon, UK,
along with visual estimates of weed patchiness. Sampling was conducted on four
occasions in 1999 across a grid of 128 sample locations. The distribution of 11
predatory taxa from the Carabidae, Staphylinidae and Linyphiidae was examined.
Additionally, the total number of aphid predators and a predation index were used
in these analyses. Carabid adults and larvae, along with staphylinid larvae
showed the strongest aggregation into patches and the most temporal stability in 
their distribution. Other taxa had more ephemeral distributions as did the cereal
aphids. The distribution of carabid larvae was disassociated from the
distribution of cereal aphids for the first two sampling occasions indicating
biocontrol was occurring. Other predatory groups showed both association and
disassociation. Carabid larvae, Bathyphantes and total numbers of Linyphiidae
showed a strong correlation with weed cover for two of the sample dates. Cereal
aphids were disassociated from weed cover on three sampling occasions.

PMID: 15385061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Exp Eye Res. 2004 Oct;79(4):451-4.

Secretion of interleukin-6 and prostaglandin E2 during uveal melanoma-monocyte in
vitro interactions.

Cools-Lartigue J(1), Marshall JC, Caissie AL, Saraiva VS, Burnier MN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)3775 University Lyman Duff, Rm 216, Montreal, Canada.
jonathan.cools-latrigue@mail.mcgill.ca

Host-tumor interactions in uveal melanoma are not well understood. It is believed
that the cytokine interleukin-6 and the lipid mediator autacoid prostaglandin E2 
are involved in tumor growth, proliferation, tumor cell survival, and
angiogenesis. These cytokines have been shown to be poor prognostic markers in
uveal and cutaneous melanoma. In this study, we investigated the levels of
interleukin-6 and prostaglandin E2 in monocyte and uveal melanoma conditioned
medium. Five human uveal melanoma cell lines (92.1, MKT-BR, OCM-1, SP6.5 and
UW-1), and one monocyte cell line (28SC) were seeded in 6 well plates at a
concentration of 1 x 10(6)cells ml(-1). After 18 hr melanoma conditioned medium
was placed on the monocyte cell line and monocyte conditioned medium was placed
on each uveal melanoma cell line. Tumor cells and monocytes incubated in fresh
medium after 18 hr were used as controls. Interleukin-6 and prostaglandin E2
levels were determined by immunoassays prior to media transfer and 6, 12, 24, and
36 hr thereafter. In the absence of conditioned medium, neither product showed
baseline levels of expression. Interleukin-6 but not prostaglandin E2, which
remained undetectable for the duration of the study, showed up-regulation of
expression after incubation in conditioned medium. 28SC incubated in melanoma
conditioned medium expressed higher levels of interleukin-6 than did uveal
melanoma cells incubated in monocyte conditioned medium. In addition each cell
line exhibited a distinct pattern of expression with individual cell lines
exhibiting peak levels of cytokine production at different time points. The
results of this study offer insight into the mechanism by which interleukin 6 may
be involved in tumor-host interactions potentially favoring tumor growth,
survival, and proliferation.

PMID: 15381029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2004 Jul 22;42(14):845-8.

[A study of the abnormalities of human epiderm in keloids and hypertrophic
scars].

[Article in Chinese]

He XJ(1), Han CM, Peng JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the abnormalities of human epiderm in keloids and
hypertrophic scars.
METHODS: Biopsies from ten untreated keloids (duration of disease 3 - 30 years)
and ten hypertrophic scars (duration of disease 6 - 10 months) and five normal
adult skin specimens. Total RNA was isolated from normal adult skin. A cDNA
fragment (base 5941 - 6481 bp) of the full-length human Tenascin-C cDNA was
synthesized by polymerase chain reaction and subcloned in pGEM-T-easy.
Dioxigen-labeled anti-sense and sense probes were synthesized by using a Sp6/T7
in vitro RNA synthesis kit in the present of Dig-UTP. In situ hybridization was
performed on 4% paraformaldehyde-fixed and wax-embedded sections of keloids and
hypertrophic scars. NBT-NCIP was used in color detection. Immunohistochemical
procedure. The sections were incubated with antibodies (anti-Tenascin-C,
anti-CK-16 and anti-Ki-67). Ultrasensitive Streptavidin Peroxidase staining was
performed following established procedures.
RESULTS: The study show that the proliferation of epidermal keratinocytes in
keloids and hypertrophic scars is very clear. The expressions of Tenascin-C mRNA 
in keloids epidermal keratinocytes markedly increased in contrast with epidermal 
keratinocytes of hypertrophic scars and adult skin. The CK-16 and Ki-67 stainings
significantly enhanced in the epidermal keratinocytes of keloids and hypertrophic
scars.
CONCLUSIONS: The different expressions of Tenascin-C, CK-16 and Ki-67 among
normal adult skin, keloids and hypertrophic scars show the abnormalities of
epidermal keratinocytes proliferation and differentiation in keloids and
hypertrophic scars.

PMID: 15363271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Altern Complement Med. 2004 Aug;10(4):643-50.

New diagnostic and therapeutic approach to thyroid-associated orbitopathy based
on applied kinesiology and homeopathic therapy.

Moncayo R(1), Moncayo H, Ulmer H, Kainz H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
anmeldung@womed.at

OBJECTIVES: To investigate pathogenetic mechanisms related to the lacrimal and
lymphatic glands in patients with thyroid-associated orbitopathy (TAO), and the
potential of applied kinesiology diagnosis and homeopathic therapeutic measures.
DESIGN: Prospective.
SETTINGS/LOCATION: Thyroid outpatient unit and a specialized center for
complementary medicine (WOMED, Innsbruck; R.M. and H.M.).
SUBJECTS: Thirty-two (32) patients with TAO, 23 with a long-standing disease, and
9 showing discrete initial changes. All patients were euthyroid at the time of
the investigation.
INTERVENTIONS: Clinical investigation was done, using applied kinesiology
methods. Departing from normal reacting muscles, both target organs as well as
therapeutic measures were tested. Affected organs will produce a therapy
localization (TL) that turns a normal muscle tone weak. Using the same approach, 
specific counteracting therapies (i.e., tonsillitis nosode and lymph mobilizing
agents) were tested.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Change of lid swelling, of ocular movement discomfort, ocular
lock, tonsil reactivity and Traditional Chinese Medicine criteria including
tenderness of San Yin Jiao (SP6) and tongue diagnosis were recorded in a graded
fashion.
RESULTS: Positive TL reactions were found in the submandibular tonsillar
structures, the pharyngeal tonsils, the San Yin Jiao point, the lacrimal gland,
and with the functional ocular lock test. Both Lymphdiaral (Pascoe, Giessen,
Germany) and the homeopathic preparation chronic tonsillitis nosode at a C3
potency (Spagyra, Grödig, Austria) counteracted these changes. Both agents were
used therapeutically over 3-6 months, after which all relevant parameters showed 
improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the involvement of lymphatic structures and
flow in the pathogenesis of TAO. The tenderness of the San Yin Jiao point
correlates to the above mentioned changes and should be included in the clinical 
evaluation of these patients.

PMID: 15353020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Psychophysiology. 2004 Sep;41(5):749-61.

Electrophysiological indices of orienting attention toward pain.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825, USA.
rdowman@clarkson.edu

This study examined the effects of orienting on two pain-related components of
the sural nerve-evoked somatosensory evoked potential: the NDP (80-230 ms), which
is generated in part by the anterior cingulate cortex (ACCc), and SP6 (280-340
ms). NDP and SP6 amplitudes were larger when subjects oriented their attention
away from an invalidly cued location and toward the sural nerve pain than when
their attention remained focused on the pain. These results and our earlier
studies suggest that the ACCc activity generating the NDP is involved in
detecting transient painful stimuli. This activity is enhanced when the pain
occurs outside the focus of attention, and it may signal other brain areas that
attention should be oriented away from its current focus and toward the pain. SP6
appears to be a pain-evoked P3a event-related potential, with an anterior
component involved in orienting attention away from some other task and toward
the pain, and an posterior component involved in evaluating the pain.

PMID: 15318881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Taehan Kanho Hakhoe Chi. 2003 Oct;33(6):753-61.

[Effects of San-Yin-Jiao(SP6) acupressure on labor pain, delivery time in women
during labor].

[Article in Korean]

Lee MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Dankook University, Korea. maternity99@hanmail.net

PURPOSE: The study was done to examine the effects of San-Yin-Jiao(SP6)
acupressure treatment on subjective labor pain, length of delivery time in women 
during labor.
METHOD: The study design was a randomized controlled clinical trial study using a
double-blinded method. Data were collected using a structured questionnaire, a
subjective labor pain scale and measurement of delivery time. The experimental
group(n=29) was received SP6 acupressure and control group(n=29), SP6 touch for
the duration of each uterine contraction, during 30 minutes after 3 cm dilatation
of cervical os.
RESULT: The subjective labor pain scores was significantly different between the 
two groups(p=0.042). The total length of delivery time in the group which had the
SP6 acupressure was shorter than SP6 touch group (p=0.036).
CONCLUSION: These findings showed that SP6 acupressure was effective related to
labor pain, length of time for delivery. SP6 acupressure during labor could be
applied as an effective nursing treatment.

PMID: 15314393  [PubMed]


366. Taehan Kanho Hakhoe Chi. 2004 Apr;34(2):324-32.

[Differences of cesarean section rates according to San-Yin-Jiao(SP6) acupressure
for women in labor].

[Article in Korean]

Chang SB(1), Park YW, Cho JS, Lee MK, Lee BC, Lee SJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Yonsei University, Korea RIHHHPC.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to explain differences of cesarean section
rates according to San-Yin-Jiao(SP6) acupressure for women in labor.
METHOD: A nonequivalent control group pre test--post test design was used to
explain differences of cesarean section rates according to SP6 acupressure. The
participants were 209 women who were assigned to one of three groups SP6
acupressure(n=86), SP6 touch(n=47), and control group(n=76). For 30 minutes, the 
SP6 acupressure group received SP6 acupressure,and the SP6 touch group received
SP6 touch for the duration of each uterine contraction. The Control group was
encouraged to deep breath and relax for the duration of each uterine contraction 
for 30 minutes.
RESULT: The rates of cesarean section were 12.8%, 29.8%, and 22.4% for the SP6
acupressure group, SP6 touch group, and control group respectively. There was a
significant difference among groups (p=0.049). Cesarean section rates were
significantly different between the SP6 acupressure and non-SP6 acupressure
group(p=0.035).
CONCLUSION: This finding shows that 30 minutes of SP6 acupressure was effective
in decreasing the cesarean section rate. Therefore, SP6 acupressure during labor 
could be applied as an effective nursing intervention.

PMID: 15314328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Int J Oncol. 2004 Aug;25(2):293-302.

High cell surface expression of Newcastle disease virus proteins via replicon
vectors demonstrates syncytia forming activity of F and fusion promotion activity
of HN molecules.

Zeng J(1), Fournier P, Schirrmacher V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D010, D-69129 
Heidelberg, Germany.

For functional studies, the hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) and the fusion
protein (F) of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) were expressed in BHK cells using
two vectors which are based on the Semliki Forest virus (SFV) replicon. The first
system of high protein expression works by transfection of RNA which before has
been in vitro transcribed from a vector containing the gene for the SFV
self-amplifying replicase (REP) and a foreign gene using the SP6 promoter. A high
level of protein (HN or F) expression was detected 18-20 h after transfection. To
study the host range of this expression system, a panel of different cell lines
were compared for transfections with SFV RNA. A wide range of expression
efficiency was observed, the highest being BHK cells. The second system is based 
on a DNA plasmid in which the SFV-REP and a foreign gene are expressed in cells
under the transcriptional and translational control of the cytomegalovirus
immediate-early enhancer T7 promoter. DNA-electroporated BHK cells expressed also
high levels of the recombinant proteins but at a delayed time point (40-48 h) as 
compared with the corresponding RNA. Co-expression of the two NDV proteins, HN
and F, via this DNA vector in the same cells led to syncytium formation in the
cell monolayer, showing that both proteins expressed in this way, were
functionally active. F alone, expressed via this vector, displayed residual
fusion activity suggesting its proteolytic cleavage and its functional
independence from HN.

PMID: 15254725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Brain Topogr. 2004 Spring;16(3):169-79.

Topographic analysis of painful laser and sural nerve electrical evoked
potentials.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825, USA.
rdowman@clarkson.edu

A quantitative scalp topographic pattern analysis was used to compare evoked
potentials elicited by painful laser (LEP) and electrical stimulation of the
sural nerve (snSEP) in 22 healthy adults. The snSEP and LEP were separated into
stable periods (consecutive time points having the same topographic pattern). The
topographic pattern is dependent upon the number, location, orientation and
relative magnitudes of the brain areas active at that time (source
configuration). Demonstrating that 2 topographies have the same topographic
pattern, therefore, provides evidence that they are generated by the same source 
configuration. The snSEP SP2/3 and SP3 stable periods have similar topographic
features as the stable periods encompassing the LEP N1 and N2 peaks. However, the
quantitative scalp topographic analysis demonstrated that the snSEP SP2/3 and SP3
have a much larger fronto-central negativity. Our earlier work suggests this
difference might be due to the sural nerve electrical stimulus evoking a more
robust pain-evoked response from the anterior cingulate cortex than the laser.
The snSEP SP6 topographic pattern was essentially the same as the LEP P2 peak.
This finding plus the results of our earlier work demonstrate that SP6 is the
snSEP analogue of the LEP P2 peak. These findings have important implications for
the choice of evoking stimulus in investigations of pain processing in humans.
For example, the sural nerve electrical stimulus will be preferred over the laser
in studies of the anterior cingulate's role in cognitive processes related to
pain, such as orienting attention, and/or in studies involving cognitive tasks
that require the presentation of a large number of painful stimuli. The LEP N1
and N2 peaks, on the other hand, will be preferred in studies of the parietal
operculum's role in pain sensation.

PMID: 15162914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31769-79. Epub 2004 May 15.

Roles of stem cell factor/c-Kit and effects of Glivec/STI571 in human uveal
melanoma cell tumorigenesis.

Lefevre G(1), Glotin AL, Calipel A, Mouriaux F, Tran T, Kherrouche Z, Maurage CA,
Auclair C, Mascarelli F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U598, Institut Biomédical des Cordeliers, 75006 Paris, France.

The B-Raf(V599E)-mediated constitutive activation of ERK1/2 is involved in
establishing the transformed phenotype of some uveal melanoma cells (Calipel, A.,
Lefevre, G., Pouponnot, C., Mouriaux, F., Eychene, A., and Mascarelli, F. (2003) 
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 42409-42418). We have shown that stem cell factor (SCF) is
involved in the proliferation of normal uveal melanocytes and that c-Kit is
expressed in 75% of primary uveal melanomas. This suggests that the acquisition
of autonomous growth during melanoma progression may involve the SCF/c-Kit axis. 
We used six human uveal melanoma tumor-derived cell lines and normal uveal
melanocytes to characterize the SCF/c-Kit system and to assess its specific role 
in transformation. We investigated the possible roles of activating mutations in 
c-KIT, the overexpression of this gene, and ligand-dependent c-Kit overactivation
in uveal melanoma cell tumorigenesis. Four cell lines (92.1, SP6.5, Mel270, and
TP31) expressed both SCF and c-Kit, and none harbored the c-KIT mutations in
exons 9, 11, 13, and 17 that have been shown to induce SCF-independent c-Kit
activation. Melanoma cell proliferation was strongly inhibited by small
interfering RNA-mediated depletion of c-Kit in these cells, despite the presence 
of (V599E)B-Raf in SP6.5 and TP31 cells. We characterized the signaling pathways 
involved in SCF/c-Kit-mediated cell growth and survival in normal and tumoral
melanocytes and found that constitutive ERK1/2 activation played a key role in
both the SCF/c-Kit autocrine loop and the gain of function of (V599E)B-Raf for
melanoma cell proliferation and transformation. We also provide the first
evidence that Glivec/STI571, a c-Kit tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be used to 
treat uveal melanomas.

PMID: 15145934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Methods Mol Biol. 2004;269:333-46.

Use of dual recombinant vaccinia virus vectors to assay viral
glycoprotein-mediated fusion with transfection-resistant primary cell targets.

Yi Y(1), Singh A, Cutilli J, Collman RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Fusion mediated by the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) envelope (Env)
glycoprotein and the cellular CD4/chemokine receptor complex is the first step in
entry and is often analyzed in cell-cell fusion assays that require Env
expression by recombinant vaccinia viruses and/or target cell transfection.
Primary lymphocytes and macrophages are the principal targets for HIV-1 in vivo, 
but are poor substrates for transfection, and constructing recombinant vaccinia
viruses expressing every novel or mutant env gene is laborious. This chapter
describes a fusion assay using two recombinant vaccinia viruses that express
distinct RNA polymerases suitable for transfection-resistant targets, such as
primary human lymphocytes and macrophages. It also uses env genes contained in
plasmid vectors, eliminating the need to construct recombinant vaccinia viruses
to analyze each construct. Effector 293T cells are cotransfected with SP6-driven 
reporter gene and T7-driven env plasmids, then infected with recombinant vaccinia
virus expressing T7 polymerase. Primary lymphocyte or macrophage targets are
infected with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing SP6 polymerase. Fusion
mediated by effector cell Env and endogenous CD4/coreceptors in target
lymphocytes or macrophages enables SP6 polymerase-mediated reporter gene
transactivation. This approach provides an efficient tool to study fusion
mediated by multiple-cloned primary isolate or mutant HIV-1 env genes with the
primary target cell types relevant to infection in vivo.

PMID: 15114024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Plasmid. 2004 May;51(3):217-26.

Construction of multi-purpose vectors, pCNS and pCNS-D2, are suitable for
collection and functional study of large-scale cDNAs.

Oh JH(1), Sohn HY, Kim JM, Kim YS, Kim NS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genomics, Division of Genomics and Proteomics, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-333, Republic of 
Korea.

To efficiently perform collection and functional studies of large-scale cDNAs, we
constructed multi-functional cDNA vectors for efficient full-length cDNA cloning,
direct sequencing, easy screening, and the expression of cDNA in vitro and in
vivo without subcloning the cDNA into other vectors. The constructed vectors,
pCNS and pCNS-D2, contain a multi-cloning site for uni-directional full-length
cDNA cloning, T7 and Sp6 RNA polymerase promoters for in vitro transcription and 
translation, and hCMV immediate early promoter and BGH poly(A) to allow
expression in mammalian cells. Using these vectors, we constructed full-length
enriched cDNA libraries containing 60-75% of the full-length cDNAs using two
different oligo-capping methods. The subtracted cDNA libraries could also be
constructed by removing of EF1-alpha cDNA, a highly expressed cDNA. In addition, 
we confirmed the translation of EF1-alpha cDNA in vitro and the expression of
luciferase cDNA in mammalian cells. The expression efficiency of luciferase cDNA 
in different cell lines, such as HeLa, Hep3B, SNU638, and SNU668, showed that
pCNS vectors can highly express target genes in different cell types. These
results indicated that our multi-purpose vectors, pCNS and pCNS-D2, are useful
tools for the construction of full-length cDNA libraries and high-throughput
based functional study of cDNAs.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15109828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Melanoma Res. 2004 Apr;14(2):91-5.

Macrophage-derived soluble factor enhances melanoma inhibitory activity
expression by uveal melanoma cells in vitro.

Callejo SA(1), Marshall JC, Cools-Lartigue J, Saraiva VS, Burnier MN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)The Henry C. Witelson Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory and Registry, McGill
University Health Center, Lyman Duff Building, 3775 University Street, Room 216, 
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) is correlated with tumour progression and
development of metastatic disease. Melanoma inhibitory activity, secreted by
melanoma cells, is known to inhibit tumour cell attachment to the extracellular
matrix enhancing their invasive potential. The regulatory pathways that lead to
MIA expression have not yet been elucidated. It is well established that tumour
cells and macrophages interact through soluble factors, preventing or enhancing
tumour growth. The purpose of the present study was to determine whether soluble 
factor(s) derived from macrophages lead to the up-regulation of MIA production by
human uveal melanoma cell lines (HUMCL) and whether MIA contributes to an
increase in the invasive behaviour of HUMCL in vitro. Baseline MIA levels were
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in five HUMCL of known metastatic
potential (92.1>SP6.5>OCM-1>MKT-BR>UW-1). Macrophage conditioned medium (MaCM)
was placed on top of the HUMCL and MIA levels were measured at 6, 12, 24, and 36 
h. The HUMCL were also seeded in a Matrigel chamber for 72 h and then cells
invading the Matrigel were counted. The assay was repeated adding recombinant
human MIA to the top layer of each well. All HUMCL expressed MIA at baseline
(average of 31 ng/ml at 36 h). Following exposure to MaCM, MIA levels increased
to an average of 45.2 ng/ml, with the 92.1 and SP6.5 cell lines expressing the
highest MIA levels and UW-1 cell line expressing the lowest level. During the
baseline invasion assay, the vast majority of cells (>95%) were found to adhere
to the upper surface of the Matrigel. When MIA was added to the invasion chamber,
no adhesion or invasion was observed. The results suggest, for the first time,
that macrophages secrete a soluble factor(s) that may stimulate nearby melanoma
cells to enhance their production of MIA in vitro. Furthermore, increased MIA
production may, in turn, increase the invasive properties of the cells by
modulating the attachment of HUMCL to the extracellular matrix.

PMID: 15057037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Bacteriol. 2004 Apr;186(7):1933-44.

Complete genomic sequence of the virulent Salmonella bacteriophage SP6.

Dobbins AT(1), George M Jr, Basham DA, Ford ME, Houtz JM, Pedulla ML, Lawrence
JG, Hatfull GF, Hendrix RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Howard University College of
Medicine, Washington, DC 20059, USA.

We report the complete genome sequence of enterobacteriophage SP6, which infects 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. The genome contains 43,769 bp, including
a 174-bp direct terminal repeat. The gene content and organization clearly place 
SP6 in the coliphage T7 group of phages, but there is approximately 5 kb at the
right end of the genome that is not present in other members of the group, and
the homologues of T7 genes 1.3 through 3 appear to have undergone an unusual
reorganization. Sequence analysis identified 10 putative promoters for the
SP6-encoded RNA polymerase and seven putative rho-independent terminators. The
terminator following the gene encoding the major capsid subunit has a termination
efficiency of about 50% with the SP6-encoded RNA polymerase. Phylogenetic
analysis of phages related to SP6 provided clear evidence for horizontal exchange
of sequences in the ancestry of these phages and clearly demarcated exchange
boundaries; one of the recombination joints lies within the coding region for a
phage exonuclease. Bioinformatic analysis of the SP6 sequence strongly suggested 
that DNA replication occurs in large part through a bidirectional mechanism,
possibly with circular intermediates.

PMCID: PMC374404
PMID: 15028677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Nat Biotechnol. 2004 Mar;22(3):321-5. Epub 2004 Feb 8.

Interferon induction by siRNAs and ssRNAs synthesized by phage polymerase.

Kim DH(1), Longo M, Han Y, Lundberg P, Cantin E, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, City of Hope and Beckman Research Institute of 
the City of Hope, 1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010-3011, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2004 Mar;22(3):280-2.

Small interfering RNAs (siRNA) are potent reagents for directed
post-transcriptional gene silencing and a major new genetic tool for
investigating mammalian cells. When synthetic siRNAs are used for gene silencing,
the costs can be substantial because of variations in siRNA efficacies. An
alternative to chemically synthesized siRNAs are siRNAs produced by bacteriophage
T7 RNA polymerase. We found that siRNAs synthesized from the T7 RNA polymerase
system can trigger a potent induction of interferon alpha and beta in a variety
of cell lines. Surprisingly, we also found very potent induction of interferon
alpha and beta by short single-stranded RNAs (ssRNAs) transcribed with T3, T7 and
Sp6 RNA polymerases. Analyses of the potential mediators of this response
revealed that the initiating 5' triphosphate is required for interferon
induction. We describe here an improved method for T7 siRNA synthesis that
alleviates the interferon response while maintaining full efficacy of the siRNAs.

PMID: 14990954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jan 30;335(5):1151-71.

Genomic analysis of bacteriophages SP6 and K1-5, an estranged subgroup of the T7 
supergroup.

Scholl D(1), Kieleczawa J, Kemp P, Rush J, Richardson CC, Merril C, Adhya S,
Molineux IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemical Genetics, The National Institute of Mental Health, NIH,
9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20895, USA. dscholl@usa.net

We have determined the genome sequences of two closely related lytic
bacteriophages, SP6 and K1-5, which infect Salmonella typhimurium LT2 and
Escherichia coli serotypes K1 and K5, respectively. The genome organization of
these phages is almost identical with the notable exception of the tail fiber
genes that confer the different host specificities. The two phages have diverged 
extensively at the nucleotide level but they are still more closely related to
each other than either is to any other phage currently characterized. The SP6 and
K1-5 genomes contain, respectively, 43,769 bp and 44,385 bp, with 174 bp and 234 
bp direct terminal repeats. About half of the 105 putative open reading frames in
the two genomes combined show no significant similarity to database proteins with
a known or predicted function that is obviously beneficial for growth of a
bacteriophage. The overall genome organization of SP6 and K1-5 is comparable to
that of the T7 group of phages, although the specific order of genes coding for
DNA metabolism functions has not been conserved. Low levels of nucleotide
similarity between genomes in the T7 and SP6 groups suggest that they diverged a 
long time ago but, on the basis of this conservation of genome organization, they
are expected to have retained similar developmental strategies.

PMID: 14729334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Methods Enzymol. 2003;370:658-68.

Mutational analysis and structure of the phage SP6 promoter.

Shin I(1), Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 373-1 Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

PMID: 14712682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Int Med Res. 2003 Nov-Dec;31(6):552-6.

Acupressure versus oxybutinin in the treatment of enuresis.

Yuksek MS(1), Erdem AF, Atalay C, Demirel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Reanimation, School of Medicine, Atatürk
University, Erzurum, Turkey. yuksek@hotmail.com

We aimed to assess the efficacy of acupressure for treating nocturnal enuresis,
compared with oxybutinin. Acupressure was administered to 12 patients by their
parents, who had been taught the technique. Pressure was applied at acupuncture
points Gv4, Gv15, Gv20, B23, B28, B32, H7, H9, St36, Sp4, Sp6, Sp12, Ren2, Ren3, 
Ren6, K3 and K5. Twelve control patients received 0.4 mg/kg oxybutinin. Parents
were asked to record incidences of bed-wetting and patients and/or parents
completed a questionnaire 15 days and 1, 3 and 6 months after the start of
treatment. Complete and partial responses after 6 months of treatment were seen
in 83.3% and 16.7%, respectively, of patients treated with acupressure, and in
58.3% and 33.3%, respectively, of children who received oxybutinin. In
conclusion, nocturnal enuresis can be partially treated by oxybutinin but
acupressure could be an alternative non-drug therapy. Acupressure has the
advantages of being non-invasive, painless and cost-effective.

PMID: 14708420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10222-7. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

Serpin mechanism of hepatitis C virus nonstructural 3 (NS3) protease inhibition: 
induced fit as a mechanism for narrow specificity.

Richer MJ(1), Juliano L, Hashimoto C, Jean F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural 3 (NS3) serine protease disrupts important 
cellular antiviral signaling pathways and plays a pivotal role in the proteolytic
maturation of the HCV polyprotein precursor. This recent discovery has fostered
the search for NS3 protease inhibitors. However, the enzyme's unusual induced fit
behavior and peculiar molecular architecture have imposed considerable obstacles 
to the development of small molecule inhibitors. In this article, we demonstrate 
that such unique induced fit behavior and the chymotrypsin-like catalytic domain 
can provide the structural plasticity necessary to generate protein-based
inhibitors of the NS3 protease. We took advantage of the macromolecular scaffold 
of a Drosophila serpin, SP6, which intrinsically supports chymotrypsin-like
enzyme inhibition, to design a novel class of potent and selective inhibitors. We
show that altering the SP6 reactive site loop (RSL) resulted in the development
of the first effective (K(i) of 34 nm) and selective serpin, SP6(EVC/S), directed
at the NS3 protease. SP6(EVC/S) operates as a suicide substrate inhibitor, and
its partitioning between the complex-forming and proteolytic pathways for the NS3
protease is HCV NS4A cofactor-dependent and -specific. Once bound to the protease
active site, SP6(EVC/S) partitions with equal probability to undergo proteolysis 
by NS3 at the C-terminal site of the engineered RSL,
(P(6))Glu-Ile-(P(4))Val-Met-Thr-(P(1))Cys- downward arrow -(P(1)')Ser, or to form
a covalent acyl-enzyme complex characteristic of cognate protease-serpin pairs.
Our results also reveal a novel cofactor-induced serpin mechanism of enzyme
inhibition that could be explored for developing effective and selective
inhibitors of other important induced fit viral proteases of the Flaviviridae
family such as the West Nile virus NS3 endoprotease.

PMID: 14701815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Jan 2;354(1):50-3.

Evidence from brain imaging with fMRI supporting functional specificity of
acupoints in humans.

Zhang WT(1), Jin Z, Luo F, Zhang L, Zeng YW, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Peking University, 38 Xue Yuan Rd, Beijing
100083, China.

We tested whether the stimulation of acupoints in the same spinal segments could 
induce different central responses with functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) study. Stimulation of acupoints ST36/SP6 (Zusanli/Sanyinjiao) or GB34/BL57
(Yanglingquan/Chengshan) both activated primary and secondary somatosensory area,
insula, ventral thalamus, parietal Brodmann Area 40, temporal lobe, putamen, and 
cerebellum, while de-activated amygdala. Nevertheless, ST36/SP6 stimulation
specifically activated orbital frontal cortex and de-activated hippocampus.
Alternatively, stimulation of GB34/BL57 activated dorsal thalamus and inhibited
those of primary motor area and premotor cortex. Thus, stimulation of acupoints
in the same spinal segments induced distinct though overlapped cerebral response 
patterns, which indicated the existence of acupoint specificity.

PMID: 14698480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Virol. 2004 Jan;78(2):1032-8.

High fidelity of yellow fever virus RNA polymerase.

Pugachev KV(1), Guirakhoo F, Ocran SW, Mitchell F, Parsons M, Penal C, Girakhoo
S, Pougatcheva SO, Arroyo J, Trent DW, Monath TP.

Author information: 
(1)Acambis, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Three consecutive plaque purifications of four chimeric yellow fever virus-dengue
virus (ChimeriVax-DEN) vaccine candidates against dengue virus types 1 to 4 were 
performed. The genome of each candidate was sequenced by the consensus approach
after plaque purification and additional passages in cell culture. Our data
suggest that the nucleotide sequence error rate for SP6 RNA polymerase used in
the in vitro transcription step to initiate virus replication was as high as 1.34
x 10(-4) per copied nucleotide and that the error rate of the yellow fever virus 
RNA polymerase employed by the chimeras for genome replication in infected cells 
was as low as 1.9 x 10(-7) to 2.3 x 10(-7). Clustering of beneficial mutations
that accumulated after multiple virus passages suggests that the N-terminal part 
of the prM protein, a specific site in the middle of the E protein, and the NS4B 
protein may be essential for nucleocapsid-envelope interaction during flavivirus 
assembly.

PMCID: PMC368746
PMID: 14694136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Immunology. 2003 Dec;110(4):474-81.

Induction of an antitumour adaptive immune response elicited by tumour cells
expressing de novo B7-1 mainly depends on the anatomical site of their delivery: 
the dose applied regulates the expansion of the response.

Sartoris S(1), Testi MG, Stefani E, Chignola R, Guerriero C, Matucci A, Cestari
T, Scarpa A, Riviera AP, Zanoni G, Tridente G, Andrighetto G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia, Sezione di Immunologia, Università di Verona,
Verona, Italy. silvia.sartoris@univr.it

De novo expression of costimulatory molecules in tumours generally increases
their immunogenicity, but does not always induce a protective response against
the parental tumour. This issue was addressed in the mouse Sp6 hybridoma model,
comparing different immunization routes (subcutaneous, intraperitoneal and
intravenous) and doses (0.5 x 10(6) and 5 x 10(6) cells) of Sp6 cells expressing 
de novo B7-1 (Sp6/B7). The results can be summarized as follows. First, de novo
expression of B7-1 rendered Sp6 immunogenic, as it significantly reduced the
tumour incidence to < or =15% with all delivery routes and doses tested, whereas 
wild-type Sp6 was invariably tumorigenic (100% tumour incidence). Second,
long-lasting protection against wild-type Sp6 was mainly achieved when
immunization with Sp6/B7 was subcutaneous: a dose of 0.5 x 10(6) Sp6/B7 cells
elicited protection that was confined to sites in the same anatomical quarter as 
the immunizing injection. Repeated injections of the same dose extended
protection against wild-type Sp6 to other anatomical districts, as well as a
single injection of a 10-fold higher dose (5 x 10(6) cells). Finally,
Sp6-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activity was detected in draining lymph
nodes, and the splenic expansion of Sp6-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
precursors quantitatively correlated with the dose of antigen. We conclude that
activation of a protective immune response against Sp6 depends on the local
environment where the immunogenic form of the 'whole tumour cell antigen' is
delivered. The antigen dose regulates the anatomical extent of the protective
response.

PMCID: PMC1783082
PMID: 14632645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 2;279(1):626-34. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

The Krüppel-like factor epiprofin is expressed by epithelium of developing teeth,
hair follicles, and limb buds and promotes cell proliferation.

Nakamura T(1), Unda F, de-Vega S, Vilaxa A, Fukumoto S, Yamada KM, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Developmental Biology and Regeneration Branch, NIDCR, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

We identified a cDNA clone for epiprofin, which is preferentially expressed in
teeth, by differential hybridization using DNA microarrays from an embryonic day 
19.5 mouse molar cDNA library. Sequence analysis revealed that this cDNA encodes 
a member of the Krüppel-like factor family containing three characteristic
C2H2-type zinc finger motifs. The full-length cDNA was obtained by the 5' Cap
capture method. Except for its 5'-terminal sequence, the epiprofin mRNA sequence 
is almost identical to the predicted sequence of Krüppel-like factor 14/Sp6
(specificity protein 6), which was previously identified in expressed sequence
tag data bases and GenBank by an Sp1 zinc finger DNA-binding domain search
(Scohy, S., Gabant, P., Van Reeth, T., Hertveldt, V., Dreze, P. L., Van Vooren,
P., Riviere, M., Szpirer, J., and Szpirer, C. (2000) Genomics 70, 93-101). This
sequence difference is due to differences in the assignment of the location of
exon 1. In situ hybridization revealed that epiprofin mRNA is expressed by
proliferating dental epithelium, differentiated odontoblast, and also hair
follicle matrix epithelium. In addition, whole mount in situ hybridization showed
transient expression of epiprofin mRNA in cells of the apical ectodermal ridge in
developing limbs and the posterior neuropore. Transfection of an epiprofin
expression vector revealed that this molecule is localized in the nucleus and
promotes cell proliferation. Thus, epiprofin is a highly cell- and
tissue-specific nuclear protein expressed primarily by proliferating epithelial
cells of teeth, hair follicles, and limbs that may function in the development of
these tissues by regulating cell growth.

PMID: 14551215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochemistry. 2003 Oct 7;42(39):11544-54.

DNA interactions of monofunctional organometallic ruthenium(II) antitumor
complexes in cell-free media.

Novakova O(1), Chen H, Vrana O, Rodger A, Sadler PJ, Brabec V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolska 135, CZ-61265 Brno, Czech Republic.

Modifications of natural DNA in a cell-free medium by antitumor monodentate
Ru(II) arene compounds of the general formula [(eta(6)-arene)Ru(en)Cl](+) (arene 
= biphenyl, dihydroanthracene, tetrahydroanthracene, p-cymene, or benzene; en =
ethylenediamine) were studied by atomic absorption, melting behavior,
transcription mapping, circular and linear dichroism, plasmid unwinding,
competitive ethidium displacement, and differential pulse polarography. The
results indicate that these complexes bind preferentially to guanine residues in 
double-helical DNA. The data are consistent with DNA binding of the complexes
containing biphenyl, dihydroanthracene, or tetrahydroanthracene ligands that
involves combined coordination to G N7 and noncovalent, hydrophobic interactions 
between the arene ligand and DNA, which may include arene intercalation and minor
groove binding. In contrast, the single hydrocarbon rings in the p-cymene and
benzene ruthenium complexes cannot interact with double-helical DNA by
intercalation. Interestingly, the adducts of the complex containing p-cymene
ligand, which has methyl and isopropyl substituents, distort the conformation and
thermally destabilize double-helical DNA distinctly more than the adducts of the 
three multiring ruthenium arene compounds. It has been suggested that the
different character of conformational alterations induced in DNA, and the
resulting thermal destabilization, may affect differently further "downstream"
effects of damaged DNA and consequently may result in different biological
effects of this new class of metal-based antitumor compounds. The results point
to a unique profile of DNA binding for Ru(II) arene compounds, suggesting that a 
search for new anticancer compounds based on this class of complexes may also
lead to an altered profile of biological activity in comparison with that of
metal-based antitumor drugs already used in the clinic or currently on clinical
trials.

PMID: 14516206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2003;(3):265-6.

Effective photo-regulation of transcription reaction by SP6 RNA polymerase with
modified DNA tethering multiple azobenzenes.

Liu M(1), Asanuma H, Komiyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 
4-6-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Effective photo-regulation of transcription reaction by SP6 RNA polymerase (RNAP)
was achieved with photo-responsive SP6 promoter tethering two azobenzenes. With
one azobenzene in either TATA or RNAP binding region of the SP6 promoter,
photo-regulation activity was very small. But when two azobenzenes were
introduced into both regions, efficient photo-regulation of transcription was
attained: transcription proceeded 3.5 fold faster under UV irradiation than under
dark.

PMID: 14510482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2002;(2):75-6.

Photo-regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase with azobenzene-tethered
promoter.

Asanuma H(1), Liu M, Tamaru D, Liang X, Komiyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Advanced Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Photo-regulation of transcription reaction by T7-RNA polymerase was investigated 
by introducing an azobenzene residue into the non-template strand of T7-promoter.
It was found that transcription was strongly interfered under dark or visible
light irradiation, whereas it efficiently proceeded after UV irradiation. With
this photo-responsive promoter, on-off switching of transcription by light
irradiation was achieved. This strategy was also effective for the
photo-regulation of SP6-RNA polymerase.

PMID: 12903112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Aug 1;31(15):e78.

Highly stable and efficient mRNA templates for mRNA-protein fusions and
C-terminally labeled proteins.

Miyamoto-Sato E(1), Takashima H, Fuse S, Sue K, Ishizaka M, Tateyama S, Horisawa 
K, Sawasaki T, Endo Y, Yanagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, 3-14-1, Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan.

For high-throughput in vitro protein selection using genotype (mRNA)-phenotype
(protein) fusion formation and C-terminal protein labeling as a post-selection
analysis, it is important to improve the stability and efficiency of mRNA
templates for both technologies. Here we describe an efficient single-strand
ligation (90% of the input mRNAs) using a fluorescein-conjugated polyethylene
glycol puromycin (Fluor-PEG Puro) spacer. This ligation provides a stable c-jun
mRNA with a flexible Fluor-PEG Puro spacer for efficient fusion formation (70% of
the input mRNA with the PEG spacer) in a cell-free wheat germ translation system.
When using a 5' untranslated region including SP6 promoter and Omega29 enhancer
(a part of tobacco mosaic virus Omega), an A(8) sequence (eight consecutive
adenylate residues) at the 3' end is suitable for fusion formation, while an
XA(8) sequence (XhoI and the A(8) sequence) is suitable for C-terminal protein
labeling. Further, we report that Fluor-PEG N-t-butyloxycarbonylpuromycin
[Puro(Boc)] spacer enhances the stability and efficiency of c-jun mRNA template
for C-terminal protein labeling. These mRNA templates should be useful for
puromycin-based technologies (fusion formation and C-terminal protein labeling)
to facilitate high-throughput in vitro protein selection for not only
evolutionary protein engineering, but also proteome exploration.

PMCID: PMC169963
PMID: 12888530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biotechniques. 2003 Jul;35(1):112-6, 118-21.

Primer design for automated DNA sequencing in a core facility.

O'Shaughnessy JB(1), Chan M, Clark K, Ivanetich KM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Resource Center, University California at San Francisco, 90
Medical Center Way, 104, San Francisco, CA 94143-0541, USA. kathyi@cgl.ucsf.edu

We assessed the quality of nine standard primers for automated fluorescent dye
terminator DNA sequencing by whether their melting temperatures (Tms) were in the
optimal range for DNA sequencing, and the degree to which their sequences matched
the sequences of 36 common vectors. The M13F (-21/-20), M13F (-41/-40), M13R, and
T7R primers showed optimal physicochemical characteristics and were not
redesigned. The M13R (-41/-40), T3, and SP6 primers showed mismatches and/or Tm
values outside of the optimal range and were redesigned by these two criteria.
With few exceptions, the redesigned primers did not significantly improve DNA
sequencing quality as assessed by Phred scores compared to the corresponding
original primer. However, both redesigned T7 primers, which were also redesigned 
to function as pET primers, strikingly improved sequencing on pET vectors. The
original and redesigned T7 primers also improved the sequence quality for the
Bluescript family of vectors compared to the original and redesigned M13R
(-41/-40) primers. The mismatch-redesigned T7, SP6, and M13R (-41/-40) primers
marginally improved the sequence quality over the corresponding original primers 
for specific vector types. Within limits, decreasing the %GC and Tm below
reported optimal levels did not affect the sequence quality. Commercially
available standard vector primers were surveyed.

PMID: 12866412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Neurol Sci. 2003 May;24 Suppl 2:S138-42.

Non-pharmacological approaches to chronic headaches: transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation, lasertherapy and acupuncture in transformed migraine
treatment.

Allais G(1), De Lorenzo C, Quirico PE, Lupi G, Airola G, Mana O, Benedetto C.

Author information: 
(1)Woman's Headache Center, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Via
Ventimiglia 3, I-10126 Turin, Italy.

In an open, randomized trial, we evaluated transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS), infrared lasertherapy and acupuncture in the treatment of
transformed migraine, over a 4-month period free of prophylactic drugs. Sixty
women suffering from transformed migraine were assigned, after a one month run-in
period, to three different treatments: TENS (Group T; n=20), infrared
lasertherapy (Group L; n=20) or acupuncture (Group A; n=20). In each group the
patients underwent ten sessions of treatment and monthly control visits. In Group
T patients were treated for two weeks (5 days/week) simultaneously with three
TENS units with different stimulation parameters (I: pulse rate = 80 Hz, pulse
width = 120 micros; II: 120 Hz, 90 micros; III: 4 Hz, 200 micros). In Group L an 
infrared diode laser (27 mW, 904 nm) was applied every other day on tender scalp 
spots. In Group A acupuncture was carried out twice a week in the first two weeks
and weekly in the next 6 weeks. A basic formula (LR3, SP6, LI4, GB20, GV20 and
Ex-HN5) was always employed; additional points were selected according to each
patient's symptomatology. The number of days with headache per month
significantly decreased during treatment in all groups. The response in the
groups differed over time, probably due to the different timing of applications
of the three methods. TENS, lasertherapy and acupuncture proved to be effective
in reducing the frequency of headache attacks. Acupuncture showed the best
effectiveness over time.

PMID: 12811613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Sheng Wu Hua Xue Yu Sheng Wu Wu Li Xue Bao (Shanghai). 2003 May;35(5):397-402.

A high-resolution genetic and physical map of a mouse coat abnormality locus
(Uncv).

Shi YZ(1), Wang DP, Hu LD, Zhao GP, Wang YZ, Kong XY, Li SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei.

More than a hundred of loci (genes) affect the development of mouse and human
hair. A locus of Uncv (uncovered) has been confirmed to be involved in
hairlessness for homozygote and sparse hair for heterozygote. Except
hairlessness(or called uncovered coat), the homozygote was also accompanied by
growth retard and puberty delay. Identification of the mutation in the gene will 
be important for understanding the related diseases in human. Although the
uncovered locus (Uncv) has been mapped to the mouse distal chromosome 11(Chr11), 
the high-resolution genetic map and physical map of the locus has not been
created. In this study, 2074 F2 mouse populations from backcross [BALB/c
(Uncv/Uncv) x C3H (+/+)]x BALB/c (Uncv/Uncv) and [BALB/c (Uncv/Uncv) x C57BL/6
(+/+)] x BALB/c(Uncv/ Uncv) were genotyped using 16 polymorphic markers with an
approximately 20 cM interval on mouse distal Chr11. By genetic linkage analysis, 
Uncv locus was mapped to an approximately 1.4 cM interval between markers
D11Mit337 and D11Mit338 with the following order: proximal D11Mit338-D11Mit203
(Uncv)-D11Mit103 -D11Mit337 distal on mouse Chr11. And then, a contig of 35 BACs 
representing the Uncv-containing region was constructed. The contig covered
800-1000 kb region flanked by 189K10-SP6 and D11Mit103. Together, we have
constructed the high-resolution genetic map and detailed physical map of the Uncv
region. This will facilitate the identification of the Uncv loci.

PMID: 12766798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Nature. 2003 May 22;423(6938):400; discussion 400.

Ecology: Hunting and fox numbers in the United Kingdom.

Aebischer NJ(1), Baker SE, Johnson PJ, Macdonald DW, Reynolds JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Game Conservancy Trust, Fordingbridge, Hampshire SP6 1EF, UK.

Comment on
    Nature. 2002 Sep 5;419(6902):34.

PMID: 12761539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biol Proced Online. 2001 May 14;3:1-7.

A sensitive non-radioactive in situ hybridization method for the detection of
chicken IgG gamma-chain mRNA: a technique suitable for detecting of variety of
mRNAs in tissue sections.

Zheng W(1), Izaki J, Furusawa S, Yoshimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation. Hiroshima
University, Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8528. Japan.Faculty of Applied Biological
Science. Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8528. Japan.
yyosimu@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

We established a sensitive non-radioactive in situ hybridization (ISH) method for
the detection of chicken IgG gamma-chain mRNA in paraffin sections. RNA probes
were transcribed in vitro from cloned chicken IgG CH1 nucleotide sequences with
SP6/T7 RNA polymerases in the presence of DIG-UTP. These probes were used for
hybridization and were immunodetected using anti-DIG antibodies conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase. The immunoreactive products were visualized with
DAB-H(2)O(2). IgG gamma-chain mRNA-expressing cells were localized in both the
spleen and oviductal tissues. This method demonstrated an excellent sensitivity
since the ISH signal was clear and the background was negligible. We found that
in the spleen IgG gamma-chain mRNA-expressing cells were present mainly in the
red pulp, whereas in the oviduct they appeared mainly in the mucosal stroma and
not in the mucosal epithelium.

PMCID: PMC145541
PMID: 12734584  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


392. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):e47.

RNase T1 mediated base-specific cleavage and MALDI-TOF MS for high-throughput
comparative sequence analysis.

Hartmer R(1), Storm N, Boecker S, Rodi CP, Hillenkamp F, Jurinke C, van den Boom 
D.

Author information: 
(1)SEQUENOM GmbH, Mendelssohnstrasse 15D, D-22761 Hamburg, Germany.

Here we devise a new method for high-throughput comparative sequence analysis.
The developed protocol comprises a homogeneous in vitro transcription/RNase
cleavage system with the accuracy and data acquisition speed of matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization coupled with time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS). In summary, the target region is PCR amplified using primers
tagged with promoter sequences of T7 or SP6 RNA polymerase. Using RNase T1, the
in vitro transcripts are base-specifically cleaved at every G-position. This
reaction results in a characteristic pattern of fragment masses that is
indicative of the original target sequence. To enable high-throughput analysis,
samples are processed with automated liquid handling devices and nanoliter
amounts are dispensed onto SpectroCHIP arrays for reliable and homogeneous MALDI 
preparation. This system enables rapid automated comparative sequence analysis
for PCR products up to 1 kb in length. We demonstrate the feasibility of the
devised method for analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
pathogen identification.

PMCID: PMC154235
PMID: 12711692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Biopolymers. 2003 Apr;68(4):528-38.

Role of C-terminal domain phosphorylation in RNA polymerase II transcription
through the nucleosome.

Liu YV(1), Clark DJ, Tchernajenko V, Dahmus ME, Studitsky VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, 540 E. Canfield Avenue, Rm. 5123, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

End-initiated transcription of a 256 base-pair (bp) template containing a single 
uniquely positioned nucleosome by yeast and calf thymus nuclear RNA polymerases
II (pol II) was analyzed in vitro. The nucleosome-specific pausing pattern is
similar to the pattern observed in the case of transcription of the same
nucleosome by yeast RNA polymerase III. However, the pausing pattern is clearly
different from the patterns observed previously during transcription by
promoter-initiated and assembled pol II. This suggests that end-initiated and
promoter-initiated RNA polymerases differ in the way they progress through the
nucleosome. The rates of transcription through the nucleosome by pol II are
significantly lower than the rates observed in the case of SP6 polymerase and RNA
polymerase III. Using calf thymus pol II, we have investigated the possibility
that phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) facilitates transcription
through the nucleosome. The rates of transcription through the nucleosome by
phosphorylated (IIO) and nonphosphorylated (IIA) forms of calf thymus pol II are 
very similar. This suggests that CTD phosphorylation is not sufficient to
facilitate transcription through the nucleosome by end-initiated pol II.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12666177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 1;170(5):2293-301.

The Yaa mutation promoting murine lupus causes defective development of marginal 
zone B cells.

Amano H(1), Amano E, Moll T, Marinkovic D, Ibnou-Zekri N, Martinez-Soría E, Semac
I, Wirth T, Nitschke L, Izui S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

The accelerated development of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in BXSB male
mice is associated with the presence of an as yet unidentified mutant gene, Yaa
(Y-linked autoimmune acceleration). In view of a possible role of marginal zone
(MZ) B cells in murine SLE, we have explored whether the expression of the Yaa
mutation affects the differentiation of MZ and follicular B cells, thereby
implicating the acceleration of the disease. In this study, we show that both
BXSB and C57BL/6 Yaa mice, including two different substrains of BXSB Yaa males
that are protected from SLE, displayed an impaired development of MZ B cells
early in life. Studies in bone marrow chimeras revealed that the loss of MZ B
cells resulted from a defect intrinsic to B cells expressing the Yaa mutation.
The lack of selective expansion of MZ B cells in diseased BXSB Yaa males strongly
argues against a major role of MZ B cells in the generation of pathogenic
autoantibodies in the BXSB model of SLE. Furthermore, a comparative analysis with
mice deficient in CD22 or expressing an IgM anti-trinitrophenyl/DNA transgene
suggests that the hyperreactive phenotype of Yaa B cells, as judged by a markedly
increased spontaneous IgM secretion, is likely to contribute to the enhanced
maturation toward follicular B cells and the block in the MZ B cell generation.

PMID: 12594250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2002 Jul;22(7):508-11.

[Study on influence of acupunctural signal on energy metabolism of human brain by
positron emission tomography].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia SW(1), Wang QS, Xu WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Shenzhen Hospital of Peking University,
Guangdong 518036.

OBJECTIVE: To study the biologic process of energy metabolism in brain during
acupuncture using positron emission tomography (PET) with 18F-2-desoxyglucose
(18FDG) for further elucidation of the relationship between acupunctural signal
and nerve system.
METHODS: Electroacupuncture (EA) was applied on right lateral of a healthy
volunteer and paralytic limbs of 4 patients with cerebral infarction at acupoints
L14, LI11, ST36 and SP6 using Hans acupoint-nerve stimulator. PET imaging was
conducted on the healthy subject or patients with the same posture before and
during EA with GE Advance II PET system.
RESULTS: PET showed that in the healthy subject, before EA, the glucose
metabolism (GM) in bilateral cerebral cortex, bilateral thalamus, basal nuclei
and cerebellum was almost symmetrical, but during EA, the GM in contralateral
thalamus, contralateral frontal lobe and parietal lobe (motor and sensory area)
increased obviously. While in the patients before EA, the GM in the infarcted
area was significantly lower than that in the non-infarcted area, as compared
with that observed with CT and MRI, it showed a similar figure but with bigger
abnormal area. During EA, GM in the infarcted area increased with apparent
reduction of size. Increased GM of focal area, widened cerebral cortex and
decreased edematous area were shown in patients with larger infarction area.
Quantitative analysis revealed evident change in local/total ratio of glucose and
increase of GM change rate.
CONCLUSION: (1) EA on limb acupoints of healthy subject could induce obvious
increase of regional GM in brain and contralateral thalamus, contralateral
frontal lobe and parietal lobe (motor and sensory area). (2) EA on acupoints of
paralytic limbs could cause increase of GM in contralateral thalamus,
contralateral frontal lobe and parietal lobe. Besides, GM also increased in the
area with lowered GM before EA, accompanied with shrinkage or disappearance of
lesion. (3) Acupuncture could evoke the function of brain cells and raise the GM 
in them.

PMID: 12592684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2002 Feb;22(2):107-9.

[Influence of needling at yin-yang meridian points on cerebral glucose
metabolism].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong JC(1), Li J, Zuo CT.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Huashan Hospital to Fudan University, Shanghai 200040.

OBJECTIVE: To study the different effect of needling at different meridian points
(MP) on different cerebral functional regions by using positron emission
tomography and cerebral function tracer 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose to observe the
effect of electro-acupuncture (EA) stimulation at Yin MP or Yang MP on local
cerebral glucose metabolism in 30 healthy volunteers.
METHODS: The thirty subjects were randomly divided into 2 groups, the 12 subjects
in the Yang MP group treated by needling at Hegu (LI4), Quchi (LI11), Zusanli
(St36) and Shangjuxu (St37), the 18 subjects in the Yin MP group treated by
needling at Neiguan (Pc6), Chize (Lu5), Sanyinjiao (Sp6) and Yinlingquan (Sp9).
All the needling was conducted at one side of body.
RESULTS: After needling at Yang MP, the cerebral glucose metabolism was elevated 
in bilateral cross region of frontal lobe and temporal lobe, parietal lobe,
thalamus and basal ganglia, and in contralateral cerebellum and hippocampus.
After needling at Yin MP, the cerebral glucose metabolism was lowered in
bilateral cross region of frontal and temporal lobe, contralateral temporal lobe,
cerebellum and thalamus, and was elevated in homolateral hippocampus and caudate 
nucleus.
CONCLUSION: Under physiological condition, the regulatory effects of acupuncture 
on central nervous system would be different when needling at different MP.

PMID: 12585145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2001 Jun;41(3):334-9.

[Studies of the resistance of the recombinant alphavirus RNAs containing dengue-2
PrM gene to virus infection].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu M(1), Qin E, Zhao W, Hu Z, Yuan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing
100850, China.

The amplified PrM gene of dengue-2 virus was cloned into the downstream SP6
promoter-pSFV vector and the recombinant plasmid (pSF.rM2) DNA which contained
sense- or antisense-PrM gene, was selected. pSF.rM2 DNA and helper DNA linearized
by the enzyme SpeI digestion were both transcribed in vitro into recombinant RNAs
which contained the capping analog on the 5'-end and contaansfected into BHK
cells by electroportation. The the transfected host cells were challenged with
dengue-2 virus and the resistant efficiency of recombinant virus RNAs containing 
sense- or antisense-PrM gene to virus infection were observed, respectively. The 
recombinant plasmids (pSFV-PrM) containing sense- or antisense-PrM gene were
selected with determination of the nucleotide sequence. The recombinant virus
particles were obtained with recombinant RNA and helper RNA co-transfected into
BHK cells. Host cells transfected with antisense-PrM RNA derived complete
resistance to dengue-2 virus replication and the efficiency was higher than that 
of the recombinant virus RNA containing sense-PrM gene.

PMID: 12549088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Gen Virol. 2002 Dec;83(Pt 12):3139-46.

Development of infectious transcripts and genome manipulation of Black queen-cell
virus of honey bees.

Benjeddou M(1), Leat N, Allsopp M, Davison S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag X17, 
Bellville 7535, Cape Town, South Africa.

The South African isolate of Black queen-cell virus (BQCV), a honey bee virus,
was previously found to have an 8550 nucleotide genome excluding the poly(A)
tail. Its genome contained two ORFs, a 5'-proximal ORF encoding a putative
replicase protein and a 3'-proximal ORF encoding a capsid polyprotein. Long
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR was used to produce infectious transcripts for
BQCV and to manipulate its genome. Primers were designed for the amplification of
the complete genome, the in vitro transcription of infectious RNA and
PCR-directed mutagenesis. An 18-mer antisense primer was designed for RT to
produce full-length single-stranded cDNA (ss cDNA). Unpurified ss cDNA from the
RT reaction mixture was used directly as a template to amplify the full genome by
long high-fidelity PCR. The SP6 promoter sequence was introduced into the sense
primer to transcribe RNA directly from the amplicon. RNA was transcribed in vitro
with and without the presence of a cap analogue and injected directly into bee
pupae, which were then incubated for 8 days. In vitro transcripts were infectious
but the presence of a cap analogue did not increase the amount of virus
recovered. A single base mutation abolishing an EcoRI restriction site was
introduced by fusion-PCR, to distinguish viral particles recovered from
infectious transcripts from wild-type virus (wtBQCV). Mutant virus (mutBQCV) and 
wtBQCV were indistinguishable by electron microscopy and Western blot analysis.
The EcoRI restriction site was present in wtBQCV and not in mutBQCV.

PMID: 12466491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem Genet. 2002 Oct;40(9-10):311-22.

Genetic analysis of jumbled spine and ribs (Jsr) mutation affecting the vertebral
development in mice.

Okano S(1), Asano A, Kon Y, Miyoshi H, Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Animal Science, Graduate School of Veterinary
Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The jumbled spine and ribs (Jsr) mouse was derived from a spontaneous mutation.
As the phenotype, a shortened trunk and kinky tail are characteristic Jsr traits.
In this study, on high resolution mapping it was found that Lunatic fringe (Lfng)
mapped at the same position as Jsr. Lfng was identified as the candidate gene for
Jsr, but sequence analysis of this gene revealed no substitution in the coding
region of cDNA. Therefore, we adopted the strategy of positional cloning for Jsr 
using a mouse bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library. A BAC contig was
constructed from three BAC clones showing positive signals of Lfng and
11MMHAP75FRD8.seq near the Jsr locus on chromosome 5. Based on the genetic
mapping of both T7 and sp6 ends of a clone of BAC382-O-7 (BAC382), the Jsr gene
was considered to exist in BAC382 and to be positioned near the sp6 side.

PMID: 12392169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Headache. 2002 Oct;42(9):855-61.

Acupuncture in the prophylactic treatment of migraine without aura: a comparison 
with flunarizine.

Allais G(1), De Lorenzo C, Quirico PE, Airola G, Tolardo G, Mana O, Benedetto C.

Author information: 
(1)Woman's Headache Center, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University
of Turin, Turin, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: In a randomized controlled trial extending over 6 months, we
evaluated the effectiveness of acupuncture versus flunarizine in the prophylactic
treatment of migraine without aura.
METHODS: One hundred sixty women with migraines were randomly assigned to
acupuncture treatment (group A, n = 80) or to an oral therapy with flunarizine
(group F, n = 80). In group A, acupuncture was carried out in weekly sessions for
the first 2 months and then once a month for the next 4 months. The same
acupoints were used at each treatment: LR3 Taichong, SP6 Sanyinjiao, ST36
Zusanli, CV12 Zhongwan, LI4 Hegu, PC6 Neiguan, GB20 Fengchi, GB14 Yangbai, EX-HN5
Taiyang, GV20 Baihui. In group F, 10 mg flunarizine were given daily for the
first 2 months and then for 20 days per month for the next 4 months.
RESULTS: The frequency of attacks and use of symptomatic drugs significantly
decreased during treatment in both groups. The number of attacks after 2 and 4
months of therapy was significantly lower in group A than in group F, and
analgesic consumption was significantly lower in group A at 2 months of
treatment. At 6 months no such differences existed between the two treatment
groups. Pain intensity was significantly reduced only by acupuncture treatment.
Side effects were significantly less frequent in group A.
CONCLUSIONS: Acupuncture proved to be adequate for migraine prophylaxis. Relative
to flunarizine, acupuncture treatment exhibited greater effectiveness in the
first months of therapy and superior tolerability.

PMID: 12390610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Plasmid. 2002 Sep;48(2):160-3.

Construction of two pGEM-7Zf(+) phagemid T-tail vectors using AhdI-restriction
endonuclease sites for direct cloning of PCR products.

Jeung JU(1), Cho SK, Shim KS, Ok SH, Lim DS, Shin JS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, South
Korea.

For applications such as sequencing, transfection, and in vitro transcription,
PCR products have to be subcloned into plasmids. Many strategies are used for
cloning, blunt-end ligation or the incorporation of restriction endonuclease
sites into PCR primers for appropriate vectors. However, the most convenient and 
direct method is T/A cloning. In this study, we developed two of the pGEM-7Zf(+) 
phagemid T-tail vectors using AhdI-restriction endonuclease sites, and these T
vectors have all the features of pGEM-7Zf(+): f1 ori, T7, and SP6 RNA polymerase 
promoters, the alpha-peptide coding region of beta-galactosidase for X-gal
blue/white color selection, the beta-lactamase gene for recombinant colony
selection, and binding sites for pUC/M13 forward and reverse sequencing primers. 
These AhdI-containing phagemid vectors, pGEM-NJ105 and pGEM-NJ107, are useful for
the easy and inexpensive preparation of T vectors and direct cloning of PCR
products.

PMID: 12383733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. DNA Res. 2002 Aug 31;9(4):117-21.

Physical map-based sizes of the centromeric regions of Arabidopsis thaliana
chromosomes 1, 2, and 3.

Hosouchi T(1), Kumekawa N, Tsuruoka H, Kotani H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromosome Research II, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu,
Chiba, Japan.

The sizes of the centromeric regions of Arabidopsis thaliana chromosomes 1, 2,
and 3 were determined by construction of their physical maps on the basis of
restriction analysis. As the reported centromeric regions contain large gaps in
the middle due to highly repetitive sequences, appropriate probes for Southern
hybridization were prepared from the sequences reported for the flanking regions 
and from the sequences of BAC and YAC clones newly isolated in this work, and
restriction analysis was performed using DNA of a hypomethylated strain (ddm1).
The sizes of the genetically defined centromeric regions were deduced to be 9
megabases (Mb), 4.2 Mb and 4.1 Mb, respectively (chromosome 1, from markers
T22C23-t7 to T3P8-sp6; chromosome 2, from F5J15-sp6 to T15D9; chromosome 3, from 
T9G9-sp6 to T15M14; G. P. Copenhaver et al. Science, 286, 2468-2479, 1999). By
combining the sizes of the centromeric regions previously estimated for
chromosomes 4 and 5 and the sequence data reported for the A. thaliana genome,
the total genome size of A. thaliana was estimated to be approximately 146.0 Mb.

PMID: 12240833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Antisense Nucleic Acid Drug Dev. 2002 Aug;12(4):283-8.

A rapid and simple nonradioactive method for in vitro testing of ribozyme
activity.

Liu R(1), Rohe B, Carson DD, Farach-Carson MC.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark 19716,
USA.

Ribozymes that target specific messenger RNA transcripts are powerful tools in
the emerging fields of functional genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. We have
found that successful in vitro testing greatly increases the likelihood of
producing ribozymes with good efficacy in living cells. A rapid and simple
nonradioactive method for systematic in vitro testing of ribozyme-cleaving
activity is reported. Ribozymes are synthesized enzymatically from
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) oligonucleotides without vector cloning. Substrate
target DNA template is cloned into a vector flanked with SP6 and T7 promoters at 
multiple cloning sites that permit colorimetric screening and ampicillin
selection, enhancing the efficiency of the cloning procedure. Ribozyme cleavage
products are satisfactorily resolved on 2.0% NuSieve 3:1 agarose (FMC Products,
Rockland, ME)/formaldehyde gels by electrophoresis. This method avoids the
preparation of polyacrylamide gels. Using this procedure, the ribozyme, target
substrate RNA, and ribozyme cleavage products are all easily detected by ethidium
bromide staining. Resolution and detection are fast and simple, eliminating the
need for either polyacrylamide gel analysis or radiolabeling. The use of RNase
inhibitors in the assays is also assessed and discussed.

PMID: 12238817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Bacteriol. 2002 May;184(10):2833-6.

Bacteriophage SP6 is closely related to phages K1-5, K5, and K1E but encodes a
tail protein very similar to that of the distantly related P22.

Scholl D(1), Adhya S, Merril CR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The lytic salmonella phage SP6 encodes a tail protein with a high degree of
sequence similarity to the tail protein of the biologically unrelated lysogenic
salmonella phage P22. The SP6 tail gene is flanked by an upstream region that
contains a promoter and a downstream region that contains a putative
Rho-independent transcription terminator, giving it a cassette or modular
structure almost identical to the structure of the tail genes of coliphages K1E, 
K5, and K1-5. It now appears that SP6, K1-5, K5, and K1E are very closely related
but have different tail fiber proteins, giving them different host specificities.

PMCID: PMC135020
PMID: 11976314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell. 2002 Mar;9(3):541-52.

Nucleosome remodeling induced by RNA polymerase II: loss of the H2A/H2B dimer
during transcription.

Kireeva ML(1), Walter W, Tchernajenko V, Bondarenko V, Kashlev M, Studitsky VM.

Author information: 
(1)NCI Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2002 Mar;9(3):451-2.

RNA polymerase II (Pol II) must transcribe genes in a chromatin environment in
vivo. We examined transcription by Pol II through nucleosome cores in vitro. At
physiological and lower ionic strengths, a mononucleosome imposes a strong block 
to elongation, which is relieved at increased ionic strength. Passage of Pol II
causes a quantitative loss of one H2A/H2B dimer but does not alter the location
of the nucleosome. In contrast, bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase (RNAP)
efficiently transcribes through the same nucleosome under physiological
conditions, and the histone octamer is transferred behind SP6 RNAP. Thus, the
mechanisms for transcription through the nucleosome by Pol II and SP6 RNAP are
clearly different. Moreover, Pol II leaves behind an imprint of disrupted
chromatin structure.

PMID: 11931762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2001 Aug;53(4):275-80.

[Frequency-specific responses of human brain to peripheral transcutaneous
electric nerve stimulation: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin Z(1), Zhang WT, Luo F, Zhang KL, Zhang L, Zeng YW, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Imaging Unit, Hospital 306, Beijing 100101.

The purpose of the present investigation was to determine the responses of human 
brain to transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS) at different
frequencies by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) examinations covering
the whole brain of eleven healthy volunteers. Each subject received TENS at
acupoints ST36 and SP6 of the left leg at the frequencies of 2 and 100 Hz.
Frequency-specific responses were found in motor-related areas, thalamus, limbic 
system and associated cortex to stimulation of the two frequencies, while the
primary somatosensory areas were activated by both. Therefore, it appears that 2 
and 100 Hz TENS act through different neuro-pathways in the central nervous
system.

PMID: 11930205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Histochem Cytochem. 2002 Apr;50(4):541-8.

Improvement of non-radioactive in situ hybridization in human airway tissues: use
of PCR-generated templates for synthesis of probes and an antibody sandwich
technique for detection of hybridization.

Divjak M(1), Glare EM, Walters EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Alfred Hospital, Monash University Medical
School, Prahran, Victoria 3181, Australia. Maja.Divjak@med.monash.edu.au

We describe the use of non-traditional methods of probe synthesis and
quantification and detection of hybridization that appreciably improved
non-radioactive in situ hybridization (ISH) in human airway tissue. To avoid the 
problems of bacterial cloning, plasmid digestion, and probe hydrolysis, we
synthesised complementary RNA probes (riboprobes) for ISH from PCR-generated DNA.
DNA template was produced by nested PCR incorporation of T7 and SP6 RNA
polymerase promoters. We then compared the efficiency of in vitro transcription
from PCR-generated template with traditional plasmid template by quantifying the 
relative probe fluorescence in denaturing gels. Transcription with SP6 or T7
polymerase in either orientation produced TNF riboprobes from a single
PCR-generated template more efficiently than from plasmid, providing there were
no primer hairpin loops. Fluorescence quantification enabled equal amounts of
probe label to be used in ISH, eliminating signals from the sense probe and
demonstrating that probes transcribed from PCR templates were as sensitive as
hydrolyzed probe transcribed from plasmid. Detection of ISH by a conventional
anti-hapten, alkaline phosphatase-based technique was found to cause tissue
damage due to extended substrate incubation at high pH. We therefore developed a 
four-layer, avidin-biotin-peroxidase technique that afforded greater sensitivity,
allowing brief substrate incubation and resulting in structural preservation of
tissue.

PMID: 11897807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Biochemistry. 2002 Mar 5;41(9):3137-46.

Limited topological alteration of the T7 RNA polymerase active center at
intrinsic termination sites.

Boudvillain M(1), Schwartz A, Rahmouni AR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS, rue Charles Sadron, 45071 Orléans
cedex 2, France. boudvill@cnrs-orleans.fr

Transcription terminators trigger the dissociation of RNA polymerase elongation
complexes and the release of RNA products at specific DNA template positions. The
mechanism by which these signals alter the catalytic properties of the highly
processive elongation transcription complexes is unclear. Here, we propose that
intrinsic terminators impede transcript elongation by promoting a misarrangement 
of reactants and catalytic effectors within the active site of T7 RNA polymerase.
In effect, a productive catalytic coordination network can be readily restored
when Mg(2+) effectors are replaced by the more "relaxing" Mn(2+) ions, leading to
transcript elongation beyond the termination point. This Mn(2+)-dependent
incorporation of additional nucleotides occurs within unstable transcription
complexes that ultimately dissociate at positions downstream from the normal
termination site. Thus, Mn(2+) coordination in the polymerase active center can
compensate for the disruptive but limited perturbation of the catalytic
arrangement of reactants that accompany larger structural changes of the
transcription complex triggered by termination signals. These results provide
evidence that the geometry of the catalytic coordination network within the
active site is a crucial component of RNA polymerase catalysis. Limited
variations of the active site architecture are sufficient to confer tight control
of the RNA polymerase function and, thus, may ubiquitously benefit signals
regulating transcription.

PMID: 11863453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 15;291(1):101-10.

NYD-SP6, a novel gene potentially involved in regulating testicular
development/spermatogenesis.

Xiao J(1), Xu M, Li J, Chang Chan H, Lin M, Zhu H, Zhang W, Zhou Z, Zhao B, Sha
J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproduction Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
210029, People's Republic of China.

Using cDNA microarray hybridization from a human testicular cDNA library, a novel
gene exhibiting 30-fold difference in expression level between adult and embryo
human testes was cloned and named NYD-SP6, which was 1858 bp in length with 87%
nucleotide identity with the mouse homologue sequence. The deduced protein
structure of NYD-SP6 was found to contain two plant homeodomain (PHD) finger
domains, believed to be involved in activating transcriptional regulation. Tissue
distribution analysis using Northern blot indicated that the NYD-SP6 gene was
expressed in a wide range of tissues, with a high expression level in the testis.
Its expression in human and mouse testes by in situ hybridization was confined to
Sertoli cells and the expression was developmentally regulated as demonstrated by
cDNA microarray, in situ hybridization, and semiquantitative PCR in mouse testes.
GFP/NYD-SP6 protein was predominantly localized in the nucleus of the transfected
CHO cells, indicating its role in transcriptional regulation. In contrast, the
N-terminal truncated NYD-SP6 (tNYD-SP6) localized in the nuclear envelope,
indicating this region function as a nuclear localization signal. Further
Northern blot analysis of gene expression in patients with spermatogenesis arrest
revealed that NYD-SP6 was absent in one patient whose spermatogenesis was blocked
at the stage of spermatocytes. Taken together, these results suggest that the
putative protein of NYD-SP6 may play an important role in stimulating
transcription involved in testicular development and/or spermatogenesis.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11829468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1999 Jan;21(1):7-9.

[In vitro cleavage action of c-erbB-2 oncogene-specific ribozyme].

[Article in Chinese]

Bi F(1), Zhang X, Fan D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Diseases of PLA, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xian 710032.

OBJECTIVE: To construct in vitro transcription vectors of genes of c-erbB-2
specific ribozyme and its substrate and to probe its in vitro cleavage action.
METHODS: According to the computer design, a specific restriction site EcoR V was
added to the 3' end of the ribozyme gene (RZ1). Then, the RZ1 gene and its
substrate gene were cloned into the in vitro transcription vector pGEM3Zf(-)
separately. The recombinants containing RZ1 gene were first screened by agrose
ge1 electrophoresis through EcoR V digestion and was identified by automatic
sequencing. The products of in vitro transcription were labeled with 32P. In
vitro cleavage reaction was performed at 37 degrees C for 1 h under the presence 
of Mg++. The cleavage product was analyzed by polyacrilamide gel electrophoresis.
After autoradiography, the cleavage rate was counted by image analysis.
RESULTS: The recombinants containing the RZ1 gene were successfully selected by
the EcoR V digestion and were designated as pGM3Z-RZ1. The automatic sequence
analysis proved that the synthesized RZ1 gene was correct. The target gene was
also cloned into the pGEM3Zf(-) under SP6 promoter. After in vitro transcription,
the cleavage reaction was shown to have cut off 79.3% target RNA in 1 h.
CONCLUSION: The c-erbB-2 oncogene-specific ribozyme has a high activity in vitro.
It lays a foundation for the study of the therapeutic use of ribozyme in gene
therapy of cancer.

PMID: 11776804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Curr Opin Mol Ther. 1999 Apr;1(2):244-51.

Non-viral amplification systems for gene transfer: vectors based on alphaviruses.

Smerdou C(1), Liljeström P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology & Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. 
cristian.smerdou@mtc.ki.se

Non-viral self-replicating vectors based on defective viral genomes have been
developed for a number of different alphaviruses including Semliki Forest virus
(SFV), Sindbis virus (SIN) and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEE). These 
vectors can be used for gene delivery as naked RNA or DNA. Recombinant alphavirus
RNA can be synthesized in vitro from plasmids containing the alphavirus replicon 
under the control of a prokaryotic promoter such as SP6 or T7. These
self-replicating RNAs have been able to induce protective immune responses in
vivo, probably due to the high level of expression of the recombinant antigen in 
the transfected cells. However, alphavirus vectors based on the direct delivery
DNA are probably a better choice due to their higher stability and lower
production cost. In these vectors, the alphavirus replicon is placed under the
control of a RNA polymerase II promoter. These vectors are more efficient than
conventional plasmids in inducing both humoral and cellular immune responses in
small animals, allowing the use of significant smaller amounts of DNA for
immunization. In addition, due to the transient nature of the alphavirus
replicons, possible problems associated with DNA integration into host
chromosomes are eliminated.

PMID: 11715947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Receptors Channels. 2001;7(5):331-43.

A novel Xenopus oocyte expression system based on cytoplasmic coinjection of
T7-driven plasmids and purified T7-RNA polymerase.

Geib S(1), Sandoz G, Carlier E, Cornet V, Cheynet-Sauvion V, De Waard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie des Canaux Ioniques, INSERM U464, IFR Jean Roche,
Faculté de Médecine Nord, Boulevard Pierre Dramard, 13916 Marseille 20, France.

The Xenopus laevis South African frog oocyte is a well suited and widely used
system for protein biochemistry and functional studies. So far, two methods are
commonly in use for the expression of exogenous proteins in this system.
Investigators have the choice between cytoplasmic injections of in vitro
synthesized cRNA or nuclear injections of cDNA. Here, we describe a new method
for ion channel expression in oocytes, which consists of a coinjection of
T7-driven cDNA and T7-RNA polymerase directly into the cytoplasm. This technique 
uses very limited amounts of purified enzyme and is also applicable to SP6
polymerase. Commercially available polymerases can also conveniently substitute
for self-purified enzymes. The technique can be used for electrophysiological and
biochemical analysis. In particular, high level expressions have been achieved
for potassium (Shaker B, Kv1.2 and Kv1.3) and sodium (P mu 1.2) channels, and we 
also demonstrate efficient metabolic labeling of the calcium channel auxiliary
beta 3 subunit. The properties of the channels expressed by this technique are
indistinguishable from those of the channels expressed by classical methods.
Expression of multi-subunit proteins was also achieved illustrating that the
technique can be used for structure-function analyses. Moreover, this novel
expression technique avoids many drawbacks of the two former techniques. It
clearly bypasses the costly and time-consuming step of cRNA synthesis in vitro,
prevents delicate cRNA manipulation and is easier to perform and more reliable
than nuclear injection. Finally, it does not affect cell survival rate. These
data indicate that the T7-RNA polymerase expression technique could be widely
used in the future for the expression of exogenous proteins in the Xenopus oocyte
system.

PMID: 11697077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001 Nov;42(12):3058-65.

Tumorigenicity of the mixed spindle-epithelioid SP6.5 and epithelioid TP17 uveal 
melanoma cell lines is differentially related to alpha5beta1 integrin expression.

Béliveau A(1), Bérubé M, Carrier P, Mercier C, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec and Laval University, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: It has been suggested that the epithelioid morphology and high
aggressiveness that is typical of the uveal melanoma cell line TP17 is dependent 
on the loss of alpha5beta1 integrin expression at the cell surface. The purpose
of the current study was to test this hypothesis in the TP17 cell line and
investigate the role this integrin may play in the tumorigenicity of the SP6.5
cells, a mixed spindle-epithelioid culture-type human uveal melanoma that shows
tumorigenic properties clearly distinct from that of TP17 cells.
METHODS: Expression of the alpha5 integrin subunit was restored in the
alpha5-TP17 cell line by stably transfecting the cells with a recombinant plasmid
encoding the integrin subunit. Flow cytometry and adhesion assays on fibronectin 
(FN)-coated culture plates were used to monitor alpha5 expression in the cells.
The effect of alpha5 expression on both tumorigenicity and cell proliferation was
evaluated in vivo in nude mice. In vitro growth properties of the alpha5(+) TP17 
cells was evaluated by cell counting and compared with that of the alpha5
parental TP17 cell line. The influence exerted by the alpha5 integrin subunit on 
the tumorigenic and proliferative properties of the SP6.5 cells was evaluated in 
vivo in nude mice by exposing the cells to increasing doses of a blocking
antibody directed against the alpha5-subunit before subcutaneous injection, and
compared with the results obtained with untreated SP6.5 cells.
RESULTS: Expression of the alpha5 integrin subunit in the alpha5-TP17 cells was
successfully achieved, as evidenced by both flow cytometry and adhesion assays on
FN-coated culture plates. Restoring expression of alpha5 in TP17 cells enhanced
epithelioid cell morphology and increased the growth properties of this cell line
in vivo. The ability of the SP6.5 cells to yield subcutaneous tumors was found to
be concentration dependent and was reduced in a dose-dependent manner when the
cells were exposed to the anti-alpha5 blocking antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: Restoring expression of alpha5 in the alpha5-negative TP17 uveal
melanoma cell line influenced the proliferative properties of these cells but did
not alter its tumorigenic potential. In contrast, the ability of the SP6.5 cells 
to yield tumors in vivo in nude mice appeared to be related to expression of this
integrin.

PMID: 11687555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. RNA. 2001 Oct;7(10):1486-95.

Synthesis and properties of mRNAs containing the novel "anti-reverse" cap analogs
7-methyl(3'-O-methyl)GpppG and 7-methyl (3'-deoxy)GpppG.

Stepinski J(1), Waddell C, Stolarski R, Darzynkiewicz E, Rhoads RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, University of Warsaw, Poland.

The ability to synthesize capped RNA transcripts in vitro using bacteriophage
polymerases has been of considerable value in a variety of applications. However,
Pasquinelli et al. [RNA (1995) 1:957-967] found that one-third to one-half of the
caps are incorporated in the reverse orientation, that is, with the m7G moiety of
m7GpppG linked by a 3'-5' phosphodiester bond to the first nucleotide residue of 
the RNA chain. Such reverse caps are unlikely to be recognized by eIF4E, based on
previous studies, and thus complicate any comparison of the translational
efficiencies of in vitro-synthesized mRNAs. We therefore designed two novel cap
analogs, P(1)-3'-deoxy-7-methyguanosine-5' P3-guanosine-5' triphosphate and
P(1)-3'-O,7-dimethylguanosine-5' P3-guanosine-5' triphosphate, that are,
theoretically, incapable of being incorporated in the reverse orientation. The
key reactions of pyrophosphate bond formation were achieved in anhydrous
dimethylformamide solutions employing the catalytic properties of zinc salts.
Structures were proven by 1H NMR. Transcripts produced with SP6 polymerase using 
"anti-reverse" cap analogs (ARCAs) were of the predicted length and
indistinguishable in size and homogeneity from those produced with m7GpppG or
GpppG. Analysis of the transcripts with RNase T2 and tobacco acid pyrophosphatase
indicated that reverse caps were formed with m7GpppG but not with ARCAs. Both of 
the ARCAs inhibited cell-free translation with a K(I) similar to that of m7GpppG.
Finally, the translational efficiency of ARCA-capped transcripts in a rabbit
reticulocyte lysate was 2.3- to 2.6-fold higher than that of m7GpppG-capped
transcripts. This suggests the presence of reverse caps in conventional in
vitro-synthesized mRNAs reduces their translational efficiency.

PMCID: PMC1370192
PMID: 11680853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Genetics. 2001 Oct;159(2):635-45.

Interallelic complementation at the Drosophila melanogaster gastrulation
defective locus defines discrete functional domains of the protein.

Ponomareff G(1), Giordano H, DeLotto Y, DeLotto R.

Author information: 
(1)Cornell Graduate School of Medicine, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The gastrulation defective (gd) locus encodes a novel serine protease that is
involved in specifying the dorsal-ventral axis during embryonic development.
Mutant alleles of gd have been classified into three complementation groups, two 
of which exhibit strong interallelic (intragenic) complementation. To understand 
the molecular basis of this interallelic complementation, we examined the
complementation behavior of additional mutant alleles and sequenced alleles in
all complementation groups. The data suggest that there are two discrete
functional domains of Gd. A two-domain model of Gd suggesting that it is
structurally similar to mammalian complement factors C2 and B has been previously
proposed. To test this model we performed SP6 RNA microinjection to assay for
activities associated with various domains of Gd. The microinjection data are
consistent with the complement factor C2/B-like model. Site-directed mutagenesis 
suggests that Gd functions as a serine protease. An allele-specific interaction
between an autoactivating form of Snake (Snk) and a gd allele altered in the
protease domain suggests that Gd directly activates Snk in a protease activation 
cascade. We propose a model in which Gd is expressed during late oogenesis and
bound within the perivitelline space but only becomes catalytically active during
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1461824
PMID: 11606540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1998 Feb;11(1):21-5.

[A study on the induction of mutation of paddy rice under space conditions].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Jiang X, Li J, Qiu H, Li G, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Science Research Institute of Fuzhon Prefexture Jiangxi Province,
Linchuan, China.

Rice seeds were carried into space by the recoverable satellite. After recovery
the seeds were sowed on the earth so as to observe the character performance and 
genetic variation of their later generations. The preliminary results showed that
the main characters of the SP1 generation didn't show significant difference from
the control. Among the individual plants of the SP2 generation strong
broad-spectrum segregation appeared in the 9 main agronomic characters. Mutation 
frequency is 4.66%. The individual plants of the SP3 generation were obviously
correlated with the SP4 generation in the average character values of the 5 main 
characters. Stable plant strains were obtained in the SP4 generation. The SP5 and
SP6 generations were put into control and polt tests. As a conclusion, it may be 
considered that certain variations of rice seeds induced by the space conditions 
are heritable to the offsprings, therefore, it can be used as a new method for
mutagenic seed breeding.

PMID: 11541262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2001 May;17(3):349-51.

[Cloning, sequencing and in vitro expression of human RANTES gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng QP(1), Yang RY, Feng LL, Fu LC.

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Medicine Institute, Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou 510405, China. qpzeng@usa.net

An expected 276 bp fragment of the gene precursor encoding the signal peptide and
mature protein of human beta-chemokine RANTES was amplified by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) from RNA of PHA-activated human 
peripheral blood lymphocytes. This putative interested gene was inserted directly
into a T-vector and the ligation was confirmed by restriction enzyme digestion.
The sequence data of the cloned fragment showed that it was almost identical with
published sequences of RANTES gene, except for only one nucleotide substitution
within the signal peptide region. The in vitro expressed recombinant RANTES
protein was detected by the chemiluminescence enzyme-linked immune Dot blotting
assay after combining the recombinant plasmid with the in vitro SP6/T7
transcription and translation system. The successful cloning and expression of
RANTES gene should shed light on future's gene therapy of AIDS.

PMID: 11517618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 1999 Oct;51(5):557-63.

[Inhibition of gastric myoelectric activity and gastric motility by
microinjection of substance P into dorsal vagal nucleus in rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Peng Y(1), Lin KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116027.

The present investigation showed that microinjection of substance P (SP) into
dorsal vagal nucleus inhibited gastric myoelectric fast wave and gastric
motility. The effect could be blocked by SP antiserum or SP antagonist [Arg6,
D-Trp7,9, N-Me-Phe8]-SP6-11 or vagotomy. Depletion of sympathetic transmitters by
reserpine did not affect induction of the inhibition. The results indicate that
both exogenous and endogenous SP of dorsal vagal nucleus decrease the gastric
myoelectric fast wave and motility, which is mediated by vagus nerve.

PMID: 11498954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2001 Aug;298(2):559-64.

Effects of TAK-637, a novel neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, on colonic function
in vivo.

Okano S(1), Nagaya H, Ikeura Y, Natsugari H, Inatomi N.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Research Division and Pharmaceutical Research
Division, Takeda Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

Substance P (SP) is an important neurotransmitter that mediates various gut
functions; however, its precise pathophysiological role remains unclear. In this 
study, we investigated the effect of SP on colonic function and the effect of
TAK-637
[(aR,9R)-7-[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)benzyl]-8,9,10,11-tetrahydro-9-methyl-5-(4-me
thylphenyl)-7H-[1,4]diazocino[2,1-g][1,7]naphthyridine-6,13-dione] a new
neurokinin-1 (NK1) receptor antagonist, on colonic responses to SP or stress in
Mongolian gerbils. SP and the selective NK1 agonist [pGlu6]SP6-11 significantly
increased fecal pellet output. TAK-637 reduced [pGlu6]SP6-11-induced defecation, 
but did not significantly affect neurokinin A-, 5-hydroxytryptamine- or
carbachol-stimulated defecation. Oral TAK-637 decreased restraint
stress-stimulated fecal pellet output with an ID50 value of 0.33 mg/kg.
Ondansetron and atropine, but not the peripheral kappa-receptor agonist
trimebutine, also reduced restraint stress-stimulated defecation. TAK-637
inhibited the increase in fecal pellet output stimulated by
intracerebroventricular injection of corticotropin-releasing factor, but did not 
affect the stress-induced increase in plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone levels. 
Denervation of the sensory neurons with capsaicin did not affect
stress-stimulated defecation. These results suggest that NK1 receptors in the
enteric plexus play an important role in stress-induced changes in colonic
function, and that TAK-637 may be useful in the treatment of functional bowel
diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome.

PMID: 11454917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Virol Methods. 2001 Aug;96(2):171-82.

Amplification and cloning of the full-length genome of Japanese encephalitis
virus by a novel long RT-PCR protocol in a cosmid vector.

Zhang F(1), Huang Q, Ma W, Jiang S, Fan Y, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
710032, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

A novel and rapid full-length long RT-PCR technique was established to produce
genome-length cDNA from Japanese encephalitis virus. In vitro positive strand RNA
transcripts from the full-length RT-PCR amplicon including T7 promoter sequences 
at the 5' end were proved to be infectious upon transfection. The full-length
amplicon without the T7 promoter was cloned into a cosmid vector under the SP6
promoter. This stable clone, designated as pJEV-1, was characterised further and 
used as a genetic resource for generation of infectious RNA transcripts, gene
manipulation and expression. The 'run-off' transcript from pJEV-1 with vector
sequences at the either end of the insert was not infectious, but transcripts of 
the full-length PCR amplicon from pJEV-1 produced infectious virus upon
transfection. A transcript with an engineered Xho I site from two ligated PCR
fragments amplified from pJEV-1 was also infectious. Furthermore, the coding
region for premembrane and envelope proteins (preM-E) from pJEV-1 was subcloned
and expressed in the Drosophila Expression System. The expressed protein showed
correct molecular size and was immunoreactive with a Japanese encephalitis virus 
E protein-specific antibody. The derivation of genome-size cDNA from Japanese
encephalitis virus and the stable clone will facilitate investigation of this
virus and elucidation of its pathogenesis at the molecular level.

PMID: 11445147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29104-10. Epub 2001 Jun 4.

Facilitated transcription through the nucleosome at high ionic strength occurs
via a histone octamer transfer mechanism.

Walter W(1), Studitsky VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Center for Molecular
Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan 48201, USA.

The rate of transcription through the nucleosome, the fine structure of the
nucleosomal barrier, and the fate of the nucleosome during transcription at
different salt concentrations were analyzed using linear 227-base pair
mononucleosomal templates containing a uniquely positioned nucleosome core. At
lower ionic strength (30 mm NaCl), the nucleosome constitutes a strong barrier
for SP6 RNA polymerase. At higher ionic strength (330 mm NaCl), the rates of
transcription on nucleosomal and histone-free DNA templates are very similar. At 
both higher and lower ionic strengths, the complete histone octamer is
transferred over the same distance by fundamentally similar mechanisms. The data 
indicate that even at the rate of transcription characteristic of histone-free
DNA, the transfer intermediates can be formed quite efficiently. This suggests
possible mechanisms that could facilitate transcription through the nucleosome at
physiological ionic strength.

PMID: 11390400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. FEBS Lett. 2001 May 11;496(2-3):96-100.

Effects of 'hydrophobic mismatch' on the location of transmembrane helices in the
ER membrane.

Monné M(1), von Heijne G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, S-106 91,
Stockholm, Sweden.

We have studied the effects of 'hydrophobic mismatch' between a poly-Leu
transmembrane helix (TMH) and the ER membrane using a glycosylation mapping
approach. The simplest interpretation of our results is that the lumenal end of
the TMH is located deeper in the membrane for both short (negative mismatch) and 
long (positive mismatch) TMHs than for poly-Leu segments of intermediate length. 
We further find that the position-specific effect of Lys residues on the location
of short TMHs in the membrane varies with an apparent helical periodicity when
the Lys residue is moved along the poly-Leu stretch. We discuss these findings in
the context of models for peptide-lipid interactions during hydrophobic mismatch.

PMID: 11356190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 20;276(29):27171-7. Epub 2001 May 4.

Sticky DNA, a self-associated complex formed at long GAA*TTC repeats in intron 1 
of the frataxin gene, inhibits transcription.

Sakamoto N(1), Ohshima K, Montermini L, Pandolfo M, Wells RD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Center for Genome Research, Texas A &
M University, Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease
caused by the expansion of GAA.TTC repeats in the first intron of the frataxin
(X25) gene. FRDA patients carrying two expanded GAA.TTC repeats show very low
levels of mature frataxin mRNA and protein. A novel type of unusual DNA
structure, sticky DNA, was previously found in the expanded GAA.TTC repeats from 
FRDA patients. To evaluate the effect of sticky DNA on transcription, in vitro
transcription studies of (GAA.TTC)(n) repeats (where n = 9-150) were carried out 
using T7 or SP6 RNA polymerase. When a gel-isolated sticky DNA template was
transcribed, the amount of full-length RNA synthesized was significantly reduced 
compared with the transcription of the linear template. Surprisingly,
transcriptional inhibition was observed not only for the sticky DNA template but 
also another DNA molecule used as an internal control in an
orientation-independent manner. The molecular mechanism of transcriptional
inhibition by sticky DNA was a sequestration of the RNA polymerases by direct
binding to the complex DNA structure. Moreover, plasmids containing the
(GAAGGA.TCCTTC)(65) repeat, which does not form sticky DNA, did not inhibit in
vitro transcription, as expected. These results suggest that the role of sticky
DNA in FRDA may be the sequestration of transcription factors.

PMID: 11340071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Urol. 2001 Apr;165(4):1329-34.

Expression studies and mutational analysis of the androgen regulated homeobox
gene NKX3.1 in benign and malignant prostate epithelium.

Ornstein DK(1), Cinquanta M, Weiler S, Duray PH, Emmert-Buck MR, Vocke CD,
Linehan WM, Ferretti JA.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Pathogenetics Unit, Laboratory of Pathology,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

PURPOSE: The NKX-3.1gene is an androgen regulated prostate specific homeobox gene
that is believed to have a vital role in normal prostate development. In mice the
homologue NKx3.1 is exclusively expressed in prostate epithelium. In humans
NKX3.1 expression is also restricted to the prostate but to our knowledge the
cellular location has not been described. Furthermore, since NKX3.1 maps to
chromosomal band 8p21, a region with high loss of heterozygosity in prostate
cancer, the gene has been proposed to have tumor suppressor function. In this
study we demonstrate that in human prostates NKX3.1 is expressed exclusively in
secretory epithelial cells and the level of NKX3.1 expression remains invariant
in normal tissue and in tissue showing various grades of prostate cancer. In the 
19 cases examined the DNA sequences of the NKX3.1 gene were identical and no
mutation was detected.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Frozen tissue from patients who underwent radical
prostatectomy was used for this study. For in situ hybridization experiments a
377 bp fragment corresponding to a portion of the 3' untranslated region of the
NKX3.1 gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into the pCRII 
plasmid vector Invitrogen. Antisense or sense [33P] uridine triphosphate labeled 
RNA probes were generated with SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase and hybridized to the
tissue sections. Slides were exposed to photographic emulsion and visualized on
autoradiography. Laser capture microdissection was performed to procure pure
populations of malignant epithelium. DNA was isolated by digesting samples in
proteinase K buffer. Polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing was
performed using standard protocols.
RESULTS: In vitro hybridization showed that NKX3.1 expression was restricted to
secretory epithelial cells within benign prostate glands. No expression was
detected in stroma or infiltrating lymphocytes. NKX3.1 was expressed in all
grades of malignant epithelium in all 25 cases examined. Direct sequencing of the
coding region of NKX3.1 revealed the wild-type sequence in all 18 microdissected 
cancers analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our studies we propose that NKX3.1 gene expression is
restricted to benign and malignant secretory epithelium within the prostate but
NKX3.1 does not appear to be a classic tumor suppressor gene responsible for
prostate cancer initiation. These findings are consistent with the role of NKX3.1
in the development of normal prostate epithelium and maintenance of normal
secretory function. Thus, NKX3.1 may represent a useful molecular marker for
benign and malignant prostate epithelium.

PMID: 11257711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 1998 May;19(5):250-3.

[Construction of the internal standard RNA and DNA templates for MRP gene
quantitative RT-PCR analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao L(1), Wang B, Yu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Liuhua Bridge Hospital, Guangzhou 510010.

OBJECTIVE: To construct the internal standard RNA and DNA templates for
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
quantitatively measure the mRNA expression of MRP gene.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A 292 bp fragment was amplified by PCR from plasmid
pRC/RSV-MRP containing full-length MRP cDNA and inserted into the Sma I site of
PUC19 vector, constructing a recombinant plasmid-pUMRP292. A 238 bp HGV fragment 
was amplified by PCR from plasmid pUHGV and inserted into the Cla I site of
pUMRP292, constructing a new recombinant plasmid-pUMRP 292/HGV as the internal
DNA competitive template for quantitative PCR of MRP. A 530 fragment containing
the 292 bp of MRP and the 238 bp of HGV was cut down by EcoR I and Xba I
pUMRP292/HGV and cloned into the transcriptional vector pSP72 by the same enzyme 
sites, constructing a recombinant plasmid-pSMRP292/HGV, and then pSMRP292/HGV was
cleaved with EcoR V and transcripted in vitro by SP6 RNA polymerase, obtaining a 
530 bp mutant MRP-RNA positive strand as the internal RNA competitive template
for quantitative RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: The established quantitative RT-PCR assay is simple, rapid and
sensitive, and the DNA competitive template is more simple, economic and reliable
than the RNA one.

PMID: 11243123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Feb 1;29(3):E11.

DNA sequencing and genotyping by transcriptional synthesis of chain-terminated
RNA ladders and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.

Kwon Y(1), Tang K, Cantor C, Köster H, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 373-1 Kusong-dong, Yusong-gu, Taejon 305-701, Korea and Sequenom,
Inc., 11555 Sorrento Valley Road, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

Sets of RNA ladders can be synthesized by transcription of a
bacteriophage-encoded RNA polymerase using 3'-deoxynucleotides as chain
terminators. These ladders can be used for sequencing of DNA. Using a nicked form
of phage SP6 RNA polymerase in this study substantially enhanced yields of
transcriptional sequencing ladders. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) of chain-terminated RNA ladders
allowed DNA sequence determination of up to 56 nt. It is also demonstrated that
A-->G and C-->T variations in heterozygous and homozygous samples can be
unambiguously identified by the mass spectrometric analysis. As a step towards
single-tube sequencing reactions, alpha-thiotriphosphate nucleotide analogs were 
used to overcome problems caused by chain terminator-independent, premature
termination and by the small mass difference between natural pyrimidine
nucleotides.

PMCID: PMC30412
PMID: 11160913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mutat Res. 2000 Feb 14;447(2):209-20.

Transcriptional slippage of p53 gene enhanced by cellular damage in rat liver:
monitoring the slippage by a yeast functional assay.

Ba Y(1), Tonoki H, Tada M, Nakata D, Hamada J, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Cancer Institute, Hokkaido University School of
Medicine, N-15, W-7, Sapporo, Japan.

The Long-Evans Cinnamon (LEC) rat is a mutant strain characterized by abnormal
copper metabolism and a high incidence of hepatitis and hepatoma. Using a
yeast-based assay which scores mutants in p53 gene transcripts as red colonies,
we detected frequent mutations in the liver of LEC rats. The majority (50-60%) of
these were frameshift mutations caused by the insertion of an extra adenine (A)
in the regions containing six consecutive adenines. The rate of A insertion was
calculated to be 6.9-9.0% of the total p53 cDNA. Insertions of an extra adenine
were found almost exclusively in the mRNA (cDNA), especially in the (A)(6) tract 
located at the most 5'-side (exon 4) among the three (A)(6) tracts (exons 4, 7,
and 8), but rarely in the corresponding sites of genomic DNA. Wild-type p53 cDNA 
was transcribed in vitro into mRNA with the use of SP6 RNA polymerase and tested 
by the yeast functional assay. Subsequent sequencing detected A insertions at an 
overall rate of 1.6% in exons 7 and 8 but none in exon 4. This indicates that the
A insertion in the exon 4 (A)(6) tract was an in vivo phenomenon rather than an
artifact in reverse transcription or polymerase chain reaction. The percentage of
red colonies increased sharply to about 20% of the liver samples in the acute
hepatitis stage, and returned to control level of those in the chronic hepatitis 
stage, and increased again slightly to those in the neoplastic stage. The
percentage of red colonies correlated with the serum GOT level (r=0.96, p<0.001) 
but not with the contents of copper and 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine in the liver of
LEC rats. Ethanol treatment of hepatic cell lines also increased the rate of
transcriptional slippage at the (A)(6) tract. These findings indicate that
cellular damage is responsible for the increase in the rate of mutation at the
transcriptional level, and suggest that cellular damage degrades transcriptional 
fidelity, thereby further impairing cellular functions.

PMID: 10751604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Genomics. 2000 Nov 15;70(1):93-101.

Identification of KLF13 and KLF14 (SP6), novel members of the SP/XKLF
transcription factor family.

Scohy S(1), Gabant P, Van Reeth T, Hertveldt V, Drèze PL, Van Vooren P, Rivière
M, Szpirer J, Szpirer C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, IBMM, Rue Professeurs Jeener & Brachet, 12,
Gosselies, B-6041, Belgium.

Using the sequence of the SP1 zinc-finger DNA-binding domain as a probe to screen
a mouse EST database, we identified two novel members of the SP/XKLF
transcription factor family, KLF13 and KLF14. The mouse Klf13 cDNA (1310 bp in
length) contains a single open reading frame of 288 amino acids with a
DNA-binding domain closely related to that of the human RFLAT-1 protein and a
putative transactivator N-terminal domain rich in proline and alanine residues.
The mouse Klf13 gene seems to be the homologue of the human RFLAT1 gene. The
mouse Klf14 sequence is homologous to a human genomic sequence from chromosome 17
that is believed to code for a protein with three zinc fingers at the end of its 
C-terminal domain. Using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, we
showed ubiquitous expression of Klf13 and Klf14 in adult mice. A third member of 
this family was also identified in a human EST database; this sequence was found 
to be identical to KLF11 (TIEG2), recently identified by Cook et al. (1998, J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 25929-25936). The corresponding mouse cDNA was isolated and
sequenced. The three genes were localized in the human and the rat: chromosomes
15 (human KLF13), 17q21.3-q22 (human KLF14; HGMW-approved symbol SP6), and 2p25
(human KLF11) and chromosomes 1q31-q32 (rat Klf13), 10q31-q32.1 (rat Klf14)
(SP6), and 6q16-q21 (rat Klf11).

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Genome Res. 2000 Oct;10(10):1561-7.

High-resolution transcript map of the region spanning D12S1629 and D12S312 at
chromosome 12q13: triple A syndrome-linked region.

Lee H(1), Choi E, Seomun Y, Montgomery K, Huebner A, Lee E, Lau S, Joo CK,
Kucherlapati R, Yoon SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Genetics, Catholic Research Institutes of
Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

For those searching for human disease-causing genes, information on the position 
of genes with respect to genetic markers is essential. The physical map composed 
of ESTs and genetic markers provides the positional information of these markers 
as well as the starting point of gene identification in the form of genomic
clones containing exons. To facilitate the effort of identification of genes in
the region spanning D12S1629 and D12S312, we constructed a high-resolution
transcript map with PAC/BAC/cosmid clones. The strategy for the construction of
such a map involved utilization of STSs for the screening of the large insert
bacterial chromosome libraries and a chromosome 12-specific cosmid library by
hybridization. The contig was constructed based on the STS contents of the
clones. The resulting high-resolution transcript map of the region between
P273P14/SP6 and D12S312 spans 4.4 cM from 66.8 to 71.2 cM of the Généthon genetic
map and represents approximately 2.4 Mb. It was composed of 81 BAC, 45 PAC, and
91 cosmid clones with a minimal tiling path consisting of 16 BAC and 4 PAC
clones. These clones are being used to sequence this part of chromosome 12. We
determined the order of 135 STSs including 74 genes and ESTs in the map. Among
these, 115 STSs were unambiguously ordered, resulting in one ordered marker per
21 kb. The order of keratin type II locus genes was determined. This map would
greatly enhance the positional cloning effort of the responsible genes for those 
diseases that are linked to this region, including male germ cell tumor as well
as palmoplantar keratoderma, Bothnian-type, and triple A syndrome. This
transcript map was localized at human chromosome 12q13.

PMCID: PMC310951
PMID: 11042153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biophys Chem. 2000 Aug 30;86(2-3):231-7.

Transcription through nucleosomes.

Felsenfeld G(1), Clark D, Studitsky V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

Transcriptionally active genes in eukaryotes still retain most of the Chromatin
packaging that is characteristic of eukaryotic DNA. Nucleosomes and even some
higher order structure are present, although the histones may be chemically
modified, for example by acetylation or phosphorylation, as part of the
activation process. The presence of nucleosomes on the coding region of active
genes raises the question: How does an RNA polymerase transcribe such a template?
We have attempted to answer this question with relatively simple model systems
involving a template carrying a single positioned nucleosome. We have shown that 
when a phage polymerase, SP6, transcribes such a template, the histone octamer of
the nucleosome is not released into solution. Instead it is retained on the same 
DNA molecule, but displaced from its original binding site. Further studies have 
allowed us to propose a detailed model, which appears to hold not only for SP6
but also for transcription by the much larger RNA polymerase III from yeast. Our 
most recent results, obtained by electron cryomicroscopy, confirm and refine this
model.

PMID: 11026687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2000 Mar;16(2):207-10.

[Cloning and infectivity analysis of the cDNAs of tobacco mosaic virus (tomato
strain) and its attenuated virus(N14) genomes].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang G(1), Qiu BS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing.

An oligonucletide primer with SP6 transcription promoter and the other primer
with a KpnI site at 5' terminuses were used to prepare the cDNAs of tobacco
mosaic virus(TMV, Chinese isolate) and its attenuated virus(N14, nitrite-treated 
mutant, tomato strain) genomic RNAs by RT-PCR. The cDNAs were cut into two
fragments by BamHI and first cloned separately then recombined into pUC18 by the 
restriction endonucleases of BamHI, SmaI, HincII, PstI, SphI. The sequences of 5'
and 3' terminal nucleotides (< 50 bp) were consistent with the reported
references. The infectious clones(pTMV-Cv/pN14) have been obtained and
corroborated by in vitro transcription with SP6 RNA polymerase and tobacco
infection. Necrotic local lesions were observed in Nicotiana samsun NN induced by
the transcripts from both pTMV and pN14 within 3-5 days after inoculation,
systemic symptoms showed in single-lesion infected Nicotiana tobacum cv,
coincided with symptoms of tobaccoes infected by TMV and N14.

PMID: 10976328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Virology. 2000 Sep 1;274(2):429-37.

Exploiting polymerase promiscuity: A simple colorimetric RNA polymerase assay.

Vassiliou W(1), Epp JB, Wang BB, Del Vecchio AM, Widlanski T, Kao CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

We developed a convenient colorimetric assay for monitoring RNA synthesis from
DNA-dependent RNA polymerases (DdRp) and viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases
(RdRp). ATP and GTP with a p-nitrophenyl moiety attached to the gamma-phosphate
were synthesized (PNP-NTPs). These PNP-NTPs can be used for RNA synthesis by
several RNA polymerases, including the RdRps from brome mosaic virus and bovine
viral diarrhea virus and the DdRps from bacteriophage T7 and SP6. When the
polymerase reactions were performed in the presence of alkaline phosphatase,
which digests the p-nitrophenylpyrophosphate side-product of phosphoryl transfer 
to the chromogenic p-nitrophenylate, an increase in absorbence at 405 nm was
observed. These nucleotide analogues were used in continuous colorimetric
monitoring of polymerase activity. Furthermore, the PNP-NTPs were found to be
stable and utilized by RNA polymerases in the presence of human plasma. This
simple colorimetric polymerase assay can be performed in a standard laboratory
spectrophotometer and will be useful in screens for inhibitors of viral RNA
synthesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10964785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Genesis. 2000 Jul;27(3):136.

Erratum

[No authors listed]

"Mesenchymal-Epithelial Transition in the Developing Metanephric Kidney: Gene
Expression Study by Differential Display," by Sergei Y. Plisov, Sergey V. Ivanov,
Kiyoshi Yoshino, Lee F. Dove, Tatiana M. Plisova, Kathleen G. Higinbotham, Irina 
Karavanova, Michael Lerman, and Alan O. Perantoni The above article originally
appeared in Volume 27, Number 1, the May 2000 issue, of genesis on pp. 22-31. The
wrong affiliations were listed for two of the co-authors: Sergey V. Ivanov is
affiliated with Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC-Frederick, Laboratory
of Immunobiology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer Research and
Development Center, Frederick, Maryland. Michael Lerman is affiliated with
Laboratory of Immunobiology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer Research
and Development Center, Frederick, Maryland. On page 24, left column, under "In
situ mRNA Hybridization" in the "Results" section, the sentence, "To verify the
results of DD and to determine in which cells of the developing kidney the
differentially displayed genes were expressed we applied mRNA hybridization
(ISH)," should read: "To verify the results of DD and to determine in which cells
of the developing kidney the differentially displayed genes were expressed we
applied in situ mRNA hybridization (ISH)." On page 27, the legend for Figure 2,
should read: "In situ RNA hybridization with thin sections of 19 dpc fetal
kidney. Labeled antisense RNA was in vitro transcribed from cloned cDNA fragments
obtained after differential display." On page 30, right column, under "In situ
Hybridization" in the "Methods" section, the sentence, "To generate sense or
antisense probes, 5 &mgr;g of plasmids with cloned cDNA fragments were linearized
either with NcoI or SpeI (Promega) restriction enzymes and transcribed with T7 or
SP6 RNA polymerase in the presence of alpha-35S-dCTP," should read: "To generate 
sense or antisense probes, 5 &mgr;g of plasmids with cloned cDNA fragments were
linearized either with NcoI or SpeI (Promega) restriction enzymes and transcribed
with T7 or SP6 RNA polymerase in the presence of alpha-35S-CTP." The authors
regret these errors.

PMID: 10951506  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


434. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2000 Aug;33(8):957-60.

Anti-hyperalgesic effect of electroacupuncture in a model of post-incisional pain
in rats.

Oliveira R(1), Prado WA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brasil.

Electroacupuncture has been proposed to be a low cost and practical method that
allows effective pain management with minimal collateral effects. In this study
we have examined the effect of electroacupuncture against the hyperalgesia
developed in a model of post-incisional pain in rats. A 1-cm longitudinal
incision was made through the skin and fascia of the plantar region of the animal
hind paw. Mechanical hyperalgesia in the incision was evaluated 135 min after the
surgery with von Frey filaments. The tension threshold was reduced from 75 g
(upper limit of the test) to 1.36 +/- 0.36 g (mean +/- SEM) in control rats. It
is shown that a 15-min period of electroacupuncture applied 120 min after surgery
to the Zusanli (ST36) and Sanyinjiao (SP6) points, but not to non-acupoints,
produces a significant and long-lasting reduction of the mechanical hyperalgesia 
induced by the surgical incision of the plantar surface of the ipsilateral hind
paw. The tension threshold was reduced from 75 to 27.6 +/- 4.2 g in animals soon 
after the end of electroacupuncture. The mechanical threshold in this group was
about 64% less than in control. Electroacupuncture was ineffective in rats
treated 10 min earlier with naloxone (1 mg/kg, ip), thus confirming the
involvement of opioid mechanisms in the antinociceptive effects of such
procedure. The results indicate that post-incisional pain is a useful model for
studying the anti-hyperalgesic properties of electroacupuncture in laboratory
animals.

PMID: 10920438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biomol Eng. 2000 Jun;16(6):191-7.

Bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase mutants with altered termination efficiency and 
elongation processivity.

Yoo J(1), Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon, South Korea.

An Escherichia coli strain containing two plasmids was developed for in vivo
isolation of the phage SP6 RNA polymerase mutants. It was developed to isolate
mutants with increased proficiency of termination at the SP6 terminator and/or
with reduced elongation processivity. Mutations were randomly introduced into an 
N-terminal third of the polymerase gene that was placed under a lac promoter in
one plasmid. In the other plasmid, a promoter-lacking lacZ gene modified for
reduced translation efficiency was placed downstream of a tandem pair of the SP6 
terminator located downstream of an SP6 promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene. Termination-up mutants were selected in vivo as they
rendered LacZ activity level lower than the wild-type, without reducing
chloramphenicol resistance substantially. Three such mutants (M15L, M15S, and
D117G) were purified, and their termination efficiencies were measured in vitro
at two different intrinsic termination signals in the E. coli rrnB terminator t1 
that are different in requiring RNA hairpin formation. All three mutations
enhanced termination efficiencies in vitro at the SP6 terminator and the upstream
signal of rrnB t1, but reduced the efficiency at the downstream signal of it. All
the mutations reduced elongation processivity, as the mutants produced much less 
amounts of large transcripts (2.1 kb) than the wild-type but the similar amounts 
of small transcripts (up to 670 nt). Thus, the mutations, all reducing elongation
processivity of the polymerase, exhibited opposite effects on the two types of
intrinsic termination signals, suggesting that the two mechanisms involve
different interactions with the phage RNA polymerase.

PMID: 10894113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Jul;41(8):2363-72.

Expression of integrin alpha5beta1 and MMPs associated with epithelioid
morphology and malignancy of uveal melanoma.

Béliveau A(1), Bérubé M, Rousseau A, Pelletier G, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec and Laval University, Ste-Foy, Canada.

PURPOSE: Altered expression of the alpha5beta1 integrin and matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) is recognized as a hallmark of invasive tumor cells.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the expression of integrin
subunit alpha5, its corresponding ligand fibronectin (FN), and the expression
pattern for MMPs in four highly proliferative human choroidal melanomas (TP17,
TP31, SP8.0, and SP6.5) to evaluate whether any correlation can be established
between these markers and cell tumorigenicity.
METHODS: Cell tumorigenicity was evaluated by subcutaneous injection of uveal
melanoma cell lines in immunodeficient nude mice. Anchorage dependency was
evaluated by growth assays in soft agar. The invasive ability of each cell type
was also determined using a modified Boyden chamber. Expression of both the
alpha5 integrin subunit and FN was determined at the mRNA level by RT-PCR. The
protein level (for alpha5) was determined by flow cytometry and inhibition of
adhesion assays by using an antibody directed against the alpha5 subunit.
Expression of MMPs was determined by standard gelatin zymography.
RESULTS: Assays in nude mice provided evidence that the cell lines possess a
range of tumorigenic ability of TP17>TP31>SP8.0>SP6.5. Antibody inhibition of
cell adhesion and flow cytometry demonstrated that TP17 cells have no detectable 
membrane-bound alpha5beta1, whereas low levels are found in primary cultured
melanocytes, as well as in SP6.5, SP8.0, and TP31 cells. RT-PCR analyses provided
evidence that both FN and alpha5 expression may be regulated at the
transcriptional level. Gelatin zymography revealed that all cell lines, as well
as normal melanocytes, express MMP-2 at varying levels but that only the highly
invasive TP17 cell line secretes a distinctive MMP with a high molecular weight
of 117 kDa.
CONCLUSIONS: Among the four melanoma cell lines selected for the completion of
this study, TP17 exhibited the most aggressive phenotype, which also correlated
with the mostly epithelioid morphology of these cells. The cell morphology of the
TP17 cell line could be related to the loss of alpha5beta1, whereas its invasive 
properties are more likely related to the expression of the 117-kDa MMP.

PMID: 10892885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochemistry. 2000 May 9;39(18):5573-85.

Regulation of rho-dependent transcription termination by NusG is specific to the 
Escherichia coli elongation complex.

Pasman Z(1), von Hippel PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Department of Chemistry, University of
Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA.

To terminate transcription in E. coli, Rho protein binds an RNA loading site on
the nascent transcript, translocates 5'--> 3' along the RNA in an ATP-driven
process, and, upon reaching the transcription elongation complex, brings about
RNA release. Thus, the Rho-dependent termination process can be viewed, in part, 
as a kinetic competition between the rate of transcript elongation by RNA
polymerase (RNAP) and the rate of Rho translocation along the nascent transcript.
In the context of this model, NusG, which is an essential E. coli protein,
regulates Rho-dependent termination in an apparently paradoxical way, increasing 
the rate of transcription elongation of E. coli RNAP in the absence of Rho while 
also shifting the sites of Rho-dependent termination upstream on the template.
Here we investigate the regulation of Rho-dependent termination by NusG.
Analytical ultracentrifugation was used to establish the existence of a stable
complex of NusG and Rho and to demonstrate a stoichiometry of one NusG monomer
per Rho hexamer. Surface plasmon resonance was used to examine the kinetics of
the formation and dissociation of the NusG-Rho complex, yielding an association
rate constant (k(on)) of 2.8 (+/-0.8) x 10(5) M(-)(1) s(-)(1), a dissociation
rate constant (k(off)) of 3.9 (+/-0.7) x 10(-)(3) s(-)(1), and a calculated
equilibrium (dissociation) constant (K(d)) of 1.5 (+/-0.3) x 10(-)(8) M. The
apparent stability of the NusG-Rho complex is insensitive to changes in salt
(potassium acetate) concentration between 0.05 and 0.15 M. The translocation and 
transcription termination activities of Rho at saturating NusG concentrations
were, however, both sensitive to salt concentration over this range, suggesting
that these activities do not directly reflect the stability of the NusG-Rho
complex. Rho-dependent termination could be demonstrated for transcription
complexes in which E. coli RNAP had been substituted by either bacteriophage SP6 
or T7 RNAP. NusG, however, was not active in transcription termination assays
with either of these phage RNAPs. Thus, we conclude that NusG modulates
Rho-dependent termination by interacting specifically with the RNAP of the E.
coli elongation complex to render the complex more susceptible to the termination
activity of Rho.

PMID: 10820031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Altern Complement Med. 2000 Apr;6(2):149-55.

Are acupuncture points tender? A blinded study of Spleen 6.

Janovsky B(1), White AR, Filshie J, Hart A, Ernst E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Complementary Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: To explore the methodology for investigating the tenderness of
acupuncture points, with particular reference to the hypothesis that the point
Spleen 6 (SP6) is more tender in women than in men.
DESIGN: Single-blind, observational study with volunteers.
SETTING: University of Exeter, U.K.
SUBJECTS: Student volunteers, 13 male and 13 female.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Pressure thresholds at SP6, a control acupuncture point Stomach
36, and two nonacupuncture control sites in each leg were measured weekly for 4
weeks.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences were found between the pressure
thresholds of SP6 in women and those in men.
CONCLUSION: The present study provides no strong evidence to support the
hypothesis that the acupuncture point SP6 is more tender in women and in men.
Recommendations for further investigations are discussed.

PMID: 10784272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 11;97(8):3890-5.

Effects of saturation mutagenesis of the phage SP6 promoter on transcription
activity, presented by activity logos.

Shin I(1), Kim J, Cantor CR, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 373-1 Kusong-dong, Yusong-gu, Taejon 305-701, Korea.

A full set of SP6 promoter variants with all possible single substitutions at
positions -17 to +5 was constructed. Transcription activities of these variants
were individually measured in vivo and in vitro to determine the contribution of 
each base pair to the promoter activity. The in vivo activity was measured
indirectly by transcriptional interference of the replication of promoter-bearing
plasmids. This activity depends most highly on residues -11, -9, -8, -7, and +1
(initiation site). All substitutions at -11, -9, -8, and -7 abolished formation
of closed complexes, except for A-8C. These residues are involved in
base-specific interactions with the polymerase, and the substitutions exhibit the
same strong inhibition in vitro. In contrast, the in vitro activities of some
other variants, measured on linearized templates, were different from those in
vivo. Some variants at -13, -4, and -2, among others, showed exceptionally higher
activities in vivo than in vitro, supporting the possibility that these residues 
are involved in postbinding steps, including template melting and bending. The
A-3T variant showed much lower activity in vivo than in vitro, but it bound to
the polymerase 2-fold more than the consensus sequence and is possibly involved
in polymerase binding. A quantitative hierarchy of all the base pairs is
graphically displayed by activity logos, revealing the energetic contribution of 
each base pair to the activity.

PMCID: PMC18112
PMID: 10760261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Endocr Regul. 1999 Dec;33(4):161-7.

Role of substance P in central control of ovulation in female rats.

Potargowicz E(1), Traczyk WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry, Medical
University of Lodz, 90-131 Lodz, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of substance P on gonadotropin release
from the pituitary as evaluated according to the final effect, i.e. the
ovulation.
METHODS: Stainless steel tube was implanted into the 3rd cerebral ventricle and
substance P (SP), C-terminal hexapeptide of Substance P (SP6-11), Gn-RH and
adrenaline were infused on the 3rd day of the cycle (proestrus). The oviducts
were then isolated on the day of estrus and the ova were counted.
RESULTS: SP or SP6-11 inhibited the ovulation which was not prevented by
intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) capsaicin pretreatment. The i.c. v.
administration of noradrenaline on the 7-8th day of pseudopregnancy induced the
ovulation which was prevented by the injection of SP immediately before
noradrenaline.
CONCLUSIONS: It is suggested that noradrenergic neuros which control the
ovulation by influencing the release of Gn-RH into pituitary portal vessels are
affected by SP-ergic neurons.

PMID: 10700084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochemistry. 2000 Feb 22;39(7):1643-54.

Characterization of a novel DNA primase from the Salmonella typhimurium
bacteriophage SP6.

Tseng TY(1), Frick DN, Richardson CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The gene for the DNA primase encoded by Salmonella typhimurium bacteriophage SP6 
has been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli and its 74-kDa protein product 
purified to homogeneity. The SP6 primase is a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that
synthesizes short oligoribonucleotides containing each of the four canonical
ribonucleotides. GTP and CTP are both required for the initiation of
oligoribonucleotide synthesis. In reactions containing only GTP and CTP, SP6
primase incorporates GTP at the 5'-end of oligoribonucleotides and CMP at the
second position. On synthetic DNA templates, pppGpC dinucleotides are synthesized
most rapidly in the presence of the sequence 5'-GCA-3'. This trinucleotide
sequence, containing a cryptic dA at the 3'-end, differs from other known
bacterial and phage primase recognition sites. SP6 primase shares some properties
with the well-characterized E. colibacteriophage T7 primase. The T7 DNA
polymerase can use oligoribonucleotides synthesized by SP6 primase as primers for
DNA synthesis. However, oligoribonucleotide synthesis by SP6 primase is not
stimulated by either the E. coli- or the T7-encoded ssDNA binding protein. An
amino acid sequence alignment of the SP6 and T7 primases, which share only 22.4% 
amino acid identity, indicates amino acids likely critical for
oligoribonucleotide synthesis as well as a putative Cys(3)His zinc finger motif
that may be involved in DNA binding.

PMID: 10677213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Clin Exp Immunol. 2000 Feb;119(2):340-5.

Experimental lupus nephritis in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice:
remodelling of the glomerular lesions by bystander IgM antibodies.

Ito MR(1), Terasaki S, Kondo E, Shiwaku H, Fukuoka Y, Nose M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr (MRL/lpr) mice develop glomerular lesions with regular variations 
in their histopathological manifestations, similar to those in lupus nephritis.
These lesions are mainly either cell-proliferative or wire loop-like and are
associated with glomerular deposits of immunoglobulins, most frequently IgG and
IgM. We previously established a nephritogenic IgG3-producing hybridoma clone,
B1, from an MRL/lpr mouse, which induces only a 'wire loop-like' type of
glomerular lesion when injected into SCID mice. Injection of SCID mice with an
anti-trinitrophenyl IgM antibody-producing hybridoma clone, Sp6, following
injection of the B1 clone, however, resulted in the development of a
'cell-proliferative' type of glomerular lesion, associated with an accumulation
of both antibodies in glomeruli. This accumulation occurred even though Sp6 IgM
antibodies did not react with B1 IgG3 antibodies and vice versa. A mutant clone
of Sp6, T/13microE/3.1, which produces antibodies deficient in C1q binding,
produced a similar effect as that of the Sp6 clone, i.e. 'cell-proliferative'
lesions. Again the B1 antibodies did not react with T/13microE/3. 1-IgM
antibodies and vice versa. We therefore conclude that bystander IgM antibodies
contribute to the remodelling of glomerular lesions in situ, following glomerular
injury by the nephritogenic antibodies.

PMCID: PMC1905503
PMID: 10632673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Methods Mol Biol. 1999;118:1-10.

Labeling and purification of RNA synthesized by in vitro transcription.

Clarke PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign (CRC) Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Royal Marsden
Hospital, Surrey, United Kingdom.

PMID: 10549510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cell. 1999 Sep;4(3):377-86.

The nature of the nucleosomal barrier to transcription: direct observation of
paused intermediates by electron cryomicroscopy.

Bednar J(1), Studitsky VM, Grigoryev SA, Felsenfeld G, Woodcock CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts-Amherst 01003, USA.

Transcribing SP6 RNA polymerase was arrested at unique positions in the
nucleosome core, and the complexes were analyzed using biochemical methods and
electron cryomicroscopy. As the polymerase enters the nucleosome, it disrupts
DNA-histone interactions behind and up to approximately 20 bp ahead of the
elongation complex. After the polymerase proceeds 30-40 bp into the nucleosome,
two intermediates are observed. In one, only the DNA ahead of the polymerase
reassociates with the octamer. In the other, DNA both ahead of and behind the
enzyme reassociates. These intermediates present a barrier to elongation. When
the polymerase approaches the nucleosome dyad, it displaces the octamer, which is
transferred to promoter-proximal DNA.

PMID: 10518218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 8;274(41):29149-55.

Bipartite modular structure of intrinsic, RNA hairpin-independent termination
signal for phage RNA polymerases.

Kwon YS(1), Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 373-1 Kusong-dong, Yusong-gu, Taejon 305-701, Korea.

The phage SP6 RNA and T7 RNA polymerases, which are closely related to each
other, intrinsically stop at two signals in the Escherichia coli rrnB terminator 
t1 through different mechanisms. The downstream signal functioned without an RNA 
secondary structure formation, in which the signal was still active when
separated from the upstream, hairpin-forming signal, and IMP incorporation
enhanced its efficiency. The sequence from -15 to -1 was essential for the
downstream, hairpin-independent termination (at -1). The results of SP6
transcription with heteroduplex templates and ribonucleotide analogs suggested
that the downstream signal consists of two functionally different modules. The
effects of iodo-CMP or IMP incorporation into RNA on termination efficiency were 
not sensitive to incorporation at -9 and upstream, but they were reactive to
incorporation at -6 and -2, as reflected by strong iodo-rC:dG and weak rI:dC base
pairing. Thus, the downstream module (from -8 approximately -6 to -1) appears to 
facilitate the release of RNA. Mismatches in the templates at -6 to +1 allowed
for efficient termination, unlike those upstream of the sequence. The upstream
module (from -15 to -9 approximately -7) functions as a duplex. Pausing of the
SP6 elongation complex at the termination site was detected when RNA release was 
suppressed by the incorporation of 5-bromo-UMP, and it was dependent on the
upstream module. Results of single-round SP6 transcriptions using
3'-deoxynucleotides and immobilized templates indicated that RNA was not released
from the elongation complexes halted at the termination site on the template
variants carrying mutations in the upstream or downstream module, whereas such
complexes on the wild type template were dissociated. Thus, halting or simple
pausing was not sufficient for termination even when the downstream module was
intact. The upstream module appears to mediate such conformation change necessary
for termination.

PMID: 10506170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Gen Virol. 1999 Sep;80 ( Pt 9):2299-309.

Functional features of the bovine enterovirus 5'-non-translated region.

Zell R(1), Sidigi K, Henke A, Schmidt-Brauns J, Hoey E, Martin S, Stelzner A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie, Klinikum der Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena,
Germany. i6zero@rz.uni-jena.de

The bovine enterovirus (BEV) serotypes exhibit unique features of the
non-translated regions (NTRs) which separate them from the other enteroviruses.
Their most remarkable property is an additional genome region of 110 nt located
between the 5'-cloverleaf and the internal ribosome entry site (IRES). This
genome region has the potential to form an additional cloverleaf structure
(domain I*) separated from the 5'-cloverleaf (domain I) by a small stem-loop
(domain I**). Other characteristics involve the putative IRES domains III and VI.
In order to investigate the features of the 5'-NTR, several full-length
coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) cDNA plasmids with hybrid 5'-NTRs were engineered. After
exchange of the CVB3 cloverleaf with the BEV1 genome region representing both
cloverleafs, a viable virus chimera was generated. Deletion of domain I** within 
the exchanged region also yielded viable virus albeit with reduced growth
capacity. Deletion of sequences encoding either the first or the second BEV
cloverleaf resulted in non-infectious constructs. Hybrid plasmids with exchanges 
of the IRES-encoding sequence or the complete 5'-NTR were non-infectious.
Transfection experiments with SP6 transcripts containing 5'-NTRs fused to the
luciferase message indicated that IRES-driven translation is enhanced by the
presence of the CVB3 cloverleaf and both BEV1 cloverleaf structures,
respectively. Deletion of either the first or the second BEV cloverleaf domain
reduced but did not abolish enhanced luciferase expression. These results suggest
that the substitution of two putative BEV cloverleaf structures for the putative 
coxsackieviral cloverleaf yields viable virus, while BEV sequences encoding the
IRES fail to functionally replace CVB3 IRES-encoding sequences.

PMID: 10501480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Virol Methods. 1999 Aug;81(1-2):55-61.

A macrophage fusion assay for rapid screening of cloned HIV-1 Env using dual
recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing distinct RNA polymerases.

Isaacs SN(1), Yi Y, Singh A, Collman RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6060, USA. isaacs@mail.med.upenn.edu

HIV-1 cell tropism is determined initially at the level of fusion mediated by the
viral envelope glycoprotein (Env). Cell-cell fusion assays are employed widely to
study Env-mediated fusion, and generally require transfection of target cells
with a reporter plasmid that is activated upon fusion with Env-expressing
effector cells. Macrophages are an important target for HIV-1, but fusion studies
using primary macrophages are limited by their resistance to transfection. An
assay described previously used recombinant vaccinia virus to express T7
polymerase in macrophages, and effector cells transfected with a T7-driven
reporter plasmid and infected with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing Env.
However, this requires a recombinant vaccinia virus for each Env. We developed a 
method to study fusion using primary macrophages and HIV-1 env plasmid clones
under control of the T7 promoter. Macrophages were infected with a recombinant
vaccinia virus expressing the SP6 RNA polymerase. Effector 293T cells were
infected with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing T7 polymerase, and
co-transfected with T7-driven env plasmids and an SP6-driven reporter gene
plasmid. Cell-cell fusion mediated by T7-driven Env results in SP6-driven
reporter gene transactivation. This approach is suitable for rapid analysis of
multiple primary isolate, chimeric, or mutant env genes cloned into plasmid
vectors.

PMID: 10488761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Curr Genet. 1999 Aug;36(1-2):37-48.

Expression studies and promoter analysis of the nuclear gene for mitochondrial
transcription factor 1 (MTF1) in yeast.

Jan PS(1), Stein T, Hehl S, Lisowsky T.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut I, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Universitätsstrasse 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The basal mitochondrial transcription apparatus of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
consists of the core enzyme for mitochondrial RNA polymerase and the specificity 
factor. The core enzyme is homologous to those of bacteriophages T3, T7 and SP6
whereas the specificity factor shows similarities with bacterial sigma factors.
Recently it was shown that the bacteriophage-type core enzyme is widespread among
the eukaryotic lineage and a common picture for the mitochondrial transcription
apparatus in eukaryotic cells is now emerging. In contrast to the situation for
the core enzyme, the gene for the specificity factor has only been identified
from S. cerevisiae and more recently from two other yeast species. As the
specificity factor is the key component for initiation of transcription at the
mitochondrial promoter we wanted to study in more detail gene expression,
regulation, and the function of the promoter of the nuclear MTF1 gene. For this
purpose the messenger RNA level for scMTF1 was investigated under a large number 
of different growth conditions and thereby exhibited a very low, but regulated
and carbon source-dependent, expression. Deletion experiments identify the
minimal promoter for functional complementation in yeast. To evaluate the
functional conservation of the promoter elements the homologous MTF1 gene from
the closely related yeast Saccharomyces douglasii was isolated and tested in
heterologous complementation experiments. In spite of a highly conserved protein 
sequence these studies demonstrate that at low-copy number sdMTF1 is not able to 
substitute for scMTF1 in S. cerevisiae. Promoter exchange experiments with MTF1
from S. cerevisiae and S. douglasii demonstrate that differences in gene
expression are responsible for the failure in heterologous complementation. This 
finding prompted us to compare the promoter regions of MTF1 from four different
yeast species. For this purpose the sequences of the 5' regions from S.
douglasii, S. kluyveri and Kluyveromyces lactis were determined. A comparison of 
these sequences identifies significant differences and rapid changes in the
intergenic regions, even between closely related yeast species.

PMID: 10447593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1999 May;74(3):173-88.

[Analysis of transcript mutations due to transcriptional slippage in rat p53
tumor suppressor gene with the use of yeast functional assay].

[Article in Japanese]

Ba Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Transcriptional slippage was previously found in Escherichia coli during RNA
elongation at runs of 10 or more As or Ts, resulting in the addition of
untemplated A or U residues. To evaluate the incidence of transcriptional
slippage in vivo, we employed a yeast functional assay, and analyzed the
frequency and spectrum of mutations in mRNA of the tumor suppressor p53 in rat
tissues. In this assay, yeast are transfected with p53 PCR products and a gapped 
p53 expression vector, which allow homologous recombination in vivo and yield a
percentage of red colonies which reflects the proportion of mutant PCR products. 
Insertion mutations of single base of adenine (A) at stretches of 6 As were
frequently detected in the liver samples of LEC rats which develop spontaneous
hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. For excluding the possibility of
artifacts involvement, p53 cDNA was amplified by PCR from plasmids containing
wild-type p53 and tested with the yeast functional assay, which resulted in no A 
insertion after sequencing 23 mutant clones. Furthermore, in vitro transcript of 
wild-type p53 was synthesized by SP6 RNA polymerase, and then,
reverse-transcribed, PCR-amplified, and tested with the yeast functional assay.
The overall rate of A insertion was much lower than that in the LEC rat liver.
Since A insertions were found predominantly at nucleotides 293-298 in exon 4, an 
exon 4-specific yeast functional assay was developed. A insertion was detected in
4.8% of the PCR product of mRNA but 0-0.1% from genomic DNA, which suggested that
such A insertion was caused by transcriptional slippage in vivo. The A insertion 
rate abruptly increased in acute hepatitis stage in the LEC rat liver, while the 
rate slowly increased by aging in control WKAH rat liver. It was suggested that
cell damage and aging were primarily responsible for the increased rate of
transcriptional slippage.

PMID: 10422562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Virology. 1999 Jun 20;259(1):219-27.

Carboxy-terminal five amino acids of the nucleocapsid protein of vesicular
stomatitis virus are required for encapsidation and replication of genome RNA.

Das T(1), Chakrabarti BK, Chattopadhyay D, Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)The Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio
44195, USA.

The encapsidation of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) genome RNA, a prerequisite 
step to the replication process by the nucleocapsid protein (N) was studied by
its ability to package VSV leader RNA in vitro in a RNase-resistant form. The VSV
leader RNA was derived from the SP6 transcription vector while the N protein was 
made in rabbit reticulocyte lysate. The in vitro encapsidation was carried out by
translating N mRNA in the presence of 32P-labeled presynthesized leader RNA. The 
RNA encapsidation property of the N protein was completely abrogated when the
C-terminal five amino acids (VEFDK-COOH) were deleted. Systematic mutational
analyses within the C-terminal five amino acid regions reveal that the RNA
encapsidation activity was lost in all mutants except K --> A and K --> R,
indicating that C-terminal five amino acids, in particular the lysine residue
play critical role in genome RNA encapsidation. To correlate the in vitro
encapsidation abilities of these mutant N proteins with genome RNA replication,
we have used a full-length cDNA clone of VSV genome RNA to rescue infectious
virions from cells expressing L, P, and wt or mutant N proteins and measured the 
recovery of plaque forming units. The results indicate that the N mutants that
are defective in in vitro encapsidation of leader RNA do not support replication,
establishing the requirement of C-terminal five amino acids of the N protein in
viral replication.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10364506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Protein Expr Purif. 1999 Jun;16(1):103-8.

Soluble expression of cloned phage K11 RNA polymerase gene in Escherichia coli at
a low temperature.

Han KG(1), Lee SS, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Pai-Chai University, 439-6 Doma-dong, Seo-gu,
Taejon, 302-735, Korea.

The gene 1 of the Klebsiella phage K11 encoding the phage RNA polymerase was
amplified using the polymerase chain reaction of the Pfu DNA polymerase, cloned
and expressed under the control of tac promoter in Escherichia coli. Although the
gene was efficiently expressed in E. coli BL21 cells at 37 degrees C, most of the
K11 RNA polymerase produced was insoluble, in contrast to soluble expression of
the cloned T7 RNA polymerase gene. Coexpression of the bacterial chaperone GroES 
and GroEL genes together did not help solubilize the K11 RNA polymerase. When the
temperature of cell growth was lowered, however, solubility of the K11 RNA
polymerase was increased substantially. It was found much more soluble when
expressed at 25 degrees C than at 30 and 37 degrees C. Thus, the cloned K11 RNA
polymerase gene was expressed in E. coli mostly to the soluble form at 25 degrees
C. The protein was purified to homogeneity by chromatography using DEAE-Sephacel 
and Affigel-blue columns and was found to be active in vitro with the K11 genome 
or a K11 promoter. The purified K11 RNA polymerase showed highly stringent
specificity for the K11 promoter. Low-level cross-reactivity was shown with the
SP6 and T7 consensus promoters, while no activity shown with the T3 consensus
promoter at all.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10336867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Parasitol. 1999 Apr;85(2):208-12.

RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity associated with Eimeria necatrix virus
particles containing either double-stranded or single-stranded RNA.

Lee S(1), Fernando MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

Single-stranded (ss) RNA containing and double-stranded (ds) RNA containing virus
particles of Eimeria necatrix were isolated by centrifugation through a CsCl
gradient. RNA from the gradient fractions was identified as single-stranded or
double-stranded by probing northern blots with digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes.
These probes were generated with SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases from a partial cDNA
clone derived from 5.6-kb viral dsRNA of E. necatrix. RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RDRP) activity was identified in these CsCl-purified virus particles.
The polymerase products of the ssRNA particles consisted of dsRNA indicating
replicase activity, whereas the polymerase products of the dsRNA particles
consisted of ssRNA indicating transcriptase. activity. RNase treatment in high
salt solution (0.3 M NaCl) of the pooled RDRP products revealed that the products
consisted of both RNase-resistant dsRNA and RNase-sensitive ssRNA. These results 
show that both replicase and transcriptase activities were present in the
purified virus. The digoxigenin-labeled products hybridized to both SP6 and T7
transcripts confirming the presence of both activities.

PMID: 10219297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 9;274(15):10259-67.

Spi-C, a novel Ets protein that is temporally regulated during B lymphocyte
development.

Bemark M(1), Mårtensson A, Liberg D, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lund University, P.
O. Box 7031, S-220 07 Lund, Sweden.

A novel Ets protein was isolated by yeast one-hybrid screening of a cDNA library 
made from lipopolysaccharide-stimulated mouse splenic B cells, using the SP6
kappa promoter kappaY element as a bait. The novel Ets protein was most closely
related to PU.1 and Spi-B within the DNA binding Ets domain and was therefore
named Spi-C. However, Spi-C may represent a novel subgroup within the Ets protein
family, as it differed significantly from Spi-B and PU.1 within helix 1 of the
Ets domain. Spi-C was encoded by a single-copy gene that was mapped to chromosome
10, region C. Spi-C interacted with DNA similarly to PU.1 as judged by
methylation interference, band-shift and site selection analysis, and activated
transcription of a kappaY element reporter gene upon co-transfection of HeLa
cells. Spi-C RNA was expressed in mature B lymphocytes and at lower levels in
macrophages. Furthermore, pre-B cell and plasma cell lines were Spi-C-negative,
suggesting that Spi-C might be a regulatory molecule during a specific phase of B
lymphoid development.

PMID: 10187812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jan 18;1444(1):61-8.

Analysis of the 5' and 3'UTRs in the post-transcriptional regulation of the
interleukin-5 gene.

Thomas MA(1), Karlen S, D'Ercole M, Sanderson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)TVWT Institute for Child Health Research, PO Box 855, West Perth, WA 6872,
Australia.

Post-transcriptional regulation is emerging as an important control point in
cytokine gene expression. However, the role that it plays in IL-5 gene expression
is unclear with some conflicting reports. Here we investigate the importance of
post-transcriptional regulation and the role of the 5' and 3' untranslated
regions (UTRs) in mIL-5 gene expression. To do this, IL-5 expression from a panel
of cDNA constructs was compared. We found it essential to remove the 5' synthetic
oligonucleotide tails, introduced during the cloning of the mIL-5 cDNA, when
studying IL-5 expression. The presence of these oligo(G) tails acted as potent
inhibitors of translation of both SV40 and SP6 transcripts. Furthermore, the
length of the tails was found to be critical to the translational efficiency.
Taking this into account, we found no evidence to suggest that IL-5 is regulated 
at the level of mRNA stability or translation efficiency by either the 5' or
3'UTR. These results suggest that post-transcriptional control is not a major
factor regulating IL-5 expression.

PMID: 9931437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Methods Mol Biol. 1999;109:337-41.

In vitro transcription and translation of lipoprotein lipase.

Ranganathan G(1), Kern PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Arkansas School for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, USA.

PMID: 9918034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Anticancer Res. 1998 Sep-Oct;18(5A):3539-47.

Transcriptional regulation of the alpha 4 integrin subunit gene in the metastatic
spread of uveal melanoma.

Larouche N(1), Larouche K, Béliveau A, Leclerc S, Salesse C, Pelletier G, Guérin 
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, CHUL Research Centre, Ste-Foy, Québec, 
Canada.

Recently, expression of the alpha 4 integrin subunit has been shown to be
inversely correlated with the invasive potential of B16 mouse epidermal melanoma.
The purpose of this study was to establish whether expression of the human alpha 
4 integrin subunit gene might be similarly regulated in human uveal melanoma
which has varying degrees of invasiveness, and whether such modifications are
determined by alterations in the transcriptional activity directed by the alpha 4
gene promoter. Two metastatic variants (MH5 and MH10) derived from a human uveal 
melanoma (SP6.5) were used. Expression studies were performed by transiently
transfecting each of these cell lines with recombinant plasmids bearing various
lengths of the alpha 4 promoter fused to the CAT reporter gene, and were further 
validated by Northern blot analyses of the alpha 4 transcript. Both transient
transfection and mRNA analyses provided evidence that the transcriptional
activity directed by the alpha 4 promoter sequences extending up to position -76 
and -120 was indeed inversely correlated to the potential of uveal melanoma to
yield metastasis. Experiments in electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
demonstrated that binding of the nuclear proteins that likely account for
transcription of the alpha 4 gene to alpha 4.1 (namely Bp1, Bp2, Bp4, and Bp5)
was dramatically reduced in uveal melanoma, but not in normal uveal melanocytes. 
These results highlight the fundamental function the alpha 4 integrin subunit may
play in the ability of tumor cells to evade the primary tumor and form
metastasis.

PMID: 9858937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Genet Anal. 1998 Oct;14(4):133-9.

Viability of E. coli cells containing phage RNA polymerase and promoter:
interference of plasmid replication by transcription.

Kwon YS(1), Kim J, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon, South Korea.

Strong transcription of phage promoters often renders the host E. coli cells
containing the phage RNA polymerase inviable. When expression of the phage SP6
RNA polymerase gene in one plasmid was induced in the E. coli JM109 cells, cells 
that bear an active SP6 promoter were inviable. When it was not induced (the
polymerase was still produced in low levels), viability of the host cells and
stability of the promoter-bearing plasmids depended on the orientation of the
promoter with respect to that of the replication origin and on the sequence of
the origin. A group of SP6 promoter-bearing plasmids (group I plasmids) that had 
the promoter directed towards the ColE1 replication origin, rendered the
polymerase-containing host cells inviable in selective media. When the sequence
of the origin was different (group II plasmids), this adverse effect was not
observed. When the promoter direction was same as the replication origin and the 
ampicillin-resistant gene (group III plasmids), many satellites formed around the
colonies on ampicillin-containing agar plates. These effects were caused by
strong transcription of the phage SP6 promoter by its RNA polymerase, since they 
were reduced or eliminated by inserting an active terminator just downstream of
the promoter. The viability of host cells and copy number of the
promoter/terminator-bearing plasmids appear to be quantitatively related with
efficiency of initiation and termination of the phage transcription. These
systems may be useful for in vivo screening for mutant variants of the phage
promoter, polymerase and terminator that are affected in their efficiency.

PMID: 9834856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Arch Dermatol. 1998 Nov;134(11):1397-9.

Acupuncture treatment of urticaria.

Chen CJ(1), Yu HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical College, Taiwan.
chungjen@cc.kmc.edu.tw

Acupuncture has long been used to treat urticaria in the Asian world. Acute
urticaria can be easily and effectively treated with acupuncture. L111 (Quchi),
Sp10 (Xuehai), Sp6 (Sanyinjiao), and S36 (Zusanli) are the 4 acupuncture points
most commonly prescribed. Chronic urticaria is a challenge for medical therapy.
There are at least 6 kinds of acupuncture methods developed to overcome this
challenge. The combination of ordinary acupuncture and auricular acupuncture has 
been observed to be a highly effective cure of chronic urticaria. Acupuncture
point injection with thiamine hydrochloride (vitamin B1) is also an effective
treatment. However, results of these clinical observations have not been
systematically confirmed for lack of a control group and the need for standard
classification of urticaria. Although these observational results have clinical
limitations, they do offer insight into an alternative to conventional treatment 
of urticaria. In the future, acupuncture or acupuncturelike techniques may
provide an effective alternative for treatment of patients with urticaria,
particularly those refractory to medication therapy.

PMID: 9828874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Parasitol Res. 1998 Aug;84(8):601-6.

Intracellular localization of viral RNA in Eimeria necatrix of the domestic fowl.

Lee S(1), Fernando MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

The intracellular localization of viral RNA in three different stages of Eimeria 
necatrix, namely, the first- and second-generation meronts and the macrogamonts, 
were examined at the light microscopy level by in situ hybridization.
Digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes generated from partial cDNA clones from 5.6-kb and
4.5-kb dsRNA (pzenv1 and pzenv2) were used in this study. Viral RNA was found to 
be confined to the cytoplasm of the eimerian host; no viral RNA was detected in
chicken tissue. The intense hybridization signal observed in the cytoplasm of the
immature meronts with the SP6 riboprobe of pzenv1 or the T7 riboprobe of pzenv2
was probably due to their hybridization to positive strands that had been
extruded from the virus during transcription. In mature meronts the intensity of 
the signal is lower, signifying a decrease in transcription activity. Viral
replicase activity may thus be synchronized with the growth phase of the eimerian
host.

PMID: 9747931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Methods Enzymol. 1998;292:279-89.

Use of cell-free systems to determine P-glycoprotein transmembrane topology.

Zhang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston 77555, USA.

PMID: 9711561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1997 Dec;30(12):1445-50.

Effects of acupuncture on behavioral, cardiovascular and hormonal responses in
restraint-stressed Wistar rats.

Guimarães CM(1), Pinge MC, Yamamura Y, Mello LE.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brasil.

Stress is a well-known entity and may be defined as a threat to the homeostasis
of a being. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of acupuncture on the 
physiological responses induced by restraint stress. Acupuncture is an ancient
therapeutic technique which is used in the treatment and prevention of diseases. 
Its proposed mechanisms of action are based on the principle of homeostasis.
Adult male Wistar EPM-1 rats were divided into four groups: group I (N = 12),
unrestrained rats with cannulas previously implanted into their femoral arteries 
for blood pressure and heart rate measurements; group II (N = 12), rats that were
also cannulated and were submitted to 60-min immobilization; group III (N = 12), 
same as group II but with acupuncture needles implanted at points SP6, S36,
REN17, P6 and DU20 during the immobilization period; group IV (N = 14), same as
group III but with needles implanted at points not related to acupuncture
(non-acupoints). During the 60-min immobilization period animals were assessed
for stress-related behaviors, heart rate, blood pressure and plasma
corticosterone, noradrenaline and adrenaline levels. Group III animals showed a
significant reduction (60% on average, P < 0.02) in restraint-induced behaviors
when compared to groups II and IV. Data from cardiovascular and hormonal
assessments indicated no differences between group III and group II and IV
animals, but tended to be lower (50% reduction on average) in group I animals. We
hypothesize that acupuncture at points SP6, S36, REN17, P6 and DU20 has an
anxiolytic effect on restraint-induced stress that is not due to a sedative
action.

PMID: 9686165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):18881-90.

Purification and characterization of a protein binding to the SP6 kappa promoter.
A potential role for CArG-box binding factor-A in kappa transcription.

Bemark M(1), Olsson H, Heinegård D, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology, Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Lund University,
S-220 07 Lund, Sweden.

A protein interacting with an A-T-rich region that is a positive control element 
within the SP6 kappa promoter was purified and identified as CArG-box binding
factor-A. The purified protein was shown to interact specifically with the coding
strand of single-stranded DNA and, with lower affinity, with double-stranded DNA.
A mutation that inhibited binding of the protein to the A-T-rich region also
aborted the transcriptional stimulatory effect of the region. Two Ets proteins,
PU.1 and elf-1, that have previously been shown to bind to an adjacent DNA
element were shown to physically interact with CArG-box binding factor-A. An
antiserum raised against the protein recognized two different forms indicating
either that different splice-forms of CArG-box binding factor-A are expressed, or
that the protein is subject to post-translational modification.

PMID: 9668064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18060-6.

Rapid, high level protein production using DNA-based Semliki Forest virus
vectors.

DiCiommo DP(1), Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Research Institute of Canada, Toronto, Ontario M5T 2S8.

Semliki Forest virus (SFV) vectors can be produced faster, and have a wider host 
range, than baculovirus vectors. However, the original SFV system requires in
vitro manipulation of RNA. We have generated a system that is wholly DNA-based.
Both the replicon vector, encoding SFV polymerase and the protein of interest,
and the helper vector, encoding viral structural proteins, were modified so that 
expression was RNA polymerase II-dependent. Transfection of the modified replicon
plasmid alone generated 20-30-fold more protein than obtained from a simple
expression vector. Expression required the SFV replicase, which amplifies
replicon RNA. The SFV-based vector generated 10-20-fold more protein than a
plasmid based on Sindbis virus. Cotransfection of SFV replicon and helper vectors
generated viral titers of around 10(6) infectious particles/ml. A single
electroporation, plated on one 10-cm plate, generated enough virus (10(7)
particles) to produce >500 microg of protein. Wild type, replication proficient
virus was not detected in three tests utilizing almost 10(8) viral particles, a
distinct advantage over a DNA Sindbis-based system in which over half the virus
particles generated are fully infectious. The new SFV vectors significantly
enhance the utility of this expression system.

PMID: 9660762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arch Virol. 1998;143(5):903-14.

Ceratobium mosaic potyvirus: another virus from orchids.

Mackenzie AM(1), Nolan M, Wei KJ, Clements MA, Gowanlock D, Wallace BJ, Gibbs AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biological Sciences, Australian National University, ACT,
Australia.

A potyvirus, which we call ceratobium mosaic virus, has been detected in about
one third of more than 100 plants representing c. 33 orchid genera in two
collections in Australia. It was detected using RT-PCR with redundant primers
that are Potyviridae-specific and have additional sequences corresponding to
either the SP6 or T7 bacteriophage promoters at their 5'-termini. Thus the
nucleotide sequence of the resulting PCR fragments, consisting of about 1.7 kb of
the 3' portion of the viral genome, could be determined directly. Viral sequences
obtained from five infected orchids indicate that they contained different
isolates of a single potyvirus species most closely related to the bean common
mosaic group of potyviruses, but clearly distinct from all whose virion protein
genes have been reported to the international gene sequence databases.

PMID: 9645197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 May 1;26(9):2105-11.

Synthesis and RNA polymerase incorporation of the degenerate ribonucleotide
analogue rPTP.

Moriyama K(1), Negishi K, Briggs MS, Smith CL, Hill F, Churcher MJ, Brown DM,
Loakes D.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Centre, Okayama University, Tsushima, Okayama 700, Japan,
Nycomed Amersham plc, Amersham Laboratories, White Lion Road, Amersham,
Buckinghamshire HP7 9LL, UK.

The synthesis and enzymatic incorporation into RNA of the hydrogen bond
degenerate nucleoside analogue 6-(beta-d-ribofuranosyl)-3,
4-dihydro-8H-pyrimido[4,5-c]-[1,2]oxazin-7-one (P) is described. The
5'-triphosphate of this analogue is readily incorporated by T3, T7 and SP6 RNA
polymerases into RNA transcripts, being best incorporated in place of UTP, but
also in place of CTP. When all the uridine residues in an HIV-1 TAR RNA
transcript are replaced by P the transcript has similar characteristics to the
wild-type TAR RNA, as demonstrated by similar melting temperatures and CD
spectra. The P-substituted TAR transcript binds to the Tat peptide ADP-1 with
only 4-fold lowered efficiency compared with wild-type TAR.

PMCID: PMC147510
PMID: 9547267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. RNA. 1998 Jun;4(6):694-708.

Influence of substrate structure on in vitro ribozyme activity of a group II
intron.

Nolte A(1), Chanfreau G, Jacquier A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS (URA 1300), Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Substrate sequences surrounding catalytic RNAs but not involved in specific,
conserved interactions can severely interfere with in vitro ribozyme activity.
Using model group II intron precursor transcripts with truncated or randomized
exon sequences, we show that unspecific sequences within the 5' exon are
particularly prone to inhibit both the forward and the reverse first splicing
step (branching). Using in vitro selection, we selected efficient 5' exons for
the reverse branching reaction. Precursor RNAs carrying these selected 5' exons
reacted more homogeneously and faster than usual model precursor transcripts.
This suggests that unfavorable structures induced by the 5' exon can introduce a 
folding step that limits the rate of in vitro self-splicing. These results stress
how critical is the choice of the sequences retained or discarded when isolating 
folding domains from their natural sequence environments. Moreover, they suggest 
that exon sequences not involved in specific interactions are more evolutionarily
constrained with respect to splicing than previously envisioned.

PMCID: PMC1369651
PMID: 9622128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Infect Immun. 1998 May;66(5):2221-9.

Use of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv bacterial artificial chromosome library
for genome mapping, sequencing, and comparative genomics.

Brosch R(1), Gordon SV, Billault A, Garnier T, Eiglmeier K, Soravito C, Barrell
BG, Cole ST.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Bacteriénne, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) cloning system is capable of stably
propagating large, complex DNA inserts in Escherichia coli. As part of the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv genome sequencing project, a BAC library was
constructed in the pBeloBAC11 vector and used for genome mapping, confirmation of
sequence assembly, and sequencing. The library contains about 5,000 BAC clones,
with inserts ranging in size from 25 to 104 kb, representing theoretically a
70-fold coverage of the M. tuberculosis genome (4.4 Mb). A total of 840 sequences
from the T7 and SP6 termini of 420 BACs were determined and compared to those of 
a partial genomic database. These sequences showed excellent correlation between 
the estimated sizes and positions of the BAC clones and the sizes and positions
of previously sequenced cosmids and the resulting contigs. Many BAC clones
represent linking clones between sequenced cosmids, allowing full coverage of the
H37Rv chromosome, and they are now being shotgun sequenced in the framework of
the H37Rv sequencing project. Also, no chimeric, deleted, or rearranged BAC
clones were detected, which was of major importance for the correct mapping and
assembly of the H37Rv sequence. The minimal overlapping set contains 68 unique
BAC clones and spans the whole H37Rv chromosome with the exception of a single
gap of approximately 150 kb. As a postgenomic application, the canonical BAC set 
was used in a comparative study to reveal chromosomal polymorphisms between M.
tuberculosis, M. bovis, and M. bovis BCG Pasteur, and a novel 12.7-kb segment
present in M. tuberculosis but absent from M. bovis and M. bovis BCG was
characterized. This region contains a set of genes whose products show low
similarity to proteins involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis. The H37Rv BAC
library therefore provides us with a powerful tool both for the generation and
confirmation of sequence data as well as for comparative genomics and other
postgenomic applications. It represents a major resource for present and future
M. tuberculosis research projects.

PMCID: PMC108185
PMID: 9573111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Immunol. 1998 Apr 15;160(8):3899-907.

Differentiation-specific, octamer-dependent costimulation of kappa transcription.

Liberg D(1), Sigvardsson M, Bemark M, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lund University, Sweden.

By mutational analysis of the octamer-TATA box intervening region in the mouse
SP6 kappa promoter, we have mapped two octamer-dependent, costimulatory regions, 
A and B. The A region was active in late B cells only, while the B region was
active throughout B cell differentiation. The B region was TATA proximal and
contained a heptamer and an E box of the E2A type that is common in Vkappa
promoters. Mutation of the heptamer element did not decrease transcriptional
stimulation from this region, but mutations in, or immediately 5' of, the E box
core sequence did. A protein binding to this region could be detected in nuclear 
extracts. The complex could only partially be competed with a muE5 binding site
and could not be supershifted with Abs raised to E2A gene products, indicating
that it may represent a novel E-box binding complex. The A region was located
proximal to the octamer and contained a CCCT element that is conserved both with 
regard to position and sequence in human VkappaII promoters. By mutational
analysis, the transcriptional stimulatory activity was mapped to the CCCT element
that also is part of an early B cell factor (EBF) binding site. In late B cells, 
a novel protein (FA), which did not bind to the EBF binding site in the mb1
promoter, interacted with the A region. This protein was found to be expressed at
lower levels in early B cells as well as in HeLa cells. Thus, the
octamer-flanking sequence contains positive control elements that may act
independently but that differ in the stage of B cell differentiation at which
they are active. One of these factors is an example of an ubiquitously expressed 
transcription factor that participate in differentiation-specific transcriptional
activation.

PMID: 9558096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1998 Feb;44(2):417-24.

In vitro processing of cucumber chloroplast tRNA(Leu)(CAA) precursor in a pea
chloroplast soluble extract.

Hande S(1), Jayabaskaran C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

To study the sequential steps in the processing pathway of the chloroplast
monocistronic intronless tRNA precursors, we examined cucumber chloroplast
tRNA(Leu)(CAA) processing in a cucumber or pea chloroplast soluble extract. The
tRNA(Leu)(CAA) precursor synthesized from SP6 RNA polymerase-directed
transcription system, was used as a substrate. Incubation of the tRNA precursor
with the pea extract resulted in processing of tRNA(Leu)(CAA) via 5'- and
3'-endonucleolytic cleavages followed by final trimming of extra 3' nucleotides
by 3' exonuclease(s). No preferred order for endonucleolytic cleavages has been
observed during the in vitro tRNA(Leu) processing and the simultaneous occurrence
of the intermediates consisting of leader + tRNA(Leu) and tRNA(Leu) + trailer,
indicate that either 5'- or 3'-endonucleolytic cleavage can occur as the first
step in vitro.

PMID: 9530524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Can J Microbiol. 1997 Dec;43(12):1147-56.

Transcription termination by bacteriophage T3 and SP6 RNA polymerases at
Rho-independent terminators.

Jeng ST(1), Lay SH, Lai HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Republic of China.
stjeng@ccm.ntu.edu.tw

Transcription termination of T3 and SP6 DNA-dependent RNA polymerases have been
studied on the DNA templates containing the threonine (thr) attenuator and its
variants. The thr attenuator is from the regulatory region of the thr operon of
Escherichia coli. The DNA template, encoding the thr attenuator, contains
specific features of the rho-independent terminators. It comprises a dG + dC rich
dyad symmetry, encoding a stem-and-loop RNA, which is followed by a poly(U)
region at the 3'-end. Thirteen attenuator variants have been analyzed for their
ability to terminate transcription and the results indicated that the structure
as well as the sequence in the G + C rich region of RNA hairpin affect
termination of both RNA polymerases. Also, a single base change in the A residues
of the hairpin failed to influence termination, whereas changes in the poly(U)
region significantly reduced the termination of both T3 and SP6 RNA polymerases. 
The requirement of a poly(U) region for termination by T3 and SP6 RNA polymerases
was studied with nested deletion mutants in this region. The minimum number of U 
residues required for termination of SP6 and T3 RNA polymerases was five and
three, respectively. However, both RNA polymerases needed at least eight U
residues to reach a termination efficiency close to that achieved by wild-type
thr attenuator encoding nine U residues. In addition, the orientation of the loop
sequences of the RNA hairpin did not affect the transcription termination of
either of the bacteriophage RNA polymerases.

PMID: 9476351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Biochemistry (Mosc). 1997 Oct;62(10):1124-7.

Peculiarities of gene expression of the EcoRII modification-restriction system.

Matvienko NN(1), Zheleznaya LA, Chernyshova EE, Buryanov YaI, Matvienko NI.

Author information: 
(1)Branch of Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino,
Moscow Region, Russia.

The restriction-modification genes of the EcoRII system have been cloned into
plasmids under control of phage-specific promoters T7 and SP6. The transcription 
was induced by cell infection with the recombinant M13 phages with the
corresponding genes of phage RNA-polymerases under control of the Plac-promoter
in the presence of IPTG. The induction yields significant amounts of EcoRII
DNA-methylase for both phage-specific promoters. In both cases no increase in
EcoRII endonuclease expression could be achieved. We hypothesize that the
expression of the endonuclease gene is regulated on the translational level.

PMID: 9461634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Science. 1997 Dec 12;278(5345):1899-901.

Getting around the nucleosomes.

Widom J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500, 
USA. j-widom@nwu.edu

Comment on
    Science. 1997 Dec 12;278(5345):1960-3.

PMID: 9417638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Science. 1997 Dec 12;278(5345):1960-3.

Mechanism of transcription through the nucleosome by eukaryotic RNA polymerase.

Studitsky VM(1), Kassavetis GA, Geiduschek EP, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Dec 12;278(5345):1899-901.

Nucleosomes, the nucleohistone subunits of chromatin, are present on transcribed 
eukaryotic genes but do not prevent transcription. It is shown here that the
large yeast RNA polymerase III transcribes through a single nucleosome. This
takes place through a direct internal nucleosome transfer in which histones never
leave the DNA template. During this process, the polymerase pauses with a
pronounced periodicity of 10 to 11 base pairs, which is consistent with
restricted rotation in the DNA loop formed during transfer. Transcription through
nucleosomes by the eukaryotic enzyme and by much smaller prokaryotic RNA
polymerases thus shares many features, reflecting an important property of
nucleosomes.

PMID: 9395401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Gene. 1997 Nov 12;201(1-2):199-202.

Cloning of the murine tetranectin gene and 5'-flanking region.

Sørensen CB(1), Berglund L, Petersen TE.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Chemistry Laboratory, University of Aarhus, Science Park, Aarhus C,
Denmark.

The gene encoding murine tetranectin (Tna) and its 5'-flanking region was
isolated and cloned from a EMBL3 SP6/T7 genomic library. The compiled nucleotide 
sequence was determined by sequencing, revealing a conserved Tna structure in man
and mouse. Mapping of the transcription start point (tsp) suggests that murine
Tna has more than one of these. In addition, no consensus TATA-box was found
uptream for the putative tsp(s) in the 5'-flanking region of the gene, indicating
that the murine Tna promoter belongs to the TATA-less class of genes. The cloned 
murine Tna was mapped to region F1-F3 on mouse chromosome 9 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH).

PMID: 9409787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Gen Virol. 1997 Dec;78 ( Pt 12):3141-5.

Infectious in vivo and in vitro transcripts from a full-length cDNA clone of
PVY-N605, a Swiss necrotic isolate of potato virus Y.

Jakab G(1), Droz E, Brigneti G, Baulcombe D, Malnoë P.

Author information: 
(1)Station Fédérale de Recherches en Production Végétale de Changins, Nyon,
Switzerland.

A full-length cDNA clone of the potato virus Y (PVY) genome was obtained after
cloning difficulties in Escherichia coli were overcome. These difficulties were
mainly due to the expression of the CI gene from upstream prokaryotic
promoter-like elements within the PVY genome. To overcome this problem, PVY cDNA 
was maintained in two subclones which were ligated before infection. A plasmid in
which these two fragments were contained could be propagated in some E. coli
strains but was unstable and yielded only low levels of plasmid DNA. Replacement 
of the 35S promoter by the SP6 promoter slightly increased the stability of the
plasmid and its RNA transcripts were infectious when capped with m7G(5')ppp(5')G.
Using two inoculation methods (mechanical or biolistic) the cDNA and its RNA
transcript proved infectious on three Nicotiana species and on Solanum tuberosum.

PMID: 9400962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Genomics. 1997 Sep 15;44(3):300-8.

High-resolution physical map of the X-linked retinoschisis interval in Xp22.

Walpole SM(1), Nicolaou A, Howell GR, Whittaker A, Bentley DR, Ross MT, Yates JR,
Trump D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
United Kingdom.

X-linked retinoschisis (RS) is the leading cause of macular degeneration in young
males and has been mapped to Xp22 between DXS418 and DXS999. To facilitate
identification of the RS gene, we have constructed a yeast artificial chromosome 
(YAC) contig across this region comprising 28 YACs and 32 sequence-tagged sites
including seven novel end clone markers. To establish the definitive marker
order, a PAC contig containing 50 clones was also constructed, and all clones
were fingerprinted. The marker order is:
Xpter-DXS1317-(AFM205yd12-DXS7175-DXS7992) -60N8-T7-DXS1195-DXS7993-DXS7174
-60N8-SP6-DXS418-DXS7994-DXS7995-DXS7996-+ ++HYAT2-25HA10R-HYAT1-DXS7997-DXS7998-
DXS257-434E8R-3542R-DXS6762-DXS7999-DXS 6763-434E8L-DXS8000-DXS6760-DXS7176-
DXS8001-DXS999-3176R-PHKA2-Xcen. A long-range restriction map was constructed,
and the RS region is estimated to be 1300 kb, containing three putative CpG
islands. An unstable region was identified between DXS6763 and 434E8L. These data
will facilitate positional cloning of RS and other disease genes in Xp22.

PMID: 9325051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Anal Biochem. 1997 Oct 1;252(1):78-88.

Optimization of spectroscopic and electrophoretic properties of energy transfer
primers.

Hung SC(1), Mathies RA, Glazer AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720, USA.

We have synthesized and characterized the spectroscopic properties of 56 energy
transfer (ET) fluorescent dye-labeled primers differing in (i) the spacing
between the donor and acceptor, (ii) the nature of the spacer (either
oligonucleotide or polydideoxyribose phosphate), (iii) the primer sequence (M13
(-40), M13 (-21), M13 reverse, SP6, T3, and T7 priming sequences), and (iv) the
dyes chosen as the donor (6-carboxyfluorescein, F; or
3-(epsilon-carboxypentyl)-3'-ethyl-5,5'-dimethyloxacarbocyanine, C) and acceptor 
(F; 5 & 6-carboxyrhodamine-110, R110; 6-carboxyrhodamine-6G, G;
N,N,N',N'-tetramethyl-6-carboxyrhodamine, T; and 6-carboxy-X-rhodamine, R)
chromophores. This study led to the development of two significantly improved ET 
primer sets for multiple-color analyses. These primers are named using the
convention D-N-A, where D is the donor, A is the acceptor, and N is the number of
nucleotides between the donor and the acceptor. The primer set C4R110, C4G, C4T, 
and C4R provides acceptor emissions of high spectral purity with donor:acceptor
emission ratios of < 0.002 for C4G, < 0.004 for C4T, and < 0.005 for C4R and
excellent matching in the electrophoretic mobilities of single-base extension DNA
fragments. The C4R110, C4G, C4T, and C4R set is valuable for diagnostic
applications where minimization of crosstalk between different labels is of
particular importance. The set C10R110, C10G, C10T, and C10R, which uses only
rhodamine dyes as acceptors, shows significantly improved matching in the
electrophoretic mobilities of single-base extension DNA fragments over the
previously described set C10F, C10G, C10T, and C10R and is the best available for
sequencing.

PMID: 9324944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Eur J Immunol. 1997 Sep;27(9):2436-40.

Monoclonal gammopathies in aging mu, kappa-transgenic mice: involvement of the
B-1 cell lineage.

van Arkel C(1), Hopstaken CM, Zurcher C, Bos NA, Kroese FG, Savelkoul HF, Benner 
R, Radl J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Monoclonal gammopathies (MG) are monoclonal proliferative disorders of B cells at
the differentiation stage of Ig production. They can be detected in the serum,
either as transient or as persistent homogenous immunoglobulin (H-Ig) components.
The exact phenotype, localization, and cell lineage origin of the precursor cells
of MG are unknown, but may be crucial for both the correct diagnosis and for
timely efficient treatment of the malignant forms. We used for the first time
transgenic (Tg) mice (Sp6; mu/kappa) to study the origin of MG. In the mu, kappa 
Tg mice a small proportion of B cells can still produce endogenous IgM. These
cells are of B-1 cell origin. The MG in Tg mice showed a later onset and a lower 
frequency than those in littermate control mice, mainly due to a four times lower
frequency of benign monoclonal gammopathy. The 10% of B-1 cells that were able to
produce endogenous Ig led to the development of MG in a frequency that was half
the number of MG found in normal littermates. None of the MG in Tg mice produced 
an Ig of the Tg origin and therefore it can be concluded that they originated
from B-1 cells.

PMID: 9341790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Leukemia. 1997 Oct;11(10):1787-92.

Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) improves the PCR-based isolation of
immunoglobulin variable region genes from murine and human lymphoma cells and
cell lines.

Doenecke A(1), Winnacker EL, Hallek M.

Author information: 
(1)Genzentrum, Universität München, Germany.

The isolation of rearranged immunoglobulin (Ig) variable region (V) genes is
usually performed by PCR with consensus primers binding to conserved regions
within the V sequences. However, the isolation of Ig genes by this method is
hampered in 15-35% by technical difficulties, mostly mismatches of
oligonucleotide primers to V sequences. In order to obtain DNA sequences from V
heavy chain (VH) genes which could not be amplified with consensus primers, we
used a modified PCR technique, the rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) PCR in
combination with new heavy chain constant region primers for the isolation of
human and murine VH genes. In comparison, consensus primer PCR with different
sets of previously published oligonucleotide primers was used. Both methods were 
applied to isolate VH genes from murine B cell lymphoma (A20 and BCL1), myeloma
(NS1) and hybridoma (SP6) cell lines and from freshly isolated human chronic
lymphocytic leukemia and lymphoma cells. RACE PCR allowed the amplification and
subsequent cloning of the complete VH gene in all cases. In contrast, consensus
primer PCR failed to isolate the VH sequence of the murine A20 cell line; this
was explained by a mismatch of consensus primers with VH sequences. When both PCR
methods amplified VH sequences, the DNA sequences obtained were identical. Taken 
together, RACE PCR represents a reliable and versatile method for the isolation
of VH genes from human and murine lymphoma cells, in particular if consensus
primer PCR fails.

PMID: 9324302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Gene. 1997 Sep 15;197(1-2):337-41.

An epitope tagged mammalian/prokaryotic expression vector with positive selection
of cloned inserts.

Schneider S(1), Georgiev O, Buchert M, Adams MT, Moelling K, Hovens CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Virologie, Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

A dual eukaryotic/prokaryotic expression vector has been developed which combines
the features of positive selection for cloned inserts along with the production
of an epitope-tagged cDNA insert by transient transfection in mammalian cells as 
well as high level induced expression in E. coli cells harbouring T7 RNA
polymerase. This vector, pZilch, has two MCSs flanking a mutant E. coli
phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase gene, pheS, which when expressed in combination with
the phenylalanine analog p-CI-Phe, results in termination of host cell protein
synthesis. Cloning of inserts using unique sites in the flanking MCS regions
results in loss of the pZilch pheS allele and hence permits growth of colonies
harbouring recombinants on p-Cl-Phe plates. Additional features of the vector
include an optimal Kozak consensus sequence for high level eukaryotic cell
expression and an efficient prokaryotic translation initiation site in frame and 
downstream from the eukaryotic initiation site. Recombinant proteins can be
produced with an N-terminal FLAG epitope which can be removed via a specific
protease cleavage site. Flanking T7 and SP6 RNA polymerase promoter sites permit 
in vitro transcription and translation of cloned inserts. A derivative of the
vector has also been constructed enabling nuclear accumulation of the tagged
proteins via an SV40 nuclear localisation signal upstream of the 5' MCS.

PMID: 9332383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Gene. 1997 Sep 1;196(1-2):25-9.

pXen, a utility vector for the expression of GST-fusion proteins in Xenopus
laevis oocytes and embryos.

MacNicol MC(1), Pot D, MacNicol AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine MC6088, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

We describe a plasmid, pXen, designed for the optimized expression of proteins
fused to glutathione-S-transferase (GST) in Xenopus laevis oocytes and embryos.
The Xenopus model system permits the biochemical analysis of signaling pathways
and analysis of embryo phenotype in response to manipulation of proto-oncogene
expression. pXen is a modified pSP64T vector which contains an SP6 RNA polymerase
promoter followed by the translational initiation sequence of Xenopus beta-globin
and the glutathione binding domain of GST. The Xenopus 3' beta-globin
untranslated region and polyadenylation site immediately follow the multiple
cloning site to permit the efficient translation of in vitro transcribed RNA in
oocytes and embryos. The utility of pXen is demonstrated by cloning the catalytic
domain of the serine/threonine kinase proto-oncogene Raf-1 into this vector and
injecting the corresponding in vitro transcribed RNA into oocytes. Catalytically 
active GST-vRaf fusion protein was expressed in the injected oocytes and induced 
oocyte maturation. Moreover, the GST-vRaf fusion protein could be readily
purified from Xenopus extracts using glutathione Sepharose. We demonstrate that
the Raf-1 catalytic domain retains activity when fused with the N-terminal GST
moiety and is subject to negative regulation by the cyclic AMP-dependent protein 
kinase (PKA). The pXen vector will be useful for an in vivo analysis of the
physiological role and regulation of a wide variety of signaling molecules when
expressed in Xenopus oocytes and embryos.

PMID: 9322737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Science. 1997 Aug 8;277(5327):809-11.

Mitochondrial and chloroplast phage-type RNA polymerases in Arabidopsis.

Hedtke B(1), Börner T, Weihe A.

Author information: 
(1)Humboldt University Berlin, Institute of Biology, Chausseestrasse 117, D-10115
Berlin, Germany.

In addition to the RNA polymerases (RNAPs) transcribing the nuclear genes,
eukaryotic cells also require RNAPs to transcribe the genes of the mitochondrial 
genome and, in plants, of the chloroplast genome. The plant Arabidopsis thaliana 
was found to contain two nuclear genes similar to genes encoding the
mitochondrial RNAP from yeast and RNAPs of bacteriophages T7, T3, and SP6. The
putative transit peptides of the two polymerases were capable of targeting fusion
proteins to mitochondria and chloroplasts, respectively, in vitro. The results
indicate that the mitochondrial RNAP in plants is a bacteriophage-type enzyme. A 
gene duplication event may have generated the second RNAP, which along with the
plastid-encoded eubacteria-like RNAP could transcribe the chloroplast genome.

PMID: 9242608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl. 1997 Jul 18;695(1):85-92.

On-the-fly fluorescence lifetime detection of labeled DNA primers.

Li LC(1), He H, Nunnally BK, McGown LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, P.M. Gross Chemical Laboratory, Duke University,
Durham, NC 27708-0346, USA.

The first application of frequency-domain, on-the-fly fluorescence lifetime
detection to the detection, identification and resolution of fluorescent labeled 
oligonucleotide primers in capillary electrophoresis is presented. These studies,
which are directed towards the development of four-decay DNA sequencing, employed
two common sequencing primers, SP6 and M13/pUC. The primers were each tagged by a
derivative of either fluorescein or BODIPY. Fluorescence emission maxima and
lifetimes of the free dyes and the labeled primers were determined both in batch 
mode and on-the-fly in capillary electrophoresis. Fluorescence intensity and
lifetime electropherograms were extracted from dynamic lifetime data that were
acquired at 0.1-s intervals during the CE separation. Lifetimes were recovered
using either conventional non-linear least-squares analysis or the self-modeling 
maximum entropy method, which does not require prior knowledge of the system.
Based on migration time and fluorescence lifetime, peaks could be detected and
identified, and co-eluting peaks could be resolved. Interference from background 
impurities and scattered light was greatly reduced by the combination of physical
separation and lifetime resolution.

PMID: 9271132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1997 Jul;42(4):711-6. doi: 10.1080/15216549700203131.

The histidine-805 in motif-C of the phage SP6 RNA polymerase is essential for its
activity as revealed by random mutagenesis.

Jeong W(1), Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon, Korea.

In order to identify functional residues of the bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase,
its C-terminal one-twelfth region was randomly mutagenized using polymerase chain
reactions of its gene under the conditions for reduced fidelity of Taq DNA
polymerase. Using a two-vector system that permits phenotypic isolation of
mutants with reduced in vivo transcription activity, 3 single and 1 multiple
mutants were isolated. A single substitution of Gln for His805 resulted in
complete inactivation of the enzyme. A multiple mutant carrying substitutions at 
808, 820, 835, 843 and 848 also abolished the activity. However, changes of
Pro856-->Ser and Asp862-->Glu individually reduced the activity only slightly. It
is noteworthy that His805 is one of the two motif-C residues that are absolutely 
conserved among all the DNA polymerases and monomeric RNA polymerases.

PMID: 19856287  [PubMed]


485. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997 Jun;54(6):559-66.

Increased concentrations of presynaptic proteins in the cingulate cortex of
subjects with schizophrenia.

Gabriel SM(1), Haroutunian V, Powchik P, Honer WG, Davidson M, Davies P, Davis
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    Arch Gen Psychiatry 1997 Oct;54(10):912.

BACKGROUND: Cytoarchitectural and neurochemical studies demonstrate
disorganization in the cerebral cortex in schizophrenia, which perhaps underlies 
the severe behavioral disturbances of the disease. This neuronal disarray should 
be accompanied by synaptic abnormalities. As such, presynaptic proteins have
proved valuable indexes of synaptic density and their concentrations have
correlated markedly with synaptic loss. Our study sought to determine whether
abnormalities exist in the concentrations of presynaptic proteins in the
postmortem cerebral cortex of subjects with schizophrenia.
METHODS: Presynaptic protein immunoreactivities were assessed in 4 different
cerebrocortical regions derived from 16 elderly controls, 19 elderly subjects
with schizophrenia, and 24 subjects with Alzheimer's disease. Tissues were
assayed with the monoclonal antibodies EP10 and SP4, which recognize
synaptophysin, and the monoclonal antibodies SP6 and SP14, which detect syntaxin 
and synaptosomal-associated protein-25-kd immunoreactivities, respectively.
RESULTS: In subjects with schizophrenia relative to controls, presynaptic
proteins were increased in the cingulate cortex, but were unchanged in the
temporal, frontal, and parietal cortices. In contrast, when cases with
Alzheimer's disease were compared with controls, presynaptic proteins were
decreased in the frontal, temporal, and parietal samples.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal changes in the synaptic organization of the
cingulate cortex in schizophrenia relative to other areas examined. These changes
are distinct from the deficits in presynaptic proteins observed in Alzheimer's
disease.

PMID: 9193197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 9;272(19):12692-8.

Cloning and characterization of the promoter region of a gene encoding a 67-kDa
glycoprotein.

Chatterjee N(1), Zou C, Osterman JC, Gupta NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-0304,
USA.

A rat genomic library constructed in lambda-EMBL3 (SP6/T7) vector () was screened
using 32P-labeled rat p67 cDNA. A clone containing a segment of 5'-upstream
region of p67 genomic DNA was obtained. The DNA (about 1.7 kilobase pairs) was
isolated and characterized. Sequence analysis of this DNA fragment showed that
the 898 base pairs at the 5'-end of the upstream region was identical to several 
long interspersed nucleotide sequences. One hundred forty-eight base pairs at the
3'-end contained the beginning of the first exon including the ATG initiator
codon. The remaining 652 base pairs in between contained two AT-rich regions and 
several regulatory sequences. The mRNA initiation site was identified at 89 base 
pairs upstream from the translation start codon. The DNA fragment was also
analyzed by transient transfection. When linked to a firefly luciferase reporter 
gene, this fragment enhanced transcription in a rat hepatoma cell line (KRC-7).
Using a series of deletions in the DNA, the minimum essential promoter region
(from -177 to -60) was identified. The promoter activity was also enhanced by
treatment with phorbol 13-myristate 12-acetate (PMA). This enhancement required
an AP-1 sequence (-298 to -292; 5'-TGACTCA-3') and a similar sequence (-97 to
-88; 5'-ATGACATCAT-3'). Deletion of either of these sequences significantly
reduced PMA enhancement. Deletion of both of these sequences almost completely
eliminated PMA enhancement.

PMID: 9139726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc. 1997 May;1(2):175-85.

In situ hybridization: identification of rare mRNAs in human tissues.

Wilson KH(1), Schambra UB, Smith MS, Page SO, Richardson CD, Fremeau RT, Schwinn 
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

In situ hybridization is used for detection of RNA expression when conservation
of tissue architecture is important. Most in situ hybridization protocols are
written for tissues from animals (i.e., rat) which can be harvested and preserved
rapidly. In contrast, human tissue is more difficult to obtain, hence in situ
hybridization experiments must frequently be performed with less than optimal
tissue preservation. This procedure details hybridization of a radiolabeled
single-stranded RNA probe (riboprobe) to complementary sequences of cellular RNA 
in human tissue sections. This method enables detection of rare mRNA species in
specific cell types of human tissue, offering distinct advantages over other in
situ methods due to increased sensitivity. In particular, we have found that UV
cross-linking and ribonuclease treatment protocols need to be altered for human
tissues to ensure successful results, making this protocol unique to those
previously described. In situ hybridization experiments can be performed using
either DNA or RNA probes. RNA probes are advantageous since they form stable
hybrids, are single-stranded, have little or no reannealing during hybridization,
and can be synthesized to high specific activity. RNA probes can be readily
created utilizing SP6, T3, or T7 promoters in both sense and antisense
orientations to provide non-specific (control) and specific probes. Disadvantages
of RNA riboprobes include a tendency for RNA to stick non-selectively more than
DNA, and degradation by RNase (hence strict adherence to RNase-free precautions
is mandatory during most of the protocol). The following protocol includes: (1)
preparation of human tissues (tissue fixation and sectioning are highlighted as
critical for probe penetration, preservation of tissue architecture, retention of
tissue RNA, and overall success); (2) generation of radiolabeled riboprobes
(total incorporation of radionucleotide is important to increase sensitivity; 35S
was chosen as a compromise between excellent sensitivity, cellular resolution,
and required exposure times (compared with 32P or 3H); non-isotopic methods have 
not been tested in a side-by-side comparison with 35S in human tissues by us, but
theoretically might offer faster exposure times while maintaining high
resolution); (3) hybridization conditions (stringency, temperature, washes,
tissue dehydration); and (4) sample visualization (application of photographic
emulsion, developing, fixing, staining, and counterstaining of individual
slides).

PMID: 9385082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Neuroscience. 1997 May;78(1):99-110.

Cingulate cortex synaptic terminal proteins and neural cell adhesion molecule in 
schizophrenia.

Honer WG(1), Falkai P, Young C, Wang T, Xie J, Bonner J, Hu L, Boulianne GL, Luo 
Z, Trimble WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The neuronal organization and patterns of afferent innervation are abnormal in
the cingulate cortex in schizophrenia, and associated changes in synaptic
terminals could be present. A panel of monoclonal antibodies was defined with
biochemical and fusion protein studies as detecting syntaxin (antibody SP6),
synaptophysin (antibody SP4) and synaptosomal-associated protein-25 (antibody
SP12). These antibodies and a polyclonal antibody reactive with neural cell
adhesion molecule were used to investigate the cingulate cortex in schizophrenia.
Immunocytochemistry indicated that syntaxin immunoreactivity had a considerably
wider distribution than synaptophysin. Overall, multivariate analysis indicated
increased synaptic terminal protein immunoreactivity in schizophrenia compared to
controls (P=0.004). Controlled for age and post mortem interval, syntaxin
immunoreactivity was significantly elevated in schizophrenia (P=0.004), and
neural cell adhesion molecule immunoreactivity was also elevated (P=0.05). The
neural cell adhesion molecule to synaptophysin ratio was increased (P=0.005),
possibly indicating the presence of less mature synapses in schizophrenia.
Elevated syntaxin immunoreactivity is consistent with increased glutamatergic
afferents to the cingulate cortex in schizophrenia, and combined with the neural 
cell adhesion molecule to synaptophysin ratio results suggests that synaptic
function in this region in schizophrenia may be abnormal.

PMID: 9135092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Methods. 1997 Apr;11(4):333-42.

Assays for eukaryotic translation factors that bind mRNA.

Merrick WC(1), Sonenberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

After a brief introduction to the function of the mRNA-specific translation
factors eIF4A, eIF4B, and EIF4F, this article presents appropriate methodology
for the study of the translation factors associated with the activation of mRNA
for translation in eukaryotic systems. The purification of eIF4A, eIF4B, and
eIF4F from rabbit reticulocyte lysates is given along with a procedure for the
purification of hemoglobin mRNA. These purifications provide reagents for the
model assays of RNA binding (as retention on nitrocellulose filters) and
RNA-dependent ATP hydrolysis. With additional reagents available as RNA
transcripts using either T7 or SP6 polymerase, two additional assays are
possible, crosslinking to the oxidized cap of the mRNA or the ATP-dependent
reaction of RNA unwinding (helicase assay). Finally, there is a description of
the most biological assay for the utilization of natural mRNAs, the synthesis of 
the authentic polypeptide chain, in this instance hemoglobin. Throughout the
portion of this article that deals with the biological assays, helpful hints are 
provided to ensure that the assay works, and suggestions are provided for control
experiments to ensure that an artifact is not being studied. It is hoped that
this information will facilitate the study of either the regulation of factor
activity (for eIF4A, eIF4B, or eIF4F) or the translation efficiency (sometimes
regulated) of various mRNAs.

PMID: 9126548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Scand J Immunol. 1997 Mar;45(3):240-7.

Polyreactive binding of antibodies generated by polyclonal B cell activation. II.
Crossreactive and monospecific antibodies can be generated from an identical Ig
rearrangement by differential glycosylation.

Fernández C(1), Alarcon-Riquelme ME, Sverremark E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University, Sweden.

In this work the authors tested the hypothesis that differential glycosylation
may be one of the mechanisms by which B cells could be able to produce
monospecific or polyreactive antibodies flexibly. The same genetic information
will be used in both situations. To prove this hypothesis the authors used mice
transgenic for the SP6 (mu + kappa) hybridoma cell line producing monoclonal
antibodies (MoAbs) with specificity for the hapten 2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (TNP). In
these animals most cells in the periphery express exclusively the transgene SP6. 
To obtain polyreactive antibodies (Abs) spleen cells from transgenic animals were
stimulated in vitro with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The authors used LPS derived B
cell blasts to produce a hybridoma cell collection. A high proportion of the
monoclonal antibodies were found to bind to TNP and to crossreact with unrelated 
antigens. Endogenous immunoglobulins (Igs) were not responsible for
crossreactivity since the crossreactive clones only expressed the transgene
products. This was demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification 
of cDNA and by sequencing analysis of the PCR products. The nucleotide sequences 
of the expressed mono- and crossreactive genes were identical to the sequences of
the rearranged V(H) and V(K) SP6 which undoubtedly demonstrates that
crossreactive Igs are derived from the same rearrangement and also that no
mutations in the V(H) or V(K) or in the CDR3 could account for the observed
crossreactivity. It is also shown here that the crossreactive antibodies bear the
idiotype Id 20-5 characteristic of SP6 binding Abs. Crossreactive monoclonal
antibodies were found to be slightly more glycosylated than the TNP-monospecific 
Abs. Furthermore, binding to TNP was not influenced by treatment with
tunicamycin, an inhibitor of glycosylation, while, in the same molecule, other
types of binding were considerably reduced. This supports the hypothesis of the
importance of glycosylation in polyreactivity.

PMID: 9122612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Int Immunol. 1997 Mar;9(3):373-80.

Effect of different Ig transgenes on B cell differentiation in scid mice.

Chang Y(1), Bosma MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA.

In this study we show that the ability of bone marrow pre-B cells to
differentiate into B cells in H/L chain transgenic scid mice correlates with the 
ability of the transgenes to inhibit initiation of endogenous kappa gene
rearrangement. Initiation of rearrangement was scored by assaying for DNA
double-strand breaks (DSB) at the recombination signal/coding borders of J kappa 
1 and J kappa 2. In H/L chain transgenic scid mice that develop B cells, we found
little or no DSB; whereas in H chain only transgenic scid mice, in which pre-B
cells are unable to give rise to B cells, we found a normal level of DSB but no
VJ kappa coding joints. As scid mice are deficient in the repair of DSB, we
suggest that initiation of kappa gene rearrangement in H chain transgenic scid
mice causes B lineage cells to die at the late pre-B stage. In one transgenic
scid line (Y-Sp6), which falls to generate B cells despite containing a H and L
chain transgene, we found evidence for loss of B lineage cells at two stages of
development: the pro-B to pre-B transitional stage and the late pre-B stage.

PMID: 9088976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Protein Expr Purif. 1997 Feb;9(1):142-51.

Rapid mutagenesis and purification of phage RNA polymerases.

He B(1), Rong M, Lyakhov D, Gartenstein H, Diaz G, Castagna R, McAllister WT,
Durbin RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York,
Health Science Center at Brooklyn, 11203-2098, USA.

We have developed plasmid-based expression systems that encode modified forms of 
T7 RNA polymerase (RNAP) having 6-12 histidine residues fused to the amino
terminus. The histidine-tagged RNAPs (His-T7 RNAPS) are indistinguishable from
the wild-type (WT) enzyme in nearly all biochemical assays. Similar plasmids that
encode His-tagged T3 and SP6 RNAPs have also been constructed. To facilitate
site-directed mutagenesis of the RNAP gene, the size of the target plasmid was
minimized by using T7 RNAP itself as a selectable marker. BL21 (DCAT4) cells
(which carry a chromosomal copy of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase cat gene
under control of a T7 promoter) are resistant to chloramphenicol when functional 
T7 RNAP is expressed, thus allowing the selection and maintenance of the target
plasmid in these cells. Mutagenesis is accomplished by denaturing the plasmid,
annealing mutagenic DNA primers, and repairing the plasmid with T4 DNA
polymerase. Two DNA primers are used: one corrects a defect in the bla gene, the 
other introduces the desired mutation into the RNAP gene; 30-85% of the
ampicillin-resistant transformants carry the desired mutation in the RNAP gene.
By using BL21 (DCAT4) cells as a recipient for transformation the functional
integrity of the RNAP gene may conveniently be monitored by assessing the level
of chloramphenicol resistance in vivo. Methods for rapid, simultaneous
purification of multiple samples of modified (His-tagged) and conventional RNAPs 
are described. Together, these developments greatly enhance our ability to
characterize this important class of enzymes.

PMID: 9116496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1997 Feb;6(1):34-41.

A nonradioactive method of in situ hybridization that uses riboprobes and
paraffin-embedded tissue and its combination with immunohistochemistry.

Smith MD(1), Triantafillou S, Parker A, Wikaningrum R, Coleman M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Research Unit, Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South
Australia.

Current research into cytokine production in tissue sections relies on the
detection of cytokine proteins using a variety of immunohistochemical methods.
The disadvantages of this technique are that precise localization to a particular
cell is difficult and it is uncertain whether the cells detected by this method
are the origin or target of the cytokine or rather have nonspecifically absorbed 
the secreted cytokine. This question can be clarified using in situ
hybridization, but current techniques are insensitive, poorly localizing, or time
consuming. Biotin-labeled riboprobes were generated from cDNA fragments
sandwiched between two RNA polymerase promoters (SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases)
using a commercial riboprobe generation kit containing biotin-labeled UTP. The in
situ hybridization technique was used to demonstrate cytokine mRNA in a range of 
tissues containing an inflammatory infiltrate and with a range of cytokine
probes. This technique of in situ hybridization was combined with
immunohistochemistry using an immunoalkaline phosphatase technique to show the
powerful combination of these two techniques. The biotin-labeled riboprobes were 
sensitive enough to detect a range of cytokine mRNAs in a variety of tissue
sections. The technique can be completed over a 24-h period and produces a stable
color product that can be stored for long periods and can be quantitated using
image analysis techniques. This technique was performed on paraffin-embedded
tissue as well as cryosections and allowed for the detection of mRNA in archival 
tissue. It was also successfully combined with immunohistochemical techniques to 
determine simultaneously the localization of a cytokine product in particular
cell lineages. A nonradioactive method for in situ hybridization using
biotin-labeled riboprobes is described; it is capable of detecting mRNA products 
from a range of genes in a variety of tissue samples. An amplification step in
the method enhances the sensitivity to a level that approaches that of
radioactive methods, while maintaining the speed, safety, and simplicity of an
immunoperoxidase detection system. The ability to use paraffin-embedded tissue
with this method allows for improved tissue architecture and examination of
archival tissue. These features should ensure greater use of in situ
hybridization techniques in future research studies.

PMID: 9028735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Brain Res. 1997 Jan 9;744(2):235-45.

The glycine site of the NMDA receptor contributes to neurokinin1 receptor agonist
facilitation of NMDA receptor agonist-evoked activity in rat dorsal horn neurons.

Heppenstall PA(1), Fleetwood-Walker SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Veterinary Sciences, Royal (Dick) School of
Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Summerhall.

We have investigated the role of the glycine recognition site of the
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (the GlyNMDA site) in the facilitation of NMDA
receptor agonist-evoked activity in rat dorsal horn neurons that is brought about
by neurokinin1 (NK1) receptor agonist and the contribution of protein kinase C
(PKC) activation to this phenomenon. Ionophoresis of the selective NMDA receptor 
agonist 1-aminocyclobutane-cis-1,3-dicarboxylic acid (ACBD) produced a sustained 
increase in the firing rate of single laminae III-V neurons recorded
extracellularly using multibarrelled glass electrodes. The highly selective NK1
receptor agonist acetyl-[Arg6,Sar9,Met(O2)11]-SP6-11 (Sar9-SP) greatly
facilitated this response, but under the present conditions had no effect when
applied alone or with alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid
(AMPA) receptor agonist) at the same current. In the presence of the GLyNMDA site
antagonists 2-carboxy-4,6-dichloro-(1H)-indole-3-propanoic acid (MDL 29951),
7-chloro-3-(cyclopropylcarbonyl)-4-hydroxy-2(1H)-quinoline (L701,252),
5,7-dinitroquinaxoline-2,3-dione (MNQX) or 7-chlorothiokynurenic acid (7-CTK), or
the PKC inhibitors, chelerythrine or GF109203X, the Sar9-SP-induced facilitation 
of ACBD-evoked activity was prevented, generally restoring activity to a level
similar to that in the presence of ACBD alone, whilst an AMPA receptor
antagonist, 6-nitro-7-sulfamoylbenzo(f)quinoxaline-2,3-dione (NBQX) did not
inhibit the facilitation. At the same ionophoretic currents these compounds had
no effect on ACBD-evoked activity in the absence of Sar9-SP but were inhibitory
at significantly greater currents. To further substantiate the importance of the 
GlyNMDA site in the interaction, the effects of NMDA receptor antagonists
selective for alternative recognition sites on the NMDA receptor were
investigated. MK-801, a non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonist and arcaine, a
competitive inhibitor at the polyamine site, were applied to the facilitated
activity seen in the presence of Sar9-SP and ACBD, and to ACBD-evoked activity
alone. Unlike the GlyNMDA site antagonists and PKC inhibitors, these compounds
reduced both facilitated and ACBD-evoked activity at similar currents.
Furthermore, like the NK1 receptor agonist, a selective GlyNMDA site agonist
1-aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid (ACPC) caused facilitation of ACBD-evoked
activity which was also blocked by currents of L701,252 that did not alter
activity evoked by ACBD alone. These data suggest that activation of the GlyNMDA 
site (perhaps as a consequence of glycine release or modification of its
influence by intracellular signalling cascades) is an essential component of the 
means by which NK1 receptor activation results in facilitated responsiveness of
dorsal horn neurons towards NMDA receptor agonists.

PMID: 9027383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. ALTEX. 1997;14(3):107-110.

Generation of a Translational Extract from Eukaryotic Cells that have Grown as
Monolayers.

Favre D(1).

Author information: 
(1)McGill University, CDN-Montreal.

The present article relates to the rapid and efficient generation of an in vitro 
translational extract that is obtained from the cytoplasmic fraction of
eukaryotic cells that have grown as monolayers. The procedure is totally devoid
of the use of animals or animal fluids. The cytoplasmic extract that is obtained 
allows efficient protein synthesis of exogenously added mRNAs. The latter mRNAs
can be purified from prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells, or can be transcribed in
vitro by employing any convenient RNA polymerase (for example, the bacteriophage 
SP6, T3 or T7 RNA polymerase). The described cytoplasmic preparation appears to
be applicable to a large number of different eukaryotic cell lines. The
cytoplasmic extract can be prepared freshly on a daily basis, or can be frozen
and subsequently thawed for further use, without loss of activity. The
preparation of the translation extract does not require living animals.

PMID: 11178495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


496. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Dec 24;229(3):974-81.

A specific synthetic RNA promotes cardiac myofibrillogenesis in the Mexican
axolotl.

Lemanski LF(1), Nakatsugawa M, Bhatia R, Erginel-Unaltuna N, Spinner BJ, Dube DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, State University of New York Health
Science Center at Syracuse, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, New York, 13210,
USA. LemanskL@VAX.CS.HSCSYR.EDU

Ambystoma mexicanum is an intriguing animal model for studying heart development 
because it carries a mutation in gene c. Hearts of homozygous recessive (c/c)
mutant embryos do not contain organized myofibrils and fail to beat. However, the
defect can be corrected by organ-culturing the mutant heart in the presence of
RNA from anterior endoderm or RNA from endoderm mesoderm-conditioned medium. We
constructed a cDNA library from total conditioned medium RNA in a pcDNAII
expression vector. We screened the cDNA library by an organ culture bioassay and 
isolated a single clone (Cl#4), the synthetic RNA from which corrects the heart
defect by promoting myofibrillogenesis. The insert size of the active clone is
166 nt in length with a unique nucleotide sequence. The anti-sense RNA from Cl#4 
using SP6 RNA polymerase failed to rescue mutant hearts. The ability of this
small RNA to correct the mutant heart defect suggests that the RNA probably does 
not act as an mRNA. While the precise mechanism of action is not yet known, on
the basis of our studies to date it is very clear that the sense strand of Cl#4
RNA has the ability to promote myofibrillogenesis and rescue the mutant hearts
both in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 8955002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell Biochem. 1996 Dec 20;165(2):145-50.

The 5' end sequences and exon organization in rat regucalcin gene.

Yamaguchi M(1), Makino R, Shimokawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Japan.

The 5'-flanking region of the gene for a Ca(2+)-binding protein regucalcin was
cloned from a rat genomic library which was constructed in lambda EMBL3 SP6/T7
vector. The genomic library was screened by using the radiolabeled probe with the
5' region (0.5 kb) of rat regucalcin complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA). 
Positive clone had the 5.5 kb fragment which was hybridized with the 5'-probe.
This fragment contained three exons (I-III) of the gene coding for a rat
regucalcin. The nucleotide sequence of exons completely agreed with that of a rat
regucalcin cDNA clone. A supposed translational initiation site existed in the
exon II. Homology analysis showed that a putative transcription start site in the
rat regucalcin gene was located at position 26 downstream from a TATA-box.
Another upstream element, a CCAAT box-like sequence, was located at -170.
Moreover, there were many regulatory elements (Hox, AP-1, AP-2 and AP-4) in the
5'-flanking region of the rat regucalcin gene. The organization of rat regucalcin
gene seemed to be about 18 kb in size and consisted of seven exons and six
introns.

PMID: 8979263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cancer Lett. 1996 Dec 3;109(1-2):77-83.

Effect of aflatoxin B1-8,9-epoxide-DNA adducts on transcription of a supF gene
fragment.

Yu FL(1), Cahill JM, Lipinski LJ, Dipple A.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry of Carcinogenesis Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and
Development Center, MD 21702, USA.

A linearized template, obtained from the vector pGEM-3Zf(+) containing a supF
gene fragment, was treated with aflatoxin B1-8,9-epoxide (AFB1 epoxide) and
transcription in vitro was then studied. The template functions of both strands
of the supF gene were similarly inhibited as shown by transcription with both T7 
and SP6 RNA polymerases. This inhibition was dose-dependent and affected the
elongation step more extensively than the initiation step. Gel electrophoretic
analysis of RNA formed by T7 RNA polymerase indicated that template treated with 
different AFB1 epoxide doses yielded the same three major truncated RNA
fragments. Sequence analysis showed that these major sites of RNA truncation
occurred in the vicinity of adjacent guanine residues in the template.

PMID: 9020905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochemistry. 1996 Nov 26;35(47):14999-5008.

Template strand gap bypass is a general property of prokaryotic RNA polymerases: 
implications for elongation mechanisms.

Liu J(1), Doetsch PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

It has previously been shown that T7 RNA polymerase is capable of bypassing gaps 
on the template strand ranging in size from 1 to 24 nucleotides. This as well as 
other observations suggested a role for the nontemplate strand during elongation.
To establish the generality of this gap bypassing event, we have extended these
studies to SP6 and Escherichia coli RNA polymerases. SP6 RNA polymerase bypasses 
template gaps from 1 to 19 nucleotides in size with various degrees of efficiency
and produces runoff transcripts of decreasing length corresponding to increasing 
gap size. RNA sequence analysis of the resulting runoff transcripts revealed that
SP6 RNA polymerase faithfully transcribed both parts of the template strand
flanking the gapped region. Similar experiments were carried out with E. coli RNA
polymerase (a multiple subunit enzyme) and indicate that it is also capable of
gap bypass albeit with reduced efficiency compared to T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases.
It appears that the ability to bypass gaps present on the DNA template strand is 
a general property of prokaryotic RNA polymerases. These results have
implications with respect to the mechanism of elongation and the role of the
nontemplate strand in transcription.

PMID: 8942666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1996 Nov;98(5 Pt 1):932-7.

Nucleotide sequence analysis of a complementary DNA coding for a Blomia
tropicalis allergen.

Puerta L(1), Caraballo L, Fernández-Caldas E, Avjioglu A, Marsh DG, Lockey RF,
Dao ML.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunological Research, University of Cartagena, Colombia.

Blomia tropicalis is a mite of allergenic importance in tropical and subtropical 
areas. A clone (Bt11a) from a B. tropicalis complementary DNA library was
expressed in lambda phage and analyzed by plaque radioimmunoassay. The
recombinant allergen produced by this clone was bound by IgE in 16 of 32 sera
from individuals with asthma with a positive RAST response and none of 3 control 
sera from healthy individuals with negative RAST response to B. tropicalis. The
cDNA insert was amplified by polymerase chain reaction with use of universal
primers. A 582-base-pair (bp) fragment was cloned into a pCR II vector. The
complete sequence of both strands was determined by using T7, SP6, and internal
primers. The sequence shows a 432 bp reading frame with a 34 bp 5' untranslated
region and a 116 bp 3' untranslated region with a poly A tail. Analysis of the
sequence suggests that it encodes a putative signal peptide of 20 residues and a 
124-residue mature protein allergen of 14,206 Da. The nucleotide and the inferred
amino acid sequences did not show homology to any known sequence. No potential
N-linked glycosylation site was found. The recombinant protein appears to
represent a major allergen of the mite B. tropicalis.

PMID: 8939156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Curr Genet. 1996 Nov;30(5):389-95.

A new point mutation in the nuclear gene of yeast mitochondrial RNA polymerase,
RPO41, identifies a functionally important amino-acid residue in a protein region
conserved among mitochondrial core enzymes.

Lisowsky T(1), Stein T, Michaelis G, Guan MX, Chen XJ, Clark-Walker GD.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Universitätsstrasse 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The core enzyme of mitochondrial RNA polymerase in yeast is homologous to those
of bacteriophages T3, T7 and SP6. In previous studies the identification of the
first conditional yeast mutant for this enzyme helped to identify the
corresponding specificity factor and to elucidate their interaction inside
mitochondria. In the present study we report the identification of a second
nuclear mutation located in the gene for mitochondrial RNA polymerase. A
comparison of the two temperature-sensitive mutants demonstrates that the new
mutant has a phenotype distinct from the first one and characterizes a new
important domain of the enzyme. Two different suppressor genes which both rescue 
the first mutant do not abolish the defect of the second one and, in addition, an
extremely high instability of mitochondrial genomes is observed in the new
mutant. The enzymatic defect is caused by a single nucleotide exchange which
results in the replacement of the serine938 residue by phenylalanine. This amino 
acid is located in the middle part of the protein in an as yet poorly
characterized region that is not highly conserved between mitochondrial core
enzymes and bacteriophage-type RNA polymerases. However, the affected amino acid 
and the respective protein domain are specific for mitochondrial RNA polymerase
core enzymes and may help to define enzymatic functions specific for the
mitochondrial transcription apparatus.

PMID: 8929390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6103-9.

The requirement of heat shock cognate 70 protein for mitochondrial import varies 
among precursor proteins and depends on precursor length.

Terada K(1), Ueda I, Ohtsuka K, Oda T, Ichiyama A, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The cytosolic heat shock cognate 70-kDa protein (hsc70) is required for efficient
import of ornithine transcarbamylase precursor (pOTC) into rat liver mitochondria
(K. Terada, K. Ohtsuka, N. Imamoto, Y. Yoneda, and M. Mori, Mol. Cell. Biol.
15:3708-3713, 1995). The requirement of hsc70 for mitochondrial import of various
precursor proteins and truncated pOTCs was studied by using an in vitro
translation import system in which hsc70 was completely depleted. hsc70-dependent
import of pOTC was about 60% of the total import, while import of the aspartate
aminotransferase precursor, the serine:pyruvate aminotransferase precursor, and
3-oxoacyl coenzyme A thiolase was about 50, 30, and 0%, respectively. The subunit
sizes of these four precursor proteins were 40 to 47 kDa. When pOTC was serially 
truncated from the COOH terminal, the hsc70 requirement decreased gradually and
was not evident for the shortest truncated pOTCs of 90 and 72 residues. These
truncated pOTCs were imported and proteolytically processed rapidly in 0.5 to 2
min at 25 degrees C, and the processed mature portions and the presequence
portion were rapidly degraded. Sucrose gradient centrifugation analysis followed 
by import assay showed that pOTC synthesized in rabbit reticulocyte lysate forms 
an import-competent complex of about 11S in an hsc70-dependent manner. S values
of import-competent forms of aspartate aminotransferase precursor,
serine:pyruvate aminotransferase precursor, and 3-oxoacyl coenzyme A thiolase
were 9S, 9S, and 4S, respectively. Thus, the S value decreased as the hsc70
dependency decreased. Precursor proteins were coimmunoprecipitated from the
reticulocyte lysate containing the newly synthesized precursor proteins with an
hsc70 antibody. The amount of coimmunoprecipitated proteins was much larger in
the absence of ATP than in its presence. Among the four precursor proteins, the
amount of coimmunoprecipitated protein decreased as the hsc70 dependency
decreased.

PMCID: PMC231613
PMID: 8887640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Gene. 1996 Oct 17;176(1-2):17-21.

Translational inhibition by 5'-polycytidine tracts in Xenopus embryos and in
vitro.

Kuo JS(1), Veale R, Maxwell B, Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, MA 02142,
USA.

Introduction of in vitro transcribed mRNA into Xenopus laevis embryos is a useful
technique for analyzing gene function. In order to optimize expression of cDNA
constructs from in vitro transcribed mRNAs, we examined the translational
efficiency of reporter genes that simulated cDNAs synthesized by tailing with
deoxyguanosine (dG) before second strand cDNA synthesis. When transcribed in
vitro, these cDNAs give rise to RNAs containing a 5'-homopolymeric cytidine
(poly(C)) stretch. We observed that the presence of a 5'-poly(C) tract depressed 
translation of a CAT reporter gene at least 100-fold in Xenopus embryos and up to
5-fold in vitro. This effect was not seen when a 5'-polyadenosine tract was
tested. Translational depression was dependent on the phage polymerase used for
in vitro transcription: RNAs transcribed by T7 polymerase translated far more
poorly than those transcribed by SP6 polymerase. These results have general
implications for optimizing expression of cDNA constructs.

PMID: 8918225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Cancer. 1996 Sep 27;68(1):97-101.

Gangliosides in human uveal melanoma metastatic process.

Tardif M(1), Coulombe J, Soulières D, Rousseau AP, Pelletier G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Rhumatologie et Immunologie, Sainte-Foy, Québec,
Canada.

The inability of current therapy to prevent metastases arising from uveal
melanoma often results in patient mortality. With the goal of developing a
treatment for metastasis, gangliosides were studied as potential tumor-associated
antigens. Our report describes the production of a metastatic liver variant (MH) 
from a human uveal melanoma cell line (SP6.5). Cells were injected into nude
mouse spleens and liver metastases collected 2 months later. After 21 days of in 
vitro subculture, the cells were re-injected into normal nude mice spleen; 10
cycles (MH10) were performed. Gangliosides were extracted, purified,
chromatographed on HPTLC plates and sprayed with a resorcinol-HCl reagent, the
sialic acid spots being quantified by densitometry. Gangliosides were analyzed in
each metastatic liver variant and compared with the SP6.5 s.c. tumor. The results
showed a significant increase in GM3 and a significant decrease in GD3 and GD2 in
the last metastatic variants obtained (MH5, MH8, MH9 and MH1O) compared with the 
primary s.c. tumor, SP6.5. Such evolution in the ganglioside pattern was
maintained throughout the progression of the different liver variants. Our
results indicate that precursor ganglioside GM3 and gangliosides GD3 and GD2
could be associated with neoplastic evolution of malignancy of human uveal
melanoma in nude mice.

PMID: 8895547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 27;271(39):24262-9.

Properties of a primer RNA-DNA hybrid at the mouse mitochondrial DNA
leading-strand origin of replication.

Lee DY(1), Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic 
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California
94305-5427, USA.

Primers for vertebrate mitochondrial leading-strand DNA replication are products 
of transcription synthesized by mitochondrial RNA polymerase. The precursor
primer RNA exists as a persistent RNA-DNA hybrid, known as an R-loop, formed
during transcription through the replication origin (Xu, B., and Clayton, D. A.
(1996) EMBO J. 15, 3135-3143). In an effort to examine the precise structure of
this primer RNA intermediate, we have used two methods to reconstitute model
R-loops containing the mouse mitochondrial DNA origin sequence. First, we
demonstrate that bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase can efficiently catalyze the
formation of an R-loop at the mouse mtDNA origin sequence. Second, the R-loop can
be assembled by annealing presynthesized RNA and supercoiled DNA template in the 
presence of formamide. R-loop formation by either method is dependent on specific
template sequences. The reconstituted R-loop is exceptionally stable and exhibits
an unexpected structure. Structural studies indicate that the RNA strand is
organized within the RNA-DNA base-paired region, suggesting that the heteroduplex
interaction occurs through a specific conformation. We propose that the organized
structure of the R-loop is critical for primer RNA function in vivo with
important implications for the RNA processing and DNA replication machinery.

PMID: 8798672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int Immunol. 1996 Sep;8(9):1375-85.

Role of c-myc and CD45 in spontaneous and anti-receptor-induced apoptosis in
adult murine B cells.

Scott DW(1), Lamers M, Köhler G, Sidman CL, Maddox B, Carsetti R.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, American Red Cross Holland Laboratory, Rockville, MD
20855, USA.

Although adult murine B cells can be stimulated to proliferate by Igm receptor
cross-linking, we and others have shown that these cells will undergo apoptosis
in vitro in a dose-, time- and temperature-dependent manner with polyclonal but
not monoclonal anti-IgM, To test the role of c-myc and cell cycle progression in 
B cell apoptosis, we examined normal, Sp6 anti-TNP lg and E micro-myc transgenic 
splenocytes for receptor-mediated apoptosis in vitro. In normal mice, both
spontaneous and anti-IgM-induced programmed cell death were specifically blocked 
by antisense oligodeoxynucleotides for the c-myc proto-oncogene, whereas nonsense
myc oligonucleotides and irrelevant oligonucleotides had only a minor effect.
Similarly, TNP-dextran-induced apoptosis in Sp6 anti-TNF transgenics was
inhibited by antisense c-myc. This effect was not due to the mitogenic effects of
unmethylated CpG-containing sequences because ones lacking this motif, as well as
methylated oligonucleotides containing this motif, prevented apoptosis, and
mitogenic doses of lipopolysaccharide failed to inhibit anti-IgM-driven cell
death. Importantly, antisense c-myc also prevented the anti-IgM-induced increase 
in myc protein species. Moreover, spontaneous apoptosis in vitro was exaggerated 
in E micro-myc transgenic B cells. To examine the role of CD45 in
anti-IgM-induced apoptosis, we treated spleen cells from CD45 knockout mice,
which do not proliferate with anti-IgM, and found that B cells from these
underwent apoptosis normally despite the lack of entry into S. These data suggest
that anti-IgM driven apoptosis does not require CD45. Rather, apoptosis may be
due to an overexpression of myc protein in the absence of signals which can drive
B cells productively into S, but the failure to proliferate normally is
insufficient for apoptosis to occur.

PMID: 8921415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Mol Biol. 1996 Aug 23;261(3):386-98.

Efficient inhibition of transcription elongation in vitro by oligonucleotide
phosphoramidates targeted to proviral HIV DNA.

Giovannangeli C(1), Perrouault L, Escudé C, Gryaznov S, Hélène C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biophysique Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, INSERM
U.201-CNRS URA 481, Paris, France.

Triplex-forming oligophosphoramidates containing thymines and cytosines or
5-methyl cytosines (5' T4CT4C6T 3') bind strongly to a 16 basepair
oligopurine.oligopyrimidine sequence of HIV proviral DNA even at neutral pH.
These triple-helical complexes formed with oligonucleotide analogues with
N3'-->P5' phosphoramidate linkages are remarkably stable compared to
oligonucleotides with natural phosphodiester linkages. In transcription assays
the (T,C)-containing phosphoramidate oligomers induce an efficient arrest of both
bacteriophage and eukaryotic transcriptional machineries under conditions where
the isosequential phosphodiesters have no inhibitory effect. In both cases the
RNA polymerase (SP6, T7 or Pol II) is physically blocked by the non-covalent
triplex and RNA synthesis is stopped at the triplex site. However the eukaryotic 
transcription machinery is blocked more efficiently (at submicromolar
concentration) than the bacteriophage polymerases. The analysis of the 3'-ends of
the truncated transcripts provides evidence for differences in the termination
patterns induced by the triplex barrier for the bacteriophage and the eukaryotic 
systems. This in vitro comparative study provides the basis for the rational
design of strong transcriptional inhibitors. The efficient in vitro inhibition
obtained using the phosphoramidate oligomers in the eukaryotic transcription
assay makes them good candidates for the development of sequence-specific
antigene agents.

PMID: 8780781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochemistry. 1996 Aug 13;35(32):10539-48.

Specific inhibition of in vitro transcription elongation by triplex-forming
oligonucleotide-intercalator conjugates targeted to HIV proviral DNA.

Giovannangeli C(1), Perrouault L, Escudé C, Nguyen T, Hélène C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biophysique, Muséum National d' Histoire Naturelle, INSERM U
201, CNRS URA 481, Paris, France.giovanna@mnhn.fr

A 16-base pair oligo(purine)-oligo(pyrimidine) sequence present in the coding
region of two HIV 1 proviral genes (pol and nef) was chosen as a target for
triplex-forming oligonucleotides in in vitro transcription assays. Inhibition of 
transcription elongation was observed with triplex-forming
oligonucleotide-acridine conjugates (Acr-15-TCG:5'-Acr-T4CT4G6-3' and
Acr-9-TC:5'-Acr-T4CT4-3' where C is 5-methylcytosine) under conditions where the 
unsubstituted oligomers did not exhibit any inhibitory effect. Both SP6
bacteriophage RNA polymerase and eukaryotic RNA polymerase II were physically
blocked by such a triplex barrier. The polymerase arrest is caused by the
triple-helical complex involving the hydrogen-bonded oligonucleotide stabilized
by the intercalated moiety and not solely by the acridine molecule specifically
intercalated at the duplex-triplex junction. The stability of the triple-helical 
complex formed by the 15-mer containing thymines, cytosine, and guanines (15-TCG)
and involving the formation of six contiguous C.GxG base triplets was strongly
enhanced in the presence of a benzopyridoindole derivative (BePI), which
intercalates in triplex structures. This improvement of the binding affinity led 
to an increased inhibition of transcription elongation. The present results
demonstrate the necessity to use triplex-forming oligonucleotides with high
binding affinity and a long residence time on their double-stranded target to
efficiently inhibit transcription elongation. These data provide a rational basis
for the optimization and the development of triplex-forming oligonucleotides as
transcriptional blockers, even when they are targeted to the transcribed portion 
of a gene, downstream of the transcription initiation site.

PMID: 8756710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Med Chem. 1996 Aug 2;39(16):3174-8.

Synthesis and biological activity of NK-1 selective, N-backbone cyclic analogs of
the C-terminal hexapeptide of substance P.

Byk G(1), Halle D, Zeltser I, Bitan G, Selinger Z, Gilon C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

The application of the concept of backbone cyclization to linear substance P (SP)
analogs is presented. We describe the synthesis, characterization, and biological
activity of a series of backbone-to-amino-terminus cyclic analogs of the
C-terminal hexapeptide of SP. These analogs were designed on the basis of NMR
data and molecular modeling of the selective NK-1 analog WS-septide
(Ac[Arg6,Pro9]SP6-11). A series of peptides with the general formula:
cyclo[-CH2)m-NH-CO-(CH2)n-CO-Arg-Phe-Phe-N-]-CH2-CO-Leu-Met-NH2 (n = 2, 3, 6 and 
m = 2, 3, 4) was synthesized by solid phase methodology using Fmoc chemistry for 
the main chain and Boc chemistry for the building units
[Na-(omega-aminoalkyl)Gly] side chains. Cyclization was performed on the resin
after removal of the Boc protecting group from the omega-aminoalkyl chain. Cyclic
and precyclic analogs were compared. They were purified by HPLC and characterized
by mass spectroscopy and NMR. Biological activity and selectivity to the NK-1
neurokinin receptor were found to depend on cyclization and the ring size: The
most active and selective analog had a ring of 20 atoms. This analog was found to
have enhanced metabolic stability in various tissue preparation compared to
WS-septide.

PMID: 8759639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Aug 1;24(15):2919-23.

Sequences involved in the dimerisation of human T cell leukaemia virus type-1
RNA.

Greatorex JS(1), Laisse V, Dockhelar MC, Lever AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, UK.

The formation of a genomic RNA dimer appears to be a critical step in the life
cycle of all retroviruses. To investigate the site and nucleotide interactions
involved in this process, a 531 bp DNA fragment encompassing sequences up- and
downstream of the splice donor in human T cell leukaemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
was inserted into a plasmid vector under the control of the SP6 promoter. RNA
transcripts generated in vitro from this template formed dimers which could be
dissociated by heating at 60-80 degrees C for 3 min. The physical properties of
the dimeric RNA were not consistent with either Watson-Crick base pairing or
guanine tetrad formation as being solely responsible for the interaction.
Deletion mutagenesis identified a 32 nt sequence required for dimerisation.
Computer modelling was carried out in order to identify putative RNA secondary
structures within this essential region. A stem-loop structure was identified,
the stem of which was conserved among different sequenced isolates of HTLV-1.
This sequence also contains a 15 nt palindrome. We sought by disruptive and
compensatory mutagenesis to define the possible roles of these two structures in 
dimer linkage.

PMCID: PMC146032
PMID: 8760874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Pept Sci. 1996 Jul-Aug;2(4):261-9.

Backbone cyclization of the C-terminal part of substance P. Part 1: The important
role of the sulphur in position 11.

Bitan G(1), Zeltser I, Byk G, Halle D, Mashriki Y, Gluhov EV, Sukhotinsky I,
Hanani M, Selinger Z, Gilon C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat-Ram,
Israel.

Novel backbone-to-side chain and backbone-to-backbone cyclic analogues of
substance P (SP) were prepared by solid-phase synthesis and screened for
biological activity. An analogue containing a thioetherlactam ring between
positions 9 and 11 showed an EC50 value of 20 nM toward the neurokinin 1 (NK-1)
and was inactive toward the NK-2 and NK-3 receptors. On the other hand, in a
multiple backbone cyclic peptide library of similar analogues, in which the
sulphur was excluded from the ring, very low activity was detected. The activity 
was re-evaluated and was found to be even lower (EC50 = 0.11 mM) than the
previously published data. These results indicate that the thioether moiety has a
crucial role in receptor activation. The results also show tolerance of the NK-1 
receptor, but not NK-2 or NK-3, to cyclization of the C-terminal portion of the
SP6-11 hexapeptide.

PMID: 9231334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Front Biosci. 1996 Jul 1;1:a39-45.

Differential susceptibility to anti-receptor induced apoptosis in adult murine
B-cells: role of B1 cells.

Maddox BR(1), Scott DW.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, American Red Cross Holland Laboratory, Rockville, MD
20855, USA.

We and others have recently found that mature murine B cells can be induced to
undergo apoptosis, in vitro, in a dose-dependent manner, by extensive
crosslinking of membrane IgM with polyclonal anti-mu. During the analysis of
tolerance in transgenic mice expressing rearranged IgM or IgM + IgD receptors, we
observed that, Sp6 anti-TNP Ig and anti-MHC transgenic splenocytes, would undergo
receptor-mediated apoptosis in vitro just like their normal, non-transgenic
littermates. However, transgenic mice expressing rearranged receptors typical of 
B1 cells, not only contained large numbers of CD5+ cells in their spleens, but
these cells failed to undergo apoptosis under conditions that led to programmed
cell death in normal splenocytes. B1 spleen cells also failed to proliferate with
anti-IgM, although the responsiveness of cells from the other transgenic lines
varied depending on the background strains. These differences are due in part, to
strain differences, but they also imply that the response pattern of transgenic B
cells reflects not only the subset composition in this organ, but also the
transgenic specificity of the receptor.

PMID: 9159193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Pept Res. 1996 Jul-Aug;9(4):183-7.

Production of radiolabeled neuropeptide precursors by in vitro transcription and 
translation.

Hook VY(1), Schiller MR, Nguyen C, Yasothornsrikul S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine #0822, University of California of San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0822, USA.

Bioactive peptide hormones and neurotransmitters are required for neuroendocrine 
regulation of cellular functions. Importantly, proteolytic processing of inactive
neuropeptide precursors is required to generate physiologically active peptide
hormones and neurotransmitters. Studies of the processing enzymes require
authentic neuropeptide precursors as substrates, rather than peptide substrates. 
This study demonstrates an efficient method to general 35S-precursors from cloned
cDNAs by in vitro transcription and translation. In vitro transcription of
neuropeptide cDNAs with SP6 RNA polymerase generates large amounts (micrograms)
of corresponding RNAs. Subsequent in vitro translation of RNAs with wheat germ
extract and 35S-methionine generates large quantities of 35S-precursors (10-25
million cpm 35S-precursor protein per reaction) with high specific radioactivity.
The radiolabeled precursor substrates offer a reliable, sensitive and accurate
method for detecting the proteolytic activity. Importantly, specific detection of
the primary proenkephalin processing activity in chromaffin granules by
35S-enkephalin precursor as substrate, but not by peptide methylcoumarinamide
(MCA) substrates, illustrates the significance of using full-length precursor to 
detect appropriate processing enzymes. This study demonstrates that efficient
production of radiolabeled neuropeptide precursors by in vitro transcription and 
translation will be useful for in vitro assays of relevant processing proteases.

PMID: 8914165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Psychophysiology. 1996 Jul;33(4):398-408.

Effects of interstimulus interval on scalp topographies evoked by noxious sural
nerve stimulation.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825, USA.
rdowman@craft.clarkson.edu

The amplitude of the late pain-related negative-positive peak complex, which we
have labeled SP3 (134-150 ms) and SP6 (277-331 ms), respectively, increased with 
increasing interstimulus interval (ISI). This contrasts with the nociceptive
spinal withdrawal reflex and subjective pain rating data, which implied that
nociceptive somatosensory processes were unaffected by ISI at stimulus levels
that were well within the pain range. A scalp topographic analysis strongly
suggested that none of the brain areas responsible for SP3 or SP6 are involved
exclusively in nociception. We also observed a pain-related positive potential
approximately 161-177 ms following sural nerve stimulation that has not been
reported by others. A dipole source localization analysis and the effects of ISI 
and stimulus intensity on this potential suggest that it is generated by the
response of primary somatosensory cortex neurons to inputs arising from the
innocuous peripheral afferents and that this response is inhibited by noxious
inputs.

PMID: 8753940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. EMBO J. 1996 Jul 1;15(13):3458-65.

Template-free generation of RNA species that replicate with bacteriophage T7 RNA 
polymerase.

Biebricher CK(1), Luce R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

A large variety of different RNA species that are replicated by DNA-dependent RNA
polymerase from bacteriophage T7 have been generated by incubating high
concentrations of this enzyme with substrate for extended time periods. The
products differed from sample to sample in molecular weight and sequence, their
chain lengths ranging from 60 to 120. The mechanism of autocatalytic
amplification of RNA by T7 RNA polymerase proved to be analogous to that observed
with viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (replicases): only single-stranded
templates are accepted and complementary replica strands are synthesized. With
enzyme in excess, exponential growth was observed; linear growth resulted when
the enzyme was saturated by RNA template. The plus strands, present at 90% of the
replicating RNA species, were found to have GG residues at both termini.
Consensus sequences were not found among the sequences of the replicating RNA
species. The secondary structures of all species sequenced turned out to be
hairpins. The RNA species were specifically replicated by T7 RNA polymerase; they
were not accepted as templates by the RNA polymerases from Escherichia coli or
bacteriophage SP6 or by Qbeta replicase; T3 RNA polymerase was partially active. 
Template-free production of RNA was completely suppressed by addition of DNA to
the incubation mixture. When both DNA and RNA templates were present,
transcription and replication competed, but T7 RNA polymerase preferred DNA as a 
template. No replicating RNA species were detected in vivo in cells expressing T7
RNA polymerase.

PMCID: PMC451910
PMID: 8670848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Gene. 1996 Jun 1;171(2):299-300.

The cDNA sequence and infectious transcripts of peanut stripe virus.

Flasinski S(1), Gunasinghe UB, Gonzales RA, Cassidy BG.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Division, Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, OK 73402,
USA.

A full-length cDNA clone of the blotch isolate of the peanut stripe potyvirus
(PStV) RNA genome was constructed downstream from the bacteriophage SP6 RNA
polymerase promoter. The full-length PStV cDNA clone (PStVSF9) was sequenced and 
compared to the previously published sequence of PStV-B. In vitro-synthesized
PStV transcripts capped with m7GpppG were infectious in Nicotiana benthamiana
plants, and the progeny virus was aphid transmissible. To confirm the origin of
infection, a mutant PStV (PStVDAE), with a Gly14 to Glu mutation in the coat
protein-encoding gene, was constructed. Transcripts from PStVDAE produced
symptoms indistinguishable from native or PStVSF9 virus, but was not transmitted 
by aphids.

PMID: 8666291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. EMBO J. 1996 May 15;15(10):2530-9.

The relationship between sequence-specific termination of DNA replication and
transcription.

Mohanty BK(1), Sahoo T, Bastia D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Duke University Medical Centre, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

In Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis replication fork arrest occurs in the
terminus at sequence-specific sites by the binding of replication terminator
proteins to the fork arrest sites. The protein-DNA complex causes polar arrest of
the replication forks by inhibiting the activity of the replicative helicases in 
only one orientation of the terminus with respect to the replication origin. This
activity has been named as polar contrahelicase. In this paper we report on a
second novel activity of the terminator proteins of E.coli and B.subtilis, namely
the ability of the proteins to block RNA chain elongation by several prokaryotic 
RNA polymerases in a polar mode. The replication terminator proteins ter and RTP 
of E.coli and B.subtilis respectively, impeded RNA chain elongation catalyzed by 
T7, SP6 and E.coli RNA polymerases in a polar mode at the replication arrest
sites. The RNA chain anti-elongation and the contrahelicase activities were
isopolar. Whereas one monomer of ter was necessary and sufficient to block RNA
chain elongation, two interacting dimers of RTP were needed to effect the same
blockage. The biological significance of the RNA chain anti-elongation activity
is manifested in the functional inactivation of a replication arrest site by
invasion of RNA chains from outside, and the consequent need to preserve
replication arrest activity by restricting the passage of transcription through
the terminus-terminator protein complex.

PMCID: PMC450185
PMID: 8665860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Invertebr Pathol. 1996 May;67(3):236-52.

Analysis and Modeling of Time-Dose-Mortality of Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta
migratoria migratorioides, and Schistocerca gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) from
Beauveria, Metarhizium, and Paecilomyces Isolates from Madagascar

Nowierski RM(1), Zeng Z, Jaronski S, Delgado F, Swearingen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, 59717

A complementary log-log (CLL) model was used to model time-dose-mortality
relationships from bioassay tests of 26 fungal isolates mostly from Madagascar,
Africa, against three acridid species, all referred to here as "grasshoppers."
The fungal pathogens included 15 isolates of Beauveria bassiana, 9 isolates of
Metarhizium flavoviridae, and 2 isolates of Paecilomyces spp. Grasshopper species
tested included Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta migratoria migratorioides, and
Schistocerca gregaria. The scaled deviance, mean deviance, Pearson X2 statistic, 
Hosmer-Lemeshow (H-L) C statistic, and three-dimensional time-dose-mortality
graphs were used to assess extra-binomial variation, data points that were
potential outliers, conformance of the scaled deviance statistic and Pearson's X2
statistic to a chi2 distribution, and the fit of the CLL model. The H-L C
statistic also was found to be useful in showing the goodness of fit of the CLL
model for the fungal isolates prior to modeling the extra-binomial variation.
After the extra-binomial variation was modeled using Williams' method, the slope 
from maximum likelihood estimation, modified log(LD50) estimates (which were
corrected for background mortality using the CLL model), a dynamic ranking of the
log(LD50) values over time, and a three-dimensional plot of time, dose, and
mortality of the three grasshopper species were used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the fungal isolates. In general, the CLL model provided a rather
poor fit of the fungal isolates which had a large number of replicate trials in
the bioassay tests (i.e., a large sample size) due to extra-binomial variation.
The CLL model provided an excellent fit of the time-dose-mortality relationships 
of such isolates after the extra-binomial variation was modeled and included in
the CLL model. Metarhizium isolates MFV and SP5 were found to be the most
virulent isolates tested against M. sanguinipes, followed by Metarhizium
isolates: SP8, SP7, SP9, SP6, and SP1, and Beauveria isolate S33B. Metarhizium
isolates SP3, SP5, SP6, and SP9, and Beauveria isolates SP11, SP12, SP13, and
SP16 showed higher levels of virulence against L. migratoria migratorioides over 
more of the time periods tested than the other pathogen isolates examined.
Metarhizium isolates SP9 and SP5 were the most effective isolates tested against 
S. gregaria. In general, the Metarhizium isolates were more virulent against the 
grasshoppers than the Beauveria isolates, which were more virulent than the
Paecilomyces isolates. The CLL model was found to be very useful in describing
grasshopper mortality as a function of time and dose. This approach combined with
model and fungal isolate assessment statistics will be helpful for determining
which pathogen isolates have the greatest potential for controlling grasshoppers 
and other pests in the future.

PMID: 8812605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. J Virol. 1996 May;70(5):2861-8.

Replication of hepatitis A viruses with chimeric 5' nontranslated regions.

Jia XY(1), Tesar M, Summers DF, Ehrenfeld E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine 92717, USA.

The role of the 5' nontranslated region in the replication of hepatitis A virus
(HAV) was studied by analyzing the translation and replication of chimeric RNAs
containing the encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) internal ribosome entry segment 
(IRES) and various lengths (237, 151, or 98 nucleotides [nt]) of the 5'-terminal 
HAV sequence. Translation of all chimeric RNAs, truncated to encode only capsid
protein sequences, occurred with equal efficiency in rabbit reticulocyte lysates 
and was much enhanced over that exhibited by the HAV IRES. Transfection of FRhK-4
cells with the parental HAV RNA and with chimeric RNA generated a viable virus
which was stable over continuous passage; however, more than 151 nt from the 5'
terminus of HAV were required to support virus replication. Single-step growth
curves of the recovered viruses from the parental RNA transfection and from
transfection of RNA containing the EMCV IRES downstream of the first 237 nt of
HAV demonstrated replication with similar kinetics and similar yields. When
FRhK-4 cells infected with recombinant vaccinia virus producing SP6 RNA
polymerase to amplify HAV RNA were transfected with plasmids coding for these
viral RNAs or with subclones containing only HAV capsid coding sequences
downstream of the parental or chimeric 5' nontranslated region, viral capsid
antigens were synthesized from the HAV IRES with an efficiency equal to or
greater than that achieved with the EMCV IRES. These data suggest that the
inherent translation efficiency of the HAV IRES may not be the major limiting
determinant of the slow-growth phenotype of HAV.

PMCID: PMC190143
PMID: 8627760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. FEBS Lett. 1996 Mar 18;382(3):327-9.

T7 DNA-dependent RNA polymerase can transcribe RNA from tick-borne encephalitis
virus (TBEV) cDNA with SP6 promoter.

Dobrikova EY(1), Pletnev AG, Karamyshev VN, Morozova OV.

Author information: 
(1)Novosibirsk Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Siberian Division of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia.

T7 RNA polymerase is shown to recognize the SP6 promoter including 17 base pairs 
before the transcription start site and produce the 5'-end TBEV RNA. The yield of
TBEV RNA synthesized by heterologous T7 RNA polymerase from cDNA construction
with SP6 promoter is higher than the RNA production by homologous SP6 RNA
polymerase. The addition of 1 pmol template DNA with SP6 17 bp promoter in
transcription mixture for SP6 or T7 RNA polymerases resulted in a 1-5 X 10(-2)
pmol RNA production.

PMID: 8605995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Gene. 1996 Feb 2;168(1):37-41.

A tightly regulated expression system in Escherichia coli with SP6 RNA
polymerase.

Sagawa H(1), Ohshima A, Kato I.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Engineering Section II, Biotechmology Research Laboratories, Takara
Shuzo Co., Ltd., Shiga, Japan.

A tightly regulated gene-expression system was developed using SP6 RNA polymerase
(RpoSP6). The RpoSp6-encoding gene (rpoSP6) was inserted into a mini-F plasmid
(mini-F) and expression was controlled by the lactose promoter (P(lac)) and
operator (O(lac)) on the plasmid. Therefore, a controlled expression system for
the target genes can easily be constructed in various host strains by
co-transformation of the system plasmid pFSP6 with other vector plasmids
containing the genes linked to the SP6 promoters (P(SP6)). Using the lac gene
linked to P(SP6) as a reporter, we evaluated the regulation of expression in this
system in various host strains. Low-level expression of lac was detected in
Escherichia coli harboring this expression system when RpoSP6 was uninduced,
although very low activities of beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal) were observed which
were independent of the presence of pFSP6. This basal level of beta-Gal activity 
was possibly derived, because the P(SP6) element has very weak activity for E.
coli RNA polymerase (Rpo). These results showed that RpoSP6 seemed to be produced
at very low levels in uninduced cells. Beta-GAl activity increased about
18-32-fold when the expression of rpoSP6 was induced, as compared with the
beta-Gal activity when uninduced. The tight regulation of this system is superior
to that of other known systems and it has a considerable advantage for gene
expression in E. coli.

PMID: 8626062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biochem. 1996 Feb;119(2):252-5.

A method for screening antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides effective for mRNA
translation-arrest.

Chen TZ(1), Lin SB, Wu JC, Choo KB, Au LC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan.

A transcription and translation coupled reticulocyte lysate system was
established for rapid screening of antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides (ODNs) to 
determine which are most effective for mRNA translation-arrest. A plasmid
containing the target cDNA under the control of the T7 (or SP6) promoter was
added to the lysate system in the presence of the T7 (or SP6) RNA polymerase,
RNase H, and the antisense ODN under test. Transcription and translation were
accomplished in a one-tube reaction. Translation-arrest caused by antisense ODN
was evaluated in terms of the amounts of de novo-synthesized, [35S]-methionine or
[35S]cysteine labeled target protein measured by gel electrophoresis and
autoradiography. The properties of this system and optimal reaction conditions
for use in antisense ODN screening were determined. Our method is simpler and
more rapid than other in vitro screening methods.

PMID: 8882714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Akush Ginekol (Sofiia). 1996;35(3):24-5.

[The effect of acupuncture in dysmenorrhea].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Tsenov D.

The author assumed the task study the effect of treatment dysmenorrhoea by
acupuncture. Object of the study were 48 women in reproductive age divided in 2
groups: 1st group--24 women with primary dysmenorrhoea, 2nd group--24 women with 
secondary dysmenorrhoea. Acupuncture treatment included acupuncture points: LI4, 
SP6, 10, S30, 36 CV2, 3, CX5, 6, B20, 23 applied via torment method for 30 min.
RESULTS. In the 1st group effect was very well after one course of 2-4
acupuncture procedures before menstruation. In the 2nd group effect was
satisfactory in 50% of the cases after two courses acupuncture treatment. In
conclusion effect of acupuncture treatment on dysmenorrhoea depend on its
kind--primary dysmenorrhoea is influenced very well, while secondary
dysmenorrhoea is influenced satisfactory.

PMID: 9045554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6729-35.

RNA polymerase bypass at sites of dihydrouracil: implications for transcriptional
mutagenesis.

Liu J(1), Zhou W, Doetsch PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

Dihydrouracil (DHU) is a major base damage product formed from cytosine following
exposure of DNA to ionizing radiation under anoxic conditions. To gain insight
into the DNA lesion structural requirements for RNA polymerase arrest or bypass
at various DNA damages located on the transcribed strand during elongation, DHU
was placed onto promoter-containing DNA templates 20 nucleotides downstream from 
the transcription start site. In vitro, single-round transcription experiments
carried out with SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases revealed that following a brief pause
at the DHU site, both enzymes efficiently bypass this lesion with subsequent
rapid generation of full-length runoff transcripts. Direct sequence analysis of
these transcripts indicated that both RNA polymerases insert primarily adenine
opposite to the DHU site, resulting in a G-to-A transition mutation in the lesion
bypass product. Such bypass and insertion events at DHU sites (or other types of 
DNA damages), if they occur in vivo, have a number of important implications for 
both the repair of such lesions and the DNA damage-induced production of mutant
proteins at the level of transcription (transcriptional mutagenesis).

PMCID: PMC230926
PMID: 8524238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Brain Res. 1995 Nov 27;700(1-2):115-20.

Pharmacological characterization of grooming induced by a selective NK-1
tachykinin receptor agonist.

Stoessl AJ(1), Brackstone M, Rajakumar N, Gibson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neurological Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
jstoessl@julian.uwo.ca

Bilateral intranigral administration of the selective NK-1 tachykinin receptor
agonist [AcArg6, Sar9, Met(O2)11]SP6-11 (0-1 nmol total bilateral dose)
selectively induced grooming in rats. This response was blocked by concurrent
intranigral administration of the NK-1 tachykinin receptor antagonist RP 67580 (2
nmol), but not by NK-2 (L-659,877) or NK-3 ([Trp7, beta-Ala8]NKA4-10)
antagonists. Pretreatment with systemic opioid (naloxone 1.5 mg/kg) and D1
dopamine (SCH 23390 100 micrograms/kg) receptor antagonists also attenuated
tachykinin-induced grooming, which was unaffected by D2 dopamine (sulpiride 30
mg/kg) or 5-HT2A+C (ritanserin 2 mg/kg) antagonists. Grooming induced by
intranigral [AcArg6, Sar9, Met(O2)11]SP6-11 was also attenuated by bilateral
6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the substantia nigra. These findings indicate that
grooming induced by intranigral tachykinins reflects activation of NK-1 receptors
and is dependent upon endogenous dopamine and consequent selective stimulation of
D1 dopamine receptors.

PMID: 8624700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Pharmacol. 1995 Nov;48(5):897-904.

In vitro transcription of DNA containing 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine
monophosphate.

Hentosh P(1), Tibudan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School,
Illinois 60064, USA.

2-Chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (cladribine [CldAdo]) represents one of the most
promising therapeutic agents for the treatment of pediatric leukemias and adult
hairy cell leukemia. We examined whether CldAdo incorporation into DNA inhibited 
subsequent transcription in vitro using purified phage RNA polymerases. Control
(Ade-containing) and 2-chloroadenine (ClAde)-substituted DNA strands that
contained a RNA polymerase promoter sequence were synthesized by a modified
asymmetric polymerase chain reaction. Complementary (+) and (-) strands were
annealed, incubated with phage RNA polymerase, and analyzed with denaturing PAGE.
When ClAde was present in both strands, the yield of full-length transcripts
(approximately equal to 100 bases) was reduced by approximately equal to 90%
relative to control DNA. Transcription was also reduced to a slightly lesser
degree when substitutions occurred in only one of two strands. The observed low
transcript levels on ClAde-containing DNA were due in part to the presence of the
analogue within the promoter region. With gel shift binding assays, we
demonstrated that RNA polymerase did not bind as well to ClAde-containing
promoters. Polymerase/DNA complex formation was decreased by approximately equal 
to 80% compared with that on control unsubstituted promoters. In addition, on
binding to the substituted promoter, RNA polymerase had an altered conformation
that led to enhanced proteolytic clipping by endoproteinase Glu-C. Transcript
sequence analysis indicated that SP6 RNA polymerase read through template ClAde
residues with no apparent misincorporation into RNA. Our results provide insight 
into a novel effect of this nucleoside analogue that may explain its cytotoxicity
in nondividing cells.

PMID: 7476921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Anal Biochem. 1995 Oct 10;231(1):34-9.

Obelin mRNA--a new tool for studies of translation in cell-free systems.

Matveev SV(1), Illarionov BA, Vysotski ES, Bondar VS, Markova SV, Alakhov YB.

Author information: 
(1)Branch of Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region, Russia.

Obelin mRNA obtained in vitro with the aid of SP6 RNA polymerase was translated
in a wheat germ cell-free system. Only the polypeptide with a molecular mass of
about 20 kDa was synthesized. The activation of apoobelin with a synthetic
coelenterazine revealed a luminescence activity initiated by calcium. The
specific activity was 3.6 +/- 0.4 x 10(15)photons per mg of the in vitro
synthesized obelin (k=6.9s(-1)). The luminescence of the obelin was in a good
correlation with the protein concentration calculated by the incorporation of
[14C]Leu. The determination of the amount of de novo synthesized obelin based on 
measurement of its luminescence is one-thousand times more sensitive than the
approach based on the incorporation of labeled amino acid. Thus, obelin mRNA has 
some advantages for evaluating the efficiency of cell-free translation when
compared with standard methods.

PMID: 8678317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Histochem Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;104(4):301-7.

Zone-specific localization of cytochrome P45011B1 in human adrenal tissue by
PCR-derived riboprobes.

Erdmann B(1), Gerst H, Bülow H, Lenz D, Bähr V, Bernhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Electron Microscopy,
Berlin-Buch, Germany.

Cytochrome P45011B1 (11 beta-hydroxylase) was detected in the human adrenal
cortex and in human adenomas by in situ hybridization methods. Specific
riboprobes were generated by in vitro transcription of 11
beta-hydroxylase--specific synthetic oligonucleotides with attached T7 and SP6
polymerase promotors. [35S]- and digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes were hybridized
to sections of an aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA), the non-tumour portion of 
the corresponding adrenal gland, and two adenomas not related to
hyperaldosteronism using standard protocols and varying washing conditions. After
exposure of the radiolabeled sections to X-ray film, the signals were quantified 
and compared by statistical tests. Following autoradiography or
immunohistochemical detection of the digoxigenin cytochrome P45011B1 mRNA was
clearly localized in the zona fasciculata/reticularis of non-tumour portion of an
human adrenal with an APA. Zona glomerulosa, medulla and connective tissue were
free of label. As revealed by the semi-quantitative analysis, 11 beta-hydroxylase
mRNA signals in the APA were significantly lower than those in the attached
non-tumour portion and the other two adenomas. The results confirm known
observations on the occurrence of cytochrome P45011B1 in the adrenal cortex of
other species, but show, contrary to several immunohistochemical studies, that
the enzyme is obviously not expressed in the zona glomerulosa.

PMID: 8548564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):4702-10.

Four subunits that are shared by the three classes of RNA polymerase are
functionally interchangeable between Homo sapiens and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Shpakovski GV(1), Acker J, Wintzerith M, Lacroix JF, Thuriaux P, Vigneron M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Commissariat à l'Energie
Atomique (Saclay), Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Four cDNAs encoding human polypeptides hRPB7.0, hRPB7.6, hRPB17, and hRPB14.4
(referred to as Hs10 alpha, Hs10 beta, Hs8, and Hs6, respectively), homologous to
the ABC10 alpha, ABC10 beta, ABC14.5, and ABC23 RNA polymerase subunits (referred
to as Sc10 alpha, Sc10 beta, Sc8, and Sc6, respectively) of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, were cloned and characterized for their ability to complement
defective yeast mutants. Hs10 alpha and the corresponding Sp10 alpha of
Schizosaccharomyces pombe can complement an S. cerevisiae mutant
(rpc10-delta::HIS3) defective in Sc10 alpha. The peptide sequences are highly
conserved in their carboxy-terminal halves, with an invariant motif
CX2CX12RCX2CGXR corresponding to a canonical zinc-binding domain. Hs10 beta, Sc10
beta, and the N subunit of archaeal RNA polymerase are homologous. An invariant
CX2CGXnCCR motif presumably forms an atypical zinc-binding domain. Hs10 beta, but
not the archaeal subunit, complemented an S. cerevisiae mutant (rpb10-delta
1::HIS3) lacking Sc10 beta. Hs8 complemented a yeast mutant (rpb8-delta 1::LYS2) 
defective in the corresponding Sc8 subunit, although with a strong
thermosensitive phenotype. Interspecific complementation also occurred with Hs6
and with the corresponding Dm6 cDNA of Drosophila melanogaster. Hs6 cDNA and the 
Sp6 cDNA of S. pombe are dosage-dependent suppressors of rpo21-4, a mutation
generating a slowly growing yeast defective in the largest subunit of RNA
polymerase II. Finally, a doubly chimeric S. cerevisiae strain bearing the Sp6
cDNA and the human Hs10 beta cDNA was also viable. No interspecific
complementation was observed for the human hRPB25 (Hs5) homolog of the yeast
ABC27 (Sc5) subunit.

PMCID: PMC230713
PMID: 7651387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 25;270(34):20215-24.

A domain of the gene 4 helicase/primase of bacteriophage T7 required for the
formation of an active hexamer.

Notarnicola SM(1), Park K, Griffith JD, Richardson CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The bacteriophage T7 gene 4 protein, like a number of helicases, is believed to
function as a hexamer. The amino acid sequence of the T7 gene 4 protein from
residue 475 to 491 is conserved in the homologous proteins of the related phages 
T3 and SP6. In addition, part of this region is conserved in DNA helicases such
as Escherichia coli DnaB protein and phage T4 gp41. Mutations within this region 
of the T7 gene 4 protein can reduce the ability of the protein to form hexamers. 
The His475-->Ala and Asp485-->Gly mutant proteins show decreases in nucleotide
hydrolysis, single-stranded DNA binding, double-stranded DNA unwinding, and
primer synthesis in proportion to their ability to form hexamers. The mutation
Arg487-->Ala has little effect on oligomerization, but nucleotide hydrolysis by
this mutant protein is inhibited by single-stranded DNA, and it has a higher
affinity for dTTP, suggesting that this protein is defective in the
protein-protein interactions required for efficient nucleotide hydrolysis and
translocation on single-stranded DNA. Gene 4 protein can form hexamers in the
absence of a nucleotide, but dTTP increases hexamer formation, as does dTDP, to a
lesser extent, demonstrating that the protein self-association affinity is
influenced by the nucleotide bound. Together, the data demonstrate that this
region of the gene 4 protein is important for the protein-protein contacts
necessary for both hexamer formation and the interactions between the subunits of
the hexamer required for coordinated nucleotide hydrolysis, translocation on
single-stranded DNA, and unwinding of double-stranded DNA. The fact that the gene
4 proteins form dimers, but not monomers, even while hexamer formation is
severely diminished by some of the mutations, suggests that the proteins
associate in a manner with two separate and distinct protein-protein interfaces.

PMID: 7650041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 25;270(34):20162-8.

Substrate specificity, gene structure, and tissue-specific distribution of
multiple human 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases.

Khanna M(1), Qin KN, Wang RW, Cheng KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

We have expressed in Escherichia coli functionally active proteins encoded by two
human cDNAs that were isolated previously by using rat 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase cDNA as the probe. The expressed proteins catalyzed the
interconversion between 5 alpha-dihydrotestosterone and 5 alpha-androstane-3
alpha,17 beta-diol. Therefore, we name these two enzymes type I and type II 3
alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases. The type I enzyme has a high affinity for
dihydrotestosterone, whereas the type II enzyme has a low affinity for the
substrate. The tissue-specific distribution of these two enzymes was determined
by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction using gene-specific
oligonucleotide primers. The mRNA transcript of the type I enzyme was found only 
in the liver, whereas that of the type II enzyme appeared in the brain, kidney,
liver, lung, placenta, and testis. The structure and sequence of the genes
encoding these two 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases were determined by
analysis of genomic clones that were isolated from a lambda EMBL3 SP6/T7 library.
The genes coding for the type I and type II enzymes were found to span
approximately 20 and 16 kilobase pairs, respectively, and to consist of 9 exons
of the same sizes and boundaries. The exons range in size from 77 to 223 base
pairs (bp), whereas the introns range in size from 375 bp to approximately 6
kilobase pairs. The type I gene contains a TATA box that is located 27 bp
upstream of multiple transcription start sites. In contrast, the type II gene
contains two tandem AP2 sequences juxtaposed to a single transcription start
site.

PMID: 7650035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Gene. 1995 Jul 28;160(2):213-7.

A vector for the synthesis of cRNAs encoding Myc epitope-tagged proteins in
Xenopus laevis oocytes.

Gloor S(1), Pongs O, Schmalzing G.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry II, ETH Center, Zurich, Switzerland.

We describe a plasmid, pNKS2-myc, designed for convenient in-frame fusion of an
antibody-specific epitope sequence to the N terminus of a desired cDNA and
subsequent synthesis of transcripts that direct the synthesis of the tagged
polypeptide in Xenopus laevis (Xl) oocytes. pNKS2-myc contains an SP6 promoter,
followed by the translation initiation sequence of the Na,K-pump beta 3 subunit
of Xl and the sequence encoding an epitope derived from the human c-myc
proto-oncogene product. Appropriate restriction sites allow one to insert
virtually any desired cDNA fragment directly behind the epitope-specific sequence
and before a long poly(A) tail. After linearization with EcoRI or NotI,
polyadenylated cRNA can be synthesized that is efficiently translated in Xl
oocytes. The utility of pNKS2-myc is demonstrated by cloning cDNAs coding for
Na,K-pump subunits into this vector and injecting the corresponding cRNAs into
oocytes. The tagged mouse beta 1 and beta 2 subunit isoforms could be purified
from detergent extracts of these cells by immunoprecipitation with a generally
available monoclonal antibody (mAb) to the tag, 9E10, as well as with specific
mAb that recognize individual beta subunit isoforms. Under native conditions,
endogenous and coexpressed exogenous alpha 1 subunits (the catalytic subunit of
the Na,K-pump) were co-precipitated, indicating that the N-terminal addition of
the decapeptide epitope has no adverse effect on the folding of beta subunits nor
on their assembly with alpha subunits. Furthermore, the Myc-specific mAb likewise
precipitated a Myc-tagged Na,K-pump alpha 1 subunit together with any of the
co-synthesized beta subunits.

PMID: 7543868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochem J. 1995 Jul 15;309 ( Pt 2):543-50.

Complete nucleotide sequence of the gene encoding bacteriophage E endosialidase: 
implications for K1E endosialidase structure and function.

Long GS(1), Bryant JM, Taylor PW, Luzio JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, U.K.

Bacteriophage E specifically recognizes and infects strains of Escherichia coli
which display the alpha-2,8-linked polysialic acid K1 capsule. Bacteriophage E
endosialidase, which is thought to be responsible for initial absorption of the
phage to the host bacterium, was purified, and the N-terminal amino acid
sequences of the polypeptide monomer and cyanogen bromide fragments were
determined. Synthetic oligonucleotide probes were designed from the N-terminal
amino acid sequences and used to identify restriction fragments of bacteriophage 
E DNA encoding the endosialidase. The primary nucleotide sequence of the
bacteriophage E endosialidase gene contains an open reading frame encoding a 90
kDa polypeptide which is processed to give a mature 74 kDa protein. The native
enzyme is probably a trimer of identical 74 kDa subunits. In the bacteriophage E 
genome the K1E endosialidase open reading frame is preceded by a putative
upstream promoter region with homology to a bacteriophage SP6 promoter. A central
region of 500 amino acids of the deduced protein sequence of the K1E
endosialidase was found to have 84% identity to K1F endosialidase. Both
endosialidases contain two copies of a sialidase sequence motif common to many
bacterial and viral sialidases. These sequences flank the region of greatest
identity between the two endosialidase forms, which suggests that this central
domain is involved in binding and hydrolysis of the polysialic acid substrate.

PMCID: PMC1135765
PMID: 7626018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Scand J Immunol. 1995 Jul;42(1):21-33.

Stimulation by T cell independent antigens can relieve the arrest of
differentiation of immature auto-reactive B cells in the bone marrow.

Andersson J(1), Melchers F, Rolink A.

Author information: 
(1)Basel Institute for Immunology, Switzerland.

The pair of microH-chain and kappa L-chain transgenes encoding the Sp6
TNP/DNA-specific IgM was bred onto the rearrangement-deficient genetic background
of RAG-2T mice, and onto the kappa L-chain expression-deficient background of iE 
kappa T mice. Bone marrow of Sp6 transgenic RAG-2T mice contained normal numbers 
of B220(CD45R)+c-kit+ pro/preB-I-like cells and normal numbers of
B220(CD45R)+TAC+ preB-II-like cells. Most strikingly, the numbers of immature
sIgM+ B cells in the bone marrow were at least five-fold lower than normal, while
mature B cells were almost undetectable in bone marrow as well as spleen. Hence, 
B cell development in these mice appears to be arrested at the transition from
preB-II to immature B cells. The contents of bone marrow and spleen of the
different precursors, immature and mature B cell compartments in Sp6iE kappa T
mice were found to be similar to those of normal mice except that all sIg+ cells 
expressed lambda L-chains, of which 40% coexpressed the transgenic kappa L-chain.
It indicates that the repertoire of lambda L-chain rearrangements and the lambda 
L-chains expressed from it suffices to relieve the arrest of differentiation seen
in Sp6RAG-2T mice. The T cell-independent antigen TNP-Ficoll elicited within 5
days a response of the Sp6RAG-2T mice to develop to IgM-secreting cells and to
fill the serum pool with the Sp6 transgenic IgM to 100 micrograms/ml, i.e. to
normal serum levels of IgM in normal mice. TNP-Ficoll appears to interfere with
the arrest of differentiation. Two scenarios for this arrest of differentiation
and its relief by the T-independent antigen TNP-Ficoll are discussed.

PMID: 7631140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 1995 Jun;47(3):245-52.

[Participation of dopamine on the muscarinergic inhibitory effect of substance P 
on gastric myoelectric activity and motility].

[Article in Chinese]

Jing H(1), Lin KW, Mei MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Dalian Medical University.

Our previous study showed that microinjection of substance P (SP) into caudate
nucleus inhibits gastric myoelectric fast wave and gastric motility, an effect
mediated by muscarinic receptor. The present investigation showed that this
effects of SP could be blocked by coinjected SP antiserum or SP antagonist [Arg6,
D-Trip7,9, MePhe8]-SP6-11 or D2 dopamine antagonist haloperidol. In addition,
microinjection of dopamine (DA) into caudate nucleus could also inhibit gastric
fast wave and motility, an effect again being blockable by coinjected DA
antagonist haloperidol or atropine. Thus, it appears that the muscarinergic
inhibitory effect of SP on gastric fast wave and motility is mediated by D2
dopamine receptor.

PMID: 7570109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Kidney Int. 1995 Apr;47(4):1095-100.

Ontogeny of angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor mRNA in the rat.

Shanmugam S(1), Lenkei ZG, Gasc JM, Corvol PL, Llorens-Cortes CM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U36, Collège de France, Paris.

To study the distribution of the recently cloned angiotensin II type 2 (AT2)
receptor in the rat fetus, a double stranded cDNA was generated by a new and
recently described methodology requiring no cloning procedure. The cDNA obtained 
after reverse transcription (RT) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification corresponded to 500 base pairs of the gene coding sequence, and
included the SP6 and T7 promoters at the 5' and 3' end, respectively. 35S-labeled
cRNA sense and antisense probes were synthesized by in vitro transcription and
used for in situ hybridization. From 13 to 19 days of gestation the AT2 receptor 
mRNA expression evolved and extended from a series of paired spots located
para-axially, which were not identifiable at this level of observation, to a
distribution in various mesenchymes (perichondrium, subepidermal layers), muscle 
cells (tongue, diaphragm, stomach), and classical target organs for Ang II
(adrenal gland, kidney, aorta). During the first days after birth, the AT2
receptor mRNA decreased and remained detectable only in the adrenal gland and
kidney. The distribution of the AT2 receptor mRNA appeared strikingly different
from that of the AT1A receptor, which was studied in parallel for comparison.

PMID: 7783406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Leukemia. 1995 Apr;9(4):719-22.

Rapid synthesis of hybrid RNA molecules associated with leukemia-specific
chromosomal translocations.

Borkhardt A(1), Mitteis M, Brettreich S, Schlieben S, Hammermann J, Repp R,
Kreuder J, Buchen U, Lampert F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, University of Giessen,
Germany.

A number of gene arrangements have been described as characteristic abnormalities
associated with different types of leukemia, and this list is still growing. In
view of the biological, clinical and prognostic relevance of the pathological
fusion products, techniques permitting their detection are of paramount
importance in the clinical setting. In some instances, permanent leukemic cell
lines carrying the abnormality of interest are available for the establishment
and standardization of molecular assays. For a number of newly discovered gene
rearrangements, however, this may not be the case. It is therefore of great
interest for clinical laboratories to have alternative technical possibilities
for the set-up of standardized molecular tests. This problem provided the
stimulus to design a simple and rapid method for in vitro generation of chimeric 
RNA molecules corresponding to pathological fusion transcripts typical for
chromosomal translocations in leukemias. Two separate fragments are generated in 
a four-primer multiplex PCR. Due to a PCR-generated overlap, a chimeric fragment 
can be synthesized in a second round of PCR. This PCR product is then purified
with the help of magnetic beads. Due to the SP6 promotor sequence incorporated
during the second round of PCR, transcription into RNA is easily facilitated
while the template DNA is still bound to the solid phase. Following this strategy
we were able to synthesize the fusion transcripts m-BCR/ABL, CBF beta/MYH11, and 
MLL/AFp1 which are the molecular equivalents of t(9;22)(q34,q11), inv16(p13;q22) 
and t(1;11)(p32;q23), respectively. The chimeric RNA will be useful as a control 
template in diagnostic RT-PCR strategies. It can also be further processed in
translation systems leading to the corresponding chimeric oncoprotein. This
approach can be easily used to create any hybrid RNA of interest.

PMID: 7723408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1343-52.

Pentadecamer-binding proteins: definition of two independent protein-binding
sites needed for functional activity.

Sigvardsson M(1), Bemark M, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Lund University, Sweden.

The SP6 kappa-promoter pentadecamer (pd) element was found to be unable to
stimulate transcription when present in one copy as the only promoter element in 
a minimal promoter but showed weak stimulatory activity when present as a
multimer (four copies). One copy of the pd element acted synergistically with an 
octamer element, but not with a SP1 site, to stimulate transcription. The effect 
was orientation dependent with regard to the pd element. Gel shift analysis
showed that pd-binding proteins were expressed in transformed as well as
nontransformed B lymphocytes, irregardless of their differentiation stage, and in
HeLa cells. Two major complexes, binding to different sites within the pd
element, were observed in gel shifts. A low-molecular-weight form dominated in
resting cells, while a higher-molecular-weight form appeared after mitogenic
stimulation. Southwestern analysis showed that the low-molecular-weight
pd-binding protein had a molecular mass of 35 kDa, which was confirmed by
fractionation by denaturating polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and molecular
sieving. The higher-molecular-weight complex was sensitive to detergent
treatment, while the low-molecular-weight complex was not. Mutation analysis
showed that the two pd-binding complexes interacted with distinct sites within
the element and that dual occupancy was required for functional activity. The
functional synergy between the pd element and the octamer was more pronounced in 
plasmacytomas than in B-cell lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC230358
PMID: 7862127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 1995 Feb;233(2):85-9.

The radiosensitivity of uveal melanoma cells and the cell survival curve.

Soulières D(1), Rousseau A, Tardif M, Larochelle M, Tremblay M, Vaillancourt L,
Pelletier G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Ste Foy,
Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: No study of the radiosensitivity of uveal melanoma cells and their
survival curve has been published. The purpose of this study was to investigate
the sensitivity to different single radiation doses of SP6.5, a human uveal
melanoma cell line.
METHODS: Cells were irradiated with cobalt-60 at doses from 0 to 1200 cGy.
Radiosensitivity was measured by three methods: soft-agar bilayer assay,
tritiated thymidine incorporation, and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation.
RESULTS: The soft-agar bilayer assay, by assessing the colony-forming units,
showed that the D1 value was 470 cGy, the Dq value was 400 cGy, and the n value
exceeded 10, thus indicating a broad, shoulder and relative radioresistance. The 
doubling time as estimated by [3H]thymidine incorporation was unaffected at doses
below 600 cGy, another indication of radioresistance. BrdU incorporation revealed
no significant increase between 0 and 1000 cGy, indicating that the cell cycle
was not interrupted.
CONCLUSION: Cell survival, doubling time, and cell phases are parameters of
growth kinetics, and the results suggest that SP6.5 is radioresistant and
virtually unaffected by single radiation doses lower than 600 cGy. Our data
parallel published data for cutaneous melanomas.

PMID: 7729709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 27;270(4):1791-7.

A long purine-pyrimidine homopolymer acts as a transcriptional diode.

Grabczyk E(1), Fishman MC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown 
02129-2600.

Polypurine-polypyrimidine (R.Y) sequences have the unusual ability to form DNA
triple helices. Such tracts are overrepresented upstream of eukaryotic genes,
although a function there has not been clear. We report that transcription in
vitro into one such upstream R.Y tract in the direction that makes a
predominantly purine RNA is effectively blocked by formation of an intramolecular
triple helix. The triplex is triggered by transcription and stabilized by the
binding of nascent purine RNA to the template. Transcription in the opposite
direction is not restricted. Polypurine-polypyrimidine DNA may provide a dynamic 
and selective block to transcription without the aid of accessory proteins.

PMID: 7829515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochemistry. 1995 Jan 17;34(2):666-72.

Tests of a model of specific contacts in T7 RNA polymerase-promoter interactions.

Schick C(1), Martin CT.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst 01003.

The T7, T3, and SP6 RNA polymerases represent a highly homologous family of
enzymes that recognize similarly homologous promoter DNA sequences. Despite these
similarities, the enzymes are highly specific for their respective promoters.
Studies of mutant RNA polymerases have linked a specific amino acid residue in
the protein to recognition of bases at positions -11 and -10 in the promoter
[Raskin, C. A., et al. (1992) J. Mol. Biol. 228, 506-515]. In kinetic analyses of
transcription from synthetic promoters containing base-analog substitutions, we
have recently shown that at positions -11 and -10 of the T3 promoter, T3 RNA
polymerase recognizes functional groups along the nontemplate strand wall of the 
major groove [Schick, C., & Martin, C. T. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 4275-4780]. We 
now extend these studies to the homologous region of the T7 promoter. The results
confirm extrapolations from the T3 system and show that T7 RNA polymerase
recognizes corresponding functional groups at positions -11 and -10 of the T7
promoter. The results are consistent with a direct readout model for recognition 
of these bases [Raskin, C. A., et al. (1992) J. Mol. Biol., 228, 506-515], in
which the 6-carbonyl and 7-imino groups of the nontemplate guanine at position
-11 and the 6-amino group of the nontemplate adenine at position -10 of the T7
promoter are directly involved in binding. The results further support an overall
model for promoter recognition in which the enzyme binds to one face of the
duplex DNA in this upstream region of the promoter.

PMID: 7819262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Virology. 1995 Jan 10;206(1):155-63.

Characterization of proteins encoded by ORFs 2 to 7 of Lelystad virus.

Meulenberg JJ(1), Petersen-den Besten A, De Kluyver EP, Moormann RJ, Schaaper WM,
Wensvoort G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute for Animal Science and Health (ID-DLO),
Lelystad, The Netherlands.

The genome of Lelystad virus (LV), a positive-strand RNA virus, is 15 kb in
length and contains 8 open reading frames (ORFs) that encode putative viral
proteins. ORFs 2 to 7 were cloned in plasmids downstream of the Sp6 RNA
polymerase promoter, and the translation of transcripts generated in vitro
yielded proteins that could be immunoprecipitated with porcine anti-LV serum.
Synthetic polypeptides of 15 to 17 amino acids were selected from the amino acid 
sequences of ORFs 2 to 7 and antipeptide sera were raised in rabbits. Antisera
that immunoprecipitated the in vitro translation products of ORFs 2 to 5 and 7
were obtained. Sera containing antibodies directed against peptides from ORFs 3
to 7 reacted positively with LV-infected alveolar lung macrophages in the
immunoperoxidase monolayer assay. Using these antipeptide sera and porcine
anti-LV serum, we identified three structural proteins and assigned their
corresponding genes. Virions were found to contain a nucleocapsid protein of 15
kDa (N), an unglycosylated membrane protein of 18 kDa (M), and a glycosylated
membrane protein of 25 kDa (E). The N protein is encoded by ORF7, the M protein
is encoded by ORF6, and the E protein is encoded by ORF5. The E protein in virus 
particles contains one or two N-glycans that are resistant to
endo-beta-N-acetyl-D-glucosaminidase H. This finding indicates that the
high-mannose glycans are processed into complex glycans in the Golgi compartment.
The protein composition of the LV virions further confirms that LV is
evolutionarily related to equine arteritis virus, simian hemorrhagic fever virus,
and lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus.

PMID: 7831770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Brain Topogr. 1995 Fall;8(1):57-65.

Effects of a selective A beta afferent block on the pain-related SEP scalp
topography.

Dowman R(1), Bridgman PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, N.Y. 13699-5825, USA.

This study examined the effects of a selective ischemic block of the A beta
peripheral afferents on the pain-related somatosensory evoked potential (SEP).
Pain descriptions given during the A beta block suggest that the SEP elicited by 
noxious sural nerve stimulation arises from activity in the A delta and not the C
peripheral afferents. The SEP recorded during the A beta block was characterized 
by a potential whose latency and topographic pattern was very similar to a late
pain-related positive potential (SP6) that we have described in previous work.
These results provide further evidence for SP6 being generated by brain areas
(sources) that receive noxious inputs and make it very unlikely that sources
involved exclusively in innocuous somatosensory processes contribute to SP6.

PMID: 8829391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Methods Mol Biol. 1995;49:271-89.

In vitro transcription of class II promoters in higher plants.

Cooke R(1), Penon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie et Biologie Moleculaire Vegetale, Universite de
Perpignan, France.

PMID: 8563812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Jan;25(1):298-301.

Stimulation of kappa transcription by a decamer-dependent, synergistic mechanism.

Sigvardsson M(1), Bemark M, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Lund University, Sweden.

The intact SP6 kappa promoter stimulated transcription 30 times more efficiently 
than did a control promoter consisting of a TATA motif as the only promoter
element. Mutation of the SP6 kappa promoter decamer in two positions reduced the 
transcriptional stimulation activity by over 90%. Promoters containing the SP6
kappa promoter octamer or a consensus octamer in front of a TATA box were
ineffective immunoglobulin promoters and stimulated at the most 15% of maximal
transcription. Identical results were obtained after transfection of
untransformed mouse splenic B cells stimulated by lipopolysaccharide, that
express high levels of Oct2A, or of S194 cells that express negligible levels of 
Oct2A. Selective mutations in the penta-decamer (pd), kappa Y or early B cell
factor (EBF) elements of the promoter reduced transcriptional stimulation by
20-30% in untransformed B cells. In S194 plasmacytoma cells the EBF mutation was 
functionally silent while the kappa Y and pd mutations reduced transcriptional
activation by 60-70% in this cell line. A mutation in a TATA-proximal E-box motif
did not alter the functional activity of the promoter in either cell population. 
It can be concluded that kappa promoter function is highly dependent on complex
interactions between individual promoter elements and that the decamer motif is
pivotal for these interactions. The relative functional activity of a given
promoter varied according to the target cell population used for the functional
assay.

PMID: 7843247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biotechniques. 1995 Jan;18(1):152-7,.

pTRIPLEscript: a novel cloning vector for generating in vitro transcripts from
tandem promoters for SP6, T7 and T3 RNA polymerase.

Meador JW 3rd, McElroy HE, Pasloske BL, Milburn SC, Winkler MM.

We have constructed a family of novel in vitro transcription vectors in which
functional T3, T7 and SP6 RNA polymerase promoters are arranged in tandem and
directed towards a multiple cloning site. This prototype vector, named
pTRIPLEscript, permits the transcription of one strand of a DNA insert by any of 
the three commonly used bacteriophage RNA polymerases with no apparent cross
talk, i.e., use of the wrong promoter sequence. The vector has two main uses: (i)
to clone probe sequences that will be distributed to many laboratories, allowing 
the use of the most convenient RNA polymerase; and (ii) to circumvent the problem
of RNA polymerase-dependent premature termination.

PMID: 7702842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Brain Res. 1994 Dec 19;667(1):24-32.

Synapse alterations in the hippocampal-entorhinal formation in Alzheimer's
disease with and without Lewy body disease.

Wakabayashi K(1), Honer WG, Masliah E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0624, USA.

We quantified by microdensitometry the immunoreactivity (IR) to monoclonal
antibodies (SP6, SP12, SP15 and SP18) against various synaptic proteins in the
molecular layers of the dentate gyrus, CA4, CA3, CA1, subiculum and entorhinal
cortex in Alzheimer's disease (AD), Lewy body variant of AD (LBV) and diffuse
Lewy body disease (DLBD). A significant decrease in SP6 IR was observed in almost
all regions in AD (28.4-70.1%, mean 41.3%), LBV (19.0-42.5%, mean 26.8%) and DLBD
(19.9-31.7%, mean 27.1%) compared to controls. In addition, SP6 IR in the outer
molecular layer of the dentate gyrus was strongly correlated with tangle count in
the entorhinal cortex (r = -0.70, P < 0.002), suggesting loss of perforant
pathway projection. Although the decrease in SP12 and SP15 IR was less
pronounced, the mean values were decreased in dementia. Furthermore, SP12 and
SP15 labeled a large number of neuritic plaques, and SP15 occasionally stained
cortical LBs. The present findings indicate (i) that in the
hippocampal-entorhinal formation, the decrease of synapse protein IR in AD is
more severe than that in LBV and DLBD, (ii) that synaptic markers detect a subset
of dystrophic neurites in the plaques and (iii) that synapse proteins are
involved in the formation of cortical LBs.

PMID: 7895080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 1994 Dec;14(12):709-11.

[Effect of electroacupuncture on gastric acid secretion and gut hormones].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu YL(1), Chen SF, Pan LL.

Author information: 
(1)Second Hospital China Medical University, Shenyang.

21 patients with mild type of chronic superficial gastritis were selected in this
study. The effect of electroacupuncture in Zhongwan (RM12), Neiguan (P6) and
Sanyinjiao (Sp6) on gastric acid secretion, serum gastrin, plasma somatostatin,
plasma motilin concentration and erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase (AchE) activity
were observed. The results were as follows: There were significant decreases in
gastric acid output, serum gastrin concentration and AchE activity (P < 0.05),
but no significant changes in plasma somatostatin and motilin concentration (P > 
0.05) after simultaneous electroacupuncture in Zhongwan, Neiguan and Sanyinjiao.

PMID: 7719101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Gene. 1994 Nov 18;149(2):357-61.

Structure of a gene coding for human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase/bile acid-binding 
protein.

Qin KN(1), Khanna M, Cheng KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cornell University Medical College, New York, NY
10021.

The structure and sequence of the gene (DD/BABP) encoding a human dihydrodiol
dehydrogenase/bile acid-binding protein (DD/BABP) were determined by analysis of 
genomic clones. Several overlapping clones containing parts of the gene were
isolated from a lambda EMBL3 SP6/T7 library and characterized by restriction
mapping and DNA sequencing. The gene spans approx. 16kb and consists of nine
exons. The sizes of the exons range from 77 to 167 bp, whereas the intron sizes
range from 375 to 3430 bp. The transcription start point (tsp) is located at -56 
bp of the first ATG codon, as determined by primer extension. Neither a TATA box 
nor a CAT box was found upstream from the tsp. Southern blot analysis of the
human genomic DNA, using the cDNA as the probe, revealed several additional
hybridizing DNA bands, suggesting the existence of multiple related genes.

PMID: 7959017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochemistry. 1994 Oct 4;33(39):11980-6.

Continuous in vitro evolution of bacteriophage RNA polymerase promoters.

Breaker RR(1), Banerji A, Joyce GF.

Collaborators: Joyce GF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037.

Rapid in vitro evolution of bacteriophage T7, T3, and SP6 RNA polymerase
promoters was achieved by a method that allows continuous enrichment of DNAs that
contain functional promoter elements. This method exploits the ability of a
special class of nucleic acid molecules to replicate continuously in the presence
of both a reverse transcriptase and a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Replication
involves the synthesis of both RNA and cDNA intermediates. The cDNA strand
contains an embedded promoter sequence, which becomes converted to a functional
double-stranded promoter element, leading to the production of RNA transcripts.
Synthetic cDNAs, including those that contain randomized promoter sequences, can 
be used to initiate the amplification cycle. However, only those cDNAs that
contain functional promoter sequences are able to produce RNA transcripts.
Furthermore, each RNA transcript encodes the RNA polymerase promoter sequence
that was responsible for initiation of its own transcription. Thus, the
population of amplifying molecules quickly becomes enriched for those templates
that encode functional promoters. Optimal promoter sequences for phage T7, T3,
and SP6 RNA polymerase were identified after a 2-h amplification reaction,
initiated in each case with a pool of synthetic cDNAs encoding greater than
10(10) promoter sequence variants.

PMID: 7522554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Immunol. 1994 Sep;31(13):1005-16.

Positive transcriptional control elements within the SP6 kappa promoter decamer
3' flanking sequence.

Sigvardsson M(1), Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Lund University, Sweden.

The SP6 kappa promoter decamer 3' flanking sequence was shown to contain several 
positive control elements for transcriptional stimulation which together
increased transcriptional stimulation one order of magnitude. One was mapped to
an A nucleotide immediately 3' of the decamer consensus motif. The mechanism was 
to increase the binding affinity of Oct2 for the decamer core motif by a direct
interaction between the Oct2 protein and the template, since in vitro transcribed
and translated Oct2 showed an identical binding preference when compared to the
corresponding gene products in nuclear extracts. By mutation analysis it was
shown that the functional activity of the SP6 kappa promoter 3' flanking sequence
with regard to transcriptional stimulation was dependent on the presence of such 
a high affinity Oct binding site. Deletion analysis showed that the POU-Homeo
domain of Oct2 sufficed for the flanking sequence mediated affinity increase for 
decamer elements and that amino or carboxy terminal variations in Oct2 did not
influence this interaction. The flanking sequence element also increased Oct1
binding to the same decamer motif. The A 3' of the decamer increased affinity of 
Oct2 binding to a consensus as well as a mutated decamer. These data illustrate
how flanking sequence elements can compensate mutations in the decamer core motif
present in a majority of kappa promoters.

PMID: 8084335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Virol. 1994 Sep;68(9):5588-95.

The human astrovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase coding region is expressed by
ribosomal frameshifting.

Marczinke B(1), Bloys AJ, Brown TD, Willcocks MM, Carter MJ, Brierley I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The genomic RNA of human astrovirus serotype 1 (HAst-1) contains three open
reading frames (ORFs), 1a, 1b, and 2. ORF 1b is located downstream of, and
overlaps, 1a, and it has been suggested on the basis of sequence analysis that
expression of ORF 1b is mediated through -1 ribosomal frameshifting. To examine
this possibility, a cDNA fragment containing the 1a-1b overlap region was cloned 
within a reporter gene and placed under the control of the bacteriophage SP6
promoter in a recombinant plasmid. Synthetic transcripts derived from this
plasmid, when translated in the rabbit reticulocyte lysate cell-free system,
specified the synthesis of polypeptides whose size and antibody reactivity were
consistent with an efficient -1 ribosomal frameshift event at the overlap region.
The HAst-1 frameshift signal has two essential components, a heptanucleotide
slippery sequence, A6C, and a stem-loop structure in the RNA. The presence of
this structure was confirmed by complementary and compensatory mutation analysis 
and by direct structure probing with single- and double-stranded RNA-specific
reagents. The HAst-1 frameshift signal, like that present at the overlap of the
gag and pro genes of the retrovirus human T-cell lymphotrophic virus type II,
does not involve the formation of an RNA pseudoknot.

PMCID: PMC236959
PMID: 8057439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 Aug 15;244(4):410-9.

Genetic recombination of nucleosomal templates is mediated by transcription.

Kotani H(1), Sekiguchi JM, Dutta S, Kmiec EB.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107.

An in vitro system has been developed to examine the influence of transcription
on genetic rearrangement. Using a homologous pairing assay, the transfer of one
strand of a nucleosomal template onto a recipient DNA molecule was monitored as a
function of RNA polymerase activity. Transcriptionally inactive nucleosomal DNA
was refractory to homologous pairing. Homologous pairing was catalyzed, however, 
by the eukaryotic recombinase, rec1, when the nucleosomal template was being
transcribed. The reaction was found to be dependent on the presence of rec1, RNA 
polymerase, NTPs and RNA synthesis. Heteroduplex formation between a short DNA
duplex fragment assembled into a nucleosome and a single-stranded circle relied
also on the presence of sequence homology between the duplex and the circle. The 
results of this study lend support to the notion that transcriptionally active
regions within a chromosome are more apt to serve as sites of genetic
recombination.

PMID: 8078467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Anal Biochem. 1994 Aug 1;220(2):420-3.

In vitro transcription: preparative RNA yields in analytical scale reactions.

Pokrovskaya ID(1), Gurevich VV.

Author information: 
(1)Branch of Shemyakin Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Pushchino, Moscow
Region, Russia.

A new method of in vitro transcription with the use of SP6, T7, and T3 RNA
polymerases is described. The method makes it possible to obtain, using only
1.6-2.6 micrograms of DNA template in as little as 50 microliters of
transcription reaction in just 2 h, more than 200 micrograms of pure mRNA (with
high translatability). Optimal conditions for the synthesis by all three RNA
polymerases of transcripts 1500-1700 nt long and also for very long transcripts
were determined. Reaction conditions that minimize DNA template or RNA polymerase
requirements are also described, and these provide synthesis of either 1200-2100 
RNA copies per DNA molecule or more than 5-15 micrograms of RNA per unit of RNA
polymerase. Reactions can be easily scaled up to volumes of several milliliters, 
yielding up to 5.2 mg/ml of 1500- to 1700-nt-long RNA or up to 7.1 mg/ml of very 
long RNA.

PMID: 7526740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Virol. 1994 Jul;68(7):4580-8.

Completion of Kunjin virus RNA sequence and recovery of an infectious RNA
transcribed from stably cloned full-length cDNA.

Khromykh AA(1), Westaway EG.

Author information: 
(1)Sir Albert Sakzewski Virus Research Centre, Royal Childrens Hospital,
Brisbane, Australia.

Completion of the Kunjin virus (KUN) RNA sequence showed that it is the longest
flavivirus sequence reported (11,022 bases), commencing with a 5' noncoding
region of 96 bases. The 3' noncoding sequence of 624 nucleotides included a
unique insertion sequence of 46 bases adjacent to the stop codon, but otherwise
it had properties similar to those of RNAs of closely related flaviviruses. A
full-length KUN cDNA clone which could be stably propagated in Escherichia coli
DH5 alpha was constructed; SP6 polymerase RNA transcripts from amplified cDNA
were infectious when transfected into BHK-21 cells. A mutational change
abolishing the BamHI restriction site at position 4049, leading to a conservative
amino acid change of Arg-175 to Lys in the NS2A protein, was introduced into the 
cDNA during construction and was retained in the recovered virus. Extra terminal 
nucleotides introduced during cloning of the cDNA were shown to be present in the
in vitro RNA transcripts but absent in the RNA of recovered virus. Although
recovered virus differed from the parental KUN by a smaller plaque phenotype and 
delayed growth rate in BHK-21 cells and mice, it was very similar as assessed by 
several other criteria, such as peak titer during growth in cells, infectivity
titer in cells and in mice, rate of adsorption and penetration in cells,
replication at 39 degrees C, and neurovirulence after intraperitoneal injection
in mice. The KUN stably cloned cDNA will provide a useful basis for future
studies in defining and characterizing functional roles of all the gene products.

PMCID: PMC236385
PMID: 8207832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Leukemia. 1994 Jul;8(7):1157-63.

Ectopic expression of myc or myn down-regulates immunoglobulin transcription.

Sigvardsson M(1), Johansson K, Larsson LG, Nilsson K, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Lund University, Sweden.

Co-transfection of expression vectors for c-myc or myn down-regulated the
expression from a reporter plasmid containing the
chloramphenicol-acetyl-transferase (CAT) gene, under the control of an
immunoglobulin kappa promoter and the immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer. The
effect was dose-dependent and an additive effect was seen when both expression
vectors were transfected simultaneously. Deletion mutants lacking the leucine
zipper region of c-myc were unable to down-regulate the transcription from the
reporter construct. Reporter genes where the immunoglobulin enhancer had been
exchanged with a SV40 enhancer or an immunoglobulin minimal enhancer were still
down-regulated by a cotransfection with c-myc expression vectors. A minimal
promoter containing an octamer motif responded to myc expression while a minimal 
promoter containing a SP1 motif did not. No direct interactions between myc, myn 
and Oct proteins could be detected either by band-shift analysis, or by
co-translation in vitro followed by precipitation with SP6 kappa promoter bound
to magnetic carriers. Furthermore, B cells from mice transgenic for myc showed
aberrant expression of transcription factors.

PMID: 8035607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):303-15.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. II.
Effects of stimulus intensity on topographic pattern and amplitude.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

The effects of innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation on the SEP scalp
topography were examined in 15 human subjects. This analysis focused on the 6
stable periods (i.e., consecutive time points where the topography did not
change) that were identified in the companion paper (Dowman 1994). Stable period 
1 (SP1: 58-90 msec post stimulus), SP4 (178-222 msec) and SP5 (223-277 msec)
showed amplitude-stimulus intensity relationships that are similar to those of
neurons involved in the sensory-discriminative aspects of innocuous
somatosensation. The SP1 topographic pattern showed little or no change across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, which together with the amplitude data
suggests that SP1 is largely generated by neurons involved in innocuous
somatosensation. The SP4 topographic pattern did not change appreciably across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, but its amplitude decreased with
increasing noxious stimulation. These data suggest that SP4 is generated by
neurons involved in innocuous somatosensation and that noxious inputs inhibit
these cells. There were differences in the SP5 topographic patterns evoked at the
innocuous and the noxious stimulus levels, which suggest SP5 also receives a
contribution from neurons involved in noxious somatosensation. SP3 (135-157 msec)
and SP6 (282-339 msec) are probably generated by neurons involved in noxious
somatosensation. The topographic patterns of both were different at innocuous and
noxious levels. SP3's amplitude-stimulus intensity function suggests that it is
generated by neurons that respond to noxious inputs in a non-graded fashion. The 
amplitude and offset latency of SP6 increased with increasing noxious
stimulation, which suggests that SP6 is generated by neurons that respond to
noxious inputs in a graded fashion.

PMID: 7517852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):291-302.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. I.
Identification of stable periods and individual differences.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

Scalp potential topographies evoked by innocuous and noxious sural nerve
stimulation were obtained from 15 human subjects. The SEP scalp topography could 
be separated into 6 different stable periods (SP), that is, consecutive time
points where there were no major changes in the topographic pattern. SP1
(occurring 58-90 msec post stimulus) was characterized by a contralateral frontal
positivity and a central negativity oriented ipsilateral to the evoking stimulus;
SP2 (92-120 msec) by a bilateral frontal positivity and a symmetrical central
negativity; SP3 (135-158 msec) by a widespread negativity with a minimum at the
contralateral temporo-frontal region; and SP4 (178-222 msec), SP5 (223-277 msec) 
and SP6 (282-339 msec) by a widespread positivity with a maximum located along
the centro-parietal midline. SP4, SP5, and SP6 could be distinguished by changes 
in the orientation of the isovoltage contour lines and/or by changes in the
location of the maximum. The stable periods had similar onset and offset
latencies and the same major features across subjects. However, the topographic
patterns were not identical across subjects. These individual differences are
likely due to the expected variability in the orientation of the equivalent
regional dipole sources generating these potentials.

PMID: 7517851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 May 25;243(4):463-72.

Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of an Azospirillum brasilense
indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase gene.

Costacurta A(1), Keijers V, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Heverlee,
Belgium.

Azospirillum brasilense isolated from the rhizosphere of different plants has the
ability to excrete indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) into the culture media. Cosmid
p0.2, isolated from an A. brasilense Sp245 genome library in pLAFR1, complements 
the Tn5-induced mutant SpM7918 of A. brasilense Sp6 which excretes reduced
amounts of IAA. Restriction mapping and gene expression studies identified a
BglII-EcoRI 4.3 kb fragment of p0.2 sufficient for the restoration of high levels
of IAA production in mutant SpM7918. Tn5 mutagenesis localized the gene
responsible on a 1.8 kb SmaI fragment. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed that
this fragment contains one complete open reading frame. The predicted protein
sequence shows extensive homology with the indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase of
Enterobacter cloacae and the pyruvate decarboxylases of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
and Zymomonas mobilis. The A. brasilense mutant Sp245a, constructed by
homogenotization of a Tn5 insertion derivative of the 1.8 kb SmaI fragment, also 
displayed reduced IAA production. Introduction of the cloned wild-type gene into 
Rhizobium meliloti 1021 resulted in increased IAA production. Cell-free extracts 
prepared from R. meliloti and A. brasilense transconjugants harboring this gene
could convert indole-3-pyruvic acid to indole-3-acetaldehyde and tryptophol.
These results clearly demonstrate that IAA production in A. brasilense is
mediated by indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase.

PMID: 8202090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Immunol. 1994 May 15;152(10):4873-83.

B cells from M167 mu kappa transgenic mice fail to proliferate after stimulation 
with soluble anti-Ig antibodies. A model for antigen-induced B cell anergy.

Sieckmann DG(1), Holmes K, Hornbeck P, Martin E, Guelde G, Bondada S, Longo DL,
Kenny JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Department, Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, MD
20889-5607.

The transgenic (TG) mouse strain 207-4, carries mu a + kappa transgenes ligated
to the anti-phosphocholine (PC) VH1 and V kappa 24 V region genes from the
MOPC-167 myeloma. Although B cells from mice carrying these transgenes respond
both in vivo and in vitro to thymus-dependent Ags, they failed to proliferate in 
response to soluble goat anti-mu Ab or other soluble anti-Ig reagents. On the
other hand, B cells from the Sp6 mu kappa anti-trinitrophenyl TG mouse line
proliferated normally after stimulation with soluble anti-mu. However, the 207-4 
anti-PC transgene positive (TG+) splenic B cells proliferated when stimulated
with anti-mu, anti-idiotype, anti-allotype, or PC-conjugated to Sepharose beads. 
TG+ B cells were also induced to proliferate when stimulated with anti-Lyb-2;
thus, their defect may be restricted to signaling through sigM. The lack of
response to soluble anti-mu could not be reversed by addition of IL-4, by removal
of T cells, by addition of anti-FcR Ab, or by stimulation with F(ab')2 anti-mu.
Thus, the failure to proliferate was not caused by active T cell suppression or
FcR-mediated inhibition. In mixed cultures of TG+ and transgene negative (TG-)
spleen cells, the TG- cells were able to proliferate normally to soluble anti-mu,
indicating that suppressive factors were not involved in the unresponsiveness of 
the TG+ anti-PC-specific B cells. These studies suggest that B cells in the 207-4
anti-PC TG mice exhibit a defect in activation through their sIgM receptors, and 
this unresponsiveness may reflect a form of Ag-induced tolerance.

PMID: 8176209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Virology. 1994 May 15;201(1):36-45.

Agrobacterium-mediated inoculation of PSTVd cDNAs onto tomato reveals the
biological effect of apparently lethal mutations.

Hammond RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Plant Pathology Laboratory, U.S. Department of
Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville, Maryland 20705.

Potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd) mutants which contain alterations in the
terminal loops of the rod-like native structure have previously been reported
from our laboratory. PSTVd-P contains mutations at positions 2, 4, and 6 in the
left terminal loop; PSTVd-R+, a sequence permutation of PSTVd-R, contains the
same mutations at positions 177 and 178 in the right terminal loop as PSTVd-R and
contains in addition a 1-nucleotide G insertion at position 176. PSTVd-P,
PSTVd-R, and PSTV-R+ were noninfectious when either cDNA or SP6-generated RNA
transcripts were used as inoculum onto tomato cotyledons. In the current study,
mutant and wild-type PSTVd constructs were mobilized into Agrobacterium
tumefaciens and used for stem inoculation of tomato plants.
Agrobacterium-mediated inoculation of the mutant and wild-type constructs has
confirmed the inability of the PSTVd-P mutant to establish an infection. The
PSTV-R+ mutant and/or sequence variants derived in vivo can establish an
infection, although PSTVd-R+ progeny and replicative intermediates appear to be
primarily restricted to the gall and root tissues of the plant and only
occasionally are progeny detectable in the newly developing leaves. The reduced
level of viroid accumulation from the PSTVd-R+ mutant appears to be consistent
with the mutant viroid replicating/accumulating only in a limited number of cells
or cell types. The mutations in the right terminal loop may alter interactions
with specific host components and thereby disrupt the normal pattern of
intercellular transport of the viroid or limit its replication to a cell type but
not abolish replication per se.

PMID: 7513926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nature. 1994 Apr 7;368(6471):548-51.

Ventralizing signal determined by protease activation in Drosophila
embryogenesis.

Smith CL(1), DeLotto R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Department, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research,
New York, New York 10021.

Specification of dorsal-ventral cell fate during Drosophila embryogenesis is
mediated by a signal transduction pathway. Asymmetry of cell fates arises through
the spatially restricted production of a ligand in an extracellular compartment
called the perivitelline space. The snake and easter genes are required for the
production of the ligand and they encode the proenzyme form of secreted
extracellular serine proteases. We have examined the effect of producing a
preactivated form of the snake protease on the generation of dorsal-ventral
polarity. SP6 RNA microinjection experiments reveal that different cell fates
acquired at cellular blastoderm can be specified by the amount and spatial
distribution of activated snake protein. Our results support a protease cascade
model in which localized activation of uniformly distributed protease proenzymes 
leads to the spatially restricted production of ligand in the perivitelline space
on the ventral side of the embryo.

PMID: 8139688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 25;22(6):937-45.

Octamer displacement and redistribution in transcription of single nucleosomes.

O'Donohue MF(1), Duband-Goulet I, Hamiche A, Prunell A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique et
Université Paris 7, France.

Single nucleosomes were assembled on a 357bp DNA fragment containing a 5S RNA
gene from sea urchin and a promoter for SP6 RNA polymerase, and were fractionated
as a function of their positions by gel electrophoresis. Transcribed nucleosome
positions were detected by observing band disappearance in gels, which in turn
provided evidence for the displacement of the histone octamer upon transcription.
Differential band disappearance showed that nucleosomes closer to the promoter
were harder to transcribe, and transcription was blocked when the nucleosome
proximal boundary was at the start site. Nucleosomes located at discrete
positions were also eluted from the gel bands and transcribed. In this case, new 
bands appeared as a consequence of octamer redistribution. Such redistribution
occurred over all untranscribed positions, as well as over transcribed positions 
close enough to the promoter. Similar conclusions were derived from another
previously investigated fragment containing a Xenopus 5S RNA gene.

PMCID: PMC307912
PMID: 8152924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Salud Publica Mex. 1994 Mar-Apr;36(2):140-7.

[Riboprobes: an alternative in the detection of viral sequences].

[Article in Spanish]

Gutiérrez-Escolano AL(1), Castro-Rodríguez EM, Núñez-de Cáceres RM, Soler-Claudín
C, Fernández-Tomás C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio del Departamento de Patología Experimental, Centro de
Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados, Instituto Politécnico Nacional
(CINVESTAV-IPN), México.

The use of riboprobes for the detection of RNA viral sequences is analyzed.
Subgenomic fragments of cDNA from poliovirus type 2, dengue virus type 4 and
human immunodeficiency virus type 1, were inserted downstream SP6 and/or T7
promoters in the transcription vectors pGEM-4z or pSP64. RNAs obtained by in
vitro transcription in the presence of UTP infinity (32P) were used as probes for
the detection of RNA viral sequences from infected cell lines in slot and
Northern blot assays. The poliovirus riboprobe (P2-221) was able to detect
specific viral sequences; thus, it could be used for the detection of the virus
in serum, as well as in residual waters. The human immunodeficiency virus
riboprobe (HIV-378), detected viral sequences poly A+RNA from infected cells;
thus it can be used as a confirmatory test or as a tool in basic research.
Finally, the dengue virus riboprobes (D4-2819 and D4-1134) detected specifically 
dengue 4 virus; however the sensitivity of the detection could be significantly
improved amplifying viral sequences by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) prior 
to probe hybridization.

PMID: 8073329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Anal Biochem. 1994 Feb 15;217(1):12-9.

Development of a chaperone-deficient system by fractionation of a prokaryotic
coupled transcription/translation system.

Kudlicki W(1), Mouat M, Walterscheid JP, Kramer G, Hardesty B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Texas at Austin 78712.

A coupled transcription/translation system from Escherichia coli has been
developed that is very active for protein synthesis but deficient in chaperone
proteins. The chaperones GroEL and DnaK distribute during the first
ultracentrifugation of the E. coli extract partially with the ribosomes and
partially in a liquid, viscous fraction above the ribosomes. Gel filtration
chromatography of this latter fraction separates GroEL and DnaK as
high-molecular-weight components from the peak of activity of the factors
required for protein synthesis. Thus, a chaperone-deficient
transcription/translation system can be reconstituted with salt-washed ribosomes.
This chaperone-deficient system was used to study synthesis and folding of
bacterial dihydrofolate reductase and of rhodanese, a eukaryotic mitochondrial
enzyme. Both enzymes were synthesized from nonlinearized plasmids that had the
respective coding sequence under the SP6 promoter. Both enzymes were synthesized 
in active form and with high specific activity in the chaperone-deficient system.
A high proportion, about 20% of newly synthesized dihydrofolate reductase and
about 50% of rhodanese, stayed with the ribosomes after coupled
transcription/translation. No enzymatic activity was detected in this fraction.
Addition of the chaperones GroEL/ES and DnaK resulted in a shift of rhodanese
molecules from the ribosomes into the supernatant fraction. Nearly all molecules 
in the supernatant were enzymatically active.

PMID: 7911283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell. 1994 Jan 28;76(2):371-82.

A histone octamer can step around a transcribing polymerase without leaving the
template.

Studitsky VM(1), Clark DJ, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The mechanism by which nucleosome cores are displaced and re-formed during
transcription in vitro has been investigated. A nucleosome core was assembled on 
a short linear DNA template (227 bp) containing an SP6 RNA polymerase promoter
and a nucleosome-positioning sequence. Transcription induced the translocation of
the nucleosome core over 75 or 80 bp to two positions at the other end of the
template, blocking the promoter. At low rNTP concentrations, transfer occurred
only on the same template molecule, even in the presence of large excesses of
competitor DNA. On a longer template (262 bp), nucleosome core position after
transcription depended on its position before transcription. The data suggest
that the octamer transfers without dissociation from DNA and provide strong
evidence for a translocation mechanism in which DNA ahead of the polymerase
uncoils from the octamer as the DNA behind coils around it. In this way, the
octamer steps around the transcribing polymerase.

PMID: 8293470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Gene. 1994 Jan 28;138(1-2):227-32.

Construction and features of lambda EMBL3cosW, a lambda replacement vector for
detailed analysis of large regions of genomic DNA.

Whittaker PA(1), Wood L.

Author information: 
(1)University Clinical Biochemistry, Southampton General Hospital, UK.

A phage lambda replacement vector, lambda EMBL3cosW, is described which expedites
detailed analysis of large regions of chromosomal DNA. Two features of the vector
aid this process. Firstly, the replaceable stuffer in lambda EMBL3cosW is flanked
by SP6 and T7 promoters so that end-specific hybridisation probes can be rapidly 
generated from cloned inserts for identification of sequentially overlapping
clones in genomic libraries. Secondly, because all the phage coding sequences in 
the vector (which are placed to the right of the replaceable stuffer) can be
removed from cloned inserts by cleavage with NotI, restriction mapping of cloned 
inserts using partial digest strategies is greatly facilitated. Other features of
the vector are: (1) strategically placed BamHI and XhoI sites for the cloning of 
genomic DNA partially digested with MboI or Sau3AI by two different methods; (2) 
SalI and SfiI sites for the isolation of intact cloned inserts; and (3)
transcription terminators to insulate vector genes from transcriptional
interference from cloned insert DNAs.

PMID: 8125306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int Immunol. 1994 Jan;6(1):41-8.

Transcriptional regulation of immunoglobulin gene expression by anti-Ig.

Johansson K(1), Sigvardsson M, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, University of Lund, Sweden.

When transfected into mouse splenic B cells stimulated with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) the expression of DNA vectors containing the chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase gene under the control of a SP6 kappa promoter and the Ig heavy chain
intron enhancer could be down-regulated 5- to 10-fold by treatment of the cells
with anti-Ig prior to transfection. Exchanging the SP6 kappa promoter by minimal 
promoters consisting of an octamer or a SP1 motif linked to TATA box did not
impair the anti-Ig induced down-regulation while inserting a rabbit beta-globin
promoter did. The transcriptional regulation could be observed after replacing
the Ig heavy chain intron enhancer with a SV40 enhancer, or duplicated minimal Ig
heavy chain enhancers containing or lacking the octamer element. The
down-regulation was not dependent on the level of transcriptional stimulation
observed. A difference in Oct2 expression could neither be detected at the RNA
nor protein level after treatment of LPS stimulated B cells with anti-Ig or
phorbol-dibutyrate. Anti-Ig treatment, but not phorbol-di-butyrate treatment,
induced increased levels of AP1 and NF kappa B transcription factors. Thus,
either differentiation specific transcriptional control of Ig genes is exerted
via transcription factors common to several distinct enhancers or via
transcriptional adaptor molecules that can interact with several distinct DNA
binding proteins.

PMID: 8148326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Antisense Res Dev. 1994 Winter;4(4):279-84.

Inhibition of in vitro transcription by oligodeoxynucleotides.

Temsamani J(1), Metelev V, Levina A, Agrawal S, Zamecnik P.

Author information: 
(1)Hybridon Inc., Worcester, Massachusetts 01605.

Single-stranded short phosphodiester oligodeoxynucleotides have been used to
inhibit in vitro T7 transcription system. These oligodeoxynucleotides were
complementary to either the 3'-5' or 5'-3' strand of the transcription initiation
site of a plasmid containing the gag region of HIV. Our results show that
incubation of this plasmid DNA with the oligodeoxynucleotide complementary to the
template DNA strand (3'-5', sense oligo) showed efficient inhibition of
transcription. Incubation of this plasmid with the oligodeoxynucleotide
complementary to the 5'-3' strand (antisense oligo) or a random
oligodeoxynucleotide failed to do so. The inhibition of gag transcription was
specific since the sense oligo failed to prevent transcription of a plasmid
containing U2 RNA sequences. The inhibition of transcription was not limited to
T7 RNA polymerase but was also observed with SP6 RNA polymerase.

PMID: 7734942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Genet Anal Tech Appl. 1994;11(5-6):117-28.

Direct sequencing of terminal regions of genomic P1 clones. A general strategy
for the design of sequence-tagged site markers.

Kimmerly WJ(1), Kyle AL, Lustre VM, Martin CH, Palazzolo MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Center, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720.

A method for the preparation of P1 DNA is presented, which allows the direct
sequencing of ends of inserts in genomic P1 clones using the Applied Biosystems
373A DNA Sequencer and the Dye Terminator sequencing methodology. We surveyed
several common methods of DNA preparation including alkaline lysis,
Triton-lysozyme lysis, CsCl density-gradient purification, and a commercial
column matrix DNA purification kit manufactured by Qiagen. We found that a
modified alkaline lysis preparation of P1 DNA was most successful for generating 
P1 DNA that could be sequenced directly. We also noted that the host bacterial
strain from which the P1 DNA was purified dramatically affected the quality of
sequencing templates. The bacterial strains NS3145 and NS3529, in which the
Drosophila melanogaster and human P1 genomic libraries are harbored, routinely
yielded poor-quality sequencing templates. However, the bacterial strain DH10B
routinely yielded P1 DNA that was sequenced successfully. A bacterial mating
scheme is presented that exploits gamma delta transposition events to allow the
transfer of P1 clones from the library host strain to DH10B. Using either an SP6 
or a T7 primer, an average of 350 base pairs of DNA sequence was obtained with an
uncalled base frequency of approximately 2%. About 4% of P1 end sequences
generated corresponded to unique Drosophila loci present in the Genbank database.
These single-pass DNA sequences were used to design sequence-tagged site markers 
for physical mapping studies in both humans and Drosophila.

PMID: 7710776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Neuropeptides. 1994 Jan;26(1):55-7.

Synthesis and biological activity of NK1 tachykinin antagonists not containing
D-residues.

Poulos C(1), Antoniou M, Patacchini R, Maggi CA, Rovero P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

A series of analogues of the previously reported NK1 tachykinin antagonist [Orn6,
Glu(OBzl)11]-SP6-11-OBzl has been synthesized and tested in order to investigate 
the effects on antagonistic activity of modifications at the C-terminal residue. 
The biological activity in the guinea-pig ileum assay (NK1 receptor) indicates
that the two aromatic rings introduced in the C-terminal part of the peptide are 
both essential for the expression of antagonistic activity.

PMID: 7512697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Dec;267(3):1168-75.

Differential blockade by tachykinin NK1 and NK2 receptor antagonists of
bronchoconstriction induced by direct-acting agonists and the indirect-acting
mimetics capsaicin, serotonin and 2-methyl-serotonin in the anesthetized guinea
pig.

Buckner CK(1), Liberati N, Dea D, Lengel D, Stinson-Fisher C, Campbell J, Miller 
S, Shenvi A, Krell RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, ZENECA Pharmaceuticals Group, ZENECA Inc.,
Wilmington, Delaware.

This study has examined the abilities of (+/-)-CP96345 and (+/-)-SR48968,
nonpeptide antagonists selective for the tachykinin NK1 and NK2 receptors,
respectively, to block bronchoconstriction caused by intravenous administration
of direct-acting receptor agonists and the indirect-acting mimetics capsaicin,
serotonin and 2-methyl-serotonin in the anesthetized guinea pig. The NK1
antagonist (+/-)-CP96345 was found to cause, at a maximally tolerated dose of 9
mumol/kg, an approximate 10-fold rightward shift of the dose-response curves for 
selective NK1 agonists substance P (SP), [Sar9,Met(O2)11]SP and
Ac-[Arg6,Sar9,Met(O2)11]SP6-11 without altering responses to selective NK2
agonists neurokinin A (NKA), [Nle10]NKA4-10 or [beta-Ala8]NKA4-10. The NK2
antagonist (+/-)-SR48968 caused dose-dependent rightward shifts of the
dose-response curves for the NK2 but not the NK1 agonists. Results using
combinations of the receptor antagonists indicate that the NK2 agonists could
cause bronchoconstriction by acting on the NK1 receptors at large doses relative 
to those used without antagonists. Of the agonists used here, [beta-Ala8]NKA4-10 
appeared to be the most selective for the NK2 receptors. When used alone, only
(+/-)-SR48968 was found to block bronchoconstriction caused by capsaicin,
serotonin (after blockade of 5-HT2 receptors by LY53857) and 2-methyl-serotonin. 
When (+/-)-CP96345 was also given, larger additional blockade was seen with
capsaicin than with serotonin or 2-methyl-serotonin as mimetic substance.
Atropine caused small and variable degrees of blockade of serotonin and
2-methyl-serotonin but not of capsaicin after combinations of the two
antagonists.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8263778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1993 Dec;31(6):1017-21.

All 4 bases of both strands at -9 and -8 in T7 promoter are needed to be
substituted by SP6-specific bases to switch promoter specificity.

Lee SS(1), Park SK, Cho IH, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon.

It has previously been shown that a substitution of two base pairs at -9 and -8
in T7 promoter by SP6 promoter-specific base pairs alone is sufficient to make
the T7 variant become an SP6 promoter, abolishing T7 promoter activity [Lee, S.
S., and Kang, C. (1992) Biochem. Int. 26, 1-5]. In order to determine which of
the 4 bases on both strands at the two positions is involved in the
discriminative specificity, each base or each pair of bases was substituted by
SP6-specific base(s), allowing one or two mismatches. The results show that
all-four-base substitution only is capable of switching promoter specificity, and
that all the four bases are substantially involved in T7 promoter activity.

PMID: 8193585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Bioorg Khim. 1993 Dec;19(12):1191-204.

[Localization of segments in the Gs protein interacting with adenylate cyclase
using a Gs/G0-chimera].

[Article in Russian]

Lipkin VM, Krasovskaia LA, Muranov AV, Pronin AN, Udovichenko IP, Iurovskaia AA, 
Zagranichnyi VE.

cDNAs coding for three types of alpha-subunits of GTP-binding proteins Gs and G0 
(a short form of alpha s with Asp-Ser in positions 71 and 72, a long form of
alpha s with the insertion of 16 amino acid residues instead of Asp-Ser
(71-72)--both from bovine brain, and alpha 0 from bovine cerebellum as well as
some chimeric alpha s/alpha 0 genes were cloned into a modified pGEM-2 plasmid
vector under the control of the SP6 promoter. All the genes were in vitro
transcribed and translated, and some functional properties of the resulting
proteins were determined, such as adenylyl cyclase activation, ADP-ribosylation
with pertussis toxin, limited nucleotide-dependent trypsin proteolysis. Parts of 
the alpha s polypeptide chain necessary for the activation of adenylyl cyclase
were mapped. The alpha s domain interacting with adenylyl cyclase is formed by
the alpha s polypeptide chain fragments 235-294 and 337-356 (numbering as of the 
alpha s long form).

PMID: 8117336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1993 Dec;42(6):565-9.

Synthesis of a potent antagonist of substance P by replacing the CH2SCH3 and the 
alpha-carboxamide groups of the methionine at [Orn6]-SP6-11 by benzyl ester
groups.

Karagiannis K(1), Stavropoulos G, Poulos C, Jordan CC, Hagan RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

Analogues of [Orn6]-SP6-11 have been synthesized in which the CH2SCH3 group of
Met11 is replaced by a COOCH3 or a COOBzl group. These analogues, which were
tested for agonist and antagonist activity in three in vitro preparations
representative of NK-1, NK-2 and NK-3 receptor types, were full agonists at NK-1 
receptors, showed very weak agonist activity at NK-2, receptors and were weak
antagonists at NK-3 receptors. The above analogues were modified by substituting 
the alpha-carboxamide of residue 11 by a COOCH3 and a COOBzl group, respectively.
The resulting analogues were found to be devoid of agonist activity in each of
the functional assays. However, they showed weak antagonist activity at each
receptor subtype, with the exception of the dibenzyl analogue, which was a potent
and selective NK-1 receptor antagonist. It is concluded that appropriate
modification of the side chain of Met11 and its alpha-carboxamide leads to a
potent and selective at NK-1 receptor antagonist.

PMID: 7508424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Nov 25;21(23):5480-4.

SP6 RNA polymerase efficiently synthesizes RNA from short double-stranded DNA
templates.

Stump WT(1), Hall KB.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biophysics, St Louis, MO 63110.

SP6 DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, like T7 RNA polymerase, can be used to
synthesize RNA sequences from short DNA templates which contain the 18 base pair 
promoter region. Use of SP6 polymerase extends the range of possible 5' sequences
of RNA products, since the preferred SP6 start site (of the RNA product) is
5'GAAGA, while T7 polymerase prefers 5'GGGAG. The SP6 start site can be
advantageous in large-scale syntheses where high concentrations of RNA can lead
to aggregation. Using the limited number of DNA templates described here, there
appears to be a significant difference between the two enzymes: SP6 polymerase
requires a complete duplex DNA substrate for efficient synthesis, unlike the T7
enzyme which works efficiently when only the 18 base promoter region is
double-stranded. SP6 polymerase consistently produces higher yields of RNA than
does T7 polymerase, and the reactions can be easily scaled up to produce
milligram quantities of RNA.

PMCID: PMC310589
PMID: 7505427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Curr Genet. 1993 Nov;24(5):428-32.

Nucleotide sequence relationships of double-stranded RNAs in flax rust,
Melampsora lini.

Dickinson MJ(1), Zhang R, Pryor A.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO, Division of Plant Industry, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

Flax rust, Melampsora lini strain SP6, contains 11 double-stranded (ds) RNA
molecules with a total length of about 25 kbp. The dsRNAs are inherited in three 
genetic units: the L unit comprising a single 5.2 kbp dsRNA and contained within 
a 40-nm virus-like particle, and the A and B units each consisting of five dsRNAs
(A1-A5, and B1-B5) ranging in size from 1.2 to 2.7 kbp. This paper reports the
isolation of a cDNA library representing 10 of the 11 dsRNAs. By nucleic-acid
hybridization techniques it has been shown that all ten sequences are unique
showing no detectable cross-hybridization with any other dsRNA present in the
rust. A near full-length sequence of 1932 bp of the B3 dsRNA is reported and
contains several open reading frames, the largest of which comprises most of the 
molecule.

PMID: 8299159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Scand J Immunol. 1993 Nov;38(5):411-6.

Characterization of the joining chain (J-chain) promoter.

Sigvardsson M(1), Olsson L, Högbom E, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Lund University, Sweden.

A 300 b.p. promoter from the mouse joining chain (J-chain) gene was studied with 
regard to functional activity and protein/DNA interactions. The promoter only
stimulated expression of a chloramphenicol-acetyl-transferase (CAT) reporter gene
when an enhancer was present in the construct, regardless of whether the
construct was transfected into cell lines that did or did not express an
endogenous J-chain. Furthermore, deletion mutants lacking the 5' portion of the
promoter were transcribed at a higher rate than the intact promoter in both
J-chain positive and J-chain negative B-cell lines but not in untransformed B
lymphocytes stimulated by lipopolysaccharide, indicating the presence of a
negative control element in the 5' portion of the J-chain promoter active in
tumour cells only. The octamer element in the J-chain promoter was found to bind 
Oct proteins, albeit with a low affinity. The penta-deca (p.d.) element in the
J-chain promoter bound proteins in extracts from untransformed B cells but not in
the tested cell lines. The protein binding to the J-chain p.d. element did not
compete efficiently with a p.d. element from the SP6 kappa promoter. A protein
binding to the 5' portion of the J-chain was expressed in some cell lines but not
in others; neither a negative nor a positive correlation to J-chain expression
could be seen. It was concluded that the J-chain promoter is equivalent to a
kappa promoter and that differentiation-specific J-chain expression is governed
by distal, positive control elements located outside the analysed region.

PMID: 8235443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Anal Biochem. 1993 Oct;214(1):289-94.

Synthesis of preparative amounts of biologically active interleukin-6 using a
continuous-flow cell-free translation system.

Volyanik EV(1), Dalley A, McKay IA, Leigh I, Williams NS, Bustin SA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Unit, London Hospital Medical College, University of London,
Whitechapel, England.

Cell-free synthesis of preparative amounts of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in a wheat
germ extract is described. Following transcription of uncapped mRNA by SP6
polymerase, protein was synthesized in a continuous flow of translation
components. The system remained active for at least 50 h, producing 1.25 x 10(6) 
units of IL-6. Recovered IL-6 was > 80% pure, reacted with anti-IL-6 polyclonal
antiserum in Western blots, and had a specific activity comparable to recombinant
IL-6 purified from Escherichia coli. This is the first time biologically active
IL-6 has been prepared in preparative amounts using a continuous-flow cell-free
translation system and confirms the feasibility of using enhanced in vitro
translation for rapid synthesis of proteins from cloned templates.

PMID: 8250237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Oct;267(1):95-101.

Pharmacological examination of receptors mediating contractile responses to
tachykinins in airways isolated from human, guinea pig and hamster.

Ellis JL(1), Undem BJ, Kays JS, Ghanekar SV, Barthlow HG, Buckner CK.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, Baltimore, Maryland.

The abilities of agonists selective for neurokinin (NK)-1
(Ac-[Arg6,Sar9,Met(O2)11]-SP6-11, ASMSP), NK-2 ([beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10) and NK-3
([Asp5,6,MePhe8]-SP5-11, senktide analog) receptors to contract human bronchus
and guinea pig and hamster trachea were studied. The antagonism of these
responses by selective antagonists was also examined. In the human bronchus and
hamster trachea, [beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10 was the most potent agonist, whereas ASMSP
and senktide analog failed to elicit contractions greater than 50% of the maximum
response even at concentrations reaching 1 to 3 x 10(-4) M. By contrast, both
ASMSP and [beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10 were potent contractile agonists in guinea pig
trachea. In all tissues, the selective NK-1 receptor antagonist
(2S,3S)-cis-2-(diphenylmethyl)-N-[(2-methoxyphenyl)-methyl]-1-a zab icyclo-
[2.2.2]octan-3-amine (CP 96,345) was without effect on contractile responses to
[beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10. Blockade by CP 96,345 of responses to ASMSP was, however,
observed in the guinea pig trachea, but not in human bronchus or hamster trachea.
Responses to ASMSP in human bronchus and hamster trachea were inhibited by NK-2
antagonists, whereas these compounds had little effect on responses to ASMSP in
guinea pig trachea. In all tissue types, responses to senktide analog were
inhibited by NK-2 antagonists.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8229792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Neurosci. 1993 Oct;72(3-4):183-91.

Induction of c-fos expression in the rostral medulla of rats following
electroacupuncture stimulation.

Ji RR(1), Zhang ZW, Zhou Y, Zhang Q, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Beijing Medical University, People's Republic of
China.

The present study was designed to examine the induction of c-fos mRNA and
Fos-like protein in the rostral medulla of awake rats following
electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation, using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical method. Rats were subjected to EA stimulation (100 Hz, 1-2-3 
mA) for 30 min by inserting two needles into acupoints Zusanli (S36) and
Sanyingjiao (Sp6) of each hind leg. Animals were sacrificed 1h and 2h after EA
for in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical study, respectively. c-fos mRNA
or Fos-like-immunoreactivity (FLI) neurons were densely distributed in the
rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM), including raphe magnus nucleus,
gigantocellular reticular nucleus, gigantocellular reticular nucleus alpha, as
well as intermediate reticular nucleus. Neurons in the solitary tract nucleus
also showed c-fos expression. The results suggest that the RVM may be an
important region for mediating EA effect.

PMID: 8138374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Microbiol. 1993 Oct;10(1):1-6.

The phage RNA polymerases are related to DNA polymerases and reverse
transcriptases.

McAllister WT(1), Raskin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Morse Institute of Molecular
Genetics, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn 11203-2098.

The single subunit DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNAP) that is encoded by
bacteriophage T7 is the prototype of a class of relatively simple RNAPs that
includes the RNAPs of the related phages T3 and SP6, as well as the mitochondrial
RNAPs. The T7 enzyme has been crystallized, and recent genetic and biochemical
analyses have facilitated an interpretation of this structure. A growing body of 
evidence suggests that the phage-like RNAPs are related to other nucleotide
polymerases such as DNA polymerases, RNA-dependent RNA polymerases, and reverse
transcriptases. In this work, we review information concerning the structure and 
function of T7 RNAP, and evidence in support of its assignment to a broader class
of nucleotide polymerases.

PMID: 7526118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int Immunol. 1993 Oct;5(10):1317-27.

Evidence that intestinal IgA plasma cells in mu, kappa transgenic mice are
derived from B-1 (Ly-1 B) cells.

Kroese FG(1), Ammerlaan WA, Kantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Cell Biology, University of Groningen, The
Netherlands.

B6-Sp6 transgenic mice carry fully rearranged (BALB/c-derived, Igh-Ca allotype)
mu heavy chain and kappa light chain transgenes, specific for trinitrophenyl, on 
a C57BL background (Igh-Cb allotype). FACS analyses show that the majority of B
cells in peripheral lymphoid organs and bone marrow (BM) express transgenic IgM
exclusively. A small proportion of the B cells, however, express endogenous IgM, 
usually concomitant with transgenic IgM. Three criteria establish that the
endogenous IgM expressing B cells belong to the B-1 cell lineage. (i) Endogenous 
IgM expressing B cells in B6-Sp6 mice have the same localization pattern as B-1
cells from normal animals: they are enriched in the peritoneal cavity. (ii) The
endogenous IgM+ B cells have the phenotype of B-1 cells: the endogenous IgM+
peritoneal B cells express Mac-1 (CD11b) and low levels of IgD, and most also
express CD5 (Ly-1). (iii) B6-Sp6 BM poorly reconstitutes endogenous IgM+ B cells,
just as adult BM from normal mice poorly reconstitutes B-1 cells. In contrast, B 
cells which only express the transgene are readily reconstituted by B6-Sp6 BM.
The few endogenous IgM+ cells in the B6-Sp6 BM recipients are located in the
peritoneal cavity and have the phenotype of B-1b cells (previously the Ly-1 B
sister population), which are known to be reconstituted by adult BM. Two-color
immunofluorescence staining of tissue sections from the gut and from isolated gut
lamina propria cells shows the presence of many IgA containing cells, about
one-third of which simultaneously express cytoplasmic (transgenic) IgM. The
C-region of this IgA is produced by endogenous C alpha genes, because the
transgene encodes only for C mu. Furthermore, the majority of gut IgA containing 
cells do not express the idiotype of the transgene, indicating that most of the
gut IgA cells are encoded by endogenous VH genes and thus the result of an
isotype switch from endogenous IgM expressing B cells. Since the endogenous IgM+ 
cells are B-1 cells (both B-1a and B-1b), the data strongly indicate that the
intestinal IgA plasma cells also belong to the B-1 cell lineage.

PMID: 7505612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 1993 Sep 15;268(26):19299-304.

Two base pairs at -9 and -8 distinguish between the bacteriophage T7 and SP6
promoters.

Lee SS(1), Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon.

Bacteriophage T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases and their promoters share a high degree 
of their primary structure homology, but each polymerase exclusively recognizes
its own promoter sequence. To reveal the molecular basis of this specificity, 4
base pairs at positions -12, -10, -9, and -8 of the T7 promoter were substituted 
individually and multiply by SP6 promoter-specific base pairs, and 3 base pairs
at -10, -9, and -8 of the SP6 promoter were replaced by T7 promoter-specific base
pairs. Promoter activities of 28 sequences were measured in vitro with T7 and SP6
polymerases separately under optimal conditions at 6 mM MgCl2. Single and double 
substitutions at -12 and -10 do not significantly affect the T7 promoter
activity, although they are almost exclusively conserved among T7 genomic
promoters. Changes at -10 of SP6 promoter hardly affect the activity. However,
any T7 variants that contain either or both changes at -9 and -8 show greatly
reduced activity. Interestingly, the double substitution at -9 and -8 yields
significant SP6 promoter activities and virtually no T7 promoter activity.
Furthermore, the SP6 promoter variants with both T7-specific -9C and -8T show
good T7 promoter activities, although they still show some SP6 promoter
activities. However, under high salt conditions (either 20 mM MgCl2 or 100 mM
NaCl plus 6 mM MgCl2), they show only slight SP6 promoter activity. No other SP6 
variants show any T7 promoter activity. All these results indicate that the 2
base pairs at -9 and -8 of both the T7 and SP6 promoters are the primary (if not 
the only) determinants of specificity and that the hierarchy of importance of
positions for promoter activity is -8, -9 > > -10 > -12. Also, a phylogenic
relationship among the T3, T7, K11, and SP6 promoters is suggested based on
dissimilarities in their sequences from -12 to -8.

PMID: 8366080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1993 Sep;31(1):153-9.

Effects of multiple mutations at the conserved TATA sequence of bacteriophage SP6
promoter on transcription efficiency.

Kim SS(1), Hong Y, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon.

Mutations of A<==>T were introduced individually and multiple to TATA from -4 to 
-1 of the phage SP6 promoter and their effects on transcription initiation
efficiency measured in vitro. All 15 mutants tested were less active than the
wild type. Mutation at -4T nearly abolishes promoter activity independent of
other changes, and alteration at -3A reduces promoter activity substantially. On 
the other hand, effects of mutations at -2T and -1A depend on other changes,
suggesting their role should be associated with neighboring base pairs. These
results suggest that -4T and -3A are involved in SP6 RNA polymerase binding and
-2T and -1A are involved in DNA unwinding. This bipartite role of the SP6
promoter TATA contrasts with the single role of T7 promoter TATA on DNA
unwinding. The polymerase binding region extends further downstream in the SP6
promoter than in the T7 promoter.

PMID: 8260939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 25;21(17):4055-8.

Relief of triple-helix-mediated promoter inhibition by elongating RNA
polymerases.

Skoog JU(1), Maher LJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198-6805.

We have characterized triple-helix-mediated inhibition of an artificial
bacteriophage promoter with respect to relief of inhibition by incoming RNA
polymerases that initiate upstream or downstream from the operator sequence.
Whereas oligonucleotide-directed triple-helix formation inhibits the test
promoter, promoter activity is restored when the triple-helical complexes are
disrupted by transcription of either strand of the homopurine operator sequence. 
The degree of relief from inhibition is related to the frequency of operator
transcription. These observations demonstrate that this artificial
repressor-operator complex is subject to antagonism by cis elements (other
promoters) acting at a distance. Such antagonism might also arise between certain
natural transcriptional control regions. Our results suggest that the efficiency 
of artificial repressors based on triple-helix formation may be limited by
transcriptional activity in the gene control region.

PMCID: PMC310001
PMID: 8371980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Virology. 1993 Aug;195(2):680-91.

Nucleotide sequence of the human coronavirus 229E RNA polymerase locus.

Herold J(1), Raabe T, Schelle-Prinz B, Siddell SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

The nucleotide sequence of the human coronavirus 229E (HCV 229E) RNA polymerase
gene and the 5' region of the genome has been determined. The polymerase gene is 
comprised of two large open reading frames, ORF1a and ORF1b, that contain 4086
and 2687 codons, respectively. ORF1b overlaps ORF1a by 43 bases in the (-1)
reading frame. The in vitro translation of SP6 transcripts which include HCV 229E
sequences encompassing the ORF1a/ORF1b junction show that expression of ORF1b can
be mediated by ribosomal frame-shifting. The predicted translation products of
ORF1a (454,200 molecular weight) and ORF1a/1b (754,200 molecular weight) have
been compared to the predicted RNA polymerase gene products of infectious
bronchitis virus (IBV) and murine hepatitis virus (MHV) and conserved structural 
features and putative functional domains have been identified. This analysis
completes the nucleotide sequence of the HCV 229E genome.

PMID: 8337838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 15;90(14):6601-5.

Effects of abasic sites and DNA single-strand breaks on prokaryotic RNA
polymerases.

Zhou W(1), Doetsch PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322.

Abasic sites are thought to be the most frequently occurring cellular DNA damage 
and are generated spontaneously or as the result of chemical or radiation damage 
to DNA. In contrast to the wealth of information that exists on the effects of
abasic sites on DNA polymerases, very little is known about how these lesions
interact with RNA polymerases. An in vitro transcription system was used to
determine the effects of abasic sites and single-strand breaks on transcriptional
elongation. DNA templates were constructed containing single abasic sites or
nicks placed at unique locations downstream from two different promoters and were
transcribed by SP6 and Escherichia coli RNA polymerases. SP6 RNA polymerase is
initially stalled at abasic sites with subsequent, efficient bypass of these
lesions. E. coli RNA polymerase also bypassed abasic sites. In contrast,
single-strand breaks introduced at abasic sites completely blocked the
progression of both RNA polymerases. Sequence analysis of full-length transcripts
revealed that SP6 and E. coli RNA polymerases insert primarily, if not
exclusively, adenine residues opposite to abasic sites. This finding suggests
that abasic sites may be highly mutagenic in vivo at the level of transcription.

PMCID: PMC46980
PMID: 8341674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Virol Methods. 1993 Jul;43(2):147-58.

Chemiluminescent detection of potato and pome fruit viroids by
digoxigenin-labeled dot blot and tissue blot hybridization.

Podleckis EV(1), Hammond RW, Hurtt SS, Hadidi A.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, National Germplasm Resources
Laboratory, Beltsville, MD 20705-2350.

A chemiluminescent molecular hybridization protocol was compared to 32P
autoradiography for detecting potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd) and apple scar 
skin group viroids (ASSVd). Labeled cRNA probes for PSTVd and ASSVd were
synthesized by SP6 RNA polymerase transcription using digoxigenin-11-UTP or
alpha-[32P]UTP. Dot blot hybridization of purified viroids and sap extracts from 
infected plants showed that chemiluminescent detection using digoxigenin-labeled 
probes was as sensitive as autoradiography using 32P probes. A minimum of 2.0-2.5
pg purified viroid was detected. ASSVd could be detected in as little as 0.4 ng
of total nucleic acid extract from infected tissue or in sap extracts diluted to 
10(-3) with healthy extracts. Tissue blots of PSTVd-infected potato tubers and
tomato roots, stems and leaves and ASSVd-infected apple fruit, stems and
petioles, gave positive reactions when hybridized with the digoxigenin probe. No 
reaction with similar tissues from healthy plants was observed.

PMID: 8366166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 1;90(13):6203-7.

Histone octamer dissociation is not required for transcript elongation through
arrays of nucleosome cores by phage T7 RNA polymerase in vitro.

O'Neill TE(1), Smith JG, Bradbury EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616.

We have examined whether dissociation of the histone octamer is required for
elongation of RNA transcripts through arrays of nucleosome cores in vitro.
Control or dimethyl suberimidate-crosslinked histone octamers were reconstituted 
onto supercoiled, closed circular pT207-18 DNA, which contains tandemly repeated 
207-base-pair (bp) 5S rDNA nucleosome positioning sequences inserted between the 
T7 and SP6 transcription promoters of pGEM-3Z. Double label transcription
experiments showed that there was little or no effect of extensive crosslinking
of the histone octamers on transcription initiation and elongation by T7 RNA
polymerase in vitro. Continuous regularly spaced linear arrays of either
crosslinked or control nucleosome cores were obtained by digesting reconstituted 
nucleosomal pT207-18 templates with Dra I, a site that is protected from
digestion by the presence of positioned nucleosome cores in the 207-pb sequence. 
After in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase, an RNA ladder with
207-nucleotide spacing was obtained from templates reconstituted both with
crosslinked and with control histone octamers, demonstrating clearly that neither
partial nor complete dissociation of the histone octamer is essential for
transcription elongation through arrays of nucleosome cores in vitro.

PMCID: PMC46896
PMID: 8327500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Jul;23(7):1727-30.

The tum- antigens P91A and P198 derive from proteins located in the cytosolic
compartment of cells.

Verlant V(1), Amar-Costesec A, Godelaine D, Turu C, Van Pel A, De Plaen E,
Dautry-Varsat A, Beaufay H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Physiologique, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium.

To characterize the proteins P91Ap and P198p, of which mutants generate the tum- 
antigens P91A and P198, respectively, rabbit antisera were raised with
ovalbumin-coupled synthetic peptides that correspond to their respective C
terminus. In immunoadsorption tests using immobilized protein A the antisera
recognized the translation products synthesized by rabbit reticulocyte lysates
programmed with the SP6 polymerase transcripts of the P91A and P198 cDNA. The
presence of the two proteins was demonstrated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting in
all the mouse cells and organs examined. P91Ap is a constituent of the cytosol;
despite a remarkable homology to the Drosophila diphenol oxidase DOX-A2, it
separates from murine catechol oxidase activity in rate zonal sedimentation
analysis. P198p is a ribosomal constituent, or a factor firmly linked to both the
free and membrane-bound ribosomes. These subcellular localizations strengthen
other evidence that the antigens presented to T lymphocytes by class I products
of the major histocompatibility complex derive from proteins of the cytosol, or
in direct contact with it.

PMID: 8325344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Jul;23(7):1561-5.

Suppression of B cell differentiation by ligation of membrane-bound IgM.

Grandien A(1), Modigliani Y, Coutinho A, Andersson J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunobiologie, CNRS URA 359, Institut Pasteur, Paris.

Using B cells from the transgenic mouse line B6-Sp6 and control littermates,
stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) under novel culture conditions that
provide for the response of all B cells, we show here that specific ligation of
the surface IgM molecules always results in inhibition of terminal
differentiation and immunoglobulin secretion by activated cells, regardless of
the ligand. Thus, monoclonal antibodies to (a) the CH region of Ig (anti-mu and
anti-allotype), (b) the C kappa region, (c) the V region (anti-idiotype) of
surface IgM, as well as (d) multivalent antigen (2,4,6-trinitrophenyl-bovine
serum albumin), all show similar effects and dose-response curves. IgD-negative
transgenic B cells are equally sensitive to IgM ligation-dependent inhibition, as
control (IgD-positive) B cells. The allotype specificity of this inhibition,
assessed by using anti-mu allotype reagents to inhibit and assay the responses,
suggests that B cells expressing transgenic or endogenous IgM in transgenic
B6-Sp6 mice are largely independent populations. These observations establish
that anti-IgM antibodies in conjunction with appropriate LPS stimulation, provide
a universal model system for functional characterization of B cell responses.

PMID: 8325333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Neuropeptides. 1993 Jul;25(1):65-71.

Characterization of neurokinin binding sites in rat brain membranes using highly 
selective ligands.

Humpel C(1), Saria A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Innsbruck, Austria.

Neurokinin binding sites are distributed throughout the central and peripheral
nervous system and three neurokinin binding sites have been described until now. 
The endogenous tachykinins substance P, neurokinin A and eledoisin as well as the
highly selective neurokinin ligands [Arg6, Sar9, Met(O2)11]SP6-11 and [Sar9,
Met(O2)11]SP (for neurokinin-1), MEN 10,376 and [beta Ala8]NKA(4-10) (for
neurokinin-2) and senktide and [MePhe7]NKB (for neurokinin-3) were used for
displacement experiments. Neurokinin-1 and -3 binding sites were demonstrated in 
membrane preparations of rat striatum, frontal cortex, hypothalamus, hippocampus 
and amygdala by displacing [125I]-BH-substance P and [125I]-BH-eledoisin,
respectively. The highly selective neurokinin-2 ligand MEN 10,376 was iodinated
to measure neurokinin-2 binding sites, but no specific binding was found in
membranes of all brain regions, the spinal cord, the stomach, the urinary bladder
or the guinea-pig lung, probably due to loss of binding properties. We conclude
that neurokinin-1 and neurokinin-3 binding sites are distributed in several brain
regions of the rat brain and selective neurokinin ligands are important tools to 
characterize neurokinin binding sites.

PMID: 7692343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1993 Jun;2(2):120-4.

Construction of overlapping oligonucleotide templates for the production of cRNA 
standards for quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.

Raftery K(1), Sharefkin J, Limanni A, Salomon RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New England Medical Center Hospitals/Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111.

The reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique for the 
study of gene expression that requires far less RNA for analysis than Northern
blots. The inclusion of cRNA standards in the initial reverse transcription step 
is a way to control for the tube-to-tube variation often inherent in the
technique and to permit quantitation of the starting amount of the native mRNA
being analyzed. We describe a method using overlapping oligonucleotides to
produce templates for the production of cRNA standards for up to three different 
mRNA species. The first step is the synthesis of a pair of overlapping
oligonucleotides each of which encodes, respectively, sequences analogous to
either sense or antisense primers for the PCR amplification of up to three
different messages. These oligonucleotides are designed to have complementary 3' 
ends which permit spontaneous annealing and allow subsequent mutually priming
extension of the annealed double-stranded portion by T7 DNA polymerase. The T7
and SP6 RNA polymerase promoters are then added to the ends of the template using
standard PCR techniques. Once the template is assembled, T7 and SP6 RNA
polymerases are used to produce copious quantities of cRNA standards and
controls. This technique can be used to construct multiple cRNA standards for
essentially any messages of interest. Production of cRNA by a single T7 RNA
polymerase reaction yields standards sufficient for several thousand separate
reverse transcriptions.

PMID: 8269276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochemistry. 1993 Apr 27;32(16):4275-80.

Identification of specific contacts in T3 RNA polymerase-promoter interactions:
kinetic analysis using small synthetic promoters.

Schick C(1), Martin CT.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst 01003.

The T7, T3, and SP6 RNA polymerases recognize very similar, yet distinct,
promoter sequences. The high homology among the promoter sequences suggests that 
differential promoter recognition must derive from relatively small changes in
the protein. Steady-state kinetic analyses of transcription from the T3 consensus
promoter and from promoters modified in the region critical to specific
recognition reveal details concerning which functional groups contribute to this 
recognition. Modifications include base pair substitutions, single base
substitutions (mismatches), and simple functional group modifications at unique
sites in the promoter. The results show that T3 RNA polymerase recognizes the
amino group on the nontemplate cytidine in the major groove at position -10,
while the identity of the base on the template strand is less critical to
binding. In contrast, recognition at position -11 allows a greater range of
modifications and seems to have a more complex recognition. The results do not
seem to be consistent with a single recognition contact at this position;
however, some groups may be ruled out as simple recognition contacts. While major
groove modifications weaken binding at positions -10 and -11, the removal of an
exocyclic amino group from the minor groove at either position does not disrupt
binding, further supporting a model for promoter recognition in which the enzyme 
binds to one face of closed duplex DNA in this region. The effects of these
changes in the DNA structure on the kinetics of initiation are compared to
complementary results from the T7 system.

PMID: 8476856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Apr 25;21(8):1927-33.

Transcription by SP6 RNA polymerase exhibits an ATP dependence that is influenced
by promoter topology.

Taylor DR(1), Mathews MB.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY 11724.

Transcription of linearized DNA templates by SP6 RNA polymerase requires a higher
concentration of ATP than of the other three nucleotides. This requirement is not
shared by T7 RNA polymerase. The ATP requirement is partially relieved when the
SP6 template is supercoiled but not when it is relaxed circular DNA. The effect
of supercoiling is eliminated by replacement of the A.T rich sequence downstream 
from the SP6 promoter with a G.C rich sequence. Examination of the reaction
products indicates that the ATP dependence of transcription from a linear
template is not due to an ATPase activity or to the premature termination of
transcription at low ATP concentration. These data suggest that the initiation of
transcription by SP6 RNA polymerase requires partial denaturation of the template
in the promoter-proximal region, and that this requirement can be satisfied by
negative supercoiling or by increasing the ATP concentration. ATP also reduces,
but does not eliminate, the abortive transcription that leads to the production
of short, prematurely terminated transcripts by SP6 polymerase from supercoiled
templates.

PMCID: PMC309434
PMID: 8493106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Gen Genet. 1993 Apr;238(1-2):59-64.

Effect of tandem repeated AUG codons on translation efficiency of eukaryotic mRNA
carrying a short leader sequence.

Wakiyama M(1), Hirao I, Kumagai I, Miura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The effect on translation of multiple copies of the initiation codon AUG at the
initiation site in a eukaryotic mRNA carrying a short leader sequence was tested 
in translation experiments in vitro. DNA, corresponding to a chimeric mRNA
sequence consisting of the 5' leader region of brome mosaic virus (BMV) RNA4 and 
the goat pre-alpha-lactalbumin mRNA sequence, was prepared and transcribed in
vitro using SP6 RNA polymerase. Site-directed mutagenesis was carried out to
change the sequence around the initiation codon AUG. In a wheat germ translation 
system, the yield of protein obtained using the mRNA with a duplication of the
AUG codons at the initiation site was 1.6 times that achieved when only one AUG
was present. The rate of formation of the 80S initiation complex was measured by 
the ribosome binding assay using cycloheximide. A good correlation was observed
between the ability to form the complex and translation efficiency.

PMID: 8479441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Acupunct Electrother Res. 1993 Apr-Jun;18(2):117-24.

The change of C-fos expression in ovariectomized rats following
electroacupuncture treatment--an immunohistochemistry study.

Hu Z(1), Chen B, Tong J, Huang D, Lu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shanghai Medical University, People's Republic of 
China.

The roles of electroacupuncture (EA) in regulating the function of ovulation in
rat have been investigated; however, the systematic study for the involvement of 
neural population of central nervous system (CNS) in acupuncturing the
ovariectomized rat for promoting functional recovery has not been well
understood. The present research was designed to examine, by C-fos
immunocytochemistry, the distribution of Fos labelled neuron in CNS after
acupuncturing the point of "Zhong-Ji (RN3)", "Guan-Yuan (RN4)", "San-Ying-Jiao
(SP6)" and "Zi-Gong (EXCA1)" in ovariectomized rat. The area occupied by Fos
protein labelled neuron, two hours after ovariotomy, was detected in medial
preoptic nucleus (MPN), lateral preoptic nucleus (LPN), suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN), paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PANH), medial amygdala
nucleus (MAN), periventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVNH), ventromedial
nucleus of the hypothalamus (VNH), and arcuate nucleus (AR). The C-fos
immunoreactive labelled neurons disappeared two weeks later following ovariotomy.
The rat, recovering for two weeks after ovariotomy, received EA, and many
specific Fos labelled cell were observed in LPN, PVNH, VNH, SCN and especially in
AR, PANH and MPN, but not any labelled neuron could be found in MAN. No obvious
C-fos expression was shown in these areas in the control group and EA group
without ovariotomy. These results indicate that the above structures involved in 
regulating the function of hypothalamus-pituitary-ovarian axis and EA could
modulate this function through effects on the above nuclei.

PMID: 7902641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1993 Apr;41(4):411-4.

Synthesis of potent antagonists of substance P by modifying the methionyl and
glutaminyl residues of its C-terminal hexapeptide and without using D-amino
acids.

Manolopoulou A(1), Karagiannis K, Stavropoulos G, Poulos C, Jordan CC, Hagan RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

Analogues of [Orn6]-SP6-11 have been synthesized in which the Met11-NH2 residue
is replaced by the alpha, gamma-dimethyl, alpha, gamma-dibenzyl and alpha,
gamma-di-tert-butyl esters of glutamic acid. These analogues were tested in three
in vitro preparations representative of NK-1, NK-2 and NK-3 receptor types for
agonist and antagonist activity. The dimethyl analogue is a selective full
agonist in the NK-1 receptor type and a weak antagonist in the other two receptor
types, while the dibenzyl and the di-tert-butyl analogues are potent antagonists 
in the NK-1 receptor type and weak antagonists in the other two receptor types.
It is concluded that appropriate modification at the alpha-carboxamide and the
side chain of the methionine residue of substance P may induce antagonism without
using D-amino acids.

PMID: 7684361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Mar 15;90(6):2522-6.

Chromosomal structure of Rhodobacter capsulatus strain SB1003: cosmid
encyclopedia and high-resolution physical and genetic map.

Fonstein M(1), Haselkorn R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, IL
60637.

A combination of cosmid genome walking and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis was
used to construct a high-resolution physical and genetic map of the 3.8-megabase 
(Mb) genome of Rhodobacter capsulatus SB1003. The mapping was done by
hybridization of pulsed-field gel blots and by grouping and further mapping of
the cosmids and bacteriophages from genomic libraries. Cosmid clones formed two
uninterrupted and ordered groups, one corresponding to the chromosome of R.
capsulatus, the other to its 134-kb plasmid. Cos site end-labeling and partial
EcoRV digestion of cosmids were used to construct a high-resolution EcoRV map of 
the genome. Overlapping of the cosmids was confirmed by the resemblance of the
cosmid restriction maps and by direct end-to-end hybridization with SP6- and
T7-specific transcripts. Twenty-three previously cloned genes and eight groups of
repeated sequences, revealed in this work, were located in the ordered gene
library and mapped with an accuracy of 1-10 kb. Blots of a minimal set of 192
cosmids, covering the chromosome and the plasmid with the known map position of
each cosmid, give to R. capsulatus the same advantages that the Kohara phage
panel gives to E. coli.

PMCID: PMC46120
PMID: 8460167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biotechniques. 1993 Feb;14(2):222-4.

SP6 RNA polymerase containing vaccinia virus for rapid expression of cloned genes
in tissue culture.

Usdin TB(1), Brownstein MJ, Moss B, Isaacs SN.

Author information: 
(1)Natl. Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892.

A hybrid transient expression system, in which tissue culture cells are infected 
with a recombinant vaccinia virus encoding bacteriophage DNA-dependent RNA
polymerase and transfected with a plasmid containing a cloned gene behind the
bacteriophage promoter, allows rapid high-level expression in nearly 100% of the 
cells. In order to extend this system to clones from libraries containing SP6
promoters, a new vaccinia virus was constructed encoding bacteriophage SP6 RNA
polymerase.

PMID: 8431286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Methods Mol Biol. 1993;15:277-86. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-244-2:277.

Site-directed mutagenesis by double polymerase chain reaction : megaprimer
method.

Barik S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland,
OH.

The "megaprimer" method (1) based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is one of
the simplest and most versatile procedures of site-specific in vitro mutagenesis 
available to date. The method utilizes three oligonucleotide primers and two
rounds of PCR performed on a DNA template containing the cloned gene that is to
be mutated. The rationale of the method is shown schematically in Fig. 1 where A 
and B represent the "flanking" primers that can map either within the cloned gene
or outside the gene (i.e., within the vector sequence) and M represents the
internal "mutant" primer containing the desired base change. The first round of
PCR is performed using the mutant primer (e.g., M1 in Fig. 1) and one of the
flanking primers (e.g., A). The double-stranded product (A-M1) is purified and
used as one of the primers (hence the name "megaprimer") in the second round of
PCR along with the other flanking primer (B). The wild type cloned gene is used
as template in both PCR reactions. The final PCR product (A-M1-B) containing the 
mutation can be used in a variety of standard applications, such as cloning in
expression vectors and sequencing, or in more specialized applications, such as
production of the gene message in vitro if primer A (or the template sequence
downstream of primer A) also contains a transcriptional promoter (e.g., that of
SP6 or T7 phage).

PMID: 21400286  [PubMed]


103. Res Microbiol. 1993 Jan;144(1):69-75.

Effect on wheat root development of inoculation with an Azospirillum brasilense
mutant with altered indole-3-acetic acid production.

Barbieri P(1), Galli E.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università degli
Studi di Milano, Italy.

To evaluate the involvement of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) in promotion of root
development, the effects of inoculation of wheat seedlings with Azospirillum
brasilense SpM7918, a very low-IAA producer, were estimated. Compared with the
wild-type strain Sp6, SpM7918 showed a reduced ability to promote root system
development in terms both of number and length of lateral roots and of
distribution of root hairs.

PMID: 8327784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1993;39(2):93-100.

Acidic domain of the phosphoprotein (P) of vesicular stomatitis virus
differentially interacts with homologous and heterologous nucleocapsid protein
(N).

Das T(1), Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195.

The homologous and heterologous interactions between the nucleocapsid protein N
and the phosphoprotein P of New Jersey and Indiana serotypes of vesicular
stomatitis virus were studied. SP6 derived N and P mRNAs were cotranslated in
rabbit reticulocyte lysate and the complexes formed thereof were analyzed by 7.5%
nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. P protein of VSV(NJ) has two
binding sites for homologous N protein: One located within the C-terminal 11
amino acids (within domain III) is responsible for the formation of five specific
complexes while the other site, which spans the acidic domain I, is necessary for
the formation of the sixth complex only. In contrast, P(IND) does not form the
sixth complex when interacted with homologous N protein. Interestingly, P(NJ)
forms only complexes 1 to 5 when it interacts with N(IND). The above results
suggest that the complex 6 formation or domain I interacting site is NJ-serotype 
specific. Two chimeric P proteins were made using heterologous domains I and
II/III of the P proteins of both serotypes. The soluble interaction of the
chimeric proteins with the N protein supported the observed serotype specific
interactions. The chimeric P proteins bound with equal efficiency with N-RNA
template of both serotypes. These results strongly suggest that the acidic domain
I of the P protein differentially interacts with homologous and heterologous N
proteins. The biological significance of these findings is discussed.

PMID: 8220588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Akush Ginekol (Sofiia). 1993;32(3):34-6.

[The treatment of the repercussion diencephalic syndrome in gynecology.
Acupuncture therapy].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Tsenov D.

The obstetricians have to know the repercussion diencephalic syndrome because the
diseases of genital organ can provoke it. Moreover its treatment is many
difficult. The most efficient is earlier, complete and adequate treatment.
Ordinary the treatment is symptomatic. The author presents 3 cases with
repercussion diencephalic syndrome after gynaecology diseases treating with
acupuncture and electroacupuncture: Liv1.7, CV1.3.6, Sp6.15. The effect is very
good.

PMID: 8037317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 25;20(22):5911-8.

Pseudouridine in the anticodon G psi A of plant cytoplasmic tRNA(Tyr) is required
for UAG and UAA suppression in the TMV-specific context.

Zerfass K(1), Beier H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Bayerische Julius-Maximilians-Universität, Würzburg,
Germany.

We have previously isolated and sequenced Nicotiana cytoplasmic tRNA(Tyr) with G 
psi A anticodon which promotes readthrough over the leaky UAG termination codon
at the end of the 126 K cistron of tobacco mosaic virus RNA and we have
demonstrated that tRNA(Tyr) with Q psi A anticodon is no UAG suppressor. Here we 
show that the nucleotide in the middle of the anticodon (i.e., psi 35) also
contributes to the suppressor efficiency displayed by cytoplasmic tRNA(Tyr). A
tRNA(Tyr) with GUA anticodon was synthesized in vitro using T7 RNA polymerase
transcription. This tRNA(Tyr) was unable to suppress the UAG codon, indicating
that nucleotide modifications in the anticodon of tRNA(Tyr) have either
stimulating (i.e., psi 35) or inhibitory (i.e., Q34) effects on suppressor
activity. Furthermore, we have shown that the UAA but not the UGA stop codon is
also efficiently recognized by tobacco tRNA(G psi ATyr), if placed in the TMV
context. Hence this is the first naturally occurring tRNA for which UAA
suppressor activity has been demonstrated. In order to study the influence of
neighbouring nucleotides on the readthrough capacity of tRNA(Tyr), we have
established a system, in which part of the sequence around the leaky UAG codon of
TMV RNA was inserted into a zein pseudogene which naturally harbours an UAG codon
in the middle of the gene. The construct was cloned into the vector pSP65 and in 
vitro transcripts, generated by SP6 RNA polymerase, were translated in a wheat
germ extract depleted of endogenous mRNAs and tRNAs. A number of mutations in the
codons flanking the UAG were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis. It was
found that changes at specific positions of the two downstream codons completely 
abolished the readthrough over the UAG by Nicotiana tRNA(Tyr), indicating that
this tRNA needs a very specific codon context for its suppressor activity.

PMCID: PMC334454
PMID: 1461724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Immunol. 1992 Nov 15;149(10):3309-15.

Neuropeptides modulate human eosinophil chemotaxis.

Numao T(1), Agrawal DK.

Author information: 
(1)Allergic Disease Center, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE
68178.

To investigate the role of neuropeptides in allergic inflammation, we examined
the effect of peptides on eosinophil chemotaxis. Eosinophils were purified from
the blood of allergic and normal subjects using a discontinuous Percoll density
gradients. Chemotaxis was induced by platelet-activating factor (PAF) and
leukotriene B4, and was assayed by a modified Boyden's chamber technique. Four
neuropeptides were examined in this study: substance P (SP), neurokinin A,
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and cholecystokinin octapeptide. Peptides
alone (10 nM to 10 microM) were not chemotactic for eosinophils. However, when
eosinophils were pre-treated with peptides (100 nM) at 37 degrees C for 30 min,
chemotactic response to PAF (10 nM) was significantly enhanced (p < 0.01) in
allergic subjects; % control by SP, neurokinin A, CGRP and cholecystokinin
octapeptide was 269 +/- 42, 243 +/- 32, 227 +/- 21, and 251 +/- 42, respectively 
(n = 8). Similar results were obtained in leukotriene B4-induced eosinophil
chemotaxis. In contrast, no enhancement was observed in normal subjects.
Potentiating effect of SP and CGRP on PAF-induced eosinophil chemotaxis in
allergic subjects was significantly attenuated by SP antagonist
[D-Pro2,D-Trp7,9]-SP and human CGRP (8-37) receptor antagonist, respectively.
Neutral endopeptidase inhibitors (phosphoramidon, leupeptin, and bestatin) failed
to significantly augment the PAF-induced eosinophil chemotaxis when the cells
were pretreated with various peptides and neutral endopeptidase inhibitors. The
C-terminal fragment of SP (SP6-11) had an effect similar to that of the intact SP
molecule, whereas no potentiating effect by the N-terminal of SP (SP1-9) was
observed. These results suggest that neuropeptides may play a significant role in
eosinophil infiltration by priming cells in allergic inflammation.

PMID: 1385521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1992 Nov-Dec;26(6):1242-50.

[De novo proteins with a given spatial structure: new approaches to design and
analysis].

[Article in Russian]

Dolgikh DA, Kirpichnikov MP, Ptitsyn OB, Fedorov AN, Finkel'shtein AV, Chemeris
VV.

Based on the molecular theory of protein structure the de novo protein was
designed in order to obtain the tertiary fold which has not yet been observed in 
natural proteins, namely four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet covered by two
alpha-helixes. The gene coding for this protein (named albebetin) was chemically 
synthesized, cloned in plasmid with SP6 phage promoter and expressed in
mRNA-dependent cell-free translation system. An approach was developed to study
albebetin using only nanogram amounts of radio labelled protein without previous 
purification. The preliminary analysis of its structure by gel-filtration,
urea-gradient electrophoresis and limited proteolysis revealed compactness and
stability of the de novo protein.

PMID: 1491670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1992 Nov;40(5):395-400.

Synthesis and biological activity of analogues of the C-terminal hexapeptide of
substance P with modifications at glutaminyl and methioninyl residues.
Structure-activity studies.

Antoniou M(1), Poulos C, Tsegenidis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

Analogues of [Orn6]-SP6-11 have been synthesized in which the methionyl residue
is replaced by glutamine gamma-carboxamide substituted derivatives. These
analogues where tested in three in vitro preparations representative of NK-1,
NK-2 and NK-3 receptor types. Substitution of the SCH3 group of the Met11 side
chain by CONHCH3, CON(CH3)2, CONHPh and CONCH3Ph groups results in analogues
which are full agonists in NK-1 and NK-2 preparations with the exception of the
Glu[N(CH3)2]11 and the Glu(NHCH3)11 analogues, which are partial agonists at NK-1
and NK-2 receptors respectively. The Glu(NHCH3)11 analogue shows selectivity for 
the NK-1 receptor type and is equipotent to the Glu(NCH3Ph)11 analogue in the
same receptor type. The latter analogue is 2.84 times more potent than the parent
hexapeptide in the NK-2 preparation. The Glu(NHPh)11 analogue is a full agonist
in the NK-3 preparation and equipotent to the parent hexapeptide, in contrast to 
the other analogues in which Met has been replaced by glutamine gamma-carboxamide
substituted residues. It is concluded that for NK-1 receptor type the lipophilic 
character of Met11 side chain is not a determining factor for activity but it is 
an important factor for activity in the NK-2 receptor type and has a stronger
effect when a phenyl group is present, thus leading to analogues which are full
agonists and more potent than the parent hexapeptide.

PMID: 1282903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PCR Methods Appl. 1992 Nov;2(2):172-4.

In vitro translation of proteins with terminal deletions by SP6 RNA
polymerase-mediated transcription of PCR products.

Titlow CC(1), Andersen JK, Trofatter JA, Breakefield XO.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

PMID: 1282438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell. 1992 Oct 2;71(1):11-22.

A nucleosome core is transferred out of the path of a transcribing polymerase.

Clark DJ(1), Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

We have determined the fate of a nucleosome core on transcription. A nucleosome
core was assembled on a short DNA fragment and ligated into a plasmid containing 
a promoter and terminators for SP6 RNA polymerase. The nucleosome core was stable
in the absence of transcription. The distribution of nucleosome cores after
transcription was examined. The histone octamer was displaced from its original
site and reformed a nucleosome core at a new site within the same plasmid
molecule, with some preference for the untranscribed region behind the promoter. 
These observations eliminate several models that have been proposed for
transcription through a nucleosome core. Our results suggest that a nucleosome
core in the path of a transcribing polymerase is displaced by transfer to the
closest acceptor DNA.

PMID: 1394427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biotechniques. 1992 Oct;13(4):604-10.

Synthesis of cRNA probes from PCR-generated DNA.

Logel J(1), Dill D, Leonard S.

Author information: 
(1)Denver Veterans Administration Medical Center.

We have compared RNA polymerase promoter activities in PCR-generated DNA
fragments for use in the in vitro transcription of cRNA probes. Sense
oligonucleotide primers, specific for the mouse acidic fibroblast growth factor
gene, were synthesized with 5' extensions containing promoter sequences for the
T7, T3 and SP6 RNA polymerase promoters. A common antisense primer was used with 
each of the promoter/aFGF primers to prepare PCR-generated DNA fragments
(minigenes). In vitro transcription efficiency for each of these constructs was
evaluated by incorporation of radioactivity into the cRNA products. We find that 
both the T7 and T3 promoters can direct the synthesis of cRNA probes of high
specific activity from a PCR-generated DNA fragment, but that SP6 cannot. No
detectable cRNA product was obtained using either T7 polymerase on the
T3/minigene or T3 on the T7/minigene. Antisense cRNA probes, transcribed from
minigene constructs were used for both Northern and in situ hybridization
studies. A PCR-generated DNA fragment with RNA polymerase promoter sequences at
each end provides a single template for synthesis in vitro of either sense or
antisense cRNA probes.

PMID: 1476730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Virus Res. 1992 Oct;26(1):15-31.

A cis-acting element within the hepatitis A virus 5'-non-coding region required
for in vitro translation.

Glass MJ(1), Summers DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular, Viral and Molecular Biology, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84132.

Every picornavirus studied thus far has a sequence within the 5'-non-coding
region that is required for internal ribosome binding and translation of the
polyprotein. In an attempt to identify this region in hepatitis A virus we
constructed a truncated hepatitis A virus (HAV) cDNA clone that contains the
entire 736 bp 5' non-coding region (5'-NCR) and 754 base pairs of the viral
capsid coding region (P1) under control of the SP6 promoter. In vitro
transcription and translation of this transcript in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate 
yielded a protein product of about 29 kDa as analyzed by autoradiography
following sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). A
series of mutations of this construct have defined a minimal sequence between
bases 347 and 734 in the 5'-NCR that is required for efficient in vitro
translation. The deleted constructs (D 523-734 and D 632-734) showed a reduced
ability to translate in the rabbit reticulocyte lysate system in comparison with 
the full-length 5'-NCR construct, pH1489. The translation of these deleted
constructs was artificially restored by the addition of a 5'-terminal methylated 
cap structure, m7GpppG, to the RNA. This increase in translational efficiency
could be competed away with cap analog (m7GDP) thus indicating that this region
is required for cap-independent internal ribosome binding for HAV translation.

PMID: 1332279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Gen Virol. 1992 Oct;73 ( Pt 10):2577-84.

Interactions between bluetongue virus core and capsid proteins translated in
vitro.

Liu HM(1), Booth TF, Roy P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Oxford University, U.K.

To determine whether the two major core proteins (VP3 and VP7) of bluetongue
virus can interact in vitro to form morphological structures, linearized VP3 and 
VP7 cDNA clones were transcribed using SP6 polymerase and the resultant
transcripts were co-translated using rabbit reticulocyte lysates. The structures 
derived were isolated by sedimentation through a sucrose gradient and found to
resemble VP3-VP7 core-like particles (CLPs) expressed in vivo. Reacting CLPs
synthesized in vivo with outer capsid proteins translated in vitro (VP2 or VP5)
indicated that each outer capsid protein has the capacity to bind to a preformed 
CLP. This was confirmed by in vivo expression of the appropriate genes using
baculovirus vectors. The interaction of VP2 or VP5 with the CLP was analysed by
electron microscopy and by using immunogold-labelled monoclonal antibody.

PMID: 1328473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;12(9):4242-8.

Translation of the rat LINE bicistronic RNAs in vitro involves ribosomal
reinitiation instead of frameshifting.

Ilves H(1), Kahre O, Speek M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Chemical Physics and
Biophysics, Tartu, Estonia.

The genomic structure of the rat LINE (L1Rn) DNA element contains two overlapping
open reading frames (ORFs) and apparently has a potential to code for a
DNA/RNA-binding protein (in ORF1) and a reverse transcriptase (in ORF2). We have 
characterized a 1,630-bp L1Rn cDNA clone encompassing the overlapping ORFs and a 
600-bp genomic fragment derived from a full-length L1Rn member and containing the
beginning of ORF1. These DNAs were used to restore in part the ORF1-ORF2
organization of L1Rn after being cloned into the pSP65 vector under the control
of SP6 polymerase promoter. To test whether L1Rn ORF1 and ORF2 are expressed as a
fusion protein, a series of capped RNAs with progressive truncations containing
one or both ORFs were prepared and translated in the rabbit reticulocyte lysate. 
Our analysis indicates that the expression of a putative reverse
transcriptase-encoded L1Rn ORF2 in vitro is regulated by reinitiation or internal
initiation of translation but not by ribosomal frameshifting.

PMCID: PMC360333
PMID: 1380649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Carcinogenesis. 1992 Sep;13(9):1529-34.

DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase and exonuclease activities on a DNA sequence
modified by benzo[a]pyrene diolepoxide.

Thrall BD(1), Mann DB, Smerdon MJ, Springer DL.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Biology and Chemistry Department, Richland, WA
99352.

Adducts produced by modification of DNA with benzo[a]pyrene diolepoxide (BPDE)
are known to inhibit both DNA and RNA synthesis. This phenomenon has been used as
a method for determining the distribution of carcinogen binding within defined
DNA sequences. A critical comparison of different enzyme activities on adducted
DNA is needed, since different enzymes may process adducted DNA differently.
Thus, we compared blocks in DNA polymerase activity with that of an RNA
polymerase and with an exonuclease at single base resolution. BPDE adducts
blocked the progression of cloned T7 DNA polymerase (Sequenase) in a
dose-dependent manner. Although the majority of these blocks were at one base
prior to adducted guanines, we also observed some blocks opposite specific
guanines, suggesting that in some sequences the polymerase inserted a base
opposite the modified guanine. Digestion with T4 DNA polymerase (3'----5')
exonuclease activity was also blocked in BPDE-adducted DNA; however, fragments
produced by blocks in T4 exonuclease migrated two or more bases longer than the
corresponding guanine. Mapping of adduct distributions using both Sequenase and
T4 exonuclease gave similar results, demonstrating that a long tract of guanines 
was preferentially modified, and within a polyguanine sequence, the 5' guanines
were more heavily modified than the 3' guanines. Transcription of adducted DNA by
SP6 RNA polymerase was also inhibited in a dose-dependent manner. However,
adducted bases which posed strong blocks to the DNA polymerase were not always
strong blocks to the RNA polymerase. Thus, in terms of adduct distribution,
Sequenase and T4 exonuclease provided more consistent results than the RNA
polymerase, since blockage of the RNA polymerase correlated poorly with guanines.

PMID: 1327570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Gene. 1992 Aug 15;117(2):161-7.

Vectors for plant transformation and cosmid libraries.

Ma H(1), Yanofsky MF, Klee HJ, Bowman JL, Meyerowitz EM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

A series of vectors has been constructed for the purpose of introducing cloned
DNAs into plant genomes, using Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation 
methods. One of these vectors, pCIT20, is a plasmid that contains a multiple
cloning site (MCS), and a marker (Hph) that confers hygromycin resistance to
plant cells. The others are all cosmid vectors which allow insertion of up to 46 
kb of plant genomic DNA, and which also contain all of the necessary sequences
for A. tumefaciens-mediated plant transformation. The cosmid vectors either
contain a Hph marker (pCIT30), or a kanamycin-resistance marker (pCIT101-104).
Three of the cosmid vectors (pCIT30, pCIT101, and pCIT103) carry bacteriophage T7
and SP6 promoters flanking the cloning Bg/II site, for synthesis of end-specific 
RNAs. The end-specific RNAs may be used as probes when labeled with radioactive
or biotinylated nucleotides, for example, in a chromosome-walking experiment. The
other two cosmid vectors (pCIT102 and pCIT104) carry restriction sites flanking
the insertion site (XhoI) for convenient release of the insert by restriction
digests. These sites, in combination with sites internal to the insert, allow the
generation of end fragments for subcloning or labeling probes. These vectors
should be valuable for isolation and analysis of plant genes, using
transformation, library screening, and chromosome-walking approaches.

PMID: 1639265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 1992 Aug;44(4):394-400.

[Induction of Fos-like protein in the rat spinal cord following
electroacupuncture stimulation].

[Article in Chinese]

Ji RR(1), Wang XM, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Beijing Medical University.

The expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene has been regarded as a marker for
noxious stimulation. We now report that electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation (100 
Hz, 0.3 ms, 1-2-3 mA, 30 min) delivered into the acupoint Sanyinjiao (SP6) could 
also induce the c-fos expression in the rat spinal cord as demonstrated by
immunohistochemical technique using antibody against the c-fos protein product
Fos. In rats receiving EA stimulation, numerous cells with Fos-like
immunoreactivity (FLI) were observed in both dorsal and ventral horn of the
spinal cord with dense labelling in laminae III and IV of the ipsilateral side.
Only scattered FLI cells were found in laminae I and II. In contrast, FLI evoked 
by noxious stimulation (5% formalin injected at the hindfoot subcutaneously) was 
shown mainly in laminae I and II, rather than in III and IV. The c-fos expression
was very low in control animals receiving neither formalin nor EA administration.
The present study indicates that the site specificity of the c-fos expression
induced by EA is different from that evoked by noxious stimulation. The
possibility that EA-induced Fos protein might participate in acupuncture
analgesia is currently under investigation.

PMID: 1293753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Neurosci. 1992 Jul-Aug;65(1-4):117-29.

Comparison of the antinociceptive effects induced by electroacupuncture and
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation in the rat.

Wang JQ(1), Mao L, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Beijing Medical University, People's Republic of
China.

The analgesic effects induced by two different kinds of peripheral conditioning
stimulations, electroacupuncture (EA) and transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS), were compared in the rat using the latency of radiant
heat-evoked tail flick reflex as nociceptive index. The parallel elevations of
withdrawal latency of tail flick were produced by EA and TENS administrations at 
the acupoints of S36 and Sp6 with low intensity (1-2-3 mA) and one of three
different frequencies (2, 15 and 100 Hz). Analgesic effects of EA or TENS were
characterized by slow-on and slow-off nature, and a significant linear
correlation was found between both at any one of three frequencies. Systemic
naloxone hydrochloride (2 mg/kg) almost completely and partially antagonized 2
and 15 Hz EA- or TENS-induced analgesia, respectively, but failed to affect those
induced by 100 Hz EA or TENS. Tolerance to EA stimulation with one of three
frequencies reduced the corresponding frequency TENS-induced analgesia and vice
versa. These data indicate that: (a) there is no significant difference in
producing antinociception for two different peripheral conditioning stimulations 
when applied at the same sites and (b) the common neural mechanisms most likely
process the analgesic effects of EA and TENS. The involvement of (an) endogenous 
opiate mechanism in the management of different frequency EA and TENS analgesia
is discussed in detail.

PMID: 1341673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Mol Biol. 1992 Apr 20;224(4):981-1001.

Chromatin reconstitution on small DNA rings. IV. DNA supercoiling and nucleosome 
sequence preference.

Duband-Goulet I(1), Carot V, Ulyanov AV, Douc-Rasy S, Prunell A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jaques Monod, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique and
Université, Paris, France.

Nucleosome formation on inverted repeats or on some alternations of purines and
pyrimidines can be inhibited in vitro by DNA supercoiling through their
supercoiling-induced structural transitions to cruciforms or Z-form DNA,
respectively. We report here, as a result of study of single nucleosome
reconstitutions on a DNA minicircle, that a physiological level of DNA
supercoiling can also enhance nucleosome sequence preference. The 357 base-pair
minicircle was composed of a promoter of phage SP6 RNA polymerase joined to a 256
base-pair fragment containing a sea urchin 5 S RNA gene. Nucleosome formation on 
the promoter was found to be enhanced on a topoisomer with in vivo superhelix
density when compared to topoisomers of lower or higher superhelical densities,
to the nicked circle, or to the linear DNA. In contrast, nucleosomes at other
positions appeared to be insensitive to supercoiling. This observation relied on 
a novel procedure for the investigation of nucleosome positioning. The
reconstituted circular chromatin was first linearized using a restriction
endonuclease, and the linear chromatin so obtained was electrophoresed as
nucleoprotein in a polyacrylamide gel. The gel showed well-fractionated bands
whose mobilities were a V-like function of nucleosome positions, with the
nucleosome near the middle migrating less. This behavior is similar to that
previously observed for complexes of sequence-specific DNA-bending proteins with 
circularly permuted DNA fragments, and presumably reflects the change in the
direction of the DNA axis between the entrance and the exit of the particle.
Possible mechanisms for such supercoiling-induced modulation of nucleosome
formation are discussed in the light of the supercoiling-dependent susceptibility
to cleavage of the naked minicircle with S1 and Bal31 nucleases; and a comparison
between DNase I cleavage patterns of the modulated nucleosome and of another,
non-modulated, overlapping nucleosome.

PMID: 1314907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1992 Apr;294(1):291-6.

Recombinant ricin B chain fragments containing a single galactose binding site
retain lectin activity.

Wales R(1), Richardson PT, Roberts LM, Lord JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United
Kingdom.

Ricin B chain is an N-glycosylated galactose-specific lectin. Examination of the 
amino acid sequence of the protein has shown it to be the product of a series of 
gene duplication events based on an original galactose binding peptide. The X-ray
crystallographic structure of the protein reveals that it consists of two
globular domains, each composed of three smaller subdomains. In each globular
domain only one of the three subdomains has retained its ability to bind
galactose. Through DNA manipulation we have created a series of fusions of
portions of ricin B chain, each carrying only one galactose binding site, to the 
ricin signal sequence. Transcripts synthesized in vitro using SP6 RNA polymerase 
were injected into Xenopus oocytes where the recombinant proteins were produced
in a mature form. The products were shown to be N-glycosylated and produced in a 
soluble stable form. Also, they retained the ability to bind galactose.
Preliminary experiments on the reassociation of these ricin B chain fragments
with ricin A chain to create a modified holotoxin were also carried out.

PMID: 1550353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Gene. 1992 Mar 15;112(2):205-11.

Human cleavage signal-1 protein; cDNA cloning, transcription and immunological
analysis.

Javed AA(1), Naz RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY 10461.

The cleavage signal-1 protein (CS-1), a doublet antigen comprised of approx.
14-kDa and 18-kDa proteins has been shown to be present on the surface of sperm
of various mammalian species including humans. Polyclonal antibodies to CS-1
inhibit the early cleavage of fertilized eggs without apparently affecting sperm 
penetration and pronuclear formation. We report here the cloning of the human
CS-1 cDNA and its expression in vitro to obtain the recombinant protein (reCS-1) 
molecule. The CS-1 cDNA clone was isolated by immunological screening of a human 
testis lambda gt11 cDNA library with mono-specific polyclonal antibody against
CS-1. The cDNA is 1828 bp long; the start codon assigned to the first ATG (bp
98-100) encodes a protein with 249 amino acid residues terminating at TAA (bp
845-847). The cDNA isolated has a 97-bp 5' and a 984-bp 3' untranslated region.
The potential polyadenylation signal (5'-AATAAA) is at bp 1803-1808. An extensive
computer search of the GenBank database did not indicate any extensive homology
with any known sequence, indicating that CS-1 is a unique protein. The CS-1 cDNA 
was cloned in the transcription vector, pGEM-11Zf, to obtain high-level in vitro 
transcription by SP6 and T7 RNA polymerase. The transcribed CS-1 RNA was
translated in a rabbit reticulocyte in vitro translation system and produced a
33-kDa reCS-1 protein, as assessed by migration in a SDS-polyacrylamide
gel.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1555770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Mar 15;89(6):2056-60.

A positive selection vector for cloning high molecular weight DNA by the
bacteriophage P1 system: improved cloning efficacy.

Pierce JC(1), Sauer B, Sternberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company, Wilmington, DE 19880-0328.

The bacteriophage P1 cloning system can package and propagate DNA inserts that
are up to 95 kilobases. Clones are maintained in Escherichia coli by a low-copy
replicon in the P1 cloning vector and can be amplified by inducing a second
replicon in the vector with isopropyl beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside. To overcome
the necessity of screening clones for DNA inserts, we have developed a P1 vector 
with a positive selection system that is based on the properties of the sacB gene
from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens. Expression of that gene kills E. coli cells that
are grown in the presence of sucrose. In the new P1 vector (pAd10sacBII) sacB
expression is regulated by a synthetic E. coli promoter that also contains a P1
C1 repressor binding site. A unique BamHI cloning site is located between the
promoter and the sacB structural gene. Cloning DNA fragments into the BamHI site 
interrupts sacB expression and permits growth of plasmid-containing cells in the 
presence of sucrose. We have also bordered the BamHI site with unique
rare-cutting restriction sites Not I, Sal I, and Sfi I and with T7 and Sp6
promoter sequences to facilitate characterization and analysis of P1 clones. We
describe here the use of Not I digestion to size the cloned DNA fragments and RNA
probes to identify the ends of those fragments. The positive selection P1 vector 
provides a 65- to 75-fold discrimination of P1 clones that contain inserts from
those that do not. It therefore permits generation of genomic libraries that are 
much easier to use for gene isolation and genome mapping than are our previous
libraries. Also, the new vector makes it feasible to generate P1 libraries from
small amounts of genomic insert DNA, such as from sorted chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC48595
PMID: 1549564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Mar;12(3):1117-25.

Identification of the sequences responsible for the splicing phenotype of the
regulatory intron of the L1 ribosomal protein gene of Xenopus laevis.

Fragapane P(1), Caffarelli E, Lener M, Prislei S, Santoro B, Bozzoni I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Acidi Nucleici, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Rome, Italy.

Splicing of the regulated third intron of the L1 ribosomal protein gene of
Xenopus laevis has been studied in vivo by oocyte microinjection of wild-type and
mutant SP6 precursor RNAs and in vitro in the heterologous HeLa nuclear extract. 
We show that two different phenomena combine to produce the peculiar splicing
phenotype of this intron. One, which can be defined constitutive, shows the same 
features in the two systems and leads to the accumulation of spliced mRNA, but in
very small amounts. The low efficiency of splicing is due to the presence of a
noncanonical 5' splice site which acts in conjunction with sequences present in
the 3' portion of the intron. The second leads to the massive conversion of the
pre-mRNA into site specific truncated molecules. This has the effect of
decreasing the concentration of the pre-mRNA available for splicing. We show that
this aberrant cleavage activity occurs only in the in vivo oocyte system and
depends on the presence of an intact U1 RNA.

PMCID: PMC369543
PMID: 1545793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1992 Mar;58(3):325-8.

Sialogogic effects on rat submandibular gland of analogs of the C-terminal
hexapeptide of substance P.

Iwabuchi Y(1), Masuhara T, Sofuku S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Nippon Dental
University, Japan.

The sialogogic response of submandibular glands to analogs of the C-terminal
hexapeptide of substance P with various amino acids at the N-terminus was
investigated in urethane-anesthetized rats. The rank order of potencies was as
follows: SP greater than (pGlu6)SP6-11 much greater than (Dab6)SP6-11 greater
than (Orn6)SP6-11 greater than (Gln6)SP6-11 greater than (Lys6)SP6-11 much
greater than (Ala6)SP6-11. These results suggest that the sialogogic activity of 
the analogs of the C-terminal hexapeptide is influenced by the steric effects of 
the N-terminal amino acid, and the nature of its side chain is of particular
importance.

PMID: 1381001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Gene. 1992 Feb 15;111(2):183-97.

Synthetic human tRNA(UUULys3) and natural bovine tRNA(UUULys3) interact with
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and serve as specific primers for retroviral cDNA
synthesis.

Weiss S(1), König B, Müller HJ, Seidel H, Goody RS.

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Mannheim GmbH, Research Center Penzberg, F.R.G.

Full-length and 5'-truncated variants of human (h) tRNA(UUULys3) were synthesized
by in vitro transcription using SP6 RNA polymerase. Bovine(b) tRNA(SUULys3) was
purified from calf liver. Both full-length tRNA species were shown to be
biologically active in an aminoacylation assay. Gel retardation assays revealed
that both full-length tRNA species, as well as a 5'-truncated h-tRNA(UUULys3)
molecule containing 24 nucleotides (nt) at the 3' end (Lys24), interact with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 reverse transcriptase (RT). Competition
studies with these three tRNA species demonstrate that the 3' end of
h-tRNA(UUULys3) contributes to the interaction with HIV-1 RT. Escherichia coli
tRNA(UUULys) and tRNA(UUCGlu2) were also able to interact with the enzyme,
whereas unrelated RNA molecules such as E. coli 5S rRNA did not bind to RT. Both 
b-tRNA(SUULys3) and h-tRNA(UUULys3) molecules, as well as the 5'-truncated
variants, could be demonstrated to prime cDNA synthesis specifically using a
HIV-1 RNA template, prepared by in vitro transcription, indicating that other
viral or cellular proteins are not essential for this process. E. coli
tRNA(UUULys) and tRNA(UUCGlu2), although able to interact with HIV-1 RT, failed
to prime retroviral transcription. Products of cDNA synthesis were characterized 
by polymerase chain reaction, demonstrating that at least 18 nt at the 3' ends of
h-tRNA(UUULys3) and b-tRNA(SUULys3) are still present in the cDNA product,
whereas the 5' ends of both primer molecules were removed by the RNase H activity
of HIV-1 RT.

PMID: 1371759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem Int. 1992 Feb;26(1):1-5.

A two-base-pair substitution in T7 promoter by SP6 promoter-specific base pairs
alone abolishes T7 promoter activity but reveals SP6 promoter activity.

Lee SS(1), Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon.

The phage T7 and SP6 RNA polymerase-promoter systems are very similar in many
characteristics, but maintains stringent specificity for each. In order to
identify the base pair element that distinguishes between T7 and SP6 promoters,
the base pairs at -12, -10, -9, and -8 of the T7 promoter consensus sequence were
changed singly and multiply to the SP6 promoter-specific base pairs, and assayed 
for T7 and SP6 promoter activities. The results indicate that the primary
discrimination element is the base pairs at -8 and -9. The two-base-pair
substitution alone in T7 promoter by SP6-specific base pairs is sufficient to
make the T7 variant be a SP6 promoter, abolishing T7 promoter activity.

PMID: 1616486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Gene. 1992 Feb 1;111(1):115-8.

A versatile shuttle cosmid vector for use in Escherichia coli and actinomycetes.

Denis F(1), Brzezinski R.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Québec, Canada.

A shuttle cosmid vector has been constructed for Escherichia coli and
actinomycetes. This vector, pFD666, utilizes the origin of replication (ori) of
the broad-host-range plasmid, pJV1, from Streptomyces phaeochromogenes, for
replication in actinomycetes and is compatible with vectors derived from pIJ101. 
The pFD666 vector employs the neomycin phosphotransferase-encoding gene (neo)
from transposon Tn5 as the selective marker. To achieve this, the native promoter
of neo was replaced by one optimized for expression in both hosts. The polylinker
used for cloning has nine unique sites flanked by the promoters for T7 and SP6
RNA polymerase for the production of specific RNA probes. Terminators on both
sides of the polylinker protect the vector from transcription originating from
cloned inserts. An M13 ori allows the production of single-stranded DNA.

PMID: 1547947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Arerugi. 1992 Feb;41(2 Pt 1):119-24.

[The potencies of substance P, substance P fragments, and compound 48/80 for
granulocyte infiltration in mouse skin].

[Article in Japanese]

Tomoe S(1), Iwamoto I, Yoshida S, Tomioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine.

To determine whether the N-terminal or C-terminal peptide of substance P (SP)
induces granulocyte infiltration in mouse skin, we examined the potencies of SP, 
the N-terminal peptides SP1-4 and SP1-9, the C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and
SP6-11, and a mast cell degranulating agent compound 48/80 in inducing
granulocyte (neutrophil and eosinophil) infiltration in the skin of BALB/c mice. 
The subcutaneous administration of SP (10(-7)-10(-5) M) caused granulocyte
infiltration in mouse skin in a concentration-dependent fashion 6 h after the
injection. SP1-9 (10(-5)-10(-4) M) also caused granulocyte infiltration in the
skin which was associated with mast cell degranulation. However, SP1-4, SP4-11
and SP6-11 (up to 10(-4) M) induced neither granulocyte infiltration nor mast
cell degranulation. In addition, compound 48/80 (0.5-50 micrograms/ml) also
induced granulocyte infiltration of mouse skin with a concentration-dependent
increase in mast cell degranulation. These results indicate that SP induces
granulocyte infiltration of mouse skin through mast cell degranulation induced by
the N-terminal peptide.

PMID: 1373599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Clin Exp Immunol. 1992 Feb;87(2):203-7.

Substance P-induced granulocyte infiltration in mouse skin: the mast
cell-dependent granulocyte infiltration by the N-terminal peptide is enhanced by 
the activation of vascular endothelial cells by the C-terminal peptide.

Iwamoto I(1), Tomoe S, Tomioka H, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Previous studies have shown that substance P induces granulocyte infiltration in 
mouse skin, which is mediated through mast cell degranulation. However, it is not
yet known whether the direct effect of substance P on vascular endothelial cells 
is involved in the granulocyte infiltration in the skin. To solve this issue, we 
used the N-terminal peptide substance P1-9 (SP1-9), which is active for mast
cells but inactive for vascular endothelial cells, and the C-terminal peptide
SP6-11, which is active for vascular endothelial cells but inactive for mast
cells, since substance P activates both mast cells and vascular endothelial
cells. The subcutaneous administration of substance P (10(-7)-10(-5)M) caused
granulocyte (neutrophil and eosinophil) infiltration in the skin of BALB/c mice 6
h after the injection. SP1-9 (10(-5)-10(-4) M) also caused granulocyte
infiltration of mouse skin which was associated with mast cell degranulation. In 
contrast, SP6-11 (10(-7)-10(-4) M), which was found to increase the vascular
permeability of endothelial cells in mouse skin, induced no significant
granulocyte infiltration nor mast cell degranulation. However, SP6-11
(10(-5)-10(-4) M) enhanced SP1-9-induced granulocyte infiltration in the skin
without any significant increase in mast cell degranulation. We conclude that
substance P causes granulocyte infiltration in mouse skin through both mast cell 
degranulation induced by the N-terminal peptide of substance P and the activation
of vascular endothelial cells induced by the C-terminal peptide of substance P.

PMCID: PMC1554257
PMID: 1370926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell Mol Biol. 1992 Feb;38(1):17-26.

Role of the phosphoprotein (P) in the encapsidation of presynthesized and de novo
synthesized vesicular stomatitis virus RNA by the nucleocapsid protein (N) in
vitro.

Das T(1), Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195.

Encapsidation of presynthesized and nascent (synthesized de novo) vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) leader RNA in vitro by the nucleocapsid protein (N) and
the role of the phosphoprotein (P, previously known as NS) in this process were
examined. Presynthesized VSV leader RNAs were derived from the SP6 transcription 
vectors containing both (+) and (-) leader genes while the nascent RNA was
derived from transcription of viral ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex. The N and
the P proteins were made by transcription from SP6 vectors containing the genes, 
followed by translation of the mRNAs in rabbit reticulocyte lysate. Here, we
demonstrate that the N protein alone encapsidated presynthesized VSV leader RNA; 
however, prior formation of N-P complex totally abolished the encapsidation
property of N. On the other hand, encapsidation of nascent RNA by the N protein
was stimulated by the N-P complex. These results suggest that encapsidation by
the N protein of presynthesized and nascent VSV RNA are separate biochemical
processes which can be distinguished by the differential role of the
phosphoprotein P in the two reactions.

PMID: 1313745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Mol Biol. 1992 Jan 5;223(1):67-78.

Nucleosome arrays inhibit both initiation and elongation of transcripts by
bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase.

O'Neill TE(1), Roberge M, Bradbury EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616.

We have examined the effects of nucleosome cores on the initiation and elongation
of RNA transcripts by phage T7 RNA polymerase in vitro. A transcription template,
pT207-18, was constructed containing tandemly repeated 207 base-pair (bp)
nucleosome positioning sequences from a sea urchin (Lytechinus variegatus) 5 S
RNA gene inserted between the T7 and SP6 transcription promoters of pGEM-3Z.
Nucleosome cores were reconstituted onto supercoiled, closed circular pT207-18
DNA and double label transcription experiments were performed to determine the
effects of nucleosome cores on the initiation and elongation of transcripts by T7
RNA polymerase. Both transcript initiation and elongation were inhibited, the
extent of the inhibition being directly proportional to the number of nucleosome 
cores reconstituted onto the pT207-18 DNA templates. Time course transcription
experiments indicated that nucleosome cores caused a reduction in the equilibrium
length of transcripts and not mere retardation of elongation rates. Continuous
regularly spaced linear arrays of nucleosomes were obtained by digesting
reconstituted nucleosomel pT207-18 templates with DraI, for which a unique
restriction site lies within the nucleosome positioning region of the 207 bp 5 S 
rDNA repeat sequence. After in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase an RNA 
ladder with 207 nucleotide spacing was obtained, indicating that transcription
can occur through continuous arrays of positioned nucleosome cores. It is
demonstrated that nucleosome cores partially inhibit the elongation of
transcripts by T7 RNA polymerase, while allowing passage of the transcribing
polymerase through each nucleosome core at an upper limit efficiency of 85%.
Hence, complete transcripts are produced with high efficiency from short
nucleosomal templates, while the production of full-length transcripts from long 
nucleosomal arrays is relatively inefficient. The results indicate that
nucleosome cores have significant inhibitory effects in vitro not only on
transcription initiation but on transcription elongation as well, and that
special mechanisms may exist to overcome these inhibitory effects in vivo.

PMID: 1731087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Plant Mol Biol. 1992 Jan;18(2):259-74.

Synthesis and assembly of soybean beta-conglycinin in vitro.

Lelievre JM(1), Dickinson CD, Dickinson LA, Nielsen NC.

Author information: 
(1)USDA Agricultural Research Service, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907.

The construction of SP6-derived expression plasmids that encode normal and
modified beta-conglycinin subunits is described. With the exception of an
additional methionine at their NH2-terminal ends and the lack of glycans, the
normal subunits synthesized at the direction of these plasmids corresponded to
mature alpha and beta subunits isolated from soybean seeds. The subunits
assembled into trimers in vitro that were equivalent in size to those formed in
vivo. This result shows that the glycans are not required either for protein
folding or oligomer assembly. Subunits produced from other plasmids, which had
modifications in a highly conserved hydrophobic region in the COOH-terminal end
of the subunits, either did not assemble or assembled at an extremely low rate
compared to unmodified subunits. Structural changes at the more hydrophilic
NH2-terminal end had mixed effects. Several subunits modified in this region
assembled into trimers at rates that were either equal or greater than those for 
normal alpha subunits. Others assembled less completely than the normal subunits.
Our results indicate that the in vitro synthesis and assembly assay will be
useful in evaluating structure-function relationships in modified
beta-conglycinin subunits. The results also show that structural changes at the
NH2-terminal end of the subunits are tolerated to a greater extent than
modifications in the hydrophobic conserved region in the COOH-terminal half of
the subunits, and this information will be useful in efforts to improve soybean
quality.

PMID: 1731988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1992;97(3):237-42.

Comparison of substance P-induced and compound 48/80-induced neutrophil
infiltrations in mouse skin.

Tomoe S(1), Iwamoto I, Tomioka H, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

It has recently been shown that substance P induces neutrophil infiltration in
the skin, which is mediated through mast cell degranulation. Since substance P
activates both skin mast cells and vascular endothelial cells, we compared the
potencies of substance P and a mast cell-degranulating agent, compound 48/80,
which is inactive for vascular endothelial cells, in inducing neutrophil
infiltration in mouse skin. We also examined the effect of the C-terminal peptide
of substance P, SP6-11, which is active for vascular endothelial cells, on
compound 48/80-induced neutrophil infiltration in the skin. Subcutaneous
administrations of substance P (10(-7) to 10(-5) M; 0.1 ml) and compound 48/80
(0.5-50 micrograms/ml) induced neutrophil infiltrations and mast cell
degranulations in mouse skin in a concentration-dependent fashion. Moreover,
substance P induced more neutrophil infiltrations than compound 48/80 in terms of
the magnitude of mast cell degranulations. SP6-11 (10(-6) to 10(-4) M) induced no
significant neutrophil infiltration or mast cell degranulation, but increased the
vascular permeability of endothelial cells in the skin. Furthermore, SP6-11
enhanced compound 48/80-induced neutrophil infiltration without any increase in
mast cell degranulation. Our results indicate that, in addition to mast cell
degranulation, the activation of vascular endothelial cells is involved in
substance P-induced neutrophil infiltration in the skin.

PMID: 1375205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Arch Virol. 1992;125(1-4):141-60.

Localization of an RNA-binding domain in the nucleocapsid protein of the
coronavirus mouse hepatitis virus.

Masters PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of
Health, Albany.

The interaction between the nucleocapsid (N) protein of mouse hepatitis virus
(MHV) and RNA was studied in an effort to define portions of the N molecule that 
participate in binding to RNA. N mRNAs transcribed from SP6 and T7 vectors were
translated in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate. Analysis of synthesized N protein in 
a nondenaturing gel system showed that it bound in vitro to an endogenous RNA in 
the reticulocyte lysate but not to its own mRNA. A set of deletion mutants was
constructed in order to localize the RNA-binding activity of the N protein. It
was found that removal of as much as 135 amino-terminal or 57 carboxy-terminal
amino acids from the molecule had little or no effect on RNA binding. Moreover,
deletion mutants lacking both termini still retained RNA-binding ability. By
contrast, internal deletions or truncations extending beyond these two limits
effectively abolished RNA binding by N protein. Thus, the RNA-binding region of N
has been mapped to the second (central) of the three structural domains of the
molecule.

PMID: 1322650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Neuron. 1992 Jan;8(1):59-70.

Efficient expression of rat brain type IIA Na+ channel alpha subunits in a
somatic cell line.

West JW(1), Scheuer T, Maechler L, Catterall WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

Type IIA rat brain Na+ channel alpha subunits were expressed in CHO cells by
nuclear microinjection or by transfection using a vector containing both
metallothionein and bacteriophage SP6 promoters. Stable cell lines expressing Na+
channels were isolated, and whole-cell Na+ currents of 0.9-14 nA were recorded.
The mean level of whole-cell Na+ current (4.5 nA) corresponds to a cell surface
density of approximately 2 channels active at the peak of the Na+ current per
microns 2, a density comparable to that observed in the cell bodies of central
neurons. The expressed Na+ channels had the voltage dependence, rapid activation 
and inactivation, and rapid recovery from inactivation characteristic of Na+
channels in brain neurons, bound toxins at neurotoxin receptor sites 1 and 3 with
normal properties, and were posttranslationally processed to a normal mature size
of 260 kd. Expression of Na+ channel cDNA in CHO cells driven by the
metallothionein promoter accurately and efficiently reproduces native Na+ channel
properties and provides a method for combined biochemical and physiological
analysis of Na+ channel structure and function.

PMID: 1309650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 1992;(27):159-60.

Relationship between the 5'-leader sequence of mRNAs and the translation
efficiency in a eukaryotic in vitro system.

Wakiyama M(1), Hirao I, Kumagai I, Watanabe K, Miura K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomolecular Science, Gakushuin University, Tokyo, Japan.

To examine the effect of the 5'-leader region of mRNAs in regulating translation 
efficiency, chimeric mRNAs which have various sequences of the 5'-leader were
synthesized by the SP6 in vitro transcription system, and translated in the wheat
germ in vitro translation system. Translation efficiency was affected by the
length of the 5'-leader and the number of the codon A-U-G at the translation
initiation site.

PMID: 1289802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 1992;17(2):85-6, 89.

[Observation on 63 cases of facial paralysis treated with acupuncture].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu J(1), Jiang D, Yu M, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, China Academy of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Beijing.

Sixty-Three cases with facial paralysis were treated mainly by acupuncture
combining with point injection. The main points selected were Yangbai (GB14), Wai
Jingming (BL1), Sibai (ST2), Yingxiang (LI20), Dicang (ST4), Jiache (ST6),
Quanliao (ST18) and Qianzheng. The points were used alternatively. Auxiliary
points: for type of deficiency of both qi and blood, Zusanli (ST36), and
Sanyinjiao (SP6) were added: for type of disharmony between Ying and Wei, Fengchi
(GB20) and Hegu (LI4) were added; for type of stagnancy of qi and blood, Weiguan 
(TE5) and Taichong (LR3) were added; for type of wind-heat stagnating
collaterals, Yifeng (TH17) and Yanglingquan (GB34) were added. 10 out of 60
cases, which showed no remarkable effectiveness after two courses, injection of
vitamin B1 and vitamin B12 to facial points combined with Hegu (LI4) point on
opposite side was performed. Therapeutic results: 31 cases (49.2%) were cured, 15
cases (23.8%) markedly effective, 16 cases (25.4%) effective and 1 case (1.6%)
ineffective.

PMID: 1288929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1992 Jan-Feb;44(1):25-32.

Bifunctional pharmacophores. Biological activities of the peptide analog
containing both casomorphine-like and substance P antagonist-like active
elements.

Lipkowski AW(1), Misterek K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston 02114.

SP-antagonistic properties of a newly synthesized peptide
Tyr-Pro-D-Phe-Phe-D-Phe-D-Trp-MetNH2 (AWL-60) were investigated both in vitro and
in vivo. In vitro AWL-60 effectively antagonized the action of SP-agonist
(SP6-11); however, this antagonism was non-competitive. Antagonistic properties
of AWL-60 were also observed in vivo: in doses as low as 0.1 nmol/kg iv AWL-60
markedly attenuated the fall in blood pressure produced by [less than
Glu]6SP6-11. Since AWL-60 exerts weak opioid agonistic properties (as a
casomorphine analog) the possible involvement of an opioid agonistic component in
their SP inhibitory action is considered.

PMID: 1279644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Gene. 1991 Dec 30;109(2):307-8.

A new vaccinia recombinant plasmid pSC-O.

Scheiflinger F(1), Bodemer W.

Author information: 
(1)IMMUNO AG., Biomedical Research Center, Orth a.d. Donau, Austria.

A new plasmid pSC-O for generation of recombinant vaccinia virus was constructed.
It offers additional advantages when compared with other widely used insertion
vectors. This plasmid allows the expression of coding sequences lacking codons
for the initiation as well as for termination of translation. Additional
sequences modulating translation, but also transcription or affecting
intracellular processing can be introduced. Sequences flanking the transcription 
unit of the gene of interest are complementary to SP6/T7 sequencing primers and
thus may allow rapid sequencing (amplification) of the inserted DNA.

PMID: 1765277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1991 Nov-Dec;25(6):1661-6.

[Effect of nucleotide replacement on the effectiveness and specificity of the SP6
promotor].

[Article in Russian]

Nazarenko IA, Gorn VV.

The interaction of SP6 RNA-polymerase with its promoter (sequence; see text)
where +1 is the initiation site, was investigated. The substitution of C for A at
+2 position and T for A at +3 creates the AluI-site (-2-1+1+2). The efficiency of
the promoter changed in this way is comparable with that of the natural one. The 
introduced restriction site permits to insert the gene precisely at the
initiation site and the synthesis of the transcripts with the authentic 5'-ends. 
The influence of the nucleotide substitution within -5-10 region of SP6-promoter 
on its interaction with SP6 and T7 RNA-polymerases was investigated. A new
promoter, able to initiate the transcription with both SP6 and T7 RNA
polymerases, was obtained.

PMID: 1813808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Genet Anal Tech Appl. 1991 Nov;8(7):206-13.

mRNA quantitation by a simple and sensitive RNAse protection assay.

Pape ME(1), Melchior GW, Marotti KR.

Author information: 
(1)Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo, Michigan 49001.

An RNAse protection assay is described that increases substantially the degree of
precision with which one can measure the mRNA levels in cells and tissues through
the use of the internal standard. The assay can be used to measure any mRNA for
which the corresponding cDNA is available. We describe here the use of the assay 
to measure the apolipoprotein (apo)-A-I, apo-B, and apo-E mRNA levels in tissues 
from the cynomolgus monkey. cDNA fragments derived from each mRNA were subcloned 
into pGEM-9Zf(-), a vector containing a polylinker that is flanked by the SP6 and
T7 RNA polymerase promoters. That series of plasmids, called RNA quantitation
vectors (pRQV-AI, B, or E), permitted the synthesis of a sense RNA strand and an 
antisense RNA strand for the gene of interest. The sense stand was used as the
internal standard and added to the RNA to be analyzed just prior to initiation of
the assay. The radiolabeled antisense strand served as the probe. By including
some nucleotides derived from the vector, we were able to design both the
internal standard and the probe such that, after solution hybridization and RNAse
digestion, the size of the protected internal standard-probe fragments was
different from that of the authentic mRNA-probe fragments. Those fragments were
then separated by gel electrophoresis, and the radioactivity in the authentic
mRNA band was compared to that in the internal standard band. The mass of the
authentic mRNA could then be calculated from the ratio of the radioactivity in
each band and the mass of the internal standard.

PMID: 1772697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1991 Oct 15;266(29):19172-9.

Mutational analysis of the galactose binding ability of recombinant ricin B
chain.

Wales R(1), Richardson PT, Roberts LM, Woodland HR, Lord JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United
Kingdom.

Ricin B chain (RTB) is an N-glycosylated galactose-specific lectin which folds
into two globular domains. Each domain binds one galactoside. The x-ray
crystallographic structure has shown that the two binding sites are structurally 
similar and contain key binding residues which hydrogen bond to the sugar, and a 
conserved tripeptide, Asp-Val-Arg. We have used oligonucleotide site-directed
mutagenesis to change either the binding residues or the homologous tripeptide in
one or other or in both of the sites. The 5' signal sequence and RTB coding
region were excised from preproricin cDNA and fused in frame to generate preRTB
cDNA. Transcripts synthesized in vitro from wild-type or mutant preRTB cloned
into the Xenopus transcription vector pSP64T using SP6 RNA polymerase, were
microinjected into Xenopus oocytes. The recombinant products were segregated into
the oocyte rough endoplasmic reticulum and core-glycosylated, and the N-terminal 
signal peptide was removed. Mutating sugar binding sites individually did not
abrogate the lectin activity of RTB. When both sites were changed simultaneously,
RTB was produced which was soluble and stable but no longer able to bind
galactose. Changing the Asn residues of the two RTB N-glycosylation sites to Gln 
showed that oligosaccharide side chains were essential for both the stability and
biological activity of recombinant RTB.

PMID: 1717462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Probes. 1991 Oct;5(5):337-44.

cDNA cloning and analysis of RNA 2 of a Prunus stem pitting isolate of tomato
ringspot virus.

Hadidi A(1), Powell CA.

Author information: 
(1)National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, United States Department of
Agriculture, Beltsville, MD 20705.

Recombinant plasmids containing sequences derived from the genome of a tomato
ringspot virus (TomRSV) isolate associated with both stem pitting disease of
stone fruits and apple union necrosis and decline were constructed. Selected
inserts were subcloned into the polylinker region of the SP6 transcription vector
pSP64. Using the SP6 promoter flanking this region, high specific activity
32P-labelled cRNA probes were generated by SP6 RNA polymerase. cRNA probes were
specific for TomRSV RNA 2 present in purified virions or in extracts from woody
and herbacous hosts. No sequence relatedness was detected between TomRSV RNA 2
and genomic RNA from tobacco ringspot, arabis mosaic, strawberry latent ringspot,
or cucumber mosaic virus in Northern blot analysis using TomRSV cRNA probes.
These probes detected TomRSV infection in woody and herbaceous hosts in dot-blot 
hybridization assays.

PMID: 1791854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1991 Oct;38(4):350-6.

Synthesis of a potent agonist of substance P by modifying the methionyl and
glutaminyl residues of the C-terminal hexapeptide of substance P.
Structure-activity relationships.

Karagiannis K(1), Manolopoulou A, Stavropoulos G, Poulos C, Jordan CC, Hagan RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

Analogues of [Orn6]-SP6-11 have been synthesized in which the Met11 residue is
replaced by glutamate gamma-alkylesters. These analogues were tested in three in 
vitro preparations representative of NK-1, NK-2, and NK-3 receptor types.
Substitution of the SCH3 group of the Met11 side chain by a COOR (R = methyl,
ethyl, n-propyl, n-butyl, cyclohexyl) group results in analogues which are full
agonists in NK-1 and NK-2 preparations but show little agonist activity in the
NK-3 preparation. When the SCH3 group is replaced by a t-butyl ester group and
the resulting analogue is a full agonist in all the above preparations and more
active than the parent hexapeptide and SP-OCH3 at NK-1 receptors. It is concluded
that for activity at NK-1 receptors methionine can be replaced by gamma-t-butyl
glutamate without loss of activity, whilst at NK-2 and NK-3 receptors the above
substitution increases the activity of [Orn6]-SP6-11. Other gamma-alkyl esters of
the glutamic acid reduce its biological activity.

PMID: 1724664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Gen Genet. 1991 Oct;229(3):460-6.

Characterisation of saporin genes: in vitro expression and ribosome inactivation.

Fordham-Skelton AP(1), Taylor PN, Hartley MR, Croy RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Durham, UK.

A. Saponaria (soapwort) genomic library was screened with a PCR-derived
saporin-specific gene probe. The nucleotide sequences of three saporin genomic
clones were determined. One of the clones contained a full-length saporin coding 
sequence whilst the other two were truncated. A hybrid full-length saporin coding
sequence was constructed using the two truncated clones. An SP6 promoter sequence
and in-frame initiation codon was added to each of the coding sequences using
PCR. In vitro translation of saporin coding sequence transcripts in rabbit
reticulocyte lysates resulted in the specific depurination of 28S RNA. This
indicated that the saporin sequences encoded functional polypeptides with RNA
N-glycosidase activity.

PMID: 1719367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Sep 11;19(17):4669-73.

SP6 RNA polymerase stutters when initiating from an AAA... sequence.

Cunningham PR(1), Weitzmann CJ, Ofengand J.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Roche Research Center, Nutley, NJ 07110.

The 16S ribosomal RNA gene of Escherichia coli was placed under the
transcriptional control of consensus and modified T7 promoters and a modified SP6
promoter. Both T7 and SP6 polymerases faithfully transcribed the coding sequence 
(beginning at the +1 position) of each construct, although SP6 polymerase was
five-fold more effective than T7 polymerase in initiating with the AAAUUG...
sequence. An appreciable fraction of the SP6 transcript molecules contained
additional adenosines in the -1, -2, -3, -4, and -5 positions. The transcripts
containing additional residues constituted approximately 40-50% of the total SP6 
transcription products. Neither the nature nor extent of the additional residues 
was affected by replacing the pppA 5'-end by pA. Since the identity of the
inserted residues does not correspond to the sequence of the template, these
additional nucleosides must result from 'stuttering' of the SP6 enzyme at the -1 
to +3 positions during initiation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC328707
PMID: 1891358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Sep 11;19(17):4639-46.

Characterization of elongating T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases and their response to a
roadblock generated by a site-specific DNA binding protein.

Pavco PA(1), Steege DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

As a means of generating homogeneous populations of elongation complexes with the
RNA polymerases encoded by phages T7 and SP6, transcription has been carried out 
in vitro on templates associated with the Gln-111 mutant of EcoRI endonuclease.
The Gln-111 protein, as a result of a single amino acid substitution at position 
111, lacks cleavage function yet shows higher than wild-type affinity for the
EcoRI recognition sequence GAATTC. On a series of linear and circular templates
associated with Gln-111 protein, blockage of the phage RNA polymerase elongation 
complex is observed. The 3' endpoint of the major blocked-length RNA species,
just 3 bp upstream from the GAATTC, reveals an extremely close approach of
polymerase's leading edge to essential contacts between Gln-111 protein and its
binding site. In contrast to E. coli RNA polymerase, which is blocked stably and 
quantitatively by Gln-111 protein (Pavco, P.A. and Steege, D. A. (1990) J. Biol. 
Chem. 265, 9960-9969), the phage polymerases show substantial levels of
readthrough transcription beyond the protein block.

PMCID: PMC328703
PMID: 1891355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1991 Aug 27;1090(1):95-101.

Expression of LDL receptor, apolipoprotein B, apolipoprotein A-I and
apolipoprotein A-IV mRNA in various mouse organs as determined by a novel
RNA-excess solution hybridization assay.

Srivastava RA(1), Pfleger BA, Schonfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63110.

We report expression of LDL receptor, apolipoprotein B (apoB), apolipoprotein A-I
(apoA-I) and apolipoprotein A-IV (apoAIV) mRNA in various mouse organs. These
mRNA were quantified by an RNA-excess solution hybridization assay. For preparing
specific probes, we cloned cDNA fragments of rat LDL receptor, apoB and apoA-I
and mouse apoA-IV into the polylinker region of pGEM3Zf(+) and used the
recombinant vectors for preparing 32P-labeled cRNA probes as well as RNA
standards using the T7 and SP6 promoters flanking the polylinker regions.
Preparation of cRNA probes and RNA standards is faster and more convenient than
preparing cDNA probes and ssDNA standards. Absolute levels of mRNA were
quantified in the liver, intestine, kidney, heart, lung, spleen and adrenals of
females of two mouse strains. C3H/HeJ and C57BL/6J. ApoB, apoA-I and apoA-IV
genes in mice are expressed in the liver and intestine and LDL receptor gene is
expressed mainly in liver, intestine and adrenals. ApoA-I mRNA levels were found 
to be 730 and 1039 molecules per cell in liver and intestine, respectively, in
C3H mice and 762 and 952 molecules per cell in C57BL mice. ApoB mRNA levels were 
66 and 170 molecules per cell in the liver and intestine of C3H and 83 and 243
molecules per cell in C57BL, respectively. ApoA-IV mRNA was found to be 3525 and 
2964 molecules per cell in the liver and intestine of female C57BL mice,
respectively. LDL receptor mRNA levels were 39, 32 and 14 molecules per cell in
the liver, intestine and adrenals of C3H.

PMID: 1909181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 25;19(16):4347-54.

Functional modularity in the SP6 kappa promoter.

Högbom E(1), Magnusson AC, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Lund University, Sweden.

The requirements of the SP6 kappa promoter for transcriptional activation were
studied in nontransformed murine B lymphocytes stimulated with
lipopolysaccharide. Three different DNA motifs, besides the TATA-box, were needed
for restoration of transcriptional activation to the same magnitude as seen with 
the native SP6 kappa promoter. The decamer motif (TNCTTTGCAT) was found to induce
transcription alone and point-mutation of this element reduced transcription to
negligible levels, although the other two required elements were present. The
penta-decamer element (TGCAG/CCTGTGNCCAG) did not stimulate transcription alone, 
but activated transcription synergistically in conjunction with the decamer
motif. This synergism required the presence of a third pyrimidine rich element
(CCCT) in the decamer 3' flanking sequence. The pyrimidine rich element could
partly be substituted for by an E-box core motif (CANNTG) 3' of, but not by the
kappa Y motif (CTTCCTTA) 5' of, the decamer. Proteins interacting specifically
with the penta-decamer element were detected by band-shift assay. The decamer 3' 
flanking sequence of the SP6 kappa promoter was found to modify the binding of
endogenous Oct2 isoforms to the decamer motif i B lymphocytes, but not in CHO
cells transfected with various Oct2 isoforms. Thus, complex protein/DNA
interactions can be observed in the SP6 kappa promoter which correlate
functionally with a synergism in transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC328619
PMID: 1909431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Aug;11(8):3978-86.

Displacement of Xenopus transcription factor IIIA from a 5S rRNA gene by a
transcribing RNA polymerase.

Campbell FE Jr(1), Setzer DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106.

In the absence of other components of the RNA polymerase III transcription
machinery, transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA) can be displaced from both strands 
of its DNA-binding site (the internal control region) on the somatic-type 5S rRNA
gene of Xenopus borealis during transcription elongation by bacteriophage T7 RNA 
polymerase, regardless of which DNA strand is transcribed. Furthermore,
substantial displacement is observed after the template has been transcribed only
once. Since the complete 5S rRNA transcription complex has previously been shown 
to remain stably bound to the gene during repeated rounds of transcription by
either RNA polymerase III or bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase, these results
indicate that a factor(s) in addition to TFIIIA is required to create a complex
that will remain stably associated with the template during transcription. Thus, 
transcription complex stability during passage of RNA polymerase cannot be
explained solely on the basis of the DNA-binding properties of TFIIIA.

PMCID: PMC361196
PMID: 2072903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Virol. 1991 Aug;65(8):4107-13.

In vitro mutagenesis of a full-length cDNA clone of Semliki Forest virus: the
small 6,000-molecular-weight membrane protein modulates virus release.

Liljeström P(1), Lusa S, Huylebroeck D, Garoff H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

We report on the construction of a full-length cDNA clone of Semliki Forest virus
(SFV). By placing the cDNA under the SP6 promoter, infectious RNA can be produced
in vitro and used to transfect cells to initiate virus infection. To achieve
efficient transfections, a new protocol for electroporation of RNA was developed.
This method gave up to 500-fold improvement over the traditional DEAE-dextran
transfection procedure. Since virtually 100% of the cells can be transfected by
electroporation, this method is a useful tool for detailed biochemical studies of
null mutations of SFV that abolish production of infections virus particles. We
used the cDNA clone of SFV to study what effects a deletion of the
6,000-molecular-weight membrane protein (6K membrane protein) had on virus
replication. The small 6K protein is part of the structural precursor molecule
(C-p62-6K-E1) of the virus. Our results conclusively show that the 6K protein is 
not needed for the heterodimerization of the p62 and E1 spike membrane proteins
in the endoplasmic reticulum, nor is it needed for their transport out to the
cell surface. The absence of the 6K protein did, however, result in a dramatic
reduction in virus release, suggesting that the protein exerts its function late 
in the assembly pathway, possibly during virus budding.

PMCID: PMC248843
PMID: 2072446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biochem. 1991 Aug;110(2):196-201.

Molecular cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of cDNA encoding the subunit
of sweet potato beta-amylase.

Yoshida N(1), Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University, Aichi.

Tuberous roots of the sweet potato are unusually rich in beta-amylase, and the
beta-amylase polypeptides account for about 5% of the total soluble protein of
the organ. Unlike beta-amylases from other origins, the sweet potato beta-amylase
is a tetramer of identical subunits, and it also bears starch
phosphorylase-inhibitor activity. A cDNA for the subunit of sweet potato
beta-amylase was obtained by immunological screening of an expression cDNA
library constructed by the vector-primer and linker method using a plasmid vector
containing tac-SP6 promoters. The SP6 transcript of a 2,000 base-pair-long cDNA
insert directed the synthesis in vitro of a precursor to the subunit of
beta-amylase which was identical in size with the mature subunit, and the
beta-amylase mRNA detected by Northern blot hybridization was identical in size
with the SP6 transcript of the cDNA insert. The cDNA insert contained 1,494 base 
pairs of an open reading frame which codes for the 499-amino-acid-long precursor 
to the subunit of beta-amylase. An amino acid sequence identical to the
N-terminal amino acid sequence of the mature subunit appeared immediately after
the initiator methionine of the precursor, indicating that the subunit of
beta-amylase is synthesized as a mature form. Comparison of the amino acid
sequences of subunits of sweet potato beta-amylase and seed beta-amylases from
barley and soybean indicated that these enzymes share about 68% amino acid
identities among each other. Escherichia coli cells harboring the cDNA clone
produced the mature-sized subunit of the beta-amylase, and the soluble extract
exhibited amylolytic activity which migrated to the same position as the
beta-amylase purified from the sweet potato in non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel 
containing soluble starch indicating that oligomerization of the subunit occurred
properly in E. coli cells.

PMID: 1837016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Med Chem. 1991 Aug;34(8):2430-8.

Pseudopeptide analogues of substance P and leucine enkephalinamide containing the
psi (CH2O) modification: synthesis and biological activity.

Roubini E(1), Laufer R, Gilon C, Selinger Z, Roques BP, Chorev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Israel.

The isosteric methyleneoxy psi (CH2O) function was employed as a novel
peptide-bond surrogate and incorporated into sequences of two neuropeptides,
substance P (SP) and enkephalin. A pseudopeptide analogue [pGlu6,Phe8
psi(CH2O)Gly9]SP6-11 (7) of SP related C-terminal hexapeptide [pGlu6]SP6-11 and
two pseudopeptide analogues of [Leu5]enkephalinamide, [Tyr1 psi (CH2O)Gly2, Leu5]
enkephalinamide (11) and [Gly2 psi (CH2O)-Gly3, Leu5]enkephalinamide (17), were
synthesized. The N alpha-protected pseudodipeptidic units were incorporated in
the appropriate peptide sequences by using conventional coupling methods in
solution. Compound 7 was a potent agonist (EC50 = 4.8 nM) of substance P as
compared to the parent peptide [pGlu6]SP6-11 (EC50 = 1.2 nM), in stimulating
contraction of the isolated guinea pig ileum (GPI). Analogue 7 was more potent on
the neuronal (NK-3) than on the muscular (NK-1) tachykinin receptors in the GPI
as shown by the ratio of activities, EC50 (NK-1)/EC50 (NK-3) = 3.16, thus
displaying an improved selectivity for the NK-3 tachykinin receptor subtype as
compared to that of [pGlu6]SP6-11, EC50 (NK-1)/EC50 (NK-3) = 0.44. In the rat vas
deferens (RVD) assay, a typical NK-2 system, the pseudopeptide analogue 7 was
(EC50 = 2 microM) 10-fold more potent than the parent peptide and 20-fold less
potent than eledoisin, an NK-2 selective tachykinin. The pseudopeptide enkephalin
analogue 17 had low biological activity when tested in the electrically induced
GPI (EC50 = 2.3 microM) and was inactive in the mouse vas deferens (MVD) assay.
In the rat brain membrane (RBM) binding assay analogue 17 had low affinity (in
the micromolar range) for both the mu and delta binding sites. In contrast,
analogue 11 was a potent enkephalin agonist (EC50 = 30 nM), being equipotent to
[D-Ala2, Leu5]enkephalinamide (DALE) in the GPI assay. In the MVD, analogue 11
showed a substantially reduced activity (EC50 = 92 nM), being about 10-fold less 
potent than DALE. In the RBM binding assay analogue 11 showed high affinity (in
the nanomolar range) for both mu and delta binding sites with increased
selectivity for the delta sites as shown by the ratio of the apparent affinities 
for both receptors, Ki (delta)/Ki (mu) = 2.1. The contribution of the modified
peptide bonds in the mode of interaction of SP and enkephalin at their
corresponding receptors is discussed.

PMID: 1714957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1991 Jul 17;83(14):1004-9.

Direct sequencing from touch preparations of human carcinomas: analysis of p53
mutations in breast carcinomas.

Kovach JS(1), McGovern RM, Cassady JD, Swanson SK, Wold LE, Vogelstein B, Sommer 
SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Foundation, Rochester, Minn 55905.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 1991 Jul 17;83(14):980-1.

A new technique for characterizing somatic mutations in very small samples of
cellularly heterogeneous human cancer tissue was developed and tested using
mutations in the p53 gene in breast carcinomas as a model system. The technique
combines touch preparation of specimens to obtain homogeneous clusters of
carcinoma cells free of normal cells with a nested pair of polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) amplifications of DNA to increase the amount of target gene
sequence sufficiently to permit direct sequencing of the p53 gene. Touch
preparations of fresh or previously frozen tissue from human adenocarcinomas
derived from several organs were stained, and clusters of 10-50 malignant cells
were transferred by pipette into microfuge tubes for PCR amplification. Exons 5-9
of the p53 gene, which contain the major mutational hot spots associated with
most human cancers, were sequenced by the following steps: 1) two rounds of PCR
amplification using DNA Taq polymerase and two sets of oligonucleotide primers,
the second set being nested within the segment amplified by the first set and
having attached T7 and SP6 phage promoter sequences, 2) transcription of the
amplified DNA sequences with T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases, and 3) dideoxy
sequencing of single-stranded RNA transcripts with reverse transcriptase and with
additional oligonucleotide primers to achieve specificity for this unique region 
of the genome. The utility of this approach is illustrated by our success in
detecting and analyzing point mutations in cell clusters from four of 11 primary 
adenocarcinomas of the human breast.

PMID: 1712853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Eur J Immunol. 1991 Jul;21(7):1601-10.

2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (TNP) responsiveness of anti-TNP (Sp6) transgenic mice.

Zöller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiology and Pathophysiology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Transgenic mouse models have demonstrated clonal deletion as well as clonal
anergy of monospecific, high-avidity autoreactive B cell. The function and fate
of naturally activated B cells, many of them displaying degenerate specificity
including autoreactivity, are still a matter of debate. The question was pursued 
in Sp6-transgenic mice. Sp6, a monoclonal anti-2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (TNP) IgM has
been shown to react with a variety of self antigens. Responsiveness of
antibody-secreting B cells was followed throughout postnatal development of
Sp6-transgenic mice and was related to the availability of antigen- and
idiotype-specific help. Thymus as well as spleen cells of transgenic mice
contained a significantly higher number of TNP-specific B cell than
non-transgenic controls. In contrast to control mice, the number of TNP-specific 
B cells remained unchanged or decreased in thymus and spleen of transgenic mice
after antigenic stimulation with TNP in T-dependent (TD) and T-independent (TI)
form. Since the relative frequency of transgenic B cells was in particular
diminished after repeated stimulation with TD antigen, it was examined whether
limited responsiveness was linked to the available repertoire of helper T cells. 
Early after birth of transgenic individuals, thymic as well as splenic T cells
which proliferated in response to TNP and Sp6 and provided help for B cells were 
found to be significantly augmented. Their number decreased rapidly during
postnatal maturation and Th cells did not expand after antigenic stimulation.
There was no indication that in the naive host transgenic B cells would suppress 
proliferation of TNP- and Sp6-specific T cells, but they did so after antigenic
stimulation. Furthermore, and in contrast to B cells of non-transgenic mice,
transgenic B cells were unable to present nominal antigen in a stimulatory way.
The decrease in the number of B cells after antigenic stimulation indicated that 
autoreactive transgenic B cells may be subject to (functional) deletion under
selected circumstances. In addition, idiotype- and antigen-specific help was
impaired in Sp6-transgenic mice and this clearly was due to interactions with B
cells expressing the immunoglobulin transgene.

PMID: 2060575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Gene. 1991 Jun 15;102(1):75-8.

Construction and properties of a family of pACYC184-derived cloning vectors
compatible with pBR322 and its derivatives.

Bartolomé B(1), Jubete Y, Martínez E, de la Cruz F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander,
Spain.

A family of cloning vectors derived from plasmid pACYC184 and, therefore,
compatible with pBR322 and its derivatives (especially the pUC family of
vectors), is described. They all contain a multiple cloning site (MCS) and the
lacZ alpha reporter gene for easy cloning. They have been grouped in three sets: 
(i) six of the vectors contain a chloramphenicol-resistance (CmR)-encoding gene
and each a different MCS with 16 unique restriction sites overall; (ii) another
six vectors contain a kanamycin-resistance (KmR)-encoding gene and the same six
MCS; and (iii) two CmR vectors that contain the SP6 and T7 promoters flanking the
MCS and lacZ alpha reporter gene of pUC18/19.

PMID: 1840539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Virol. 1991 Jun;65(6):2829-38.

A 269-amino-acid segment with a pseudo-leucine zipper and a helix-turn-helix
motif codes for the sequence-specific DNA-binding domain of herpes simplex virus 
type 1 origin-binding protein.

Deb S(1), Deb SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio 78284-7758.

The UL9 gene of herpes simplex virus (HSV) codes for a DNA-binding protein (OBP) 
that interacts sequence specifically with the origin of replication. This protein
is essential for HSV DNA replication in cultured cells. The UL9 gene was cloned
into a plasmid vector downstream of the SP6 RNA polymerase promoter. By using in 
vitro transcription and translation systems, a full-length OBP was synthesized.
This synthetic protein is recognized by an antiserum generated against the
C-terminal decapeptide of OBP and is functionally active in binding to OriS
sequence specifically. The in vitro-synthesized protein has sequence specificity 
for binding similar to that found for the in vivo-generated OBP. A total of 14
in-frame deletion and insertion mutants of the UL9 gene were generated and
expressed in vitro. Using these deletion mutants, we determined that the
269-amino-acid stretch defined by amino acids 564 to 832 localizes the
OriS-specific DNA-binding domain. The N-terminal boundary is between amino acids 
565 and 596, while the C terminus lies between amino acids 833 and 805. This
segment contains a helix-turn-helix moiety and a pseudo-leucine zipper, neither
of which alone can support DNA binding. The other leucine zipper from amino acids
150 to 173 is not required for the in vitro sequence-specific DNA-binding
activity of OBP.

PMCID: PMC240903
PMID: 1851856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biochimie. 1991 Jun;73(6):789-96.

The absence of modified nucleotides affects both in vitro assembly and in vitro
function of the 30S ribosomal subunit of Escherichia coli.

Cunningham PR(1), Richard RB, Weitzmann CJ, Nurse K, Ofengand J.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Roche Research Center, Nutley, NJ 07110.

16S RNA of Escherichia coli lacking all post-transcriptional modifications and
with 5'-termini of pppGGGAGA-, pppGAA-, pppAAA-, and pAAA- were prepared by in
vitro transcription of appropriately engineered plasmids with T7 or SP6 RNA
polymerases. These synthetic versions of 16S RNA were compared with natural 16S
RNA for their ability to reconstitute 30S ribosomal subunits in vitro using
varied conditions for both the isolation of the RNA and for reconstitution. Under
all conditions studied, natural 16S RNA assembled correctly, as judged by
velocity centrifugation comparison with an internal standard of native 30S
particles, and the recovered ribosomes were 80-100% as active as native 30S
ribosomes in initiation complex formation, P site binding of AcVal-tRNA, A site
binding of Phe-tRNA, and formation of the first peptide bond. In contrast, all of
the synthetic constructs including pAAA-, which has the same sequence as native
16S RNA, were only partially active in reconstitution and in the functional
assays. We conclude that the lack of the 10 methylated nucleotides and/or the 2
pseudouridylate residues present in natural 16S RNA must be responsible for the
reduced activity of the synthetic RNAs in ribosome assembly and function.

PMID: 1764523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Anal Biochem. 1991 Jun;195(2):207-13.

Preparative in vitro mRNA synthesis using SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases.

Gurevich VV(1), Pokrovskaya ID, Obukhova TA, Zozulya SA.

Author information: 
(1)Branch of M. M. Shemyakin Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Academy of
Sciences of the USSR, Pushchino, Moscow Region.

A method for preparative in vitro mRNA synthesis is presented. The method makes
it possible to generate several hundred RNA copies per molecule of linearized DNA
template. The protocol is applicable to the synthesis of RNAs of differing
lengths (from 200 to 3000 bases), and both SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases can be
used. The transcription can be scaled up to at least 6-12 ml, yielding 4.5-18 mg 
of homogeneous biologically active mRNA.

PMID: 1750668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Virology. 1991 Jun;182(2):430-41.

Infectious RNA transcripts from Ross River virus cDNA clones and the construction
and characterization of defined chimeras with Sindbis virus.

Kuhn RJ(1), Niesters HG, Hong Z, Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

We have constructed a full-length cDNA clone of the virulent T48 strain of Ross
River virus, a member of the alphavirus genus. Infectious RNA can be transcribed 
from this clone using SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase. The rescued virus has properties 
indistinguishable from those of the T48 strain of Ross River virus. We have used 
this clone, together with a full-length cDNA clone of Sindbis virus, to construct
chimeric plasmids in which the 5' and the 3' nontranslated regions of the Sindbis
and Ross River genomes were exchanged. The nontranslated regions of the two viral
genomes differ in both size and sequence although they maintain specific
conserved sequence elements. Virus was recovered from all four chimeras. Chimeras
containing heterologous 3' nontranslated regions had replicative efficiencies
equal to those of the parents. In contrast, the chimeras containing heterologous 
5' nontranslated regions were defective in RNA synthesis and virus production,
and the severity of the defect was dependent upon the host. Replication of a
virus containing a heterologous 5' nontranslated region may be inefficient due to
the formation of defective protein-RNA complexes, whereas, the presumptive
complexes formed between host or virus proteins and the 3' nontranslated region
to promote RNA synthesis appear to function normally in the chimeras.

PMID: 1673812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 May 15;88(10):4171-5.

Molecular cloning and identification of a serine/threonine protein kinase of the 
second-messenger subfamily.

Jones PF(1), Jakubowicz T, Pitossi FJ, Maurer F, Hemmings BA.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, Basel, Switzerland.

A partial cDNA was isolated that encoded a protein kinase, termed rac (related to
the A and C kinases). This cDNA was subsequently used to screen libraries derived
from the human cell lines MCF-7 and WI38 and led to the isolation of full-length 
cDNA clones. DNA sequence analysis identified an open reading frame of 1440 base 
pairs encoding a protein of 480 amino acids (Mr, 55,716). This result was
supported by the synthesis of a Mr 58,000 protein in an in vitro translation
system that used RNA transcribed from cloned cDNAs with SP6 RNA polymerase. The
predicted protein contains consensus sequences characteristic of a protein kinase
catalytic domain and shows 73% and 68% similarity to protein kinase C and the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase, respectively. Northern (RNA) analysis revealed a
single mRNA transcript of 3.2 kilobases that varied up to 300-fold between
different cell lines. Specific antisera directed towards the carboxyl terminal of
the rac protein kinase were prepared and used to identify that phosphorylated
several substrates in immunoprecipitates prepared with the rac-specific antisera.

PMCID: PMC51620
PMID: 1851997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Scand J Immunol. 1991 May;33(5):615-20.

'E-boxes' as promoter elements in B cell lines and untransformed B lymphocytes.

Högbom E(1), Magnusson AC, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

The penta-deca (pd) promoter element from the SP6 kappa promoter and the muE2 box
from the Ig heavy chain intron enhancer were analysed in an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA), utilising cell extracts from total mouse splenic B
cells before and after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide. With both probes a
changed EMSA pattern was observed after stimulation of the cells, where higher
molecular weight DNA/protein complexes became dominant. When the pd and muE2
sequence elements were cloned in front of a TATA box and analysed for their
transcriptional promoting activity in lipopolysaccharide stimulated B cells, they
were inactive. On the contrary, the same constructs were transcriptionally active
in some but not all B cell lines. Thus, E-boxes display functional heterogeneity 
as transcriptional activators depending on host cell.

PMID: 2031151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Virol. 1991 May;65(5):2728-31.

Identification and functional characterization of Epstein-Barr virus DNA
polymerase by in vitro transcription-translation of a cloned gene.

Lin JC(1), Sista ND, Besençon F, Kamine J, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599.

In order to identify the gene encoding the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA
polymerase, a portion of the BamHI-A fragment containing the fifth leftward open 
reading frame (BALF5) of the EBV genome was cloned into SP6 and T7
promoter-containing vectors for in vitro transcription-translation. The RNA
synthesized in vitro was used to program rabbit reticulocyte lysates, which were 
analyzed for the synthesis of the putative polymerase polypeptide (110 kDa) and
assayed directly for EBV DNA polymerase activity. The polypeptide synthesized by 
the full-length BALF5 genomic fragment had a molecular mass of 110 kDa.
5'-truncated BALF5 with the first and second ATGs deleted produced 95- and 83-kDa
polypeptides, respectively. All three translation products were enzymatically
active and displayed resistance to high salt concentrations. The identity of the 
largest polypeptide as the viral polymerase was established by (i)
immunoprecipitation with EBV-positive sera from patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and by a rabbit polyclonal antiserum prepared with a synthetic peptide 
derived from the DNA sequence of BALF5; (ii) identification of a polypeptide of
identical size (110 kDa) immunoprecipitated from superinfected Raji cell extracts
by these antibodies; and (iii) salt-resistant enzymatic activity which was
neutralized by the rabbit EBV antiserum. Thus, BALF5 encodes a functional
polymerase identical to that induced in superinfected Raji cells.

PMCID: PMC240638
PMID: 1850046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Gene Expr. 1991 May;1(2):117-25.

Effects of long 5' leader sequences on initiation by eukaryotic ribosomes in
vitro.

Kozak M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, Piscataway 08854.

Lengthening the 5' noncoding sequence on SP6-derived transcripts can increase
their translational efficiency by an order of magnitude under some conditions of 
translation in reticulocyte lysates. This effect was observed upon reiterating
three different synthetic oligonucleotides, the sequences of which were designed 
simply to preclude secondary structure. It seems unlikely that such arbitrarily
designed sequences are recognized by sequence-specific translational enhancer
proteins. Rather, long 5' leader sequences appear to accumulate extra 40S
ribosomal subunits, which may account for their translational advantage. The
buildup of 40S subunits on long, unstructured leader sequences is predicted by
the scanning model for initiation. Leader sequences such as these may be ideal
for in vitro expression vectors.

PMID: 1820209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Genet Anal Tech Appl. 1991 May;8(3):107-10.

An improved and rapid procedure for isolating RNA-free Escherichia coli plasmid
DNA.

He M(1), Kaderbhai MA, Adcock I, Austen BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, St. George's Hospital Medical School, London, UK.

We describe a simple, rapid, and inexpensive procedure for the isolation of
plasmid DNA in high yields from Escherichia coli cultures. The procedure entails 
two main steps, which involve treating intact bacterial cells with
phenol/chloroform in the presence of Triton X-100 and LiCl followed by
polyethylene glycol precipitation. Plasmid DNA preparations isolated by this
method are highly pure and virtually devoid of RNA. The DNA is suitable substrate
for restriction mapping, DNA-modifying enzymes, and in vitro transcription with
SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases.

PMID: 1712213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Lab Invest. 1991 May;64(5):709-12.

Transcription of cRNA for in situ hybridization from polymerase chain
reaction-amplified DNA.

Young ID(1), Ailles L, Deugau K, Kisilevsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

The synthesis of cRNA probes for in situ hybridization is usually accomplished
with transcription systems using cloning vectors that contain bacteriophage RNA
polymerase promoters. In this report we describe an alternative technique for
generating cRNA probes that obviates the need for cDNA cloning by using the
polymerase chain reaction. The segment of DNA corresponding to the desired RNA
sequence was amplified from genomic DNA by the polymerase chain reaction. The
bacteriophage SP6 and T7 RNA polymerase promoters were incorporated into the
amplified DNA by including the promoter sequences in the 5' termini of the
oligonucleotides used to prime the polymerase chain reaction. The promoters
permitted the subsequent transcription of sense and antisense cRNA from the
amplified DNA. The antisense cRNA was radiolabeled to high specific activity for 
use as a probe in Northern and mRNA in situ hybridization analyses. This
technique offers the advantages of speed and simplicity over conventional
transcription systems, which require cDNA cloning. Bypassing the need for cloning
in the synthesis of cRNA probes may facilitate the use of these probes in
research and diagnostic applications of mRNA in situ hybridization.

PMID: 1709428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Immunol. 1991 Apr 15;146(8):2568-77.

Receptor-mediated elimination of phosphocholine-specific B cells in x-linked
immune-deficient mice.

Kenny JJ(1), Stall AM, Sieckmann DG, Lamers MC, Finkelman FD, Finch L, Longo DL.

Author information: 
(1)Program Resources Inc./DynCorp. NCI-FCRDC, Frederick, MD 21702-1201.

The combined expression of the M167 mu/kappa anstiphosphocholine (PC) transgenes 
with the x-linked immunodeficiency gene, xid, results in an almost total failure 
to develop B cells in the peripheral lymphoid organs of such mice. Although there
is no significant difference between the normal transgene positive (TG+) female
offspring and the immunodeficient TG+ xid males with respect to the number of
B220+ pre-B cells and IgM+B220+B cells that develop in their bone marrow, the
hemizygous xid males have 85% fewer B cells in their spleens than the
phenotypically normal heterozygous F1 females. In xid M167-mu-transgenic mice,
PC-specific B cells also fail to develop in the spleen; however, numerous B cells
bearing the mua+VH1(+)-transgene product associated with endogenous kappa L
chains that do not give rise PC-specific antibodies are present. In the
phenotypically normal TG+ (B6.CBA/N x mu 243-4)F1 female mice, PC-specific B
cells represent almost 10% of the total B cell population, and these B cells
express an M167-Id that has been produced by association of the VH1 transgene
product with an endogenous V kappa 24L chain. B cells expressing the normally
dominant T15-Id are not detectable in the spleens of these M167 mu-transgenic
mice. Furthermore, M167-Id+ B cells are present at a fivefold lower level in the 
bone marrow of mu-TG+ normal mice than in their spleens. These data suggest that 
the PC-specific B cells that develop in TG+ xid mice are either clonally deleted 
via some "IgR-directed" mechanism or they fail to receive the appropriate signals
to exit the bone marrow or to enter the peripheral lymphoid tissues. This
hypothesis is supported by the finding that TNP-specific B cells develop normally
and do not undergo clonal deletion in xid mice carrying the Sp6 mu/kappa anti-TNP
transgenes.

PMID: 1901880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Neuroimmunol. 1991 Apr;32(1):11-8.

Tachykinin-mediated modulation of the primary antibody response in rats: evidence
for mediation by an NK-2 receptor.

Eglezos A(1), Andrews PV, Boyd RL, Helme RD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Parkville, Australia.

Evidence for the involvement of primary afferent nerves and their associated
neuropeptides in in vivo immunologic responses has been based on experiments in
rats in which destruction of primary afferent nerves by the sensory neurotoxin
capsaicin results in a diminished ability of the animal to mount a primary
antibody response to sheep red blood cell (SRBC) antigen. This effect was shown
to be reversed by substance P infusion immediately following antigenic
stimulation. In this report we show that neurokinin A (NKA) is 12 times more
potent than substance P in its capacity to reverse the effects of neonatal
capsaicin pretreatment on the antibody response. Neurokinin A has a pD2 of 6.65
compared to 5.98 for substance P. In addition, NKA was more potent than substance
P in reversing the effects of surgical lesions 2 days prior to antigenic
stimulation. The effects of the D- and L-Pro9 analogues of [Glp6, Pro9]-SP6-11 on
the plaque-forming cell response in capsaicin-treated rats provide further
support for the hypothesis that the tachykinin receptor modulating the primary
antibody response is an NK-2 receptor. These results demonstrate, for the first
time, a role for NKA in in vivo immunomodulation.

PMID: 1705944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Mar 1;88(5):1982-5.

Interstrand cross-links are preferentially formed at the d(GC) sites in the
reaction between cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) and DNA.

Lemaire MA(1), Schwartz A, Rahmouni AR, Leng M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, Orléans, France.

A DNA restriction fragment with convergent SP6 and T7 promoters has undergone
reaction with cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cis-DDP) and was then used as a
template for RNA synthesis in vitro. The T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases generate
fragments of defined sizes. Analysis of the RNA fragments shows that the
polymerases are mainly blocked at the level of the d(GG) and d(AG) sites and to a
lesser extent at the level of the d(GC) sites. The adducts at the d(GC) sites are
more resistant to cyanide ion attack than those at the major sites and are
identified as interstrand cross-links. The formation of an interstrand cross-link
between the N-7 atoms of two guanine residues at the d(GC) sites was further
confirmed by chemical modifications.

PMCID: PMC51150
PMID: 2000402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Gene. 1991 Mar 1;99(1):47-54.

New vectors in fission yeast: application for cloning the his2 gene.

Weilguny D(1), Praetorius M, Carr A, Egel R, Nielsen O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

We describe a new Escherichia coli vector (pON5) that allows positive selection
for recombinant clones. In this plasmid, the bla gene from pBR322 is permanently 
active, whereas the neo gene from transposon Tn5 is repressed by the cI-encoded
lambda repressor. When DNA is inserted into the Bc/I or HindIII restriction sites
situated within the cI gene, the neo gene becomes transcribed from the lambda pR 
promoter. We have also made a Schizosaccharomyces pombe derivative of pON5 (=
pON163) by introducing the fission yeast ars1 and ura4+ sequences. We show that
this plasmid is capable of transforming Sc. pombe ura4 strains, as well as ura 3 
strains of the distantly related budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We have 
used pON163 for the construction of two fission yeast genomic libraries. From
these gene banks clones were isolated that were able to complement fission yeast 
his2 mutants. Such plasmids could also rescue his4C mutants of Sa. cerevisiae,
defective in the histidinol dehydrogenase activity of the multifunctional HIS4
gene product. Finally, we describe the plasmid pDW232 which is useful for
functional analysis of fission yeast genes. It is a pGEM3 derivative adapted to
fission yeast, carrying multiple cloning sites between the T7 and SP6 promoters, 
together with ars1 and ura4+ from Sc. pombe.

PMID: 1850709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1991 Mar;37(3):180-4.

Synthesis and biological activity of substance P C-terminal hexapeptide and
heptapeptide analogues.

Stavropoulos G(1), Karagiannis K, Cordopatis P, Halle D, Gilon C, Bar-Akiva G,
Selinger Z, Chorev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

The analogues [Glu(OBzl)11]SP6-11 and [Glu(OBzl)11]SP5-11 of the C-terminal
hexapeptide and heptapeptide of Substance P have been synthesized by conventional
solution methods. In each analogue the SCH3 group of Met11 is replaced by the
COOCH2C6H5 group. The in vitro activity of both analogues has been determined on 
three biological preparations: guinea pig ileum (GPI), rat vas deferens (RVD),
and rat portal vein (RPV). The selectivity for the different receptors has been
studied by utilizing atropine-treated guinea pig ileum (GPI + At). The results
showed that both analogues are mainly active on GPI through the NK-1 receptor and
that both analogues are equipotent to Substance P.

PMID: 1714423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Virus Res. 1991 Mar;18(2-3):165-78.

High level expression of the major core protein VP7 and the non-structural
protein NS3 of bluetongue virus in yeast: use of expressed VP7 as a diagnostic,
group-reactive antigen in a blocking ELISA.

Martyn JC(1), Gould AR, Eaton BT.

Author information: 
(1)C.S.I.R.O., Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.

The major core protein VP7 and a non-structural protein NS3 of bluetongue virus
serotype 1 have been synthesized from recombinant plasmids using both an in vitro
transcription/translation system and a yeast expression system. Bluetongue virus 
genes were transcribed under the control of the bacteriophage SP6 promoter and
the regulatable yeast metallothionein promoter. An indirect ELISA showed that
expression of NS3 in yeast was inducible with 1 mM CuSO4 and VP7 synthesis was
constitutive but could be further induced. The preferred procedure for antigen
extraction from yeast was sonication for VP7 and SDS/NaOH treatment for NS3.
Yeast-expressed VP7 antigen and a monoclonal antibody were used in a blocking
ELISA to distinguish sera raised against bluetongue virus serotypes from those
generated to viruses of the epizootic haemorrhagic disease serogroup.

PMID: 1645903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Clin Microbiol. 1991 Mar;29(3):583-91.

Comparison of biotinylated DNA and RNA probes for rapid detection of
varicella-zoster virus genome by in situ hybridization.

Forghani B(1), Yu GJ, Hurst JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratories, California State Department of Health Services,
Berkeley 94704.

We describe a general method for the production of nonisotopic DNA and RNA probes
for the detection of the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) genome by in situ
hybridization. VZV DNA was extracted from purified viral nucleocapsids, cleaved
with restriction enzyme (RE) BamHI, and cloned into plasmid pBR322 by the
standard vector insert procedure. We cloned over 85% of the VZV genome and
obtained 18 recombinants. Plasmids containing the B, F, G, H, and J fragments of 
VZV DNA were labeled by the nick translation method with biotin-11-dUTP as the
dTTP analog. Additionally, the B fragment was cleaved with RE AvaI, subcloned
into the plasmid pGEM-4 transcription vector, and subsequently linearized with
REs PstI and EcoRI. RNA was transcribed with T7 or SP6 polymerase, with a
substitution of allylamine-UTP as the UTP analog, and labeled with
epsilon-caproylamidobiotin-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester. The DNA and RNA probes
were used under full-stringency conditions for in situ hybridization with
alkaline phosphatase as the detector and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl
phosphate-Nitro Blue Tetrazolium as the substrate. When tested under comparable
conditions, the RNA probe was slightly more sensitive than was the DNA probe:
both probes showed homology only with VZV-infected cells and clinical tissues and
not with the other herpesviruses. Probes prepared from variable regions of the
genome (fragments F and J) performed as well as did those from conserved regions 
(fragments B. G. and H). Biotinylated probes have distinct advantages over
isotopic probes and retain their full potency for more than 2 years when stored
properly.

PMCID: PMC269823
PMID: 1645371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Mol Biol. 1991 Feb 20;217(4):637-48.

Sequence changes in both flanking sequences of a pre-tRNA influence the cleavage 
specificity of RNase P.

Krupp G(1), Kahle D, Vogt T, Char S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Allgemeine Mikrobiologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel, 
F.R.G.

The cleavage specificities of the RNase P holoenzymes from Escherichia coli and
the yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and of the catalytic M1 RNA from E. coli were
analyzed in 5'-processing experiments using a yeast serine pre-tRNA with
mutations in both flanking sequences. The template DNAs were obtained by
enzymatic reactions in vitro and transcribed with phage SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase.
The various mutations did not alter the cleavage specificity of the yeast RNase P
holoenzyme; cleavage always occurred predominantly at position G + 1, generating 
the typical seven base-pair acceptor stem. In contrast, the specificity of the
prokaryotic RNase P activities, i.e. the catalytic M1 RNA and the RNase P
holoenzyme from E. coli, was influenced by some of the mutated pre-tRNA
substrates, which resulted in an unusual cleavage pattern, generating extended
acceptor stems. The bases G - 1 and C + 73, forming the eighth base pair in these
extended acceptor stems, were an important motif in promoting the unusual
cleavage pattern. It was found only in some natural pre-tRNAs, including
tRNA(SeCys) from E. coli, and tRNAs(His) from bacteria and chloroplasts. Also,
the corresponding mature tRNAs in vivo contain an eight base pair acceptor stem. 
The presence of the CCA sequence at the 3' end of the tRNA moiety is known to
enhance the cleavage efficiency with the catalytic M1 RNA. Surprisingly, the
presence or absence of this sequence in two of our substrate mutants drastically 
altered the cleavage specificity of M1 RNA and of the E. coli holoenzyme,
respectively. Possible reasons for the different cleavage specificities of the
enzymes, the influence of sequence alterations and the importance of stacking
forces in the acceptor stems are discussed.

PMID: 1706437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Eur J Immunol. 1991 Feb;21(2):305-12.

Evidence for regulation of naturally activated autoreactive B cells.

Zöller M(1), Achtnich M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Radiology and Pathophysiology, German Cancer Research Center,
Hiedelberg, FRG.

A large fraction of naturally activated B cells in the neonate displays
degenerate specificity, including reactivity with autoantigens. Transgenic mouse 
models of autoreactive B cells are mainly concerned with monospecific B cells of 
high avidity, and the fate of naturally activated autoreactive B cells is still a
matter of debate. To pursue this question further, we chose an IgM autoantibody
with a recurrent idiotype (Id), i.e. Sp6, because transgenic mice expressing this
IgM also were available. In a first approach monoclonal antibodies (mAb) derived 
from untreated, antigenically stimulated and transgenic mice were used to test
whether there were indications for deletion or for Id regulation of naturally
activated autoreactive B cells. Over 90% of thymus and spleen cell derived
hybridomas from 6-day-old Sp6-transgenic mice were trinitrophenyl (TNP) reactive,
carried the Sp6-Id and bound to a panel of self antigens, including mouse
albumin. We failed to obtain B cell hybridomas from the thymus of 28-day-old
Sp6-transgenic mice. Furthermore, we could not detect any mAb carrying an
anti-Sp6 Id, but Sp6 did weakly bind to itself. About 25% of mAb derived from
control mice displayed degenerate specificity, the majority of them also were TNP
reactive. The Sp6 Id was found at a low frequency and a comparable number of mAb 
carried an anti-Sp6 Id. Prenatal manipulation at the antigen level
(trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid treatment) led to a transient expansion of TNP- and
autoreactive mAb. The number of mAb carrying the Sp6 Id was not increased, but
mAb carrying an anti-Sp6 Id were observed at high frequency. Those mAb also
displayed degenerate specificity. Since Sp6-transgenic mice were perfectly
healthy, it is concluded that this particular autoreactive antibody of degenerate
specificity cannot be harmful for the developing organism, which may possibly be 
due to its self-binding capacity. Furthermore, some process of down-regulation
was indicated by the absence of B cells expressing the transgene in the thymus of
young adult mice. Autoreactivity of untreated and prenatally antigen-treated mice
was, in addition, regulated at the Id level. In particular, mAb recognizing the
Id of Sp6 were significantly expanded in antigenically stimulated mice. The data 
were interpreted in the sense that autoreactive B cells appearing early during
ontogeny were rather strictly controlled either by (functional) clonal deletion
or by idiotypic connectivity.

PMID: 1999221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell Probes. 1991 Feb;5(1):11-20.

Strand-specific detection of enteroviral RNA in myocardial tissue by in situ
hybridization.

Hohenadl C(1), Klingel K, Mertsching J, Hofschneider PH, Kandolf R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Federal Republic of Germany.

In this report we describe the development and application of single-stranded RNA
probes for strand-specific detection of enterovirus RNA in infected heart tissue 
by in situ hybridization. For synthesis of RNA probes a full-length
reverse-transcribed, recombinant CVB3 cDNA was inserted into the transcription
vector pSPT18. Run-off transcripts of plus-strand and minus-strand orientation
were produced using either T7 or SP6 RNA polymerase. Binding specificity and
sensitivity of the radioactively labelled RNA probes were determined by slot-blot
hybridization. Due to the high degree of genetic identity among enteroviruses,
the in vitro transcribed CVB3 RNA probes hybridized with various enterovirus
serotypes, including group A and B coxsackieviruses and echoviruses, which are
commonly implicated in human viral heart disease. Strand-specific in situ
hybridization led to detection of viral plus-strand or minus-strand RNA in
infected cell cultures and in myocardial tissue sections of infected mice. In
consecutive sections either viral genomic plus-strand RNA or complementary
minus-strand RNA were localized in the same infected myocardial cells. In situ
hybridization with enterovirus-specific and highly sensitive single-stranded RNA 
probes is of particular interest for the diagnosis of myocardial infections and
for studies concerning viral RNA replication.

PMID: 1850115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Virology. 1991 Feb;180(2):697-708.

Rotavirus morphogenesis: domains in the major inner capsid protein essential for 
binding to single-shelled particles and for trimerization.

Clapp LL(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of
Medicine, Florida 33101.

A cell-free system containing rotavirus subviral particles (SVPs), rabbit
reticulocyte lysate, and [35S]methionine was programmed to synthesize viral
protein by the addition of messenger RNA (mRNA). Electrophoretic analysis of
single-shelled particles recovered from the system by CsCl centrifugation showed 
that newly made VP6 assembled into the particles in vitro. Electrophoretic
analysis also showed that the newly made VP6 which bound to single-shelled
particles in vitro was arranged in trimeric units. To identify the domain within 
VP6 essential for assembly into single-shelled particles, amino- and
carboxyl-truncated species of VP6 were assayed for the ability to associate with 
single-shelled particles in the cell-free system. The truncated proteins were
introduced into the system by adding VP6 mRNAs containing 5'- and 3'-terminal
deletions. The terminally deleted mRNAs were prepared using SP6 RNA polymerase to
transcribe portions of cDNAs of the rotavirus SA11 gene for VP6 (gene 6).
Analysis of the ability of truncated VP6 to associate with single-shelled
particles showed that a domain essential for assembly resides at the carboxyl-end
of VP6 located between amino acid residues 251 and 397. To contrast the domain
for assembly with that for trimerization, amino- and carboxyl-truncated species
of VP6 were also examined by electrophoretic assay for the ability to trimerize
in vitro. The results showed that the domain for trimerization resides near the
center of VP6 located between amino acid residues 105 and 328. Comparison of the 
domains for assembly and trimerization showed that they are unique but may
overlap. The fact that some truncated species of VP6, although able to bind to
single-shelled particles were unable to form trimers in vitro, suggests that
trimerization of VP6 is not prerequisite for the assembly of single-shelled
particles.

PMID: 1846494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jan 5;266(1):645-51.

Specific contacts between the bacteriophage T3, T7, and SP6 RNA polymerases and
their promoters.

Jorgensen ED(1), Durbin RK, Risman SS, McAllister WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Morse Institute for Molecular
Genetics, State University of New York Health Science Center, Brooklyn
11203-2098.

The specificity and structural simplicity of the bacteriophage T3, T7, and SP6
RNA polymerases make these enzymes particularly well suited for studies of
polymerase-promoter interactions. To understand the initial recognition process
between the enzyme and its promoters, DNA fragments that carry phage promoters
were chemically modified by three different methods: base methylation, phosphate 
ethylation, and base removal. The positions at which these modifications
prevented or enhanced binding by the RNA polymerases were then determined. The
results indicate that specific contacts within the major groove of the promoter
between positions-5 and -12 are important for phage polymerase binding. Removal
of individual bases from either strand of the initiation region (-5 to +3)
resulted in enhanced binding of the polymerase, suggesting that disruption of the
helix in this region may play a role in stabilization of the polymerase-promoter 
complexes.

PMID: 1985921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Methods Mol Biol. 1991;7:283-96. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-178-0:283.

The RNase Protection Assay.

Finer MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Genesys Inc., Foster City, CA.

A sensitive method for quantitation of mRNA in gene transfer studies is mRNA
protection using end-labeled DNA probes. In addition, this technique also
provides structural information about the transcript under study (1). In vitro
labeled antisense RNAcan be used as an alternative to end-labeled DNA probes
(2,3. RNA probes have attained wide popularity because of the ease of synthesis
and high yield of probe in a labeling reaction. This has been made possible by
the recent characterization of single subunit bacteriophage RNA polymerases and
their promoters (4,5). Currently, three different bacteriophage RNA
polymerase/promoter combinations are in use. They are derived from bacteriophage 
SP6 of Salmonella typhimurium (3), bacteriophage T3 of E. coli (6), and
bacteriophage T7 of E. coli (6). These RNA polymerases are ideal for in vitro
synthesis of labeled transcripts because of their ease of purification,
stability, high rate of polymerization (10 times faster than E. coli), and their 
high specificity resulting from the recognition of large promoter sequences.

PMID: 21416363  [PubMed]


181. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1991;418(6):539-46.

Detection of growth hormone, prolactin and human beta-chorionic gonadotropin
messenger RNA in growth-hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas by in situ
hybridization.

Uhlig H(1), Saeger W, Fehr S, Lüdecke DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Marienkrankenhaus Hamburg, FRG.

In a series of 39 adenomas from patients with the clinical hyperfunction syndrome
of acromegaly and in one from a case of prolactinoma we studied the mRNA
expression of growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL) and beta-human chorionic
gonadotropin (HCG) by using this technique of in situ hybridization (ISH). This
technique allows the direct identification and localization of cells expressing
mRNA and thus synthesizing the respective hormone. The aim of our study was to
demonstrate the frequent co-expression of PRL mRNA and HCG mRNA in pituitary
adenomas of acromegalic patients. Probes for ISH of the above-mentioned hormones 
were obtained by subcloning cDNA fragments into pGEM plasmids. Subsequent
Sp6-polymerase catalysed in vitro transcription with 35S-CTP revealed
radiolabelled single-stranded antisense RNA probes [the probe for beta HCG
detects beta-luteinizing hormone (beta LH) simultaneously because of a sequence
homology of 90%]. To localize the labelled hybrids, autoradiography was carried
out. Light microscopical evaluation of the tissue sections demonstrated positive 
signals in all cases for GH, in 80% of cases for PRL and in 25% of cases for HCG 
[LH] mRNA. The comparison of mRNA content shown by ISH with immunocytochemical
(ICC) hormone detection revealed that in all cases the detection of GH
corresponded to GH mRNA content of the cells. For PRL and HCG [LH] positive mRNA 
detection (ISH) and negative hormone detection (ICC) occurred in some cases (PRL 
17.5%; HCG [LH] 15%). In contrast, negative mRNA detection (ISH) and positive
hormone content (ICC) was also demonstrated (PRL 5%; HCG [LH] 37.5%). The
remaining adenomas showed both mRNA and the respective hormone, as well as
negative ISH and ICC.

PMID: 2058088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Int Immunol. 1991 Jan;3(1):67-73.

Endogenous VH gene family expression in immunoglobulin-transgenic mice: evidence 
for selection of antibody repertoires.

Grandien A(1), Coutinho A, Andersson J, Freitas AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunobiologie, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UA 359, Paris, France.

VH gene family expression in single cells of the emergent, available and actual B
cell repertoires of C57BL/6 mice was compared to that of two immunoglobulin
(Ig)-transgenic B6 lines (B6-Sp6 and M54). We found that less than 5% of bone
marrow cells of transgenic mice express endogenous VH genes and that the vast
majority (95%) of the peripheral, mature B cell repertoire in these animals is
composed of cells expressing the VHJ558 transgenic family. Unimmunized transgenic
mice, however, diversify VH gene family usage by 'background' Ig-secreting cells 
in the spleen, greater than 50% of which express endogenous VH genes. The pattern
of endogenous VH gene family expression in the actual repertoire of B6-Sp6 mice
is indistinguishable from that of normal B6 mice. In contrast, actual repertoires
of M54 mice differ by a 4- to 5-fold higher representation of the VHQ52 family.
These results demonstrate a powerful positive selection of B cells into the
secretory compartments of unimmunized animals, show that actual and available
repertoires differ very markedly, and suggest that V region interactions
participate in the selection of 'natural antibody' repertoires.

PMID: 2049337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 1991;16(2):120-4.

[C fiber is not necessary in electroacupuncture analgesia, but necessary in
diffuse noxious inhibitory controls (DNIC)].

[Article in Chinese]

Bao H(1), Zhou Z, Yu Y, Han J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Beijing Medical University.

Experiments were carried on rats. We applied capsaicin topically on sciatic nerve
and used the techniques of extracellular recording and nerve trunk recording, Our
results showed that the size of C compound action potentials in nerve trunk and C
fiber response of spinal cord WDR neurons were decreased by at least 70% (mean)
after topical application of capsaicin (250 micrograms) on the nerve, but A
compound action potentials and A fiber response did not change significantly. It 
indicated that capsaicin blocked C fiber conduction selectively.
Electroacupuncture (EA: 100 Hz, 0.1 ms, 3V) applied on left Zusanli (S36) and
Sanyinjiao (Sp6) points inhibited C fiber response of spinal WDR neurons in the
right side. The effect was similar to animal behavior analgesia elicited by EA.
After applying capsaicin (250 micrograms) topically on left sciatic nerve, the
inhibitory effect of EA on WDR neurons remained essentially intact (from 61.3 +/-
12.0% to 59.0 +/- 11.6%, n = 6, P greater than 0.05). It indicated that C fiber
was not important in EA analgesia. Noxious heat (NH) applied on left hind paw by 
immersing the hind paw into 52 degrees C water inhibited C fiber response of
spinal WDR neurons in the right side. It was called diffuse noxious inhibitory
controls (DNIC). After applying capsaicin (250 micrograms) topically on left
sciatic nerve, the inhibitory effect of NH on WDR neurons was dramatically
decreased (from 77.7 +/- 8.5% to 8.1 +/- 8.9%, n = 6, P less than 0.001). It
indicated that C fiber was important in DNIC. Both inhibitory effects of NH and
EA were not changed by vehicle treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1914132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Antiviral Res. 1991 Jan;15(1):27-39.

Structure-function studies of human interferons-alpha: enhanced activity on human
and murine cells.

Cheetham BF(1), McInnes B, Mantamadiotis T, Murray PJ, Alin P, Bourke P, Linnane 
AW, Tymms MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Medicine, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

To identify functionally important regions of the human interferon (IFN)-alpha
molecule, mutagenesis in vitro of human IFN-a genes was used to create analogs
with deletions or specific amino acid replacements. These analogs were expressed 
in vitro using SP6 RNA polymerase and a rabbit reticulocyte lysate protein
synthesis system. Deletion of 7 highly conserved hydrophilic amino acids from the
C-terminus of human IFN-alpha 4 reduced, but did not abolish, antiviral activity 
on human cells. However, analogs with deletions of 15 or 25 amino acids from the 
C-terminus, or 28 amino acids from the N-terminus, had no measurable antiviral
activity. The antiviral activity of human IFN-alpha 4 was increased by
substitution of cysteine for serine at position 86, and lysine for arginine at
position 121. However, other amino acid substitutions at positions 121, 122 or
123 reduced antiviral activity. The size of the side chain of the amino acid
residue at position 130 was shown to be important. Replacement of the absolutely 
conserved leucine residue at position 131 with glutamine had little effect on
antiviral activity. However, the introduction of a proline residue at this
position abolished antiviral activity, probably due to the formation of a beta
turn in the polypeptide chain. The antiviral activity of human IFN-alpha 4 on
murine cells was increased by substitutions at positions 86, 121 and 133. This
study illustrates the utility of the in vitro mutagenesis and rabbit reticulocyte
lysate systems for the investigation of structure-function relationships, and
extends our knowledge of the biologically active regions and species specificity 
of the human IFN-alpha molecule.

PMID: 1903622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Virol Methods. 1991 Jan;31(1):119-36.

Detection of hepatitis A virus and other enteroviruses in water by ssRNA probes.

Shieh YS(1), Baric RS, Sobsey MD, Ticehurst J, Miele TA, DeLeon R, Walter R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599-7400.

Sensitive and specific methods are needed to detect hepatitis A virus (HAV) and
other human enteroviruses in environmental samples such as drinking water and
foods. Clones of cDNA encoding the 5'-most 1 kb of the HAV and coxsackievirus B3 
(CB3) genomes were subcloned into T7/SP6 RNA transcription vectors. In vitro
transcribed RNA from the T7 promoter detected their respective HAV or CB3 genomic
RNA. Conversely, SP6 transcripts detected viral negative-stranded RNA but not the
genome. When both ssRNA probes were tested at high temperature (65 degrees C),
they did not hybridize with intracellular RNAs from 6 primate cell cultures used 
for isolation of HAV and other enteroviruses. The HAV probe did not hybridize
with 13 different enteroviruses but detected as little as 500-1000 infectious
units of the 7 strains of HAV tested. Conversely, the CB3 probe showed strong
homology with all 13 enteroviruses tested but not HAV. The probes were used to
detect HAV and other enteroviruses in water samples after virus amplification in 
cell culture. HAV was detected in water samples obtained during a waterborne
hepatitis outbreak using the ssRNA probe. These samples were negative for HAV by 
direct solid phase radioimmunoassay and were not positive by immunoassays of
inoculated cell cultures until several weeks of propagation. The CB3 ssRNA probe 
detected enteroviruses in samples of surface water and drinking water that were
negative for cytopathic effects in inoculated cell cultures.

PMID: 1849914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Gen Pharmacol. 1991;22(5):879-82.

Substance P and its fragments affect Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent synaptosomal
membrane protein phosphorylation from rat cerebral cortex.

Hrabec Z(1), Szkudlarek J, Lachowicz L.

Author information: 
(1)II Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry,
School of Medicine, Lódz, Poland.

1. We have used synaptosomal membranes to study the influence of substance P and 
its fragments and analogues of its C-terminal fragment on
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent synapsin I endogenous phosphorylation. 2. SP1-11,
SP1-4, [Tyr8]SP6-11 and [pGlu6, Tyr8]SP6-11 at 10(-3) M greatly inhibited
synapsin I phosphorylation. 3. SP6-11 at all investigated concentrations and
SP1-11, SP1-4, [Tyr8]SP6-11, [pGlu6, Tyr8]SP6-11 at 10(-4) and 10(-5) M were
ineffective. 4. The results indicate that SP1-11 and its N-terminal fragment and 
analogues of its C-terminal fragment act on the phosphorylation of specific
synaptic protein (synapsin I) and therefore may influence the release of
neurotransmitters, membrane conductance and potentiation or inhibition of other
signalling systems.

PMID: 1722184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 1990 Dec 15;265(35):21430-2.

Single crystals of a chimeric T7/T3 RNA polymerase with T3 promoter specificity
and a nonprocessive T7 RNAP mutant.

Sousa R(1), Chung YJ, McAllister WT, Wang BC, Lafer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15260.

Two RNA polymerases homologous to bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase, bacteriophage 
Sp6 and T3 RNA polymerases, were screened for crystallization under conditions
identical or similar to those reported for the growth of large single crystals of
T7 RNA polymerase (Sousa, R., Rose, J. P., Chung, Y. J., Lafer, E. M., and Wang, 
B.-C. (1989) Proteins 5, 266; Sousa, R., Lafer, E. M., and Wang, B.-C. (1990) J. 
Crystal Growth, in press; Sousa, R., and Lafer, E. M. (1990) Methods 1, in
press). A number of mutant T7 RNAPs were also screened under these conditions as 
were three chimeric RNA polymerases consisting of T7 RNAP N-terminal and T3 RNAP 
C-terminal sequences. One chimeric polymerase and two mutant polymerases
crystallized readily under T7 RNAP crystallization conditions. The chimeric
polymerase crystallized in a space group different from T7 RNA polymerase:
orthorombic with unit cell parameters a = 75 A, b = 98 A, c = 159 A; space group 
P2(1)2(1)2(1) and 4 molecules/unit cell. This chimeric enzyme exhibits T3
promoter specificity and will make it possible to investigate how structural
differences between the T3 and T7 RNA polymerase promoter recognition domains
determine their different promoter specificities. One of the mutant polymerases
successfully crystallized was an enzyme which can carry out promoter recognition 
and abortive transcription but cannot carry out processive transcription. Its
structure may provide information on the nature of the conformational changes
undergone by T7 RNAP in the abortive-processive switch. Crystals of the second
mutant T7 RNA polymerase were unsuitable for x-ray analysis.

PMID: 2254305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gene. 1990 Dec 15;96(2):301-4.

Modification of the anticodon wobble position of tRNA(Ala) in vitro does not
require 5' or 3' processing.

French BT(1), Trewyn RW.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210.

Maturation of eukaryotic tRNA molecules requires nuclear processing as well as
nuclear and cytoplasmic modification of specific nucleotides. Nucleotide
modifications within the anticodon are found in the majority of all tRNAs and are
among the last maturation events to occur in vivo. We show that 5' and 3'
processing of SP6 polymerase-generated transcripts are not necessary for the in
vitro modification of A----I in the anticodon of tRNA(Ala).

PMID: 2176640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biotechniques. 1990 Dec;9(6):762-8.

A highly sensitive, nonradioactive DNA labeling and detection system.

Martin R(1), Hoover C, Grimme S, Grogan C, Höltke J, Kessler C.

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Mannheim Corp, Indianapolis, IN 46250-0816.

A highly sensitive method for detecting specific nucleotide sequences was
recently developed. The method uses digoxigenin-labeled nucleic acid probes for
hybridization to immobilized target nucleic acids. Probes can be labeled by the
random-primed method, nick translation, oligonucleotide tailing, cDNA synthesis, 
photodigoxigenin or SP6/T7/T3 polymerase-mediated transcription. Hybrids are
detected by an enzyme-linked immunoassay using an anti-digoxigenin antibody
conjugate. Visualization of the bound antibody is accomplished by an enzymatic
color reaction, enzymatic chemiluminescent reaction or immunofluorescence,
depending on the antibody conjugate and enzymatic substrate used. Here we report 
the successful application of this technology in the detection of specific cloned
DNA in colony and plaque hybridizations, specific detection of a single mRNA
species in Northern blots and single-copy gene detection in genomic Southern
blots.

PMID: 2148679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Cell Biol. 1990 Dec;111(6 Pt 1):2775-84.

Early expression of the gene for interphotoreceptor retinol-binding protein
during photoreceptor differentiation suggests a critical role for the
interphotoreceptor matrix in retinal development.

Gonzalez-Fernandez F(1), Healy JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Medical Center,
Charlottesville 22908.

Interphotoreceptor retinol-binding protein (IRBP), the major protein component of
the subretinal space, is in a strategic position to mediate cellular interactions
between the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) and the neural retina. While IRBP 
appears to be involved in vitamin A transport during the visual cycle in the
adult, the role of this protein during eye development has not been determined.
As a first step to understanding the role of IRBP during retinal development, we 
have studied the expression of the mRNA for this glycolipoprotein during
photoreceptor differentiation in the rat. A rat neural retina cDNA library was
prepared from which an IRBP clone was isolated. The clone contains an open
reading frame followed by a 3' noncoding sequence ending in 10 adenosine
residues. The coding region has an identity of 83.9 and 82.5% with the nucleotide
sequence of human and bovine IRBP, respectively. Rats (Sprague-Dawley, Wistar,
and Royal College of Surgeon pink-eyed controls) have a 6.4 and a 5.2-kb mRNA for
IRBP which are present in a 1:4 ratio and thus are the only vertebrate known to
definitely have more than one major form of the IRBP message. Genomic Southern
blots are consistent with the hypothesis that there is only one allele of the
IRBP gene, suggesting that the two forms are produced by alternative processing
of the mRNA. To generate an antisense RNA probe for use in molecular titration
assays and Northern blots, an Eco RI-Bam HI fragment from the coding region was
subcloned in between flanking Sp6 and T7 promoters. Total RNA was prepared from
undissected rat globes from postnatal days p0-p22. The expression of the mRNA for
IRBP was studied by Northern blots and the level of the transcripts determined by
solution hybridization assays. Approximately 10(5) IRBP mRNA
transcripts/micrograms total eye RNA are present at birth. This increases to a
final level of 3.1 X 10(6) transcripts/micrograms total RNA by p9. The one-half
maximal level of the mRNA occurs at p4.2 which is 2 wk before the one-half
maximal level of IRBP is reached in the subretinal space (Gonzalez-Fernandez, F.,
R. A. Landers, P. A. Glazebrook, S.-L. Fong, G. I. Liou, D. M. K. Lam, and C. D. 
B. Bridges. 1984. J. Cell Biol. 99:2092-2098). The expression of the mRNA for
IRBP reflects the developmental emergence of the interphotoreceptor matrix as an 
important structure within the retina.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC2116398
PMID: 1703544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biotechniques. 1990 Nov;9(5):610-2, 614-5.

A simple assay for determining the capping efficiencies of RNA polymerases used
for in vitro transcription.

Theus SA(1), Liarakos CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock 72205.

We have developed an assay that uses phenyl boronate agarose column
chromatography to measure the capping efficiencies of RNA polymerases used for in
vitro transcription of cloned cDNAs. Capped 32P-labeled ovalbumin mRNAs were
synthesized by in vitro run-off transcription with SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase in
the presence of cap analogs and digested to completion with T1 and T2 RNase. The 
resulting 3'-nucleoside monophosphates (NMPs) and cap structures were separated
by chromatography on phenyl boronate agarose, and the ratio of radioactivity
between the two was used to estimate the extent of transcript capping.

PMID: 2268428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Virology. 1990 Nov;179(1):395-402.

Factors affecting efficient infection of tobacco with in vitro RNA transcripts
from cloned cDNAs of satellite tobacco mosaic virus.

Mirkov TE(1), Kurath G, Mathews DM, Elliott K, Dodds JA, Fitzmaurice L.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute Biotechnology/Industrial Associates, Inc., San Diego,
California 92138.

Recombinant cDNA clones of the complete satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV)
genome (1059 ribonucleotides) were constructed with unique Xbal and HindIII or
Pstl restriction sites engineered at the 5' and 3' termini, respectively. The
genome-length cDNAs were positioned downstream of T7 or SP6 phage promoters.
Genome-sense RNAs transcribed in vitro from the T7 promoter were biologically
active, while negative-sense RNAs transcribed in vitro from the SP6 promoter were
not. Constructs that were identical to STMV and two other constructs in which
there were two or six specific nucleotide differences in the 3' noncoding region 
yielded RNAs that were infectious. Sequence analysis of the progeny RNA derived
from infections with transcripts containing nucleotide differences between
nucleotides 682 and 753 revealed that these changes in sequence were maintained. 
In contrast, differences in the nucleotide sequence between nucleotides 989 and
1059 were not maintained in progeny RNA; one mutant reverted to the wild-type
sequence, and the other generated a new sequence during infection.

PMID: 2219729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. EMBO J. 1990 Nov;9(11):3691-7.

Signal sequence for generation of mRNA 3' end in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
GAL7 gene.

Abe A(1), Hiraoka Y, Fukasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Kitasato Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

We have identified a signal sequence (designated core signal) necessary to
specify formation of mRNA 3' end of the GAL7 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
within a DNA segment 26 bp long. The sequence was located 4-5 nucleotides
upstream from the 3' end, i.e. the polyadenylation site, of the GAL7 mRNA.
Replacement of a DNA segment encompassing the polyadenylation site with a pBR322 
DNA, leaving the core signal intact, resulted in alteration of the mRNA 3' end by
several nucleotides, suggesting the existence of an additional signal (designated
end signal) at or near the polyadenylation site. The normal end formation was
abolished when the core signal was placed in the reverse orientation. A
considerable fraction of pre-mRNA synthesized in vitro with SP6 RNA polymerase on
the template of a DNA fragment containing these signals was cleaved and
polyadenylated presumably at the in vitro 3' end during incubation in a cell-free
system of yeast. By contrast pre-mRNA synthesized on the template with the core
signal alone was processed but much less efficiently. No such processing was seen
when the pre-mRNA either lacked the core signal or contained it in the reverse
orientation.

PMCID: PMC552124
PMID: 2209557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. EMBO J. 1990 Nov;9(11):3565-71.

Complementation of fission yeast cdc2ts and cdc25ts mutants identifies two cell
cycle genes from Drosophila: a cdc2 homologue and string.

Jimenez J(1), Alphey L, Nurse P, Glover DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK.

We have exploited the universality of the molecular mechanisms that control entry
into mitosis to clone the Drosophila melanogaster homologues of fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe cell division control (cdc) genes by the
complementation of temperature sensitive mutations. The Drosophila genes were
expressed in S.pombe as cDNAs from the SP6 promoter. Successful recovery of
complementing plasmids required that we first 'adapt' pooled plasmids from a
Drosophila embryonic cDNA library for propagation in fission yeast by introducing
an ars1-LEU2 DNA fragment into the vector. This library was introduced into
S.pombe cdc2 and cdc25 mutants, and plasmids isolated carrying cDNAs that
complement these mutations. The gene that encodes the Drosophila cdc2 homologue
maps to a single locus in the Drosophila genome at 31E on chromosome 2. It is
expressed maternally to provide mRNA in syncytial embryos, and appears to be
zygotically expressed in mitotically active regions of the cellularized embryo.
We have isolated two different cDNAs that complement cdc25-22. One corresponds to
a transcript of string, previously described as the Drosophila homologue of
cdc25, and the other to a gene that has not been previously characterized.

PMCID: PMC552107
PMID: 2120044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1990 Oct 30;172(2):477-82.

Removal of twelve C-terminal amino acids from firefly luciferase abolishes
activity.

Sala-Newby G(1), Kalsheker N, Campbell AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Wales College of Medicine,
Heath Park, Cardiff, U.K.

cDNA coding for the luciferase in the firefly Photinus pyralis was cloned using
pcDV1 primer and Honjo linker containing SP6 RNA polymerase promoter. This
enabled conditions to be established to produce mRNA, capped with m7 GpppG, in
vitro and then translated to form light emitting protein. Full length recombinant
luciferase produced by in vitro translation, was fully active, had the same
isoelectric focusing point as the native enzyme and produced a similar, yellow
emission. Removal of the coding sequence for the last 12 amino acids at the C
terminus, containing the peroxisome signal peptide, by polymerase chain reaction 
resulted in greater than or equal to 99% loss in activity of the protein formed
from mRNA in vitro. This has important implications for using this luciferase as 
an indicator or reporter gene in eukaryotic cells, and for identifying the active
centre of the enzyme.

PMID: 2241947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Virology. 1990 Oct;178(2):584-7.

The hepatitis B virus X-C fusion protein is unlikely to be produced by the
mechanism of ribosomal frameshifting.

Lo SJ(1), You LR, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming Medical 
College, Taipei Taiwan, Republic of China.

A novel hepatitis B viral (HBV) protein of 35-40 kDa, characterized by antibodies
and proposed as an X-C fusion protein, was previously described in core particles
isolated from HBV-, WHV-, and GSHV-infected livers. The X and C genes are two
adjacent genes in all mammalian hepadnaviruses but are not contiguous in WHV and 
GSHV. After examination of the X and preC/C junction sequences of 10 HBV, 4 WHV, 
and 1 GSHV, we found that the ORF of preC can be extended 7 more sense codons
upstream so that X overlaps with the preC/C gene in all sequences. The number of 
overlapping base pairs (bp) is varied: 46 bp in HBV, 19 bp in WHV, and 10 bp in
GSHV. In this region a conserved A-track was found to be followed by a pair of
inverted repeats, suggesting that a ribosomal frameshift may occur for X-C fusion
protein production. To assess this possibility, we have used an in vitro
transcription and translation coupling system to identify X-C protein production.
Two recombinant SP6 plasmids were used. One contained a full length of the X and 
preC/C gene of wild-type HBV-DNA and the other fused the X-preC/C gene by
inserting a 10-bp HindIII linker at the junction of the X-preC/C region. No X-C
fusion protein was detected from the wild-type plasmid. In contrast a large
amount of X-C fusion protein was produced from the linker-inserted clone. It
appears, therefore, that the X-C fusion protein is unlikely to be produced via
the mechanism of ribosomal frameshifting.

PMID: 2219709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Cell Biol. 1990 Oct;111(4):1661-71.

Functional reconstitutional of the human epidermal growth factor receptor system 
in Xenopus oocytes.

Opresko LK(1), Wiley HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah Medical Center, Salt Lake City
84132.

We have expressed the human EGF receptor (hEGF-R) in Xenopus oocytes by injecting
mRNA synthesized in vitro using SP6 vectors containing receptor cDNAs. Each
oocyte could express over 1 x 10(10) receptors of a single affinity class and
these were able to bind and rapidly internalize EGF. Occupancy resulted in
receptor tyrosine autophosphorylation, downregulation, and release of
intracellular calcium. Occupied receptors also rapidly induced meiotic maturation
in stage VI oocytes. Receptors lacking tyrosine kinase activity bound EGF
normally, but did not downregulate or induce any biological responses. The rate
of oocyte maturation was proportional to hEGF-R occupancy and was significantly
faster than progesterone-induced maturation at nanomolar EGF concentrations.
Mutant hEGF-R truncated at residue 973 displayed identical phenotypes in both
mammalian cells and oocytes in that they were defective in their ability to
release intracellular calcium, undergo ligand induced internalization and
receptor downregulation. However, these receptors were fully capable of inducing 
oocyte maturation. The remarkable retention of specific biological activities of 
different hEGF-R in the context of oocytes suggests that this receptor system
interacts with generally available cellular components that have been conserved
during evolution. In addition, it suggests that cell surface tyrosine kinase
activity may play an important role in regulating resumption of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC2116234
PMID: 1976639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 1990 Sep 25;265(27):16337-42.

Inhibition of expression of human immunodeficiency virus-1 in vitro by
antibody-targeted liposomes containing antisense RNA to the env region.

Renneisen K(1), Leserman L, Matthes E, Schröder HC, Müller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Angewandte Molekularbiologie, Universität, Mainz, German Democratic 
Republic.

Previous studies revealed that antisense oligodeoxynucleotides to specific
regions of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) are potent inhibitors of
replication of HIV-1 in vitro (Zamecnik, P. C., Goodchild, J., Taguchi, Y., and
Sarin, P. S. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 83, 4143-4146). We now report
that antisense RNA, synthesized in vitro using T7 and SP6 RNA polymerase,
displayed an anti-HIV-1 effect in the HTLV-IIIB/H9 system in vitro. Treatment of 
HIV-1-infected H9 cells with viral env region antisense RNA encapsulated in
liposomes targeted by antibodies specific for the T cell receptor molecule CD3
almost completely inhibited HIV-1 production. The viral env segment covered a
part of exon II of HIV-1 tat gene. No anti-HIV activity could be detected with
similarly targeted liposome-encapsulated sense env RNA or with pol RNA
synthesized in either the sense or antisense orientations, or with env region
antisense RNA free in solution, or encapsulated in liposomes in the absence of
the targeting antibody. A semiquantitative evaluation revealed that 4000-7000 RNA
molecules became cell-bound in targeted liposomes; the half-life of the
intracellularly present hybridizable antisense env RNA was approximately 12 h.
Western blots showed that antisense env RNA suppressed tat gene expression by
approximately 90% and gp160 production by 100%. These data were confirmed by
immunoprecipitation studies. Northern blots (using an env probe) demonstrated the
existence of all major HIV RNA species (9.3-, 4.3-, and 2.0-kb mRNA) in
HIV-infected cells treated with antisense env RNA although at a reduced level. We
conclude that the antisense env RNA inhibited viral protein production at the
translational level.

PMID: 1697856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Brain Res. 1990 Sep 3;526(2):228-34.

Intranigral substance P modulation of striatal dopamine: interaction with
N-terminal and C-terminal substance P fragments.

Reid MS(1), Herrera-Marschitz M, Terenius L, Ungerstedt U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

The effects of unilateral injections of two substance P fragments, the N-terminal
substance P (1-7) (SP1-7) and the C-terminal substance P (6-11) (SP6-11) into the
substantia nigra, pars reticulata on dopamine (DA) release in the ipsilateral
striatum of halothane-anaesthetized rats were studied using microdialysis. SP1-7 
and SP6-11 were also tested for their ability to modify the DA stimulation
produced by intranigral injections of SP or neurokinin A (NKA). In addition, the 
SP antagonist Spantide I was tested for its ability to modify the DA stimulation 
produced by an intranigral injection of SP1-7. Intranigral injections of SP1-7
(0.001-5.0 nmol) inhibited DA release after low doses (0.001-0.01 nmol), but
stimulated DA release after high doses (0.1-5.0 nmol). Striatal
dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) levels increased moderately after high doses
of SP1-7 (1.0-5.0 nmol). Intranigral injections of SP6-11 (0.01-5.0 nmol)
inhibited DA release, but enhanced striatal DOPAC levels, dose-dependently. SP1-7
(0.01-0.1 nmol), but not SP6-11 (0.1 nmol), blocked the stimulation of striatal
DA release produced by intranigral SP (0.07 nmol). Neither SP1-7 (0.1 nmol) nor
SP6-11 (0.1 nmol) could modify the stimulation of striatal DA release produced by
intranigral NKA (0.09 nmol). The increase in DA release after a high dose of
SP1-7 (1.0 nmol) was not modified by co-administration with Spantide I (0.07
nmol).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1701682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Biol. 1990 Sep;141(1):1-12.

The secretory pathway is blocked between the trans-Golgi and the plasma membrane 
during meiotic maturation in Xenopus oocytes.

Leaf DS(1), Roberts SJ, Gerhart JC, Moore HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720.

Protein secretion is blocked in Xenopus oocytes arrested at second meiotic
metaphase. In this report, we show that secretion becomes blocked coincident with
germinal vesicle breakdown (GVBD). Transport through the metaphase-arrested
oocyte's secretory pathway continues unimpeded until proteins reach the
trans-Golgi. These conclusions are drawn from experiments using exogenous
prolactin and vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV G) encoded by SP6
transcripts and endogenous glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains initiated on
beta-D-4-methylumbelliferyl-xyloside. From the initiation of maturation with
progesterone until GVBD, secretion of prolactin synthesized before the start of
maturation is comparable to secretion in immature oocytes, but after GVBD
secretion of prolactin declines approximately 63% in the first hour. Not all
steps in the secretory pathway are blocked when oocytes mature. Since VSV G
protein acquires resistance to endo H digestion with equal efficiency in immature
oocytes (arrested in first meiotic prophase) and matured oocytes (arrested in
second meiotic metaphase), we conclude that transport of this protein from the ER
to the Golgi is not inhibited at meiotic metaphase. Using [35S]sulfate to label
xyloside-initiated GAG chains we find that transport of GAG chains from the
trans-Golgi to the cell surface is 15-fold lower in matured oocytes than in
immature oocytes. Examination of the size of GAG chains by SDS-PAGE and HPLC
indicates that matured oocytes produce GAG chains significantly larger than GAG
chains from immature oocytes. This increase in size suggests that GAG chains from
matured oocytes have a longer residence time in the trans-Golgi than GAG chains
from immature oocytes. Hence, part of the block to secretion in
metaphase-arrested oocytes could be an inhibition of vesicle budding from the
trans-Golgi.

PMID: 2390997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Virol. 1990 Sep;64(9):4578-81.

Preferred translation of human hepatitis B virus polymerase from core protein-
but not from precore protein-specific transcript.

Ou JH(1), Bao H, Shih C, Tahara SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles 90033.

In the human hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome, the 5' end of the polymerase coding 
sequence overlaps with the 3' end of the core protein coding sequence. Recent
results obtained from genetic studies have suggested that translation of HBV
polymerase initiates from the first ATG codon of the polymerase reading frame and
is not a result of frameshift translation from the core protein reading frame, as
in the case of retroviruses. By using in vitro-synthesized SP6 RNA transcripts,
we now demonstrate that HBV core protein-specific mRNA can direct the synthesis
of polymerase from the internal polymerase ATG codon in rabbit reticulocyte
lysates and Xenopus oocytes. A related message with an additional 60 nucleotides 
at the 5' end (pre-core protein mRNA) was not as efficient as the core protein
mRNA for translation of polymerase. Furthermore, translation of polymerase from
the core protein mRNA was not inhibited by the cap analog m7GpppG. This result,
together with the results described above, indicates that translation of HBV
polymerase occurs in a novel, cap-independent manner.

PMCID: PMC247932
PMID: 2384923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Chem Neuroanat. 1990 Sep-Oct;3(5):377-96.

Distribution of glutamic acid decarboxylase messenger RNA-containing nerve cell
populations of the male rat brain.

Ferraguti F(1), Zoli M, Aronsson M, Agnati LF, Goldstein M, Filer D, Fuxe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Physiology, University of Modena, Italy.

The distribution of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) mRNA was investigated
throughout the rat brain by means of in situ hybridization. Hybridization was
carried out with a 35S-radiolabeled cRNA probe transcribed from a cDNA from cat
occipital cortex and cloned in a SP6-T7 promoter-containing vector. Fixed tissue 
sections were hybridized with 35S GAD probe (0.6 kb length). Signal was detected 
by means of film or emulsion autoradiography. The autoradiograms were
semiquantitatively evaluated by means of computer-assisted image analysis. The
results obtained with this evaluation were correlated with the results of the
semiquantitative analysis of GAD immunoreactivity performed by Mugnaini and
Oertel. Specific labeling was only observed in neuronal cell bodies, whereas no
labeling was found over neuropil, glial and endothelial cells. The highest
labeling was found in the bulbus olfactorius (internal plexiform and granular
layers) and in the caudal magnocellular nucleus of the hypothalamus. Strong
labeling was observed in the Purkinje layer of the cerebellar cortex, the
interpeduncular nucleus, the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, the nucleus of
Darkschewitsch and the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Intermediate or low levels of GAD
mRNA were present in various brain nuclei, where gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)-containing cell bodies had been observed with other techniques.
Interestingly, a low level of GAD mRNA was found in the caudate-putamen and
nucleus accumbens, where the vast majority of nerve cells is known to contain GAD
immunoreactivity. Only a poor correlation was found between the present
semiquantitative measurements of GAD mRNA content and previous analyses of the
number of GAD-immunoreactive cell bodies. The present study demonstrates that
there exists a differential regional expression of GAD mRNA. The comparison with 
cell counts performed by immunocytochemistry suggests that some brain areas, such
as caudate-putamen and nucleus accumbens, contain a large number of
GAD-immunoreactive cell bodies which express a low level of GAD mRNA. The
opposite seems to be true for other nuclei, such as the globus pallidus, the zona
reticulata of the substantia nigra and the inferior collicle, where few
GAD-immunoreactive cell bodies contain high levels of GAD mRNA. In conclusion,
the present study gives a low magnification map of GAD mRNA levels in the adult
male rat brain. Marked biochemical heterogeneities may be present among GABA
neuronal populations based on their expression of GAD mRNA. The comparison
between the present in situ hybridization and previous immunocytochemical studies
suggests that there may exist at least two populations of GABA neurons in the
brain, having high and low levels respectively of both GAD mRNA and GAD enzyme.

PMID: 2222893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Virology. 1990 Sep;178(1):62-71.

Two independent signals, a nuclear localization signal and a Vp1-interactive
signal, reside within the carboxy-35 amino acids of SV40 Vp3.

Gharakhanian E(1), Kasamatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, 
Los Angeles 90024.

The carboxy-terminal 35 amino acids (numbering 199 to 234) of SV40 Vp3 are
essential for the nuclear localization of the protein as well as for its
interactions with Vp1. Here, we describe studies directed at the further mapping 
of these two functions. Deletion and site-directed mutants of Vp3 were created
within both a eukaryotic transfection and an SP6 transcription vector which
encode Vp3. The subcellular localization of mutant Vp3's was assayed by
immunofluorescence microscopy following DNA transfections, and the
Vp1-interactive determinant of Vp3 was mapped by a recently described eukaryotic 
in vitro translation/interaction system. We show that a plasmid-encoded wild-type
Vp3, whose overlapping Vp1 coding segment has been removed by mutagenesis,
continues to localize to the nucleus in the absence of any SV40 Vp1. Thus, Vp3 is
capable of nuclear localization on its own. Modification of Lys-202 of Vp3 into
Thr is sufficient to destroy the wild-type nuclear localization of the protein,
but has no effect on its interactions with Vp1. Furthermore, deletion of the
terminal 13 amino acids, 222 to 234, of Vp3 does not affect its wild-type nuclear
localization, but is sufficient to destroy its interactions with Vp1. Thus, the
Vp3 amino acids 199-221--specifically Lys-202--are important for its nuclear
localization, while the Vp3 amino acids 222-234 play a role in its interactions
with Vp1. Thus, the two functions, a Vp3 nuclear localization signal and a
Vp1-interactive determinant, are spatially and functionally separable within the 
last 35 residues of Vp3 and are, hence, independent.

PMID: 2167562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Br J Haematol. 1990 Sep;76(1):135-42.

Expression of the human carbonic anhydrase I gene is activated late in fetal
erythroid development and regulated by stage-specific trans-acting factors.

Brady HJ(1), Edwards M, Linch DC, Knott L, Barlow JH, Butterworth PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College London.

Using flow cytometric analysis of red cells from different stages of ontogeny
with anti-CAI antibody, it was shown that the human carbonic anhydrase I (HCAI)
gene product appears in a developmental stage-specific manner. Virtually no CAI
protein was detectable in fetal red cells prior to birth. However, at about the
time of normal delivery (40 weeks gestation) CAI production is switched on. The
proportion of cells containing CAI reaches adult levels during the second half of
the first year of life. Northern analysis suggests that the appearance of CAI
protein results directly from the activation of the gene and the production of
new mRNA. A transient heterokaryon system was set up by fusing the
erythroleukaemic cell lines MEL C88 (a mouse cell line in which CAI is expressed)
and K562 SAI (a human cell line with an embryonic/fetal phenotype, not expressing
CAI). SP6 RNAase mapping of RNA from the fused cells showed activation of the
human CAI gene. This shows the developmental stage-specific expression of HCAI to
be regulated by trans-acting factors.

PMID: 2121263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1990 Sep-Oct;42(5):483-90.

Synthesis and some biological properties of the hexapeptide analog of substance P
with a C-terminal thioamide group.

Kruszynski M(1), Kupryszewski G, Misterek K, Gumulka S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Poland.

A new hexapeptide analog of Substance P, containing a C-terminal thioamide group 
in the molecule [( Glp6, Mett11]SP6-11) was synthesized:
Glp-Phe-Phe-Gly-Leu-Mett-NH2. Conversion to thioamide was accomplished from
tert-butoxycarbonyl-L-methionine amide (Boc-Met-NH2) using Lawesson's Reagent.
Its contracting activity on isolated guinea-pig ileum was considerably lower than
that of [Glp6]SP6-11.

PMID: 1711685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1990 Aug 27;1050(1-3):124-8.

An initiation signal in the 5' untranslated leader sequence of
encephalomyocarditis virus RNA.

Oudshoorn P(1), Thomas A, Scheper G, Voorma HO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.

A 593 nucleotide fragment of the 5' leader of encephalomyocarditis virus RNA
(EMCV-RNA) was linked to the SP6 promoter and inserted upstream of the reporter
gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). The presence of the 5'-UTR of
EMCV-RNA in the RNA transcripts, made in vitro with the SP6 polymerase, resulted 
in a strong translational enhancement when tested in the micrococcal
nuclease-treated reticulocyte lysate. The transcripts were equally active with or
without a 5' methylated capstructure as expected, since EMCV-RNA is one of the
mRNAs capable of internal initiation. We searched for a signal in the 5' leader
that allows the 43S preinitiation complex to bind internally and localized a
hairpin containing a unique nucleotide sequence, CUUUA, present in a domain
conserved among cardio- and aphtoviral RNAs. Replacing this sequence into AGCU
resulted in a 50% loss of translational activity. A second mutation involving a
U-G change in the stem of that hairpin resulted in an almost complete loss of
initiation.

PMID: 2169887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Eur J Biochem. 1990 Aug 17;191(3):557-61.

Molecular cloning of a cDNA for the smallest nuclear-encoded subunit of sweet
potato cytochrome c oxidase. Analysis with the cDNA of the structure and import
into mitochondria of the subunit.

Nakagawa T(1), Maeshima M, Nakamura K, Asahi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University, Japan.

A cDNA clone for the subunit Vc, the smallest nuclear-encoded subunit, of sweet
potato cytochrome c oxidase was isolated. Nucleotide sequence analysis showed
that the subunit is synthesized as a precursor from which only the amino-terminal
amino acid, methionine, residue is removed to form the mature subunit. The mature
subunit consists of 63 amino acid residues which are arranged so as to form one
hydrophobic cluster lying between two hydrophilic clusters; such an arrangement
is also seen with some nuclear-encoded small subunits of the enzymes from other
eukaryotes. The labelled precursor protein was synthesized with the cDNA by in
vitro transcription (SP6 system) and translation (wheat germ system). This
precursor was imported into isolated sweet potato tuberous root mitochondria
without any significant processing, the import being dependent on membrane
potential.

PMID: 2167844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Int J Neurosci. 1990 Aug;53(2-4):167-72.

The role of periaqueductal gray in mediation of analgesia produced by different
frequencies electroacupuncture stimulation in rats.

Wang QA(1), Mao LM, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Beijing Medical University, People's Republic of
China.

The marked suppression of noxious heat-evoked tail flick reflex was produced in
conscious rats by low (2 Hz) or high (100 Hz) frequency electroacupuncture (EA)
stimulation at acupoints S36 and Sp6. Electrolytic and kainate lesions in the
ventral periaqueductal gray (vPAG) led to significant attenuation of the low and 
high frequency EA analgesia as measured 4 and 6 days following the lesion. In
sham-operated animals, analgesia induced by either low or high frequency EA
remained intact. The role of vPAG in organization of different EA analgesia is
discussed in detail.

PMID: 2265935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. EMBO J. 1990 Aug;9(8):2631-8.

Cleavage-site preferences of Sindbis virus polyproteins containing the
non-structural proteinase. Evidence for temporal regulation of polyprotein
processing in vivo.

de Groot RJ(1), Hardy WR, Shirako Y, Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

The non-structural proteins of Sindbis virus, nsP1, 2, 3 and 4, are produced upon
cleavage of polyproteins P123 and P1234 by a proteinase residing in nsP2. We used
cell free translation of SP6 transcripts to study the proteolytic activity of
nsP2 and of nsP2-containing polyproteins. To generate polyprotein enzymes, a set 
of plasmids was made in which cleavage sites were eliminated and new initiation
and termination codons introduced by in vitro mutagenesis. As a substrate, we
used a polyprotein in which the nsP2 proteinase had been inactivated by a single 
amino acid substitution. All nsP2-containing polyproteins cleaved the nsP1/2 site
in trans. However, proteinases containing nsP1 were unable to cleave the nsP2/3
site. Furthermore, only proteinases containing nsP3 could cleave the nsP3/4 site.
These differences in cleavage site specificity result in a temporal regulation of
processing in vivo. At 1.7 h post infection P123 and nsP4 accumulated and only
small amounts of P34 were found. However, at 4 h post infection P123 was
processed rapidly and P34 was produced rather than nsP4. Since nsP4 is thought to
be the viral RNA polymerase, the temporal regulation of the nsP4/P34 ratio may be
responsible for the temporal regulation of RNA synthesis.

PMCID: PMC552296
PMID: 2142454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jul 25;18(14):4295.

Three component system consisting of host bacteria, phage and plasmid, for
efficient gene expression controlled by the SP6 promoter.

Zheleznaya LA(1), Savchenko RS, Matvienko NI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, USSR Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region.

PMCID: PMC331232
PMID: 2198543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Virology. 1990 Jul;177(1):152-8.

Infectious transcripts and nucleotide sequence of cloned cDNA of the potexvirus
white clover mosaic virus.

Beck DL(1), Forster RL, Bevan MW, Boxen KA, Lowe SC.

Author information: 
(1)DSIR Plant Protection, Auckland, New Zealand.

The complete nucleotide sequence of white clover mosaic virus (WCIMV) strain O
has been determined and compared to the WCIMV strain M sequence. The two virus
strains show 12% divergence at the nucleotide level and 3% divergence at the
amino acid level (open reading frames 1 to 5). Two open reading frames, 10 and 21
kDa, identified in the strain M sequence were not found in the strain O sequence.
High levels of infectious RNA transcripts were produced from a full-length cDNA
clone of strain O constructed downstream of the SP6 RNA polymerase promoter
(greater than 2 micrograms RNA/micrograms template DNA). Symptoms characteristic 
of WCIMV developed when host plants were inoculated with SP6 RNA transcripts. The
specific infectivity of transcript RNA produced in the presence of m7GpppG was
similar to that of virion RNA. The SP6 transcripts lacked 5' nonviral
nucleotides, but contained 6, 14, or 198 3' nonviral nucleotides (derived from
the pUC19 vector). Transcripts were infectious without m7GpppG, or with long
nonviral 3' nucleotide stretches. Progeny virus RNA from infections initiated
with transcripts containing 198 nonviral 3' nucleotides did not maintain these
sequences.

PMID: 2353451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Biol. 1990 Jul;111(1):87-94.

Development of a cell-free system to study the membrane assembly of
photosynthetic proteins of Rhodobacter capsulatus.

Troschel D(1), Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut, Universität, Freiburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

A cell-free translation system from the facultatively photoheterotrophic
bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus is described. Synthesis of two proteins of the
bacterium's photosynthetic apparatus (light-harvesting complex B870 alpha and
beta) was performed by SP6 polymerase transcription of the subcloned genes,
isolation of the mRNA and translation in vitro using a cell-free extract of R.
capsulatus cells. The integration of these proteins in vitro into added
intracytoplasmic membrane vesicles (ICM) is demonstrated. Without addition of ICM
approximately 70% of the synthesized B870 proteins were soluble. If, however, ICM
were present during synthesis, the majority of the soluble protein was found to
associate with the membranes. The membrane-associated polypeptides could be
solubilized only by detergent treatment but could not be extracted by treatment
at alkaline pH (Na2CO3), suggesting that the proteins had been firmly inserted
into the lipid bilayer. Moreover, the B870 alpha and beta proteins that
integrated in vitro into ICM were also found to associate with pigment ligands
and to assemble into a native reaction center/B870 complex. The native
conformation of this complex isolated from ICM by Triton fractionation was
demonstrated by microspectral analysis of the bound pigments.

PMCID: PMC2116174
PMID: 2195040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Physiol. 1990 Jul;426:453-71.

Substance P mediates synaptic transmission between rat myenteric neurones in cell
culture.

Willard AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
27599-7545.

1. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were made from pairs of neurones in cell
cultures of rat myenteric neurones. In some pairs, action potentials evoked in
the first neurone evoked a slow excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the
second neurone. 2. Action potentials at a frequency of at least 5 Hz were
required to evoked slow EPSPs. In one group of cells, the slow EPSP followed a
series of nicotinic fast EPSPs; in another group, fast EPSPs did not precede the 
slow EPSP. 3. The slow EPSPs were 2-16 mV in amplitude and were accompanied by
decreased resting potassium conductance. 4. Most (17/28) neurones in which action
potentials evoked only slow EPSPs in a follower cell contained substance P
(SP)-like immunoreactivity; they were not immunoreactive for 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(0/15) or vasoactive intestinal peptide (0/22). 5. Postsynaptic responses to SP, 
neurokinin A and a synthetic tachykinin [( pGlu6, Pro9]SP6-11) mimicked the slow 
EPSPs. The non-tachykinin peptide vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), which 
was not found in neurones that evoked only slow EPSPs, also mimicked the slow
EPSPs. Responsiveness to SP decreased significantly during slow EPSPs. 6.
Desensitization to either SP or VIP reduced or prevented the slow EPSPs and also 
responses to each other. Two proposed antagonists of SP receptors, [D-Arg1,
D-Pro2,D-Trp7,9,Leu11]substance P and [D-Arg1,D-Trp7,9,Leu11]substance P, did not
affect the slow EPSPs significantly. 7. Antisera against SP reversibly blocked or
reduced slow EPSPs evoked by eight of thirteen presynaptic neurones that evoked
slow EPSPs without evoking fast EPSPs. All eight of the presynaptic neurones that
evoked anti-SP-sensitive slow EPSPs contained SP-like immunoreactivity. None of
the presynaptic neurones that evoked anti-SP-insensitive slow EPSPs contained
detectable SP-like immunoreactivity. Normal sera and anti-VIP antisera did not
alter the slow EPSPs detectably. 8. It is concluded that subsets of myenteric
neurones release an SP-like transmitter to evoke slow EPSPs. These neurones
appear to lack a 'classical' neurotransmitter that evokes fast EPSPs.

PMCID: PMC1189899
PMID: 1700107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Anal Biochem. 1990 Jul;188(1):192-9.

pOEV: a Xenopus oocyte protein expression vector.

Pfaff SL(1), Tamkun MM, Taylor WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

We have constructed a Xenopus laevis oocyte expression vector, pOEV, which allows
cloned DNA to be transcribed and translated directly in the oocyte. Since
proteins translated in oocytes are post-translationally modified according to
conserved eukaryotic signals, these cells offer a convenient system for
performing structural and functional analyses of cloned genes. pOEV can be used
for direct analysis of proteins encoded by cloned cDNAs without preparing mRNA in
vitro, simplifying existing protocols for translating proteins in oocytes with a 
very high translational yield. Transcription of the vector in oocytes is driven
by the promoter for the TFIIIA gene, which can generate 1-2 ng (per oocyte within
2 days) of stable mRNA template for translation. The vector also contains SP6 and
T7 promoters for in vitro transcription to make mRNA and hybridization probes.
DNA clones encoding chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) were injected into
oocyte germinal vesicles and CAT protein accumulated in the cell over a 2- to
4-day period. We found that the concentration of DNA injected affected protein
yields; surprisingly relatively low concentrations in the range 25-50 pg DNA per 
oocyte gave maximum yields of CAT protein. When as little as 5 pg of pOEV DNA is 
injected we typically expressed 40 fmol of CAT protein per oocyte, after 4-day
incubations. In addition, we have shown that this system is amenable to the
expression of nuclear and membrane proteins.

PMID: 1699447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Immunol. 1990 Jun 1;144(11):4147-55.

Antigen-induced Ca2+ signaling and desensitization in B cells.

Lazarus AH(1), Mills GB, Delovitch TL.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto,
Canada.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 1991 Jan 1;146(1):401-3.

Cross-linking of B cell surface Ig (sIg) by anti-Ig results in transmembrane
signaling. However, the capacity of a thymus-dependent (TD) Ag to mediate B cell 
signal transduction has been less well documented. Therefore, we examined
Ag-induced intracellular free calcium concentration [( Ca2+]) in B cells by using
TD Ag that would be expected to either cross-link or not cross-link sIgM and/or
induce the coupling of sIgM to FcR. Stimulation of mouse TA3 hybridoma B cell
transfectants that express the SP6 anti-TNP specific sIgM with either TNP-OVA or 
anti-IgM antibodies resulted in a maximal fourfold increase in [Ca2+]i. The net
increase in [Ca2+]i in response to TNP-OVA was dependent upon both the Ag dose
and the TNP:OVA molar ratio. Because occupancy of several cell-surface receptor
types leads to a loss of response to subsequent stimulation by ligand (homologous
desensitization), we examined the ability of Ag to induce homologous
desensitization of sIgM in these B cells. TNP1-OVA at all concentrations tested
(up to 500 micrograms/ml) did not lead to any change in [Ca2+]i or
desensitization. Cross-linking of TNP1-OVA (10 micrograms/ml) with F(ab')2 of
anti-OVA antibody induced both a rise in [Ca2+]i and homologous desensitization
of sIg, suggesting that cross-linking of sIgM by Ag is sufficient to induce both 
these processes. TNP6-OVA at a concentration of 10 micrograms/ml induced changes 
in [Ca2+]i and partially desensitized TNP-specific B cells to stimulation by
anti-IgM. Interestingly, a high dose (180 micrograms/ml) of TNP6-OVA stimulated
minimal changes in [Ca2+]i yet did not lead to desensitization. However,
cross-linking of TNP6-OVA at this high dose with F(ab')2 of rabbit anti-OVA
elevated [Ca2+]i and elicited partial desensitization. Complete desensitization
of sIgM by Ag was achieved when intact (Fc-containing) anti-OVA antibody was
used, suggesting that the FcR can play a role in desensitization. Ag- and
antibody-mediated desensitization was not caused by steric hindrance of sIg.
Thus, we have observed two forms of Ag-induced desensitization of sIgM, both of
which involve sIg cross-linking and one of which is mediated by the physiologic
coupling of sIg to FcR.

PMID: 2341715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Virol. 1990 Jun;64(6):2467-73.

Infectious foot-and-mouth disease virus derived from a cloned full-length cDNA.

Zibert A(1), Maass G, Strebel K, Falk MM, Beck E.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Universität Heidelberg, Federal
Republic of Germany.

A full-length cDNA plasmid of foot-and-mouth disease virus has been constructed. 
RNA synthesized in vitro by means of a bacteriophage SP6 promoter inserted in
front of the cDNA led to the production of infectious particles upon transfection
of BHK-21 cells. These particles were also found to be highly infectious for
primary bovine kidney cells as well as for baby mice. The difficulty in cloning
the foot-and-mouth disease virus cytidyl tract in Escherichia coli was
circumvented by joining two separate cloned parts, representing the S and L
fragments of the genome, and, in a second step, inserting a dC-dG homopolymer.
Homopolymeric sequences of up to 25 cytidyl residues did not lead to the
production of virus. Replicons containing poly(C) tracts long enough to permit
virus replication were first established in yeast cells. One of these constructs 
could also be maintained in E. coli and was used to produce infectious RNA in
vitro. The length of the poly(C) sequence in this cDNA plasmid was 32
nucleotides. However, the poly(C) tracts of two recombinant viruses found in
transfected BHK-21 cells were 60 and 80 nucleotides long, respectively. Possible 
mechanisms leading to the enlargement of the poly(C) tract during virus
replication are discussed.

PMCID: PMC249421
PMID: 2159523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Neuropeptides. 1990 Jun;16(2):103-7.

Differential effects of two C-terminal peptides of substance P on human
neutrophils.

Iwamoto I(1), Yamazaki H, Nakagawa N, Kimura A, Tomioka H, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

To determine the mechanism by which substance P (SP) activates human neutrophils,
we examined the potencies of SP, the C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and SP6-11, and
the N-terminal peptides SP1-9 and SP1-4 for inducing the increase in cytosolic
free Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i), superoxide (O2-) generation, and chemotaxis in
human blood neutrophils. SP and the C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and SP6-11 and
SP6-11 (10(-6)-10(-4) M) induced the increase in ([Ca2+]i, O2- generation, and
chemotaxis of the neutrophils dose--dependently, whereas the N-terminal peptides 
SP1-9 and SP1-4 (up to 10(-4) M) were inactive in inducing these responses.
Furthermore, the potencies of the two C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and SP6-11 were 
not parallel in these three responses. SP6-11 was 7.7-fold more potent in
increasing [Ca2+]i than SP4-11, whereas SP4-11 was 16.6-fold more potent in
inducing O2-generation than SP6-11. SP6-11 was also 2.1-fold more potent in
inducing chemotaxis than SP4-11. Thus, we conclude that the C-terminal peptides
of SP induce differential activations of human neutrophils.

PMID: 1701227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Gene. 1990 May 14;89(2):265-9.

Isolation of a genomic clone encoding the rat histone variant, H1d.

Cole KD(1), Kandala JC, Kremer E, Kistler WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Carolina, Columbia 29208.

Mammals contain a family of five closely related H1 histone variants (H1a-e) as
well as two less closely related forms, H10 and H1t. We have sequenced a rat
genomic clone that encodes one of the standard H1 variants. An RNA transcript of 
the gene was made with bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase and translated in a
cell-free system. The protein synthesized in vitro was identified as variant H1d 
by its electrophoretic mobility.

PMID: 2373370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Neuropeptides. 1990 May;16(1):41-9.

Proteolytic resistance and biological activity of N-methylated analogs of [pGlu6]
substance P6-11.

Wormser U(1), Laufer R, Chorev M, Gilon C, Selinger Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel.

Five synthetic N-methylated analogs (II-V) of the C-terminal hexapeptide analog
of substance P (SP), [pGlu6]SP6-11 (I) were evaluated for their metabolic
stability and in vitro spasmogenic activity. The metabolic resistance of the
analogs was tested by two SP degrading systems with different specificities,
namely, the rat parotid and the hypothalamic slice systems. Their biological
activity was assessed in the isolated guinea pig ileum. The analog [pGlu6, N-Me
Phe7, N-Me Gly9]SP6-11 (III), had relative potency of 65% in the spasmogenic
assay as compared to the parent compound. It was found to be more stable than the
parent peptide in the hypothalamus, whereas in the parotid system it was
susceptible as the parent peptide. However, the analog [pGlu6, N-Me Leu10]SP6-11 
(II) (46% relative potency in the spasmogenic assay) was more stable than the
parent peptide in the parotid system but did not show any improved stability in
the hypothalamus. Identification of degradation products of the [pGlu6, N-Me
Leu10]SP6-11 reflected the differences in the specificities of the two
preparations. A significant drop in potency (7%) was observed for [pGlu, N-Me
Phe7]SP6-11 (IV). This analog was more stable in the hypothalamic system than in 
the parotid. Introduction of a double methylation, [pGlu6, N-Me Leu10] SP6-11,
contributed toward the stabilization in both degrading systems. Its relative
spasmogenic activity was comparable to that of analog IV. In light of the above
mentioned findings the implications of the N-methylated analogs with respect to
putative CNS activity are discussed.

PMID: 1701226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 1990 Apr 15;265(11):6291-5.

Hepatic lipase: site-directed mutagenesis of a serine residue important for
catalytic activity.

Davis RC(1), Stahnke G, Wong H, Doolittle MH, Ameis D, Will H, Schotz MC.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Research, Veterans Administration Wadsworth Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California 90073.

Hepatic lipase (HL) is a member of the lipoprotein lipase/pancreatic lipase gene 
family and is believed to function in processing of intermediate and high density
lipoproteins. As a lipase, HL is presumed to have a lipid interfacial binding
domain, distinct from the esterase catalytic site, orienting the enzyme at
aqueous-lipid interfaces and resulting in activation of esterase activity.
However, the structural domains responsible for these separate functions have not
been identified. Amino acid sequence homology to serine proteases, thioesterases 
and other lipases, identified Ser147 of rat HL as part of a highly conserved
element in an esterase gene family. In order to better define the function of
this domain in HL, site-directed mutagenesis was utilized to produce mutant cDNAs
with amino acid substitutions for Ser147, Ser133, or Ser228. Following injection 
of Xenopus oocytes with SP6 transcripts for normal or mutant HL, media from the
oocytes were assayed for lipolytic activity and immunoprecipitable HL protein.
Mutations of Ser133 and Ser228 produced no decrease in activity whereas the
mutant protein in which Ser147 was replaced with glycine had little, if any
activity against emulsified triolein substrates. Replacing HL Ser147 with glycine
also resulted in a protein with little or no measurable activity for tributyrin, 
a substrate which does not provide a lipid interface. These results suggest that 
Ser147 in rat HL is either located at the catalytic site or is required for
maintaining the structural integrity of the catalytic site.

PMID: 2108159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 1990 Apr 15;265(11):6079-85.

Primary structure of a precursor for the delta-subunit of sweet potato
mitochondrial F1-ATPase deduced from full length cDNA.

Kimura T(1), Takeda S, Asahi T, Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University, Japan.

A cDNA library constructed from poly(A)-rich RNA of the sweet potato tuberous
root using a newly developed plasmid vector carrying tac-SP6 promoters was used
to identify full length cDNAs for the nuclear-encoded delta-subunit of
mitochondrial F1-ATPase by oligonucleotide-hybridization selection. Selected
clones contained cDNA insert which carry the entire coding capacity for the
pre-delta-subunit, since the RNA transcribed in vitro from SP6 promoter on the
vector directed the synthesis of pre-delta-subunit polypeptide in a wheat germ in
vitro translation assay. The nucleotide sequence of one of these cDNAs indicates 
that it can code for the pre-delta-subunit of 244 amino acids of which 199 amino 
acids encode the mature subunit. The amino acid sequence of the mature
delta-subunit shows similarities of about 18-25% amino acid positional identity
with the delta-subunits of bacterial F1-ATPases, about 26% with the delta-subunit
of chloroplast CF1-ATPase, and about 32-37% with oligomycin sensitivity
conferring proteins of animal and fungal mitochondria. The N-terminal presequence
of the precursor composed of maximum of 45 amino acids does not show any obvious 
sequence homology with either the transit peptide of the nuclear-encoded
pre-delta-subunit of chloroplast CF1 or the presequence of the nuclear-encoded
pre-oligomycin sensitivity conferring proteins. At least two types of the
delta-subunit cDNAs with very similar structures were identified from the
library, and the presence of multiple copies of the delta-subunit gene in the
hexaploid genome of the sweet potato is also suggested by genomic Southern blot
hybridization.

PMID: 1690722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 1990 Apr 5;265(10):5585-9.

Modulation of translation by the 5' leader sequence of the mRNA encoding murine
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases.

Waterhouse P(1), Khokha R, Denhardt DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Murine tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP) is a Mr 28,000 secreted
glycoprotein. The nucleotide sequence has been determined previously, and
evidence for a multiplicity of TIMP transcripts presented. The longest TIMP
transcript contains a small open reading frame (ORF) which is upstream of and
overlaps the TIMP ORF, whereas the shorter inducible transcripts lack the AUG
start codon of the upstream putative ORF. Serum stimulation of quiescent
fibroblasts selectively enhances the abundance of the shorter transcripts
(Edwards, D. R., Waterhouse, P., Holman, M. L., and Denhardt, D. T. (1986)
Nucleic Acids Res. 14, 8863-8878). Here we have used an in vitro
transcription/translation system to determine the effect of the upstream region
on the efficiency of TIMP translation. TIMP transcripts either containing or
lacking a segment including the AUG of the 5' ORF were generated by SP6
polymerase, and equal amounts of these transcripts were translated in
reticulocyte lysates. TIMP synthesized in vitro was immunoprecipitable by an
antiserum raised against a recombinant TIMP protein. TIMP was translated 3-fold
more efficiently from the 5'-truncated transcript, consistent with the
possibility that induction of shorter, more efficiently translated, TIMP
transcripts are an important means of amplifying TIMP expression in response to
serum.

PMID: 2180930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Gen Genet. 1990 Apr;221(2):283-6.

The gene for Klebsiella bacteriophage K11 RNA polymerase: sequence and comparison
with the homologous genes of phages T7, T3, and SP6.

Dietz A(1), Weisser HJ, Kössel H, Hausmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III der Universität Freiburg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

We determined the nucleotide sequence of gene 1 of Klebsiella phage K11, which is
a member of the T7 group of phages. The largest open reading frame corresponds to
a polypeptide with 906 amino acids and a molecular weight of 100,383 daltons. The
deduced amino acid sequence of this polypeptide shows 71% homology to the T7 RNA 
polymerase (the product of T7 gene 1), 72% homology to the T3 RNA polymerase and 
27% homology to the SP6 RNA polymerase. Divergent evolution was clearly most
pronounced in the amino-terminal portion.

PMID: 2370850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Virol. 1990 Apr;64(4):1465-76.

Mutagenesis of the 3' nontranslated region of Sindbis virus RNA.

Kuhn RJ(1), Hong Z, Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

A cDNA clone from which infectious RNA can be transcribed was used to construct
42 site-specific mutations in the 3' nontranslated region of the Sindbis virus
genome. The majority of these mutations were made in the 3'-terminal
19-nucleotide conserved sequence element and consisted of single nucleotide
substitutions or of small (1 to 8) nucleotide deletions. An attempt was made to
recover mutant viruses after transfection of SP6-transcribed RNA into chicken
cells. In most cases, viable virus was recovered, but almost all mutants grew
more poorly than wild-type virus when tested under a number of culture
conditions. In the case of mutations having only a moderate effect, the virus
grew as well as the wild type but was slightly delayed in growth. Mutations
having a more severe effect led to lower virus yields. In many cases, virus
growth was more severely impaired in mosquito cells than in chicken cells, but
the opposite phenotype was also seen, in which the mutant grew as well as or
better than the wild type in mosquito cells but more poorly in chicken cells. One
substitution mutant, 3NT7C, was temperature sensitive for growth in chicken cells
and severely crippled for growth in mosquito cells. Insertion mutations were also
constructed which displaced the 19-nucleotide element by a few nucleotides
relative to the poly(A) tail. These mutations had little effect on virus growth. 
Deletion of large regions (31 to 293 nucleotides long) of the 3' nontranslated
region outside of the 19-nucleotide element resulted in viruses which were more
severely crippled in mosquito cells than in chicken cells. From these results,
the following principles emerge. (i) The entire 3' nontranslated region is
important for efficient virus replication, although there is considerable
plasticity in this region in that most nucleotide substitutions or deletions made
resulted in viable virus and, in some cases, in virus that grew quite
efficiently. Replication competence was particularly sensitive to changes
involving the C at position 1, the A at position 7, and a stretch of 9 U residues
punctuated by a G at position 14. (ii) The panel of mutants examined collectively
deleted the entire 3' nontranslated region. Only mutants in which 8 nucleotides
in the 3' terminal 19 nucleotides had been deleted or in which the 3' terminal C 
was deleted were nonviable. Although the 3' terminal C was essential for
replication, it could be displaced by at least 7 nucleotides from its 3' terminal
position adjacent to the poly(A) tract.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC249280
PMID: 2319643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biolumin Chemilumin. 1990 Apr-Jun;5(2):131-9.

From Luc and Phot genes to the hospital bed.

Campbell AK(1), Sala-Newby G, Aston PJ, Kalsheker N, Kishi Y, Shimomura O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Wales, College of Medicine, 
Heath Park, Cardiff, UK.

The Luc gene from the firefly Photinus pyralis has been isolated by cloning it in
pcDV1 PL plasmid primer and Honjo linker and the Phot gene isolated from Aequorea
victoria using the polymerase chain reaction. A method has been established using
SP6 RNA polymerase for transcribing and translating bioluminescent genes in
vitro. It should now be possible to engineer these genes to measure intracellular
ATP and the covalent modification of proteins in single, live cells, providing
unique insights into the molecular basis of disease.

PMID: 1970919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. FASEB J. 1990 Mar;4(5):1488-93.

Membrane morphogenesis from cloned fragments of bacteriophage PM2 DNA that
contain the sp6.6 gene.

Armour GA(1), Brewer GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Southern Illinois
University School of Medicine, Springfield 62794.

The formation of new membrane vesicles normally occurs during eukaryotic
organellogenesis and maturation of bacteriophage PM2. This virus was studied as a
simple model for membrane morphogenesis. Previous biochemical and genetic studies
suggest that a major structural protein of PM2, sp6.6, is an integral membrane
protein involved in viral membrane morphogenesis. To establish the necessity of
sp6.6 in membrane formation, restriction fragments of PM2 that contained the
sp6.6 coding sequence were cloned into several plasmid vectors for expression in 
Escherichia coli. A construction in pBR322 containing two HindIII fragments of
PM2 DNA caused production of intracellular membrane vesicles of the same size as 
those produced in the course of natural infection of Alteromonas espejiana.
Similar results were obtained with a smaller construct of HindIII fragments in
the plasmid vector pPL-lambda. Expression of sp6.6 was detected via incorporation
of 35S-labeled methionine after SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and with a
specific rabbit antiserum on immunoblots. Other constructs did not produce
recognizable vesicles or sp6.6. These results are the first to suggest that a
hydrophobic membrane protein can cause development of new membrane structure.

PMID: 2407591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell Immunol. 1990 Mar;126(1):31-46.

Intrathymic T cell repertoire after prenatal trinitrobenzene-sulfonic
acid-treatment.

Zöller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Radiology and Pathophysiology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

It is still a matter of debate, whether tolerance toward self-non-MHC antigens is
due to intrathymic deletion or to regulatory processes in the periphery. To
further pursue this question, responsiveness toward TNP and an anti-TNP
monoclonal antibody (Sp6) carrying a recurrent idiotype was evaluated in
prenatally trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS)-treated mice. In prenatally
untreated as well as in TNBS-treated mice, thymocytes proliferating in the
absence of nominal antigen were double negative (L3T4-/Lyt2-), but
antigen-specific thymocytes were single positive (L3T4+/Lyt2- or L3T4-/Lyt2+).
TNBS-treated mice differed from controls inasmuch as in their first week of life 
T cells proliferating in response to TNP were found in the thymus and detected at
increased frequencies in the spleen. The frequency of TNP-specific thymocytes and
spleen cells declined rapidly, finally reaching in the spleen a level of 20-30%
of controls. Furthermore, after antigenic stimulation, the frequency of
thymocytes and spleen cells proliferating in response to TNP was found to be
increased in control mice, but TNP-specific T cell were no more recovered in the 
thymus or the spleen of tolerized mice. The same accounted for thymic and splenic
T cells proliferating in response to Sp6. They were expanded in control mice
after antigenic stimulation, but were undetectable in TNBS-treated mice. Thus, T 
cells with specificity for an internal (Sp6) and an external (TNP) antigen,
provided the latter was present during ontogeny, were detected in the thymus of
control and, transiently, in the thymus of tolerized mice. But, the fate of
antigen-specific thymocytes was different in prenatally untreated and
TNBS-treated mice. The data are interpreted in the sense that tolerance toward
non-MHC antigens may be acquired subsequently to tolerance toward self-MHC
antigens and possibly after imprinting of antigen specificity.

PMID: 2302740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Virus Res. 1990 Mar;15(3):213-29.

Expression of the outer capsid protein, VP2, from a full length cDNA clone of
genome segment 2 of bluetongue serotype 1 from South Africa, using both Sp6 and
vaccinia expression systems and a comparison of the nucleic acid sequence of this
segment with those of other serotypes.

Wade-Evans AM(1), Mertens PP.

Author information: 
(1)AFRC Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Woking, Surrey, U.K.

Genome segment 2 of bluetongue virus serotype 1 from South AfricA (BTV-1SA) was
purified from a preparation of all ten dsRNA segments. This dsRNA was used as a
template to make a full-length DNA copy of segment 2, which was then cloned into 
pUC19. The cDNA insert was transferred into a bacterial expression vector (pGEM; 
PROMEGA) and, by means of in vitro transcription and translation systems, used to
synthesise a polypeptide of similar size to VP2 (as analyzed by PAGE). The cDNA
insert was also transferred into a vaccinia virus vector using homologous
recombination. The resulting recombinant virus when transfected into TK- cells
produced a protein that co-migrated with VP2 of bluetongue virus.
Immunoprecipitation of these polypeptides, synthesised by in vitro and in vivo
techniques, using BTV-1SA antisera, confirmed that they were virus specific.
Nucleotide sequence analysis of the cDNA demonstrated that genome segment 2 is
2940 base pairs in length. The positive sense (+ ve) RNA strand contains an open 
reading frame, coding for a polypeptide of 961 amino acids, which is flanked by
3' and 5' terminal non-coding regions of 37 and 17 nucleotides, respectively.
Comparison with published data shows that genome segment 2 of BTV-1SA is
identical in these characteristics to segment 2 of BTV-1 from Australia
(BTV-1AUS) but differs from isolates of the five American serotypes of BTV
(BTV-2, -10, -11, -13 and -17). However, there is a higher level of homology, in 
both the nucleotide and the amino acid sequence of genome segment 2 and protein
VP2 respectively, between the two isolates of BTV-1 and the American isolate of
BTV-2, than there is between BTV-2 and the other American serotypes. The
significance of this similarity is discussed.

PMID: 2160764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;10(3):1287-92.

Nuclear transport of proteins translated in vitro from SP6 plasmid-generated
mRNAs.

Parnaik VK(1), Kennady PK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

A sensitive and versatile assay is described for the nuclear transport of
35S-labeled proteins obtained by the in vitro translation of SP6
plasmid-generated mRNAs. A specific nuclear accumulation of greater than 20-fold 
is observed for the transformation-related nuclear proteins, p53 and E1b, and the
nuclear enzyme, thymidine kinase, whereas transport of the nonnuclear proteins,
dihydrofolate reductase and simian virus 40 small t antigen, is negligible within
30 min.

PMCID: PMC361022
PMID: 2137554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1990 Mar;32(6):686-9.

Expression of an Erwinia sp. gene encoding diphenyl ether cleavage in Escherichia
coli and an isolated Acinetobacter strain PE7.

Liaw HJ(1), Srinivasan VR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge 70803.

An Acinetobacter strain PE7 with the ability to grow on salicyclic acid and to
degrade diphenyl ethers was isolated from a petroleum waste pit in Louisiana. A
cloned Erwinia sp. dpe gene encoding diphenyl ether cleavage was introduced into 
PE7 in order to enhance its degradative ability. A broad-host-range expression
plasmid, pDPE2388, was constructed by inserting an SspI-HpaI fragment from a dpe 
gene-containing plasmid, pDPE7321, into the kanamycin resistance gene of plasmid 
pKT230. The DNA fragment contained the dpe gene flanked between sp6 and T7
promoters. Transconjugants of pDPE2388 plasmid into PE7 were isolated. Expression
of the dpe gene in Escherichia coli or PE7 displayed a degradative ability to
cleave the following diphenyl ethers: 4-chlorodiphenyl ether, 4-nitrodiphenyl
ether, and 4-hydroxydiphenyl ether.

PMID: 1366541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Feb;87(4):1283-7.

RNA processing and ribonucleoprotein assembly studied in vivo by RNA
transfection.

Kleinschmidt AM(1), Pederson T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury,
MA 01545.

We present a method for studying RNA processing and ribonucleoprotein assembly in
vivo, by using RNA synthesized in vitro. SP6-transcribed 32P-labeled U2 small
nuclear RNA precursor molecules were introduced into cultured human 293 cells by 
calcium phosphate-mediated uptake, as in standard DNA transfection experiments.
RNase protection mapping demonstrated that the introduced pre-U2 RNA underwent
accurate 3' end processing. The introduced U2 RNA was assembled into
ribonucleoprotein particles that reacted with an antibody specific for proteins
known to be associated with the U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle. The 
3' end-processed, ribonucleoprotein-assembled U2 RNA accumulated in the nuclear
fraction. When pre-U2 RNA with a 7-methylguanosine group at the 5' end was
introduced into cells, it underwent conversion to a 2,2,7-trimethylguanosine cap 
structure, a characteristic feature of the U-small nuclear RNAs. Pre-U2 RNA
introduced with an adenosine cap (Ap-ppG) also underwent processing, small
nuclear ribonucleoprotein assembly, and nuclear accumulation, establishing that a
methylated guanosine cap structure is not required for these steps in U2 small
nuclear ribonucleoprotein biosynthesis. Beyond its demonstrated usefulness in the
study of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein biosynthesis, RNA transfection may be of
general applicability to the investigation of eukaryotic RNA processing in vivo
and may also offer opportunities for introducing therapeutically targeted RNAs
(ribozymes or antisense RNA) into cells.

PMCID: PMC53458
PMID: 2137610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 1990 Jan 5;265(1):493-8.

Tagetitoxin inhibits RNA synthesis directed by RNA polymerases from chloroplasts 
and Escherichia coli.

Mathews DE(1), Durbin RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Tagetitoxin, a chlorosis-inducing phytotoxin produced by Pseudomonas syringae pv.
tagetis, inhibits RNA synthesis directed by chloroplast RNA polymerase. In
isolated chloroplasts, tagetitoxin quickly and specifically reduced the
incorporation of [3H]uridine into RNA. When it was added to transcriptionally
active chloroplast protein extracts, the toxin directly inhibited incorporation
of [32P]UTP into RNA. In addition, tagetitoxin inhibited in vitro RNA synthesis
directed by the RNA polymerase from Escherichia coli. In vitro transcription
reactions directed by chloroplast RNA polymerase or E. coli RNA polymerase are
inhibited at tagetitoxin concentrations less than 1 microM. Nuclear RNA
polymerase II purified from wheat germ was only affected at tagetitoxin
concentrations greater than 100 microM during in vitro transcription. Tagetitoxin
concentrations as high as 1 mM did not affect in vitro transcription reactions
directed by RNA polymerase from bacteriophage T7 or SP6.

PMID: 1688434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int Immunol. 1990;2(5):427-34.

Intrathymic presentation of nominal antigen by B cells.

Zöller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Radiology and Pathophysiology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Prenatal tolerization with TNBS leads to a transient increase in intrathymic
TNP-specific B cells during the first postnatal week. To evaluate whether this
may influence selection of the T cell repertoire and establishment of tolerance
towards the neoself-determinant TNP, the capacity of intrathymic B cells to
present TNP as well as an anti-TNP antibody (Sp6), which carries a recurrent
idiotype, to thymocytes of prenatally untreated and TNBS-treated litters was
explored. Depletion and reconstitution experiments revealed that in the thymus of
10-day-old litters Sp6 as well as TNP was presented exclusively by B cells. After
stimulation with TNP-HRBC, B cells could still present the antigen, but depletion
of B cells no longer abolished proliferation, i.e. after stimulation intrathymic 
B cells were no longer the only source for presentation of external antigen. B
cells of prenatally tolerized mice differed inasmuch as they initiated
proliferation only in response to Sp6, but not in response to the
neoself-determinant TNP. Furthermore, after challenge with TNP in an immunogenic 
form, thymic as well as splenic B cells had lost the capacity to provide positive
signals to T cells specific for the neoself determinant as well as to T cells
specific for the cognate antibody. It is concluded that B cells are of importance
in the intrathymic selection of the T cell repertoire and that they are involved 
in the process of tolerization towards nominal antigen.

PMID: 2085487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol. 1990;93(2-3):120-5.

Skin reactivity to substance P, not to neurokinin A, is increased in allergic
asthmatics.

Iwamoto I(1), Kimura A, Tanaka M, Tomioka H, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The tachykinins substance P (SP) and neurokinin A are believed to be major
mediators of neurogenic inflammation. To determine whether the skin reactivity to
tachykinins is increased in asthmatics, we examined the erythemas and wheals
induced by intradermal injections of SP, the C-terminal peptide SP6-11, the
N-terminal peptide SP1-9 and neurokinin A (10(-7)-10(-5) M) in 10 allergic
asthmatics and 9 normal subjects. SP and SP1-9 induced both erythemas and wheals 
in a concentration-dependent manner in allergic asthmatics and in normal
subjects, whereas SP6-11 and neurokinin A induced only wheals in both groups. SP 
induced greater erythemas and wheals in allergic asthmatics than in normal
subjects. However, the wheals induced by neurokinin A were not significantly
different between the two groups. SP1-9 also induced greater erythemas and wheals
in allergic asthmatics than in normal subjects, whereas the wheals induced by
SP6-11 were not significantly different between the two groups. Therefore, the
increased skin reactivity to SP was dependent on the N-terminal peptide but not
on the C-terminal peptide. We conclude that the skin reactivity to SP but not to 
neurokinin A is increased in allergic asthmatics.

PMID: 1712000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Comp Biochem Physiol C. 1990;96(1):59-63.

The influence of substance P and its fragments on endogenous phosphorylation of
synaptosomal membrane protein (synapsin) from cerebral cortex of rat brain.

Hrabec Z(1), Szkudlarek J, Lachowicz L.

Author information: 
(1)II Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Lodz, Poland.

1. The effects of substance P and its fragments and analogue of a C-terminal
fragment on cyclic AMP-dependent phosphorylation of synapsin I in synaptosomal
membranes (SM) from cerebral cortex were investigated. 2. SP(I-II) and SP(1-4) at
10(-3) M caused a marked stimulation of synapsin I phosphorylation. 3. A
C-terminal fragment of SP (SP6-11) had no effect on phosphorylation of synapsin
1. 4. Analogue of C-terminal fragment [(Tyr8)SP6-11] at 10(-3) M distinctly
inhibits phosphorylation of synapsin I. 5. These data suggest that SPI-II and its
C- and N-terminal fragments have a modulator function against the phosphorylation
of some rat brain proteins.

PMID: 1704299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Gen Pharmacol. 1990;21(4):403-6.

Effects of N- and C-terminal fragments of substance P on ATPase and monoamine
oxidase activities in rat brain.

Wojtkowiak R(1), Turska E, Lachowicz L, Koziolkiewicz W.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry,
School of Medicine, Lódz, Poland.

The in vitro influence of substance P (SP) C- and N-terminal fragments on the
Na+,K(+)-ATPase and Ca2+,Mg2(+)-ATPase and monoamine oxidase (MAO) from
synaptosomal membrane and extra-synaptosomal mitochondria were studied. The
obtained results indicate: 1. C-terminal fragment of SP (SP6-11) in 10 microM
concentration stimulates the Ca2+,Mg2(+)-ATPase activities from cerebral cortex
and hippocampus. Na+,K(+)-ATPase from cerebral cortex is hardly sensitive to the 
action of this fragment. 2. N-terminal fragment of SP (SP1-5) in 10 microM
concentration increases Na+,K(+)-ATPase activity from cerebral cortex and
hippocampus. 3. N-terminal tetrapeptide (SP1-4) exerts no influence on ATPases
independently from their brain localization. 4. The activity of monoamine oxidase
after use of C- and N-terminal fragments is unchanged.

PMID: 1696230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Arerugi. 1990 Jan;39(1):6-11.

[Skin reactivity to substance P in asthmatics].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwamoto I(1), Kimura A, Tanaka M, Tomioka H, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine.

Substance P (SP) is believed to be a major mediator of neurogenic inflammation.
To determine whether the skin reactivity of SP is increased in asthmatics, we
examined the reactivity to intradermal injections of SP, the C-terminal and
N-terminal peptides SP6-11 and SP1-9, respectively, and neurokinin A
(10(-7)-10(-5) M) in 12 asthmatics and 9 normal subjects. SP and the N-terminal
peptide SP1-9 induced both erythemas and wheals in asthmatics and in normal
subjects, whereas the C-terminal peptide SP6-11 and neurokinin A primarily
induced only wheals in both groups. SP induced greater erythemas and wheals in
asthmatics than in normal subjects. SP1-9 also induced greater erythemas and
wheals in asthmatics than in normal subjects. However, the wheals induced by
SP6-11 or neurokinin A were not significantly different in either group.
Therefore, the increased skin reactivity to SP was the N-terminal peptide
dependent, which has been shown to be able to activate skin mast cells. We
conclude that the skin reactivity to SP is increased in asthmatics, possibly
through the increased reactivity of skin mast cells.

PMID: 1693494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1990;100(3):308-15.

Reinforcing effects of peripherally administered substance P and its C-terminal
sequence pGlu6-SP6-11 in the rat.

Oitzl MS(1), Hasenöhrl RU, Huston JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Psychology, University of Düsseldorf, Federal
Republic of Germany.

Reinforcing effects of intraperitoneally (IP) administered substance P (SP1-11), 
its amino-terminal fragment SP1-7 (SPN) and an analog of the carboxy terminus
(pGlu6-SP6-11: SPC) were studied in rats. Two conditioned place preference
paradigms were used. After three pairings of the drug with a certain environment 
the effect of the treatment was evaluated in the drug-free state during a test
trial. The reinforcing effects of SP (37 nmol) and the equimolar dose of SPC were
expressed by a significant increase in the amount of time the animals spent in
the treatment environment. Other doses of SP (3.7 and 185 nmol) and SPC (7.4 and 
185 nmol) and none of the doses of SPN (37, 185, 370 nmol) influenced the place
preference behavior of the rats. The reinforcing effects of SP parallel the known
facilitating effects of peripherally administered SP on memory. The amino acids
that encode the reinforcing effects of SP may lie within the C-terminal sequence 
of the SP molecule.

PMID: 1690433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Pharm Sci. 1990 Jan;79(1):74-6.

A synthetic glycopeptide of substance P analogue (SP6-11) with enhanced NK-1
receptor specificity.

Haro I(1), Busquets MA, Torres JL, Valencia G, Garcia-Anton JM, Reig F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Peptides, Biological Organic Chemistry Department, Barcelona,
Spain.

A new glycopeptide analogue of substance P (6-11) (SP6-11), namely, N1,6
(beta-D-glucopyranosyl) [Glu6, Pro9]SP6-11, has been synthesized and found to be 
water soluble. The in vitro biological activity of this glycopeptide was
determined for spasmogenic activity in the guinea pig ileum and for potentiation 
of electrically evoked contractions in the rat vas deferens. Thus, activities on 
NK-1, NK-2, and NK-3 receptor types have been differentiated by two assays and,
in the case of NK-1 and NK-3, receptors in guinea pig ileum (GPI) were assayed
using specific pharmacological procedures. The ED50 values for the analogue and
reference peptides substance P (SP), neurokinin A(NKA), and neurokinin B (NKB)
were determined and potencies relative to SP were calculated. The analogue is
three times more potent than the potent NK-1 agonist SP on NK-1 receptors.
Moreover, this glycopeptide proved to be as selective for the NK-1 receptor as
the specific agonist SPOMe (the methyl ester of substance P).

PMID: 1690289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Mol Biol. 1989 Dec 5;210(3):659-63.

Ribosomal affinity and translational initiation in Escherichia coli. In vitro
investigations using translational initiation regions of differing efficiencies
from the atp operon.

Lang V(1), Gualerzi C, McCarthy JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung mbH, 
Braunschweig, F.R.G.

The atp operon of Escherichia coli comprises nine genes that are differentially
expressed. The control of the atp genes' expression rates has been shown to be
exercised primarily at the level of translational initiation, but how is this
achieved in molecular terms? In order to study the interactions of 30 S ribosomal
subunits with specifically the translational initiation regions (TIRs) of atpB,
atpE and atpG, restriction fragments bearing these TIRs were excised from the atp
operon and cloned into an SP6 promoter transcription vector. mRNA transcripts
were made in vitro and used in primer extension inhibition studies and
equilibrium mRNA-30 S ribosomal subunit binding measurements. The binding of 30 S
ribosomal subunits blocked primer extension 14 to 15 bases downstream from the
respective translational start codons. The affinities of binding of 30 S
ribosomal subunits showed the relationship atpE greater than atpB greater than
atpG. This was also the order of the efficiency of translation promoted by the
respective TIRs, both in vivo and on the in vitro synthesized mRNA fragments.
Thus, the affinity of 30 S ribosomal subunits is at least to some extent
correlated with the rate of translational initiation.

PMID: 2693739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 1989 Dec 5;264(34):20199-205.

Development expression of the genes encoding the four subunits of the chicken
muscle acetylcholine receptor.

Moss SJ(1), Darlison MG, Beeson DM, Barnard EA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Neurobiology Unit, Medical Research Council
Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Subunit-specific DNA probes for the chicken muscle acetylcholine receptor have
been used in conjunction with Northern blots and dot-blots based upon the SP6/T7 
RNA polymerase reaction to quantitate changes in the steady-state mRNA levels of 
all four subunits during development. In pectoral muscle, maximal subunit
transcript levels are observed at day 12 in ovo for alpha, days 12-16 in ovo for 
beta, day 14 in ovo for gamma, and days 12-14 in ovo for delta. Interestingly,
two delta-subunit transcripts which have somewhat different patterns of temporal 
expression are detected. At the peak of expression of each subunit mRNA the
absolute levels of the alpha-, beta-, and gamma-subunit transcripts are very
similar (49.2, 66.0, and 70.7 attomoles of transcript/micrograms of poly(A)+ RNA,
respectively) whereas that for the summed delta-subunit transcripts is
significantly lower (17.8 attomoles/micrograms of poly(A)+ RNA). Further, this
lower level of delta-subunit mRNA is observed from day 10 to day 16 of embryonic 
development. We conclude that subunit transcript availability is important in the
synthesis of acetylcholine receptor protein during development and that the level
of the delta-subunit transcript can be rate limiting in the expression of this
receptor.

PMID: 2584213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Phys Rev C Nucl Phys. 1989 Dec;40(6):2844-2861.

Sp6 <= crSscrU2 symmetry of the fermion dynamical symmetry model.

Chen JQ, Chen XG, Feng DH, Wu CL, Ginocchio JN, Guidry MW.

PMID: 9966294  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Dec;86(24):10024-8.

Expression of immunoglobulin-T-cell receptor chimeric molecules as functional
receptors with antibody-type specificity.

Gross G(1), Waks T, Eshhar Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

To design and direct at will the specificity of T cells in a non-major
histocompatibility complex (MHC)-restricted manner, we have generated and
expressed chimeric T-cell receptor (TcR) genes composed of the TcR constant (C)
domains fused to the antibody's variable (V) domains. Genomic expression vectors 
have been constructed containing the rearranged gene segments coding for the V
region domains of the heavy (VH) and light (VL) chains of an
anti-2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (TNP) antibody (SP6) spliced to either one of the
C-region gene segments of the alpha or beta TcR chains. Following transfection
into a cytotoxic T-cell hybridoma, expression of a functional TcR was detected.
The chimeric TcR exhibited the idiotope of the Sp6 anti-TNP antibody and endowed 
the T cells with a non-MHC-restricted response to the hapten TNP. The
transfectants specifically killed and produced interleukin 2 in response to
TNP-bearing target cells across strain and species barriers. Moreover, such
transfectants responded to immobilized TNP-protein conjugates, bypassing the need
for cellular processing and presentation. In the particular system employed, both
the TNP-binding site and the Sp6 idiotope reside almost exclusively in the VH
chain region. Hence, introduction into T cells of TcR genes containing only the
VHSp6 fused to either the C alpha or C beta was sufficient for the expression of 
a functional surface receptor. Apparently, the VHC alpha or VHC beta chimeric
chains can pair with the endogenous beta or alpha chains of the recipient T cell 
to form a functional alpha beta heterodimeric receptor. Thus, this chimeric
receptor provides the T cell with an antibody-like specificity and is able to
effectively transmit the signal for T-cell activation and execution of its
effector function.

PMCID: PMC298636
PMID: 2513569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochemistry. 1989 Nov 28;28(24):9447-52.

Expression of a functional glucose transporter in Xenopus oocytes.

Gould GW(1), Lienhard GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03756.

A cDNA encoding the rat brain glucose transporter was inserted between the 5' and
3' untranslated regions from the Xenopus globin gene and downstream of an SP6 RNA
polymerase start site. RNA synthesized from this vector was microinjected into
oocytes from Xenopus laevis; this resulted in expression of the glucose
transporter, as determined by both immunoblotting and the appearance of transport
activity. The properties of the transporter were those expected from previous
studies: it was glycosylated, and its activity, measured by 3-O-methylglucose
transport, was inhibited by D-glucose and cytochalasin B, but not by L-glucose.
The low level of endogenous glucose transport activity found in water-injected
oocytes makes this a useful system in which to determine the kinetic parameters
of transport. The Km for 3-O-methylglucose was found to be 20 mM under
equilibrium exchange conditions. Despite the fact that oocytes exhibit
insulin-dependent responses, insulin did not stimulate 3-O-methylglucose
transport by injected oocytes.

PMID: 2692709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biochemistry. 1989 Nov 14;28(23):9088-94.

Analysis of the ribonuclease H activity of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase using
RNA.DNA hybrid substrates derived from the gag region of HIV-1.

Mizrahi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Macromolecular Sciences, Smith Kline and French Research and
Development Laboratory, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406.

The RNase H activity associated with recombinant p66/p51 HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase (RT) has been analyzed in the absence of DNA synthesis by using
homogeneous RNA.DNA substrates. The substrates consisted of SP6 runoff
transcripts from a portion of the gag region of the HIV-1 genome hybridized to
complementary single-stranded DNA from either an M13 subclone or a phagemid
transcription vector subclone. The corresponding hybrids either carried a
5'-mismatch of seven nucleotides or were fully base-paired. Analysis of
recombinant HIV-1 p66/p51 RT by an activated gel assay employing these substrates
suggested that the RNase H activity was exclusively associated with the p66
polypeptide. Denaturing gel electrophoresis was used to analyze the
oligonucleotide products generated by hydrolysis of the hybrids by HIV-1 RT,
M-MuLV RT, and Escherichia coli RNase H. The significant difference in the
time-dependent distribution of products of HIV-1 RT vs E. coli RNase H catalyzed 
cleavage of 5'-mismatched hybrids indicated that the preparation of recombinant
HIV-1 RT was free of contaminating bacterial RNase H. Although the HIV-1 RT
associated RNase H activity shares many of the general mechanistic features of
other retroviral enzymes [Gerard, G. F. (1981) Biochemistry 20, 256-265], the
appearance of unique intermediates and end products in the course of hydrolysis
of 5'-mismatched and fully base-paired hybrids indicated a significant difference
in the sequence dependence of the kinetics of RNase H cleavage by HIV-1 RT and
M-MuLV RT.

PMID: 2481501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Virol. 1989 Nov;63(11):4653-64.

Processing the nonstructural polyproteins of sindbis virus: nonstructural
proteinase is in the C-terminal half of nsP2 and functions both in cis and in
trans.

Hardy WR(1), Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

The processing of the Sindbis virus nonstructural polyprotein translated in vitro
has been studied. When Sindbis virus genomic RNA was translated in a reticulocyte
lysate, polyprotein P123 was cleaved efficiently to produce nsP1, nsP2, and nsP3.
Inhibition of this processing by anti-nsP2 antibodies, but not by antibodies
specific for nsP1, nsP3, or nsP4, suggested that the viral proteinase was present
in nsP2. To localize the proteolytic activity more precisely, deletions were made
in a full-length cDNA clone of Sindbis virus, and RNA was transcribed from these 
constructs with SP6 RNA polymerase and translated in vitro. Although virtually
all of the nsP1, nsP3, and nsP4 sequences could be deleted without affecting
processing, deletions in the N-terminal half of nsP2 led to aberrant processing, 
and deletions in the C-terminal half abolished proteolysis. However, inactive
polyproteins containing the nsP2 deletions could be processed by exogenously
supplied proteins translated from virion RNA, demonstrating that cleavage was
virus specific and not due to a protease present in the reticulocyte lysate and
that the deleted polyproteins still served as substrates for the enzyme. From
these results and from experiments in which processing was studied at
increasingly higher dilution, we have concluded the following: (i) the viral
nonstructural proteinase is located in the C-terminal half of nsP2; (ii) in the
P123 precursor the cleavage between nsP2 and nsP3 occurs efficiently as a
bimolecular reaction (in trans) to remove nsP3, while the bond between nsP1 and
nsP2 is cleaved inefficiently, but detectably, in trans, but no autoproteolysis
of P123 was detected; (iii) once nsP3 has been removed, the bond between nsP1 and
nsP2 in the P12 precursor is cleaved efficiently by autoproteolysis (in cis).
This mode of processing leads to a slow rate of cleavage, particularly early in
infection, suggesting that the polyproteins might play roles in virus RNA
replication distinct from those of the cleaved products. A hypothesis is
presented that the proteinase is a thiol protease related to papain.

PMCID: PMC251099
PMID: 2529379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biochem. 1989 Oct;106(4):555-7.

Molecular cloning and characterization of MACIF, an inhibitor of membrane channel
formation of complement.

Sugita Y(1), Tobe T, Oda E, Tomita M, Yasukawa K, Yamaji N, Takemoto T, Furuichi 
K, Takayama M, Yano S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Showa University, Tokyo.

Human erythrocytes contain a membrane protein, MACIF, which inhibits the
formation of a membrane attack complex (MAC) of complement. We have cloned and
sequenced the complementary DNA of MACIF messenger RNA. The amino acid sequence
predicted from its nucleotide sequence consists of 128 amino acids. The
amino-terminal 25 residues may correspond to a signal peptide. The
carboxy-terminal sequence confirmed that MACIF is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
(GPI)-anchored protein. The amino acid sequence of MACIF was partially determined
by established techniques for protein chemistry and the resultant sequence was
consistent with that predicted from the nucleotide sequence. The results of
sequence analyses also suggested that asparagine at the 18th position was
N-glycosylated. When mRNA obtained from the MACIF cDNA clone with SP6 RNA
polymerase was microinjected into Xenopus oocytes, the oocytes synthesized a
product which exhibited MACIF activity and reacted with anti-MACIF antibody.
Comparison of the predicted sequence revealed significant homology with mouse
Ly-6 antigens.

PMID: 2606909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Oct;9(10):4422-31.

Accurate processing of human pre-rRNA in vitro.

Hannon GJ(1), Maroney PA, Branch A, Benenfield BJ, Robertson HD, Nilsen TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106.

We report here that the mature 5' terminus of human 18S rRNA is generated in
vitro by a two-step processing reaction. In the first step, SP6 transcripts were 
specifically cleaved in HeLa cell nucleolar extract at three positions near the
external transcribed spacer (ETS)-18S boundary. Of these cleavage sites, two were
major and the other was minor. RNase T1 fingerprint and secondary nuclease
analyses placed the two major cleavage sites 3 and 8 bases upstream from the
mature 5' end of 18S rRNA and the minor cleavage site 1 base into the 18S
sequence. All three cleavages yielded 5'-hydroxyl, 2'-3'-cyclic phosphate termini
and were 5' of adenosine residues in the sequence UACCU, which was repeated three
times near the ETS-18S boundary. In the second step, the initial cleavage product
containing 3 bases of ETS was converted to an RNA with a 5' terminus identical to
that of mature 18S RNA by an activity found in HeLa cell cytoplasmic extracts.

PMCID: PMC362525
PMID: 2586517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem J. 1989 Oct 1;263(1):187-94.

Inhibition of human coagulation factor VIII by monoclonal antibodies. Mapping of 
functional epitopes with the use of recombinant factor VIII fragments.

Leyte A(1), Mertens K, Distel B, Evers RF, De Keyzer-Nellen MJ, Groenen-Van
Dooren MM, De Bruin J, Pannekoek H, Van Mourik JA, Verbeet MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Coagulation, The Netherlands Red Cross Blood Transfusion
Service, Amsterdam.

The epitopes of four monoclonal antibodies against coagulation Factor VIII were
mapped with the use of recombinant DNA techniques. Full-length Factor VIII cDNA
and parts thereof were inserted into the vector pSP64, permitting transcription
in vitro with the use of a promoter specific for SP6 RNA polymerase. Factor VIII 
DNA inserts were truncated from their 3'-ends by selective restriction-enzyme
digestion and used as templates for 'run-off' mRNA synthesis. Translation in
vitro with rabbit reticulocyte lysate provided defined radiolabelled Factor VIII 
fragments for immunoprecipitation studies. Two antibodies are shown to be
directed against epitopes on the 90 kDa chain of Factor VIII, between residues
712 and 741. The 80 kDa chain appeared to contain the epitopes of the other two
antibodies, within the sequences 1649-1778 and 1779-1840 respectively. The effect
of antibody binding to these sequences was evaluated at two distinct levels
within the coagulation cascade. Both Factor VIII procoagulant activity and Factor
VIII cofactor function in Factor Xa generation were neutralized upon binding to
the region 1779-1840. The antibodies recognizing the region 713-740 or 1649-1778,
though interfering with Factor VIII procoagulant activity, did not inhibit in
Factor Xa generation. These findings demonstrate that antibodies that virtually
inhibit Factor VIII in coagulation in vitro are not necessarily directed against 
epitopes involved in Factor VIII cofactor function. Inhibition of procoagulant
activity rather than of cofactor function itself may be explained by interference
in proteolytic activation of Factor VIII. This hypothesis is in agreement with
the localization of the epitopes in the proximity of thrombin-cleavage or Factor 
Xa-cleavage sites.

PMCID: PMC1133407
PMID: 2481438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. FEBS Lett. 1989 Sep 25;255(2):215-8.

Interaction of antibodies to synthetic peptides of proNGF with in vitro
synthesized NGF precursors.

Dicou E(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 298, CHRU, Angers, France.

Sera raised against three synthetic peptides that reproduce sequences of the
pro-nerve growth factor (proNGF) protein were tested in immunoprecipitation
experiments using in vitro translation products of SP6-directed NGF mRNA in a
rabbit reticulocyte lysate. The interaction of these antibodies with bacterially 
synthesized chimeric preproNGF was also examined. Digestion of the translation
products by the gamma-subunit generated the 22 and 18 kDa intermediates. A
predominant 13 kDa intermediate was obtained after digestion of translation
products in wheat germ extract. This is shown to be the N-terminal peptide by
immunoprecipitation with an anti-peptide serum. These antibodies may be used to
detect NGF precursor cleavage products in vivo.

PMID: 2792376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989 Sep 21;1009(1):19-26.

Requirements for efficient in vitro transcription and translation: a study using 
yeast invertase as a probe.

Roitsch T(1), Lehle L.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Zellbiologie und Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Regensburg,
F.R.G.

Factors for efficient synthesis of mRNA in vitro and its subsequent translation
in cell free lysates from reticulocyte and wheat germ were studied using yeast
invertase as a probe. Among various transcription systems tested, containing
either SP6, T5, T7 or a bacterial synthetic consensus promoter, the T7 system was
superior both from a quantitative and qualitative point of view. Transcription
with SP6 polymerase, but not with the other enzymes, resulted in premature
transcript termination, which is ascribed to a sensitivity of the SP6 polymerase 
towards a hairpin loop structure in the invertase coding region. In-frame fusion 
of the critical DNA sequence to a different gene promoted premature transcription
termination of the resulting chimeric template, which in its original form is
transcribed correctly. Transcripts with additional sequences 5' upstream of the
natural translation start revealed a diminished protein synthesis presumably due 
to the presence of out of frame ATG codons. In contrast, no influence on
translation was found when additional sequences at the 3' end were present or
when the stop codon was missing. Capping of transcripts was essential for
translation in wheat germ lysates, whereas protein synthesis in reticulocytes was
only reduced in the absence of a cap. The influence of polyadenylation on
translation was studied using transcripts with engineered poly(A) tracts of
different size. Increasing poly(A) chain length abolished translation in vitro in
both translation systems. Inhibition was poly(A)-specific and is discussed as
interference of the poly(A) sequences with a crucial component(s) of the protein 
synthesis machinery.

PMID: 2675976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Virus Genes. 1989 Sep;3(1):45-55.

Differential inhibition of downstream gene expression by the cauliflower mosaic
virus 35S RNA leader.

Fütterer J(1), Gordon K, Pfeiffer P, Sanfaçon H, Pisan B, Bonneville JM, Hohn T.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, Basel, Switzerland.

The effect of the 600 nucleotide-long CaMV 35S RNA 5' leader sequence on the
expression of downstream genes was analyzed both in plant protoplasts and in
vitro. For transient expression studies in protoplasts derived from host and
nonhost plants, the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) gene was
fused to the initiation codon of ORF VII. The leader sequence reduced CAT
expression two- to four-fold in protoplasts derived from three host species, but 
10- to 50-fold in protoplasts derived from three different nonhost species. For
in-vitro studies the 35S promoter was replaced by the SP6 promoter. The leader
reduced in-vitro translation of SP6 transcripts approximately six-fold,
indicating that at least part of the inhibition observed in protoplasts is
directly due to the interference of the leader sequence with translation. Other
steps in gene expression that may also be affected are discussed.

PMID: 2815595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Biochem Cell Biol. 1989 Sep;67(9):510-5.

Plasmid library for the transcription of RNA probes complementary to the entire
genome of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).

Roy C(1), Knaak C, Garvie P, Limmer B, Campione-Piccardo J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Health and Welfare Canada, Ottawa, Ont.

A plasmid (pBH10R3) containing a 9-kb Sst I fragment of HIV-1 (clone BH-10)
inserted in pSP64, an in vitro expression vector, has been used for the
transcription of anti-sense HIV-1 RNA. With this system, the transcripts obtained
in vitro were not usually full length (1 to 2 kb long) and they predominantly
span the 3' end ORF and ENV regions of the viral genome. We have rearranged the
HIV-1 genomic sequences with respect to the SP6 promoter in the pSP64 vector and 
have obtained a series of new constructs allowing the expression in vitro of RNA 
transcripts complementary to other regions in the HIV-1 genome, including the 5' 
end of the ENV region as well as the TAT, POL, and GAG regions. In fact, the
combined use of these constructs as templates for in vitro transcription allows
the production of RNA probes spanning the entire viral genome. Compared with the 
1- to 2-kb probes mentioned above, the combined use of such probes results in a
several-fold increase in the sensitivity of molecular hybridization for the
detection of HIV-1 nucleic acid sequences. Also, these constructs enable the
preparation of RNA probes that have the potential to detect restriction
polymorphisms throughout the HIV-1 genome.

PMID: 2803730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biotechniques. 1989 Sep;7(8):856-65.

Construction of mRNA genes for the synthesis and translation of duck alpha globin
mRNA.

Paddock GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston 29425.

In studies of the effects of changes in mRNA structure and sequence on the
initiation of protein synthesis, we used a generally applicable approach to
transcribe reconstructed genes for duck alpha A globin by the bacteriophage SP6
RNA polymerase promoter in a pGEM-2 plasmid vector. The genes were reconstructed 
such that the first nucleotide to be transcribed, the 5' adenosine, was placed
directly adjacent to the SP6 promoter sequence. The 3' ends of the genes were
constructed such that cleavage with Ssp 1 endonuclease yielded a template that
directed the synthesis of mRNA terminating in a poly A tail containing 56
adenosines and a single 3' uridine. Special conditions using a Mn++ buffer were
developed to enable the SP6 RNA polymerase to initiate at the 5' adenosine and
synthesize the A-start transcription product. The mRNA could be capped and was
subsequently used as an effective template for in vitro translation and synthesis
of duck alpha A globin.

PMID: 2631791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Aug 30;163(1):102-5.

Expression of active alpha-3 subunit of rat brain Na+,K+-ATPase from the
messenger RNA injected into Xenopus oocytes.

Hara Y(1), Ohtsubo M, Kojima T, Noguchi S, Nakao M, Kawamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Cloned cDNA encoding the so-far uncharacterized alpha-3 subunit of rat brain
Na+,K+-ATPase (Hara et al. (1987) J. Biochem. 102, 43-58, Shull et al. (1986)
Biochemistry 25, 8125-8132) was incorporated into a vector carrying the SP6
promoter. The mRNA produced in vitro was injected into Xenopus oocytes with the
mRNA encoding the Na+,K+-ATPase beta subunit of Torpedo electroplax. Increased
Na+,K+-ATPase activity in the oocyte membrane was observed. This newly expressed 
activity was inhibited by ouabain (Ki = 1.5 x 10(-7) M), suggesting that the
alpha-3 subunit of rat brain Na+,K+-ATPase is a highly ouabain-sensitive
catalytic subunit.

PMID: 2549984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Aug 15;162(3):977-83.

Pre-mRNA with a trimethylguanosine cap structure can be spliced efficiently in
vitro.

Tokumoto Y(1), Iwase R, Sekine M, Hata T, Ohshima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

A chemically synthesized 2,2,7-trimethylguanosine cap (TMG-cap) analogue was
added to an in vitro pre-mRNA splicing system. A slight inhibition of the
splicing was observed, but it was much less remarkable than that by a
7-methylguanosine cap analogue. This result does not favor a direct role of the
TMG-cap structure of small nuclear RNAs in pre-mRNA splicing, and suggests that
the TMG-cap does not effectively interact with the 7-methylguanosine cap binding 
factors. Using the SP6 in vitro transcription system and a TMG-cap analogue, we
prepared a beta-globin transcript which has a TMG-cap at the 5' end. This
TMG-capped transcript was spliced accurately and efficiently in vitro.

PMID: 2764950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochemistry. 1989 Aug 8;28(16):6562-71.

Use of chemical modifications and site-directed mutagenesis to probe the
functional role of thiol groups on the gamma subunit of Torpedo californica
acetylcholine receptor.

Pradier L(1), Yee AS, McNamee MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, Davis
95616.

Alkylation of Torpedo californica purified nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(AChR) with N-phenylmaleimide (NPM) under nonreducing conditions led to ion flux 
inhibition without affecting ligand binding properties [Yee, A. S., Corey, D. E. 
& McNamee, M. G. (1986) Biochemistry 25, 2110-2119]. The gamma subunit was shown 
to be preferentially labeled by [3H]NPM with partial labeling of the alpha
subunit at higher NPM concentrations. Alkylation occurs at cysteine residues as
confirmed by amino acid analysis. Cyanogen bromide peptide mapping of the gamma
subunit indicates that at least two residues corresponding to Cys-416, -420, or
-451 are labeled. Residues 416 and 420 are part of the proposed amphipathic
helix, and the functional role of these two cysteines is further investigated by 
site-directed mutagenesis of T. californica AChR cDNAs and expression of the
mutants in Xenopus laevis oocytes following injection of SP6 transcripts. Several
features of SP6 transcripts are shown to be important for efficient translation
in vivo. Mutations Cys----Ser gamma 416,420 and Cys----Phe gamma 416 did not
perturb either the receptor functional properties or its expression levels. The
double mutant Cys----Phe gamma 416,420 displayed a 30% decrease of normalized
AChR activity. The relatively small effect of large steric mutations in the
amphipathic helix argues against its presence in the tightly packed transmembrane
domain of the protein.

PMID: 2790013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. EMBO J. 1989 Aug;8(8):2343-51.

Nucleosomes inhibit both transcriptional initiation and elongation by RNA
polymerase III in vitro.

Morse RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892.

To examine the effect of nucleosomes on in vitro transcription, purified chicken 
erythrocyte core histones and plasmid DNA bearing the Xenopus 5S RNA gene were
assembled into nucleosomes and used as templates for transcription in a Xenopus
oocyte nuclear extract. Plasmids having a nucleosome incorporating a specific
region of the gene were selected by treating the reconstituted molecules with
restriction endonucleases. In this way, it was shown that a nucleosome on or
close to the internal control region of the 5S RNA gene inhibits transcription.
Furthermore, experiments with 5S maxigenes showed that RNA polymerase III, in
contrast to SP6 RNA polymerase, will not transcribe through a nucleosome in
vitro.

PMCID: PMC401168
PMID: 2792088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Antiviral Res. 1989 Aug;12(1):37-47.

Functional significance of amino acid residues within conserved hydrophilic
regions in human interferons-alpha.

Tymms MJ(1), McInnes B, Waine GJ, Cheetham BF, Linnane AW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Medicine, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

Site-directed in vitro mutagenesis was used to create analogs of human
interferons (IFNs)-alpha 1 and -alpha 4. Analogs were expressed in vitro using
SP6 RNA polymerase and a rabbit reticulocyte lysate cell-free protein synthesis
system. Amino acid substitutions for the highly conserved residues at positions
33, 121, 122 and 123 greatly reduced the antiviral and antiproliferative
activities on human cells of IFNs-alpha 1 and -alpha 4. In general, the amino
acid substitutions had much less effect on the antiviral activities on bovine,
compared with human, cells. Substitutions at positions 31, 41, 42, 124, 134, 135 
and 136 had little or no effect on the biological activities of the IFN analogs. 
The abrogation of antiviral activity resulting from amino acid substitutions for 
the arginine residue at position 33 suggests that this arginine residue is
required for binding to the IFN-alpha receptor on the cell surface.

PMID: 2688550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Br J Pharmacol. 1989 Aug;97(4):1232-8.

NK-1 receptor mediation of neurogenic plasma extravasation in rat skin.

Andrews PV(1), Helme RD, Thomas KL.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Mount Royal
Hospital, Parkville, Australia.

1. Plasma extravasation was induced by electrical nerve stimulation and by
perfusion of tachykinins over a vacuum-induced blister base on rat footpad. 2.
Stimulation of the sciatic nerve (18 V, 15 Hz, 0.5 ms) for 20 min produced a
significant increase in the protein content of the perfusate. The response in
capsaicin pretreated rats was only 4% of the control response. This indicates
that the electrically-induced plasma extravasation response was mediated by
capsaicin-sensitive sensory fibres. 3. Exogenous perfusion of the mammalian
tachykinins substance P, neurokinin A and neurokinin B and the non-mammalian
tachykinins physalaemin, kassinin and eledoisin was used to determine the
tachykinin receptor type mediating the plasma extravasation response.
Dose-response curves of the tachykinins (10(-9) M-10(-4) M) gave a rank order of 
potency of substance P = physalaemin greater than eledoisin greater than or equal
to kassinin greater than neurokinin B = neurokinin A. 4. In addition, specific
agonists of neurokinin receptors were perfused. Perfusion of [Glp6, D-Pro9]
SP6-11 and [Glp6, L-Pro9]SP6-11 demonstrated that the L-Pro isomer was much more 
potent than the D-Pro isomer. 5. The rank order of potency and the greater
potency of [Glp6, L-Pro9]SP6-11 over its D-isomer indicate an NK-1 neurokinin
receptor mediates plasma extravasation in rat footpad skin.

PMCID: PMC1854634
PMID: 2477105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Br J Pharmacol. 1989 Aug;97(4):1218-24.

Actions of tachykinins on the rabbit mesenteric artery: substance P and
[Glp6,L-Pro9]SP6-11 are potent agonists for endothelial neurokinin-1 receptors.

Stewart-Lee A(1), Burnstock G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University College, London.

1. Identification of the subtype of neurokinin receptor on the endothelium of the
rabbit mesenteric artery was demonstrated by comparing the relative potencies of 
the naturally occurring tachykinins, substance P, neurokinin A and neurokinin B
and the highly selective agonists [Glp6,L-Pro9]SP6-11 (L-Pro),
[Glp6,D-Pro9]SP6-11 (D-Pro) and N-succinyl-[Asp6,MePhe8]SP6-11 (senktide). 2.
Relaxations of the rabbit mesenteric artery to substance P, neurokinin A and
neurokinin B were concentration-dependent and were abolished by the removal of
the endothelium. 3. Substance P was more potent than neurokinin A or neurokinin B
and L-Pro was more potent than D-Pro or senktide. 4. Substance P, neurokinin A
and neurokinin B all significantly reduced the nerve-mediated contractile
response in the presence of the endothelium at a concentration of 0.1 microM,
with a rank order of potency substance P greater than neurokinin A greater than
neurokinin B. 5. At a concentration of 0.1 microM, L-Pro also significantly
reduced the nerve-mediated contractile response, unlike D-Pro and senktide. 6. It
is concluded that the relaxation of the rabbit mesenteric artery produced by
substance P is mediated by neurokinin-1 receptors (NK-1) located on the
endothelium. Furthermore, of the analogues, L-Pro was particularly potent for
these receptors.

PMCID: PMC1854638
PMID: 2477103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochem J. 1989 Jul 1;261(1):155-66.

Primary structure of a novel 4-acetamido-4'-isothiocyanostilbene-2,2'-disulphonic
acid (SITS)-binding membrane protein highly expressed in Torpedo californica
electroplax.

Jentsch TJ(1), Garcia AM, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, MA 02142.

Polyclonal rabbit antibodies were raised against
4-acetamido-4'-isothiocyanostilbene-2,2'-disulphonic acid (SITS), an inhibitor of
a variety of anion transport proteins. These antibodies specifically recognize
SITS-reacted erythrocyte band 3 in immunoprecipitations and Western blots. In
Western blots of SITS-reacted membrane proteins derived from vesicles of the
electric organ of Torpedo californica (known to express a SITS-sensitive Cl-
channel) the antibodies recognized two major species of approximately 93 kDa and 
approximately 105 kDa. The approximately 93 kDa protein was identified as the
alpha-subunit of the Na,K-ATPase. The approximately 105 kDa protein (designated
sp105) is a glycoprotein which binds to wheat-germ agglutinin and concanavalin A 
and is present as a disulphide-linked homodimer under non-reducing conditions. A 
partial amino acid sequence and a polyclonal antibody were used to clone the
corresponding cDNA. sp105 is encoded in electroplax by two abundant mRNAs of
approximately 6 and approximately 6.8 kb. A hybridizing mRNA of approximately 5
kb was over 200-fold and over 500-fold less abundant in brain and heart
respectively. Sequence analysis of the cDNA predicted a novel protein of 697
amino acids containing eight potential N-linked glycosylation sites. Analysis of 
hydrophobicity indicated the presence of at least one, and possibly three,
putative membrane-spanning domains. When expressed from the Sp6 message in
Xenopus laevis oocytes, the protein was inserted into membranes, glycosylated and
processed to form a dimer. However, no increase in 36Cl uptake or in membrane
conductance could be detected. We found no effect of hybrid depleting the
specific message on expression of the Torpedo electroplax Cl- channel in oocytes.
Thus we conclude that this novel electroplax membrane protein is probably not a
functional part of the chloride channel.

PMCID: PMC1138795
PMID: 2775201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1989 Jul;69(1):15-24.

Insulin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid sequence alterations detected by
ribonuclease cleavage in patients with syndromes of insulin resistance.

Goldstein BJ(1), Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

We used a ribonuclease cleavage assay to screen for insulin receptor mRNA
sequence alterations in 12 patients with syndromes of severe insulin resistance. 
Uniformly labeled [32P]antisense RNA probes complementary to insulin receptor
mRNA were prepared by an SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase transcription reaction. Four
probes ranging in size from 670-1470 bases were used to examine the entire
4.2-kilobase receptor protein-coding region. Patient RNA samples were hybridized 
to individual probes in solution, and mismatched sequences were detected by
susceptibility to cleavage by a mixture of RNAses A and T1. The method was
validated with insulin receptor mRNAs from cells transfected with cDNA constructs
bearing known point and deletion mutations. Alterations in the insulin receptor
mRNA sequence of two patients were detected. A patient with the type A syndrome
of severe insulin resistance (A2-Boston) had a mutation in the insulin receptor
beta-subunit mRNA sequence that localized to the region coding for amino acid
residues 1174-1211 near the tyrosine kinase domain. The second alteration was a
sequence polymorphism in the insulin receptor alpha-subunit mRNA in a patient
with lipoatropic diabetes (LA-2) that localized to a region within amino acids
268-272. Direct sequence analysis revealed that the ribonuclease cleavage sites
in patients A2-Boston and LA-2 were due to distinct single base changes in the
insulin receptor gene and mRNA. Additional insulin receptor mRNA sequence
polymorphisms were also identified as mismatches between the labeled RNA probes
used and mRNA from several cultured human cell types. This study demonstrates
that ribonuclease cleavage can rapidly detect and localize insulin receptor mRNA 
sequence mutations and polymorphic variations as small as single base changes.
Further analysis of insulin receptor mRNA sequence alterations identified in this
way may elucidate a possible genetic basis for functional insulin receptor
defects in patients with severe insulin resistance and can also reveal some
insulin receptor sequence polymorphisms that occur in the population at large.

PMID: 2732294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Virol. 1989 Jul;63(7):3142-50.

Mapping of RNA- temperature-sensitive mutants of Sindbis virus: assignment of
complementation groups A, B, and G to nonstructural proteins.

Hahn YS(1), Strauss EG, Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

Four complementation groups of temperature-sensitive (ts) mutants of Sindbis
virus that fail to make RNA at the nonpermissive temperature are known, and we
have previously shown that group F mutants have defects in nsP4. Here we map
representatives of groups A, B, and G. Restriction fragments from a full-length
clone of Sindbis virus, Toto1101, were replaced with the corresponding fragments 
from the various mutants. These hybrid plasmids were transcribed in vitro by SP6 
RNA polymerase to produce infectious RNA transcripts, and the virus recovered was
tested for temperature sensitivity. After each lesion was mapped to a specific
region, cDNA clones of both mutants and revertants were sequenced in order to
determine the precise nucleotide change responsible for each mutation. Synthesis 
of viral RNA and complementation by rescued mutants were also examined in order
to study the phenotype of each mutation in a uniform genetic background. The
single mutant of group B, ts11, had a defect in nsP1 (Ala-348 to Thr). All of the
group A and group G mutants examined had lesions in nsP2 (Ala-517 to Thr in ts17,
Cys-304 to Tyr in ts21, and Gly-736 to Ser in ts24 for three group A mutants, and
Phe-509 to Leu in ts18 and Asp-522 to Asn in ts7 for two group G mutants). In
addition, ts7 had a change in nsP3 (Phe-312 to Ser) which also rendered the virus
temperature sensitive and RNA-. Thus, changes in any of the four nonstructural
proteins can lead to failure to synthesize RNA at a nonpermissive temperature,
indicating that all four are involved in RNA synthesis. From the results
presented here and from previous results, several of the activities of the
nonstructural proteins can be deduced. It appears that nsP1 may be involved in
the initiation of minus-strand RNA synthesis. nsP2 appears to be involved in the 
initiation of 26S RNA synthesis, and in addition it appears to be a protease that
cleaves the nonstructural polyprotein precursors. It may also be involved in
shutoff of minus-strand RNA synthesis. nsP4 appears to function as the viral
polymerase or elongation factor. The functions of nsP3 are as yet unresolved.

PMCID: PMC250872
PMID: 2724421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Jul;86(13):4858-62.

Specific binding of a HeLa cell nuclear protein to RNA sequences in the human
immunodeficiency virus transactivating region.

Gaynor R(1), Soultanakis E, Kuwabara M, Garcia J, Sigman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles.

The transactivator protein, tat, encoded by the human immunodeficiency virus is a
key regulator of viral transcription. Activation by the tat protein requires
sequences downstream of the transcription initiation site called the
transactivating region (TAR). RNA derived from the TAR is capable of forming a
stable stem-loop structure and the maintenance of both the stem structure and the
loop sequences located between +19 and +44 is required for complete in vivo
activation by tat. Gel retardation assays with RNA from both wild-type and mutant
TAR constructs generated in vitro with SP6 polymerase indicated specific binding 
of HeLa nuclear proteins to the TAR. To characterize this RNA-protein
interaction, a method of chemical "imprinting" has been developed using
photoactivated uranyl acetate as the nucleolytic agent. This reagent nicks RNA
under physiological conditions at all four nucleotides in a reaction that is
independent of sequence and secondary structure. Specific interaction of cellular
proteins with TAR RNA could be detected by enhanced cleavages or imprints
surrounding the loop region. Mutations that either disrupted stem base-pairing or
extensively changed the primary sequence resulted in alterations in the cleavage 
pattern of the TAR RNA. Structural features of the TAR RNA stem-loop essential
for tat activation are also required for specific binding of the HeLa cell
nuclear protein.

PMCID: PMC297514
PMID: 2544877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Virology. 1989 Jul;171(1):280-4.

Evidence that Sindbis virus NSP2 is an autoprotease which processes the virus
nonstructural polyprotein.

Ding MX(1), Schlesinger MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

The four nonstructural proteins (nsP1-4) of Sindbis virus, a member of the
Togaviridae family, are initially expressed from the 5' segment of the
single-stranded genomic (+)RNA as a polyprotein which is subsequently
proteolytically processed. In attempts to identify the protease acting on this
nonstructural polyprotein, we established a coupled in polyprotein, we
established a coupled in vitro transcription-translation system which was able to
faithfully process the major polyprotein when an mRNA encoding all four
nonstructural proteins was used. A cDNA plasmid containing the entire Sindbis
virus genome positioned immediately downstream of the phage SP6 polymerase
promoter was cut with restriction endonucleases at sites located within the genes
for the nonstructural proteins and mRNAs transcribed from these DNA fragments.
The nsP1-2 and nsP2-3 cleavage sites are alanyl-alanine and both were susceptible
to proteolysis in vitro only after all of nsp1 and nsP2 and 157 amino acids of
nsP3 were translated. The nsP1-2 site was cleaved from a polyprotein that
contained nsP1 and nsP2 and 59 amino acids of nsP3 but not from six polyproteins 
whose sequences terminated in the nsP2 gene. These data support our hypothesis
that the nonstructural polyprotein is processed by a virus autoprotease and we
propose that its active site is encoded within the nsP2 sequences.

PMID: 2525839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Jun 26;17(12):4817-28.

U2 small nuclear RNP assembly in vitro.

Kleinschmidt AM(1), Patton JR, Pederson T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury,
MA 01545.

Incubation of a SP6-transcribed human U2 RNA precursor molecule in a HeLa cell
S100 fraction resulted in the formation of ribonucleoprotein complexes. In the
presence of ATP, the particles that assembled had several properties of native U2
snRNP, including resistance to dissociation in Cs2SO4 gradients, their buoyant
density, and pattern of digestion by micrococcal nuclease. These particles also
reacted with Sm monoclonal antibody and a human autoantibody with specificity for
the U2 snRNP-specific proteins A' and B", but not with antibodies for U1
snRNP-specific proteins. In contrast, the particles that formed in the absence of
ATP did not have these properties. ATP analogs with non-hydrolyzable beta-gamma
bonds did not substitute for ATP in U2 snRNP assembly. Additional experiments
with a mutant U2 RNA confirmed that nucleotides 154-167 of U2 RNA are required
for binding of the U2 snRNP-specific proteins but not of the "Sm" core proteins. 
Pseudouridine formation, a major post-transcriptional modification of U2 RNA, was
enhanced under assembly permissive conditions.

PMCID: PMC318034
PMID: 2748338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Virology. 1989 Jun;170(2):486-95.

Infectivity of chimeric viroid transcripts reveals the presence of alternative
processing sites in potato spindle tuber viroid.

Hammond RW(1), Diener TO, Owens RA.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Plant Pathology Laboratory, Plant Science Institute USDA-ARS,
Beltsville, Maryland 20705.

In an investigation of viroid replication and pathogenesis, we have assessed the 
effect of sequence duplication of the upper central conserved region (CCR) of the
molecule on the infectivity of RNAs transcribed in vitro from partial dimers of
wild-type and mutant viroid cDNAs. In one set of experiments, the relative
infectivities of one monomeric potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) and five
oligomeric SP6 transcripts [PSTV or PSTV-TASV (tomato apical stunt viroid)
chimeras] were compared. With one exception, the extent of sequence duplication
in the CCR, and thus the length of the so-called palindrome, does correlate with 
an increase in specific infectivity. In a second set of experiments, in vitro
generated site-specific mutations in cloned PSTV were used as markers to
determine if a cleavage/ligation at sites other than the palindrome could
generate infectious molecules in vivo. The creation of a novel PSTV-TPMV (tomato 
planta macho viroid) chimera in these experiments provides evidence that
multimeric RNAs can be processed at sites other than the CCR to yield monomeric
progeny.

PMID: 2728347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Genes Dev. 1989 Jun;3(6):803-15.

Poly(A) elongation during Xenopus oocyte maturation is required for translational
recruitment and is mediated by a short sequence element.

McGrew LL(1), Dworkin-Rastl E, Dworkin MB, Richter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, Massachusetts
01545.

Xenopus oocytes contain several mRNAs that are mobilized into polysomes only at
the completion of meiosis (maturation) or at specific times following
fertilization. To investigate the mechanisms that control translation during
early development, we have focused on an mRNA, termed G10, that is recruited for 
translation during oocyte maturation. Coincident with its translation, the
poly(A) tail of this message is elongated from approximately 90 to 200 adenylate 
residues. To identify the cis sequence that is required for this cytoplasmic
adenylation and recruitment, we have synthesized wild-type and deletion mutant
G10 mRNAs with SP6 polymerase. When injected into oocytes that subsequently were 
induced to mature with progesterone, wild-type G10 mRNA, but not mutant
transcripts lacking a 50-base sequence in the 3'-untranslated region, was
polyadenylated and recruited for translation. The 50-base sequence was sufficient
to confer polyadenylation and translation when fused to globin mRNA, which does
not normally undergo these processes during oocyte maturation. Further mutational
analysis of this region revealed that a U-rich sequence 5' to the AAUAAA
hexanucleotide nuclear polyadenylation signal, as well as the hexanucleotide
itself, were both required for polyadenylation and translation. The 50-base cis
element directs polyadenylation, but not translation per se, as a transcript that
terminates with 3'-deoxyadenosine (cordycepin) is not recruited for translation. 
The available data suggest that the dynamic process of polyadenylation, and not
the length of the poly(A) tail, is required for translational recruitment during 
oocyte maturation.

PMID: 2568313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochemistry. 1989 May 16;28(10):4277-83.

Sequence-dependent termination of bacteriophage T7 transcription in vitro by
DNA-binding drugs.

White RJ(1), Phillips DR.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia.

An in vitro T7 bacteriophage transcription system has been utilized in which the 
RNA was initiated to a specific length (defined by the absence of the appropriate
nucleoside triphosphate). When the DNA-RNA-RNA polymerase ternary complex was
exposed to nonsaturating levels of DNA-binding ligands (i.e., a small fractional 
occupancy at each site), and the RNA transcript then allowed to elongate in the
presence of all four nucleoside triphosphates, there was a synchronous increase
of RNA lengths up to sites occupied by ligands. A unique characteristic is that
bacteriophage transcription was completely terminated at every ligand site, in
contrast to bacterial RNA polymerases where "read-through" past drug sites occurs
and results merely in a delay of transcription at each site due primarily to
dissociation of drug from the DNA. Similar termination of transcription at each
drug site was observed with T3 and SP6 RNA polymerases. The termination at drug
sites in the bacteriophage system results in RNA of specific lengths which define
the location of ligand sites, and the RNA concentration provides a measure of
relative ligand occupancy at that site. Termination of transcription was observed
with four drugs with relatively long DNA residence times (half-life greater than 
or equal to 300 s at 20 degrees C for nogalamycin, actinomycin, mithramycin, and 
echinomycin) but to a lesser extent with drugs of intermediate residence times [a
bis(thiadaunomycin) and an acridine-tripyrrole, with half-lives of 230 and 7 s,
respectively, at 20 degrees C]

PMID: 2527555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Virol. 1989 May;63(5):2405-10.

Translational readthrough of the murine leukemia virus gag gene amber codon does 
not require virus-induced alteration of tRNA.

Feng YX(1), Hatfield DL, Rein A, Levin JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

An in vitro system to assay translational readthrough of the UAG termination
codon at the murine leukemia virus (MuLV) gag-pol junction was developed by using
rabbit reticulocyte lysates programmed by SP6-generated Moloney MuLV gag-pol
mRNA. Under conditions in which the suppressor activity of the lysate was
dependent on addition of tRNA, it could be shown that readthrough synthesis was
stimulated to approximately the same extent by equivalent amounts of tRNA from
MuLV-infected and uninfected NIH 3T3 cells. Analysis of glutamine tRNA, which
mediates suppression in vivo, showed that the level of glutamine acceptor
activity and the chromatographic profile of glutamine isoacceptors were unchanged
following virus infection. On the basis of these results, we conclude that the
suppressor tRNA occurs normally within the tRNA population of uninfected cells
and need not be induced in response to virus infection.

PMCID: PMC250668
PMID: 2784837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 May;9(5):1987-95.

Synthesis of an enzymatically active FLP recombinase in vitro: search for a
DNA-binding domain.

Amin AA(1), Sadowski PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We have used an in vitro transcription and translation system to synthesize an
enzymatically active FLP protein. The FLP mRNA synthesized in vitro by SP6
polymerase is translated efficiently in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate to produce
enzymatically active FLP. Using this system, we assessed the effect of deletions 
and tetrapeptide insertions on the ability of the respective variant proteins
synthesized in vitro to bind to the FLP recognition target site and to carry out 
excisive recombination. Deletions of as few as six amino acids from either the
carboxy- or amino-terminal region of FLP resulted in loss of binding activity.
Likewise, insertions at amino acid positions 79, 203, and 286 abolished
DNA-binding activity. On the other hand, a protein with an insertion at amino
acid 364 retained significant DNA-binding activity but had no detectable
recombination activity. Also, an insertion at amino acid 115 had no measurable
effect on DNA binding, but recombination was reduced by 95%. In addition, an
insertion at amino acid 411 had no effect on DNA binding and recombination. On
the basis of these results, we conclude that this approach fails to define a
discrete DNA-binding domain. The possible reasons for this result are discussed.

PMCID: PMC362991
PMID: 2664465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1989 May;33(5):335-9.

Synthesis and biological activity of substance P analogues.

Haro I(1), Torres JL, Valencia G, García-Antón JM, Reig F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Peptides, Centre for Research and Development (C.S.I.C.),
Barcelona, Spain.

The synthesis of the hexapeptide [Glu6]SP6-11 and its glycosylated analogue at
the Glu6 gamma-carboxyl position by solution procedures according to several
strategies is discussed. The biological activity of SP, [Glu6]SP6-11 (VI) and
[Glu(beta-D-Glcp)6]SP6-11 (VIII) have been determined and compared to SP by the
GPI and RVD assays. The introduction of a beta-D-glucopyranosyl moiety at the
sixth position of the [Glu6]SP6-11 did not affect to a great extent the in vitro 
activity pattern of the parent hexapeptide.

PMID: 2475448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Scand J Immunol. 1989 May;29(5):579-88.

Recognition of idiotypic structures in the thymus.

Zöller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Radiology and Pathophysiology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

During the passage through the thymus, T cells are selected which recognize self 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens with low avidity. Whether the
T-cell repertoire for recognition of altered self is also built up
intrathymically or in the periphery, and whether it is determined exclusively by 
external antigens or is shaped by the internal environment is still a matter of
debate. This question was addressed by analysing the responsiveness of thymocytes
during post-natal development towards a nominal antigen [trinitrophenyl (TNP)]
and an anti-TNP monoclonal antibody (Sp6), which carries a recurrent idiotype.
During the first weeks of life, in vitro cultures of thymocytes proliferated
strongly in the absence of nominal antigen. Proliferation rates were not
increased by the addition of nominal antigen [TNP-ovalbumin (OA)], but a
significant increase was noted in the presence of Sp6, thymocytes recognizing the
processed immunoglobulin. After in vivo stimulation with TNP conjugates,
'antigen-specific' clones could also be detected in the thymus, the frequency of 
clones proliferating in response to Sp6 being further augmented. With increasing 
age, the proliferative capacity of thymocytes from unstimulated and antigenically
stimulated mice decreased significantly. Responsiveness of spleen cells (SC)
differed in some respects. The response towards Sp6 decreased with age, while
antigen-specific clones were detected at increasing frequencies during post-natal
development. Furthermore, after antigenic stimulation, the frequency solely of
antigen-specific, but not of Sp6-specific clones was increased. Thus, it appears 
that the T-cell repertoire is shaped already during the intrathymic passage,
being influenced primarily by the B-cell repertoire and modulated further by
external antigen.

PMID: 2471259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Bioorg Khim. 1989 Apr;15(4):562-5.

[Synthesis of oligoribonucleotides with the use of RNA polymerases of E. coli and
immobilized synthetic DNA-templates].

[Article in Russian]

Denisova LIa, Zagrebel'nyy SN, Pustoshilova NM, Ven'iaminova AG, Gorn VV.

A new approach to synthesis of oligoribonucleotides is suggested, based on
transcription by E. coli RNA polymerase of synthetic immobilized DNA-templates
with AUG as primer. The approach has been experimentally verified by synthesis of
two oligonucleotides, viz., a RNA fragment of the fr phage (16 nucleotides long) 
and a RNA fragment of the tickborne encephalitis virus (18 nucleotides long).
Fraction of the synthesized RNA fragments in the whole nucleotide material is
about 20%. The templates can be used repeatedly. Sequences of the
oligoribonucleotides were confirmed. Advantages of this approach and its
usefulness for SP6 DNA-dependent RNA polymerase are discussed.

PMID: 2665754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1989 Apr;270(1):77-83.

Effect of spermidine on the development of bacteriophage SP6.

Verma M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Howard University Cancer Center, Washington,
D.C. 20060.

Bacteriophage SP6 is a virulent phage of Salmonella typhimurium which behaves
differently than other phages of the same host. The effect of spermidine on SP6
infection of S. typhimurium has been found to depend on the time of addition of
spermidine with respect to the time of addition of the phage and also on the
composition of the growth medium. If spermidine was added prior to or within a
short time after infection, the cells survived. Under this condition the invading
DNA appeared to remain trapped in the cell membrane, and there was no expression 
of the phage genome. If spermidine was added after the initiation of the
infection process, the replication of the phage was inhibited but the cells did
not survive. Furthermore, if spermidine was added after DNA synthesis was over,
there was no effect of spermidine on phage multiplication. Spermidine was found
to affect phage DNA synthesis but not host DNA synthesis.

PMID: 2648998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 1989 Mar 25;264(9):5031-5.

Translation initiation at non-AUG triplets in mammalian cells.

Peabody DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque 87131.

In a previous report it was shown that mammalian ribosomes were capable of
initiating translation at a non-AUG triplet when the initiation codon of mouse
dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) was mutated to ACG (Peabody, D.S. (1987) J. Biol. 
Chem. 262, 11847-11851). In order to assess the capacity of the mammalian
translation apparatus to initiate at other non-AUG triplets, the initiator AUG of
dihydrofolate reductase was converted to GUG, UUG, CUG, AGG, AAG, AUA, AUC, and
AUU. These represent (with ACG) all the possible triplets that differ from AUG by
only one nucleotide. The ability of each mutant to produce dihydrofolate
reductase was assessed by in vitro transcription/translation of the mutant dhfr
sequences under control of the bacteriophage SP6 promoter. Each of the triplets
(with the exceptions of AGG and AAG) was able to direct the synthesis of
apparently normal dihydrofolate reductase. Incorporation of [35S]tRNAifMet into
the products of in vitro translation indicates that in each case the non-AUG
triplet is able to direct initiation of the polypeptide chain with methionine.
The mutant dhfr sequences were also inserted into the mammalian expression vector
SVGT5 for expression in cultured monkey cells. The hierarchy of relative
translation efficiencies was similar in vivo and in vitro.

PMID: 2538469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Virol. 1989 Mar;63(3):1194-202.

Mapping of RNA- temperature-sensitive mutants of Sindbis virus: complementation
group F mutants have lesions in nsP4.

Hahn YS(1), Grakoui A, Rice CM, Strauss EG, Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

Temperature-sensitive (ts) mutants of Sindbis virus belonging to complementation 
group F, ts6, ts110, and ts118, are defective in RNA synthesis at the
nonpermissive temperature. cDNA clones of these group F mutants, as well as of
ts+ revertants, have been constructed. To assign the ts phenotype to a specific
region in the viral genome, restriction fragments from the mutant cDNA clones
were used to replace the corresponding regions of the full-length clone Toto1101 
of Sindbis virus. These hybrid plasmids were transcribed in vitro by SP6 RNA
polymerase to produce infectious transcripts, and the virus recovered was tested 
for temperature sensitivity. After the ts lesion of each mutant was mapped to a
specific region of 400 to 800 nucleotides by this approach, this region of the
cDNA clones of both the ts mutant and ts+ revertants was sequenced in order to
determine the precise nucleotide change and amino acid substitution responsible
for each mutation. Rescued mutants, which have a uniform background except for
one or two defined changes, were examined for viral RNA synthesis and
complementation to show that the phenotypes observed were the result of the
mutations mapped. ts6 and ts110 had a single base substitution in nsP4, resulting
in replacement of Gly by Glu at position 153 or position 324, respectively. It is
of interest that nsP4 contains the Gly-Asp-Asp motif characteristic of a number
of viral replicases, and this, together with the fact that all RNA synthesis in
ts6-infected cells and, to a lesser extent, in ts110-infected cells shut off when
the cells were shifted from a permissive to a nonpermissive temperature, suggests
that nsP4 is the virus polymerase. ts118 was a double mutant. It contained a
single base substitution in nsP2, resulting in replacement of Val by Ala at
position 425 that resulted in the formation of minute plaques, but not in a
reduction in the plaque number at the nonpermissive condition. The second change,
a substitution of Gln by Arg in ts118 at residue 93 in nsP4, had little apparent 
phenotype on its own, but in combination with the change in nsP2 led to a ts
phenotype. Thus, in each case the mutation responsible for the temperature
sensitivity of the three known complementation group F mutants lay in nsP4. In
addition, the result with ts118 suggests that nsP2 and nsP4 may interact with
each other in a complex.

PMCID: PMC247815
PMID: 2521674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Feb 25;17(4):1717-32.

Isolation and in vitro expression of the ricin A-chain gene: effect of deletions 
on biological activity.

Sundan A(1), Evensen G, Hornes E, Mathiesen A.

Author information: 
(1)Apothekernes Laboratorium A.S., Oslo, Norway.

The gene encoding the ricin A-chain was isolated and subcloned into an in vitro
expression vector downstream from the SP6 promotor. mRNA encoding the A-chain
strongly inhibited the translational activity of reticulocyte lysates. The
inhibition correlated with glycosylase activity on rRNA, and could be abolished
by addition of antibodies specific for ricin. mRNA generated after linearization 
of the vector at unique restriction sites within the A-chain coding sequence did 
not inhibit, except after linearization with ScaI. Also mutants lacking the 28
N-terminal amino acids of native A-chain strongly inhibited the lysates. However,
in both cases no glycosylase activity could be observed. We also show that the
lack of a stop codon in mRNA does not affect the level of expression as assayed
here.

PMCID: PMC331830
PMID: 2922291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 1989 Feb 25;264(6):3380-4.

Proteolytic processing of the beta-subunit of the lysosomal enzyme,
beta-hexosaminidase, in normal human fibroblasts.

Quon DV(1), Proia RL, Fowler AV, Bleibaum J, Neufeld EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles 90024.

We have characterized the proteolytic processing of the beta-subunit of
beta-hexosaminidase by identifying the amino termini of the various forms
synthesized in cell-free translation and in cultured human fibroblasts. The
procedures used had been developed for similar studies of the alpha-subunit
(Little, L. E., Lau, M. M. H., Quon, D. V. K., Fowler, A. V., and Neufeld, E. F. 
(1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 4288-4292). Radioactive amino acids were incorporated 
biosynthetically into the different forms of the beta-subunit, which were
isolated by immunoprecipitation, gel electrophoresis, and electroelution, and
analyzed by automated Edman degradation. Translation by reticulocyte lysate in
the presence of canine pancreas microsomes gave a product with alanine 43 at the 
amino terminus. The lysate could initiate translation at methionine 1 or
methionine 13, depending on the SP6 mRNA provided. The product of signal
peptidase action, the precursor form of the beta-subunit with amino-terminal
alanine 43, was found in NH4+-induced secretions of cultured fibroblasts;
intracellularly, this form was trimmed of two additional amino acids. The mature 
form was found to consist of three polypeptides joined by disulfide bonds; the
amino termini were found to be valine 48, threonine 122, and lysine 315. Thus, in
contrast to the alpha-subunit, the mature form of the beta-subunit of
beta-hexosaminidase is derived from the precursor by internal proteolytic nicking
rather than by removal of a large amino-terminal peptide segment.

PMID: 2521634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Feb 11;17(3):969-78.

Activation of interferon-regulated, dsRNA-dependent enzymes by human
immunodeficiency virus-1 leader RNA.

SenGupta DN(1), Silverman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, MD 20814-4799.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) leader RNA, which contains double-stranded
regions due to inverted repeats, was shown to activate the dsRNA-dependent
enzymes associated with the interferon system. HIV-1 leader RNA produced in vitro
using SP6 RNA polymerase was characterized using probes for antisense and
sense-strand RNA. The RNA preparation was free from significant levels of
antisense RNA. HIV-1 leader RNA was shown to activate dsRNA-dependent protein
kinase in a cell-free system from interferon-treated HeLa cells. Affinity resins,
consisting of HIV-1 leader RNA covalently attached to cellulose, immobilized and 
activated dsRNA-dependent protein kinase and 2-5A-synthetase. HIV-1 leader RNA,
therefore, may be a contributing factor in the mechanism by which interferon
inhibits HIV replication.

PMCID: PMC331716
PMID: 2922280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 1989 Feb 5;264(4):1915-8.

Fused bacterial luciferase subunits catalyze light emission in eukaryotes and
prokaryotes.

Boylan M(1), Pelletier J, Meighen EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, PQ Canada.

A monocistronic luxAB gene containing the luxA and luxB genes coding for
bacterial luciferase has been generated by site-specific mutagenesis so that it
is now possible to express luciferase under control of a single promoter in
eukaryotes as well as in prokaryotes. The fused luciferase subunits (alpha and
beta), linked by a decapeptide, were synthesized in yeast under the Gal-4
promoter, in Escherichia coli under the T7-phage promoter, and in vitro in a
rabbit reticulocyte lysate after transcription and capping of the mRNA under the 
SP6 phage promoter. Replacement of the ATG codon initiating the luxB sequence in 
the fused luxAB gene with CAG prevented internal initiation and allowed
purification of a highly active fused luciferase in the absence of the
beta-luciferase subunit. Consequently luciferase activity can be directly
attributed to the fused luciferase alone and does not require complementation
with free beta subunit of luciferase. Light emission could be measured in yeast
and bacterial cells without the need for cell lysis providing the basis for
measuring gene expression directly in vivo. These results demonstrate the
potential applicability of the fused bacterial luciferase genes as a reporter of 
gene expression both in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems.

PMID: 2644245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Virology. 1989 Feb;168(2):292-301.

Control of reovirus messenger RNA translation efficiency by the regions upstream 
of initiation codons.

Roner MR(1), Gaillard RK Jr, Joklik WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710.

The 10 species of reovirus messenger RNA are translated in vivo with
efficiencies/frequencies that differ by as much as 100-fold. The s1 mRNA, which
is translated 10 times less efficiently than the s4 mRNA but 10 times more
efficiently than the/1 and m1 mRNAs, has a unique BamH1 cleavage site located
immediately downstream of its initiation codon. Because the reovirus mRNAs have
been cloned, this provides the opportunity for placing modified and altered
sequences upstream of its coding sequence. The translation efficiencies of the
variant mRNAs, transcribed via the SP6 in vitro transcription system, can then be
measured in the rabbit reticulocyte lysate in vitro translation system. Using
this system it was found that replacing the 5'-upstream sequence of the s1 mRNA
with that of the s4 mRNA increases its in vitro translation efficiency by 4-fold;
that the trinucleotide immediately upstream of the s1 initiation codon renders it
very weak, and that it is only slightly superior to the weakest Kozak consensus
sequence; that the nature of the nucleotides further upstream than position -3
can profoundly affect translation efficiency; that the nature of this effect is
in turn markedly modified by the nature of nucleotides in positions -1 to -3; and
that there is a minimum optimal 5'-upstream sequence length of about 14
nucleotides. We also investigated the effect of secondary structure involvement
on the ability of 5'-upstream sequences to promote translation. Two effects were 
noted. First, being part of moderately stable stem loops (delta G, -18 kcal/mol) 
decreased translation efficiency about 3-fold; second, mRNA in which only three
5'-terminal nucleotides were unpaired were translated five times less efficiently
than mRNA in which six nucleotides were unpaired. Accessibility of the 5'-cap as 
well as secondary structure of the 5'-upstream sequences are therefore factors
that affect translation efficiency. Finally, we showed that the m1 mRNA, which is
transcribed very poorly in vivo, is translated very efficiently in vitro; and
that its 5'-upstream sequence is as effective in increasing protein sigma 1
formation as that of s4 mRNA. Since both m1 mRNA and protein mu 2 are stable in
infected cells, the reason why m1 mRNA is translated so inefficiently in vivo
therefore remains unexplained.

PMID: 2916327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Genes Dev. 1989 Feb;3(2):224-31.

3'-end formation of mouse pre-rRNA involves both transcription termination and a 
specific processing reaction.

Kuhn A(1), Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Würzburg, FRG.

We have studied the sequence requirements for 3'-end formation of rDNA
transcripts in a cell-free system and show that the generation of correct ends of
mouse pre-rRNA is brought about by a two-step process that involves a bona fide
termination reaction, followed by a specific trimming of the primary transcript
by 10 nucleotides. We show that termination of mouse ribosomal gene transcription
by RNA polymerase I (pol I) takes place in front of an 18-bp DNA sequence element
(the 'Sal box'), which was previously shown to function as termination signal.
Termination of pol I transcription occurs at a fixed distance (11 bp) upstream of
the Sal box, independent of the sequence of adjacent gene regions. The processing
reaction, however, is strongly influenced by sequences flanking the termination
signal at the 5' site. Substitution of a cluster of T residues by guanines within
the region of 3'-end formation abolishes the 3'-terminal trimming of the primary 
transcript. Interestingly, this 3'-terminal processing event, which can be
uncoupled from the termination reaction, requires both a correct 3' end and
specific sequences in the 3'-terminal region of the primary transcript.
Read-through transcripts generated in the extract system or by SP6 RNA polymerase
are no substrate for the processing nuclease(s). Because the termination and
processing activity can be separated chromatographically, the nucleolytic
activity does not reside in TTF-I, the factor that binds to the Sal box and
directs transcription termination.

PMID: 2714650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Feb;9(2):406-14.

Selective enhancement of bovine papillomavirus type 1 DNA replication in Xenopus 
laevis eggs by the E6 gene product.

Romanczuk H(1), Wormington WM.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Brandeis University,
Waltham, Massachusetts 02254.

Genetic analyses of bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV-1) DNA in transformed
mammalian cells have indicated that the E6 gene product is essential for the
establishment and maintenance of a high plasmid copy number. In order to analyze 
the direct effect of the E6 protein on the replication of a BPV-1-derived
plasmid, a cDNA containing the BPV-1 E6 open reading frame was subcloned into an 
SP6 vector for the in vitro synthesis of the corresponding mRNA. The SP6 E6 mRNA 
was injected into Xenopus laevis oocytes to determine the subcellular
localization of the E6 gene product and to analyze the effect of the protein on
BPV-1 DNA replication. SP6 E6 mRNA microinjected into stage VI oocytes was
translated into a 15.5-kilodalton protein that was specifically
immunoprecipitated by antibodies directed against the E6 gene product. The E6
protein preferentially accumulated in oocyte nuclei, a localization which is
consistent with the replicative functions in which it has been implicated. The
expression of E6 in replication-competent mature oocytes selectively enhanced the
replication of a BPV-derived plasmid, indicating a direct role for this gene
product in the control of BPV-1 DNA replication.

PMCID: PMC362615
PMID: 2540419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cancer. 1989 Jan 15;63(2):266-71.

Detection of human probombesin mRNA in neuroendocrine (small cell) carcinoma of
the lung. In situ hybridization with cRNA probe.

Hamid QA(1), Bishop AE, Springall DR, Adams C, Giaid A, Denny P, Ghatei M, Legon 
S, Cuttitta F, Rode J, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histochemistry, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, London,
England.

The production of human bombesin (gastrin-releasing peptide), a peptide with
mitogenic action, is a recognized feature of neuroendocrine (small cell)
carcinoma of the lung. However, immunostaining of bombesin is not always possible
in these tumors, probably because of poor storage mechanisms or rapid release of 
hormone. Molecular biological analysis of the gene encoding human bombesin has
revealed the DNA sequence of human pro-bombesin. We have used in situ
hybridization to study the expression of the human bombesin gene at the cellular 
level in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Probombesin cDNA was subcloned in
pSP64 vector, linearized with Bam HI and transcribed in the presence of
phosphorus 32(32P)-cytosine triphosphate (CTP) and SP6 polymerase. The cRNA probe
was applied to tissue sections (from six cases of small cell carcinoma of the
lung, freshly fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde), cell culture preparations (two
different cell lines of small cell carcinoma), and cytologic specimens (smears of
cells from three different cases of small cell carcinoma). Hybridization of
probombesin mRNA was detected in tumor cells in all samples. Specificity of the
signal was determined by control experiments, including the use of a probe which 
has a sequence identical to probombesin mRNA. Our results provide evidence for
the expression of the bombesin gene in small cell carcinoma of the lung at a
cellular level and show that probombesin mRNA is highly expressed in these
tumors.

PMID: 2535954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Plant Mol Biol. 1989 Jan;12(1):13-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00017443.

Chloroplast import characteristics of chimeric proteins.

Lubben TH(1), Gatenby AA, Ahlquist P, Keegstra K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin, 53706, Madison, WI, USA.

We have examined the import of a series of chimeric precursor proteins into
chloroplasts. These fusion proteins contained the transit peptide, and various
amounts of the amino-terminal region of the mature peptide, from the small
subunit of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, linked to the coat protein of
brome mosaic virus. Chimeric genes were cloned into SP6 plasmids and in vitro
transcription/translation was used to produce fusion proteins, which were
examined in a quantitative in vitro import assay. A chimeric protein which
contained only the transit peptide fused to the coat protein was imported into
chloroplasts. A second chimeric precursor, which also contained a small portion
of the mature peptide, was imported at nearly the same rate. A chimeric protein
which contained the transit peptide and most of the mature peptide fused to the
coat protein was not imported. These results suggest that secondary or tertiary
structural features of precursor proteins are important for protein import, and
that the presence of a transit peptide in a protein does not necessarily ensure
import of that protein into chloroplasts.

PMID: 24272713  [PubMed]


288. Methods Enzymol. 1989;180:42-50.

Synthesis of long, capped transcripts in vitro by SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases.

Yisraeli JK, Melton DA.

PMID: 2559301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Acta Histochem Suppl. 1989;37:117-21.

Detection of calcitonin and CGRP mRNAs in thyroid parafollicular cells using
biotinylated probes.

Zabel M(1), Schäfer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, Medical Academy, Poznan, Poland.

Probes for hybridocytochemistry were produced using SP6 RNA polymerase system and
biotinylated 11-UTP as a label. Probes were obtained capable of detecting
calcitonin-mRNA and CGRP-mRNA. Probe quality was tested using Southern blotting. 
Hybridocytochemistry on rat thyroid sections demonstrated both mRNAs in all
parafollicular cells.

PMID: 2505306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Bioorg Khim. 1989 Jan;15(1):18-23.

[Localization of a lysine residue near the site of initiating substrate binding
of T7 bacteriophage RNA polymerase].

[Article in Russian]

Maksimoa TG, Mustaev AA, Zaichikov EF, Baranova LV, Kumarev VP.

A highly selective affinity label was introduced into the T7 phage RNA polymerase
by means of GMP ortho-formylphenyl ester and [alpha-32P]UTP nearby the enzyme's
active site, which was located using limited cleavage technique. Hydroxylamine,
bromine, N-chlorosuccinimide, and cyanogen bromide were employed as the reagents.
Analysis of gel-electrophoretic patterns of the cleavage products led to a
conclusion that Lys631 is the target of labelling. The region nearby this residue
has a high degree of sequence homology with regions of RNA polymerases from T3
and SP6 phages and yeast mitochondria.

PMID: 2500935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biopolymers. 1989 Jan;28(1):51-64.

1H-NMR studies of receptor-selective substance P analogues reveal distinct
predominant conformations in DMSO-d6.

Levian-Teitelbaum D, Kolodny N, Chorev M, Selinger Z, Gilon C.

Proton nmr parameters are reported for DMSO-d6 solutions of two
receptor-selective substance P analogues: Ac[Arg6,Pro9]SP6-11, which is selective
for the NK-1 (SP-P) receptor and [pGlu6,N-MePhe8]SP6-11, which selectively
activates the NK-3 (SP-N) receptor. Full peak assignments of both analogues were 
obtained by COSY experiments. The chemical shifts, coupling constants, and
temperature coefficients of amide proton chemical shifts as well as NOESY effects
and calculated side-chain rotamer populations of Phe side chains are reported for
both peptides. Analysis of coupling constants and temperature coefficients
together with the nuclear Overhauser enhancement spectroscopy effects suggest
that Ac[Arg6,Pro9]SP6-11 has a trans configuration about the Phe8-Pro9 amide bond
and the preferred conformation of this analogue has a type I beta-turn. The nmr
data for [pGlu6,N-MePhe8]SP6-11 suggest that this peptide exists as a mixture of 
cis-trans isomers in which the cis isomer can preferably adopt a type VI
beta-turn conformation, and the trans isomer can adopt a gamma-turn conformation.
There are indications that the two last turns are stabilized by a hydrogen bond
between the syn carboxamide proton and the pGlu ring carbonyl.

PMID: 2470438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 1988 Dec 25;263(36):19662-9.

Studies on the role of actin's aspartic acid 3 and aspartic acid 11 using
oligodeoxynucleotide-directed site-specific mutagenesis.

Solomon TL(1), Solomon LR, Gay LS, Rubenstein PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City 
52242.

One or more of the five acidic amino-terminal residues of skeletal muscle actin
have been implicated as being important in a number of actin-related processes.
We have constructed a series of actins containing mutations at Asp3 and Asp11 and
tested these mutant proteins for their ability to bind to DNase I-agarose,
polymerize with rabbit skeletal muscle actin, undergo amino-terminal processing, 
and bind to the myosin-S1 subfragment. The mutant actins were expressed in vitro 
using a coupled transcription/translation system which involves the synthesis of 
mutant RNAs with SP6 RNA polymerase followed by their translation in a rabbit
reticulocyte lysate. When Asp3 was changed to Ala, His, or Asn there was no
difference in the tested properties as compared to wild type actin. These results
suggest that an acidic residue at position 3 is not critical for the actin
functions measured. When Asp11 was changed to Glu, Asn, or His or if the
conserved Asp-Asn sequence at positions 11 and 12 was reversed, the mutants were 
able to copolymerize with rabbit skeletal muscle actin and be cross-linked to
myosin-S1 to nearly the same extent as wild type actin. However, the amount of in
vitro-synthesized actin capable of binding to DNase I-agarose with high affinity 
or undergoing amino-terminal processing was reduced significantly relative to the
wild type actin synthesized in vitro. The Asp11 mutants ran anomalously on native
polyacrylamide gels suggestive of a conformational change induced in the actin.
Together, these results suggest that Asp11 may be important in proper actin
folding and function.

PMID: 3198644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1988 Dec 20;951(2-3):335-43.

Characterisation of the CDC7 gene product of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a
protein kinase needed for the initiation of mitotic DNA synthesis.

Bahman M(1), Buck V, White A, Rosamond J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Manchester,
U.K.

The product of the CDC7 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is needed for the
initiation of mitotic DNA synthesis, has homology with known and putative protein
kinases. This homology is confined to the kinase catalytic domain, which has a
unique organisation in CDC7. To demonstrate that, nonetheless, CDC7 protein has
kinase activity, the gene was subcloned under the control of the SP6 promoter.
Protein synthesised by transcription and translation in vitro was capable of
transferring 32P from [gamma-32P]ATP to histone. This activity was not dependent 
on Ca2+ or cyclic nucleotides. A mutation of CDC7 constructed in vitro, in which 
the organisation of the kinase catalytic domain was converted to that found in
all other similar enzymes, was unable to function in vivo, as judged by its
inability to complement the cdc7-1 allele. This suggests that the abnormal
structure of the CDC7 catalytic domain is a key element in the cellular function 
of this protein in initiating DNA synthesis.

PMID: 2850010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 1988 Dec 5;263(34):18123-7.

Transcription initiation site selection and abortive initiation cycling of phage 
SP6 RNA polymerase.

Nam SC(1), Kang CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology, Seoul.

Effects of mutations around the phage SP6 transcription initiation site on SP6
RNA polymerase's selection of initiation site were studied. In the in vitro
transcription reactions, the limiting concentration of a ribonucleotide causes
the SP6 RNA polymerase to stall long enough only at the positions of the limited 
nucleotide and dissociate from the elongation complex. As a result, a series of
RNA oligomers comprises a sequencing ladder, and abortive initiation cycling
products up to 6-mer are made in high yield. Precise sizing of the product RNAs
from the elongation pausings determined the initiation site of each mutant. When 
the wild-type +1 G is changed to C or A without change in the upstream sequence
including TATA from -4 to -1, transcription still starts only at the +1 site.
But, the mutant containing TATCC from -4 to +1 C. We propose that the phage SP6
RNA polymerase selects the initiation site precisely at a certain distance from a
direct contact point in the upstream promoter sequence, regardless of the species
of initiating nucleotide. It is also suggested that the sequence-dependent
perturbations of DNA helical structure, for example D to B form, may shift the
initiation site.

PMID: 3192528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Virol Methods. 1988 Dec;22(2-3):247-54.

A rapid and sensitive solution hybridisation assay for the quantitative
determination of specific viral RNA sequences.

Johnson MA(1), McCrae MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, U.K.

A solution hybridisation assay has been developed which allows the quantitation
of specific viral (RNA) sequences in infected cells. The assay makes use of
single-stranded (ss) RNA probes of known polarity synthesised at high specific
activity in vitro from cDNA clones of the relevant viral gene by the SP6 or T7
RNA polymerase. These probes are used together with samples containing the RNA to
be detected at a known concentration to construct a calibration curve to relate
RNase resistant radioactivity following solution hybridisation to amount of RNA. 
The amount of RNA in experimental samples is then determined using the
calibration curve that is produced each time the assay is performed. The UKtc
strain of Rotavirus growing in BSC-1 cells was used to develop this method but
with the substitution of suitable cDNA clones it could be applied to any viral
system.

PMID: 2851603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Mol Biol. 1988 Nov 20;204(2):309-29.

Translational regulation of the spc operon in Escherichia coli. Identification
and structural analysis of the target site for S8 repressor protein.

Cerretti DP(1), Mattheakis LC, Kearney KR, Vu L, Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California-Irvine 92717.

The spc ribosomal protein operon of Escherichia coli is feedback-regulated by
ribosomal protein S8, a translational repressor. We have analyzed the region of
the spc mRNA that is responsible for this regulation. First, we have established 
that the S8 target site on the mRNA is near the translation start site of the
third gene encoding ribosomal protein L5 in the operon. This was done by
constructing hybrid plasmids carrying spc operon ribosomal protein genes under
lac transcriptional control, as well as their deletion derivatives, and carrying 
out both in vivo and in vitro protein synthesis experiments. Next, the secondary 
structure of this region was studied by analyzing 5' end-labeled RNA synthesized 
from the phage SP6 promoter using structure-specific nucleases. A secondary
structure model consistent with the results was deduced with the aid of a
computer prediction of RNA folding. In addition, we cloned and sequenced the
corresponding region from Salmonella typhimurium, Proteus vulgaris and Serratia
marcescens and found five "compensating" substitutions that support some of the
deduced helical structures of mRNA. None of the base changes was inconsistent
with the deduced secondary structure model. Finally, site-directed mutagenesis
experiments have identified bases important for regulation, including two
base-paired sites representing each of two helical regions. This has led to the
conclusion that some specific nucleotide residues located between these two
helical regions are directly involved in S8 recognition, and that the function of
the two helical regions is to maintain the proper orientation of these nucleotide
residues. Comparison of the structure of the S8 target site on the spc mRNA with 
the known S8 binding site on rRNA has revealed a striking similarity in both
primary and secondary structures. In particular, primary sequences of rRNA
conserved among distantly related bacterial species in this region is found to be
identical with the sequences at the corresponding positions in mRNA. These
results suggest that the same structural features of the S8 repressor protein are
involved in the interaction with both 16 S rRNA and the mRNA target site.

PMID: 2464692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Gene. 1988 Nov 15;71(1):49-56.

Enrichment for 5'-TG termini: a method for subcloning structural genes into
expression vectors.

D'Alessio JM(1), Hammond AW, Chatterjee DK.

Author information: 
(1)Bethesda Research Laboratories, Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD
20877.

We describe a method for creating a population of randomly digested, blunt-ended 
DNA fragments with 5'-TG... 3'-AC... (TG) at their termini. When these fragments 
were ligated to a blunt-ended vector that contains ...CATA-3' ...GTAT-5' at its
termini, as high as 84% of the clones obtained after transformation contained
plasmids with a reconstructed Nde I site ... CATATG... ...GTATAC.... When the DNA
vector is prepared from an appropriate plasmid [Gross et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 5 
(1985) 1015-1024; Kotewicz et al., Gene 35 (1985) 249-258], the ATG within the
restriction site corresponds to a start codon positioned downstream from a strong
ribosome-binding site and controllable promoter. If a gene has been digested to
the TG contained within its authentic initiation codon, the endogenous
translation-initiation control sequences are deleted and expression can be
controlled using the plasmid-derived promoter. In addition, a gene digested to
other in-frame TGs can potentially express proteins with altered N termini. Using
this method, we have placed the structural gene of SP6 RNA polymerase, trimmed
precisely to its authentic start codon, under the control of the tac promoter.

PMID: 3063614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 1988 Nov 5;263(31):15868-71.

cDNA cloning and sequence of a new type of actin in mouse B16 melanoma.

Sadano H(1), Taniguchi S, Kakunaga T, Baba T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Cell Research, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Parent B16 melanoma and B16-F1 cell lines express a third actin (Ax) in addition 
to beta- and gamma-actin. It has the same molecular mass (43,000 daltons) and a
more acidic isoelectric point (pI = 5.2) than the latter two actins (pI = 5.3)
(Taniguchi, S., Kawano, T., Kakunaga, T., and Baba, T. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 261,
6100-6106). We constructed a cDNA library from poly(A)+ RNA of B16-F1 and then
isolated Ax actin candidate clones. According to the nucleotide sequencing
analysis for one of the candidate clones, pMA 30, the predicted amino acid
sequence was composed of 375 amino acids and was similar to that of beta-actin,
but differed at the 28th amino acid in that leucine replaced the arginine of
beta-actin. When RNA synthesized from the clone pMA 30 with the SP6 transcription
system was translated in vitro using reticulocyte lysate, we identified a
polypeptide which had the same isoelectric point and molecular weight as Ax
actin; the polypeptide had binding activity to DNase I, a common characteristic
of native actin. These observations provide evidence that the clone pMA 30
encodes the mRNA for Ax actin. In the nucleotide sequence of the Ax cDNA, there
are: 1) one base change in the coding region which causes a loss of the SmaI site
and an amino acid exchange, as mentioned above; 2) four deletion sites in the
3'-noncoding region; 3) one insertion site in the 3'-noncoding region; and 4) one
base change in the 5'-noncoding region, as compared with hitherto known mouse
beta-actin cDNA. These differences between Ax and beta-actin cDNA indicate that
the Ax actin is encoded by an unique gene set, independent of beta-actin.

PMID: 3182774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 1988 Nov 5;263(31):16372-8.

Biological activity and receptor binding of human prointerleukin-1 beta and
subpeptides.

Jobling SA(1), Auron PE, Gurka G, Webb AC, McDonald B, Rosenwasser LJ, Gehrke L.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology Division of Health Sciences and 
Technology, Cambridge 02139.

We report here that the human interleukin-1 beta precursor (proIL-1 beta) protein
as well as several interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) subpeptides bind cellular
receptors specifically and exhibit biological activity by stimulating
proliferation of helper T-cells. IL-1 beta polypeptides have been synthesized by 
in vitro translation of mRNAs transcribed from plasmid vectors containing the
bacteriophage SP6 promoter joined to the complete IL-1 beta cDNA or to deletion
constructs. The quantity of IL-1 beta in vitro translation products was increased
significantly by replacing the cognate IL-1 beta untranslated leader sequence
with a 37-nucleotide plant viral untranslated leader. Translation of chimeric
mRNAs followed by direct bioactivity assay demonstrated that mature IL-1
beta-(117-269), proIL-1 beta-(1-269), and peptide IL-1-(71-269) were all
biologically active. Specific binding to cellular receptors was observed with
these three IL-1 beta molecules; moreover, several peptides with minimal
biological activity also bound receptor specifically. The biological activity and
receptor binding properties of the IL-1 beta proteins reported here contrast with
those described by Mosley et al. (Mosley, B., Urdal, D. L., Prickett, K. S.,
Larsen, A., Cosman, D., Conlon, P. J., Gillis, S., and Dower, S. K. (1987) J.
Biol. Chem. 262, 2941-2944; Mosley, B., Dower, S. K., Gillis, S., and Cosman, D. 
(1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 84, 4572-4576), who reported that proIL-1
beta-(1-269) had no biological activity and does not bind receptor. Our results
indicate that proIL-1 beta is active at a relatively high concentration, and
analysis of the proIL-1 beta-(1-269) and IL-1-(71-269) bioactivity data suggests 
a possible relationship with membrane-bound IL-1.

PMID: 2972707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Am J Hum Genet. 1988 Nov;43(5):764-9.

Mitochondrial import and processing of an in vitro synthesized human prebranched 
chain acyltransferase fragment.

Litwer S(1), Danner DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322.

A 1.6-kb cDNA for human liver branched-chain acyltransferase [E2b] was placed in 
a transcription vector under the control of the SP6 promoter. In vitro
translation of transcripts from this vector produced a pre-E2b fragment of Mr
39,000. Following import into mitochondria, this protein was processed to a
protein with an Mr of 36,000. The processed protein was fully protected from
trypsin digestion. Import and processing did not occur in the presence of
rhodamine 123 or carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone, suggesting that
membrane potential and coupled respiration were required. Uptake and processing
were species and tissue independent, since both mouse-liver and human-lymphoblast
mitochondria converted the human pre-E2b protein fragment. Mitochondria from
patient cells that lack E2b through an inherited defect were able to import and
process the in vitro-made protein, suggesting that the inherited defect was in
the gene for E2b and not in the organelle-structure function. This system now
provides additional methods for investigation of mechanisms responsible for the
human inherited disorders affecting the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid
dehydrogenase complex.

PMCID: PMC1715554
PMID: 3189339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Nov;85(21):7917-21.

Expression of a bovine rhodopsin gene in Xenopus oocytes: demonstration of
light-dependent ionic currents.

Khorana HG(1), Knox BE, Nasi E, Swanson R, Thompson DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139.

Xenopus oocytes express a gene encoding bovine rhodopsin as well as its SP6 RNA
polymerase-derived transcripts and total retinal mRNA. The opsin produced is in
unglycosylated (30 kDa) and two glycosylated (35 kDa and 41 kDa) forms.
Incubation of the cells expressing the above proteins with 11-cis-retinal
generates rhodopsin, which was purified by immunoaffinity chromatography. The
purified protein shows the expected UV/visible absorption spectrum and
characteristic light-dependent activation of the rod outer segment GTP binding
protein. Oocytes expressing rhodopsin exhibit light-dependent ionic currents that
are detected by voltage-clamp techniques.

PMCID: PMC282324
PMID: 3141920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Cell Biol. 1988 Nov;107(5):1677-87.

Topogenic analysis of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope
glycoprotein, gp160, in microsomal membranes.

Haffar OK(1), Dowbenko DJ, Berman PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco,
California 94080.

The orientation in cellular membranes of the 856 amino acid envelope glycoprotein
precursor, gp160, of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 was investigated in
vitro. Variants of the env gene were transcribed using the bacteriophage SP6
promoter, translated using a rabbit reticulocyte lysate, and translocated into
canine pancreatic microsomal membranes. Immunoprecipitation studies of gp160
variants using antibodies specific for various gp160-derived polypeptides
provided evidence that the external (cell surface) domain of gp160 begins at the 
mature amino terminus of the protein and continues through amino acid 665. A
stop-transfer sequence (transmembrane domain) was identified in a hydrophobic
region COOH-terminal to amino acid 665 and NH2-terminal to amino acid 732.
Protease protection experiments demonstrated that gp160 possesses a single
cytoplasmic domain COOH-terminal to residue 707. Membrane extraction studies
using carbonate buffer provided evidence that the 29 amino acid hydrophobic
domain (residues 512-541) of gp160 was unable to serve as a stop-transfer
sequence. Finally, we propose that the cytoplasmic tail of gp160 forms a
secondary association with the microsomal membranes.

PMCID: PMC2115321
PMID: 3053734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Nov;85(21):7977-81.

NH2-terminal acidic region of the phosphoprotein of vesicular stomatitis virus
can be functionally replaced by tubulin.

Chattopadhyay D(1), Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44106.

The phosphoprotein (NS) of vesicular stomatitis virus is an indispensable subunit
of the virion-associated RNA polymerase (L). NS consists of a highly acidic
NH2-terminal domain and a basic COOH-terminal domain. Unlike the latter, the
amino acid sequences of the NH2-terminal regions are highly dissimilar among
different viral serotypes, although they share structural similarities. We have
cloned an NS gene into the SP6 transcription vector and replaced the 5'-terminal 
80% by a full-length gene for beta-tubulin, which contains an acidic
COOH-terminal domain. Here we present evidence that the chimeric tubulin-NS
protein is biologically active and that the acidic region in tubulin directly
affects the transcription reaction. These observations indicate that NS probably 
functions as an activator protein in which the acidic domain stimulates
transcription of the viral genes by interacting with the RNA polymerase as
observed for eukaryotic cellular transcription activators.

PMCID: PMC282336
PMID: 2847150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Oct 25;16(20):9737-59.

A 5' exo-ribonuclease and RNA ligase of T. brucei.

Huang J(1), Van der Ploeg LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, NY 10032.

We identified a Mg2+ dependent 5' exo-ribonuclease and an RNA ligase in cell-free
extracts of Trypanosome brucei. The exo-ribonuclease in S100 or nuclear extracts,
removes about 20 nts from the 5' end of SP6 derived capped as well as uncapped
RNA and then stops. In contrast to the activity of the exo-ribonuclease on capped
SP6 mini-exon transcripts, the exonuclease cannot degrade trypanosome-derived
mini-exon transcripts or the mini-exon located at hsp 70 mRNAs. We therefore
assume that the four secondary base modifications adjacent to the mini-exon cap, 
generated in vivo, confer resistance to the exo-ribonuclease. After exonuclease
shortening of SP6 transcripts, an RNA ligase catalizes intramolecular ligation,
generating a 3'-5' phosphodiester bond in a Mg2+ and ATP dependent reaction.

PMCID: PMC338776
PMID: 2460826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Biol Chem. 1988 Oct 15;263(29):15176-83.

Posttranslational processing of alpha-, beta-, and gamma-preprotachykinins.
Cell-free translation and early posttranslational processing events.

MacDonald MR(1), McCourt DW, Krause JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

We have used an in vitro transcription-translation system to study initial
protein processing events of the rat substance P/neurokinin A gene products. cDNA
clones for three different mRNA species, which are derived by differential RNA
splicing, were subcloned into a plasmid, pGEM1, which contains the promoter for
the bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase. In vitro synthesized mRNAs for alpha-,
beta-, and gamma-preprotachykinin were translated in a wheat germ or rabbit
reticulocyte cell-free system. When analyzed by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, the translated protein products
migrate consistent with the deduced molecular masses of alpha (13,035 Da)-, beta 
(15,003 Da)-, and gamma (13,343 Da)-preprotachykinin. The addition of dog
pancreatic microsomal membranes to either cell-free translation system causes the
production of a protease-resistant form of each of the three preprotachykinins
which migrates with an apparent increase in molecular mass of approximately 2,000
Da. Each of these modified preprotachykinins lacks the putative signal peptide of
the prepro- form, with signal peptidase cleavage occurring after the alanine
residue at position 19. Both the prepro- and proforms of each tachykinin
precursor molecule are recognized by antiserum R-140, an antiserum specific for
the mid-portion of the undecapeptide substance P. The most likely explanation for
the apparent increase in molecular mass is anomalous electrophoretic migration,
since beta-preprotachykinin mRNA lacking the signal peptide encoding sequence is 
translated, in the absence of microsomal membranes, into a protein with the same 
apparent molecular mass as the modified form of beta-preprotachykinin. Therefore,
each of the three preprotachykinin mRNAs are translatable, and their products are
targeted to the secretory pathway by the presence of a cleavable signal peptide.

PMID: 3049602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mol Cell Biol. 1988 Oct;8(10):4484-91.

Short donor site sequences inserted within the intron of beta-globin pre-mRNA
serve for splicing in vitro.

Mayeda A(1), Ohshima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

We constructed SP6-human beta-globin derivative plasmids that included possible
donor site (5' splice site) sequences at a specified position within the first
intron. The runoff transcripts from these templates truncated in the second exon 
were examined for splicing in a nuclear extract from HeLa cells. In addition to
the products from the authentic donor site, a corresponding set of novel products
from the inserted, alternative donor site was generated. Thus, a short sequence
inserted within an intron can be an active donor site signal in the presence of
an authentic donor site. The active donor site sequences included a 9-nucleotide 
consensus sequence, 14- or 16-nucleotide sequences at the human beta-globin first
or second donor, and those at simian virus 40 large T antigen or small t antigen 
donor. These included 3 to 8 nucleotides of an exon and 6 to 8 nucleotides of an 
intron. The activity of the inserted donor site relative to that of the authentic
donor site depended on the donor sequence inserted. The relative activity also
strongly depended on the concentrations of both KCl (40 to 100 mM) and MgCl2 (1.6
to 6.4 mM). At the higher KCl concentrations tested, all the inserted, or
proximate, donor sites were more efficiently used. Under several conditions, some
inserted donor sites were more active than was the authentic donor site. Our
system provides an in vitro assay for donor site activity of a sequence to be
tested.

PMCID: PMC365523
PMID: 3185558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Cell Biol. 1988 Oct;8(10):4041-7.

Homologous recombination between transferred and chromosomal immunoglobulin kappa
genes.

Baker MD(1), Shulman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Homologous recombination between transferred and chromosomal DNAs provides a
means of introducing well-defined, predetermined changes in the chromosomal
genes. Here we report that this approach can be used to specifically modify the
immunoglobulin genes in mouse hybridoma cells. The test system is based on the
Sp6 hybridoma, which synthesizes immunoglobulin M (kappa) specific for the hapten
2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (TNP). As recipient cells, we used the Sp6-derived mutant
hybridoma igk14, which has a deletion of the kappa TNP gene and consequently does
not synthesize TNP-specific immunoglobulin M. igk14 retains the mu TNP gene and
two additional rearranged kappa genes, denoted kappa M21B1 and kappa M21G. As a
transfer vector, we used pSV2neo bearing the functionally rearranged TNP-specific
V kappa segment. Following DNA transfer by electroporation, we isolated rare
transformants which produced normal amounts of the functional kappa TNP chain.
Analysis of the DNA of these transformants indicated that in all cases, a
functional kappa TNP gene had been formed as the result of a homologous
integrative recombination event with the igk14 kappa M21B1 gene. These results
suggest that homologous recombination might be used for mapping and introducing
immunoglobulin gene mutations and for more conveniently engineering specifically 
altered immunoglobulins.

PMCID: PMC365472
PMID: 3141782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Virus Res. 1988 Oct;11(3):227-40.

Sequence analysis and in vitro expression of a cDNA clone of genome segment 5
from bluetongue virus, serotype 1 from South Africa.

Wade-Evans AM(1), Pan ZQ, Mertens PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Woking, Surrey, U.K.

A full length copy of genome segment 5 of bluetongue virus serotype 1 from South 
Africa (BTV-1SA) was assembled from two incomplete cDNA clones. The complete
nucleotide sequence was determined (1635 nucleotides in length) and an open
reading frame coding for 527 amino acids was found, which was flanked by a 5'
non-coding region of 25 nucleotides and a 3' non-coding region of 29 nucleotides.
The cDNA clone was transferred to an Sp6 expression vector from which an RNA
transcript was obtained. This transcript, when translated in vitro in a
reticulocyte lysate system, produced a protein that co-migrated during
electrophoresis with both protein VP5 from disrupted virus particles and VP5
translated from denatured viral dsRNA. The protein synthesized from the cDNA
clone was precipitable with antisera raised against BTV-1SA virus particles and
with antisera raised against a synthetic peptide, the sequence of which was
obtained from the predicted amino acid sequence of BTV-1SA protein VP5. These
antisera also precipitated protein VP5 translated from denatured viral dsRNA.
Collectively these data indicate that the cDNA clone encodes an authentic VP5
protein product. The amino acid sequence of BTV-1SA VP5, when compared to other
published sequences for VP5, contained highly conserved regions interrupted by
variable domains. If two isolates of the same serotype are compared, (BTV-1SA and
BTV-1AUS) only two variable regions are apparent. However, if the amino acid
sequences of VP5 from two different serotypes are compared, (BTV-1SA and BTV-10),
eight variable regions are detectable (two of which are in the same position as
the variable regions within a serotype). The implications of these variations in 
the outer coat protein, VP5, are discussed.

PMID: 2848383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Virology. 1988 Oct;166(2):350-7.

The functional domains of the phosphoprotein (NS) of vesicular stomatitis virus
(Indiana serotype).

Paul PR(1), Chattopadhyay D, Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Nutley, New Jersey 07110.

A full-length cDNA clone of the mRNA encoding the phosphoprotein (NS) of the
Indiana serotype of vesicular stomatitis virus was inserted into the SP6
transcription vector. By in vitro transcription of the inserted gene followed by 
translation of the mRNA in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate, NS protein was
synthesized. The biological activity of the protein was demonstrated by RNA
synthesis in vitro by reconstitution with L protein and N-RNA template purified
from virions. Using oligonucleotide-directed RNase H cleavage of the full-length 
NS mRNA, a series of deleted RNAs were made which gave rise to corresponding size
classes of truncated NS protein after translation in vitro. The N-RNA template
binding site was located at the C-terminal domain (21 amino acids) of the NS
protein and the L-protein binding site was present within 14 amino acids spanning
the NH2-terminal side of the N-RNA binding site. These results are similar to
that obtained with the NS protein of the New Jersey serotype of VSV, indicating
conservation of the functional domains within the VSV serotypes.

PMID: 2845648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Neuroscience. 1988 Oct;27(1):159-67.

In situ hybridization demonstrates vasopressin gene transcription in hypothalamic
neurons of crossbred hypertensive x diabetes insipidus rats.

McCabe JT(1), Almasan K, Lehmann E, Hänze J, Lang RE, Pfaff DW, Ganten D.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Behavior Laboratory, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021-6399.

In situ hybridization, Northern blotting, and solution hybridization assay were
used to examine vasopressin-gene messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) transcripts in
hypothalamic tissue from five strains of rats: Long-Evans, Wistar-Kyoto, and
diabetes insipidus (Brattleboro) rats, spontaneously hypertensive-stroke-prone
rats, and cross-bred diabetes insipidus x spontaneously hypertensive-stroke-prone
rats. A 290 base-pair, single-stranded RNA probe, with 221 bases complementary to
exon C of the vasopressin gene was synthesized by the SP6 transcription vector
system. This probe labeled appropriate neurohypophysial hypothalamic neurons, as 
well as suprachiasmatic nucleus cells, in tissue samples from all five strains of
rats. Confirming other recent hybridization results with diabetes insipidus rat
brain tissue, diabetic animals were found to transcribe their mutated vasopressin
gene. In addition, this investigation found that the cross-bred
diabetic-hypertensive rat also synthesizes a vasopressin-gene messenger
ribonucleic acid transcript. Quantitative analyses of solution and in situ
hybridization results suggested the cross-bred diabetic-hypertensive rat exhibits
a level of vasopressin-gene messenger ribonucleic acid similar to diabetes
insipidus rats. This observation is consistent with previous data on the
cross-bred diabetic-hypertensive rat which suggests they inherit the mutant
vasopressin gene from Brattleboro rats.

PMID: 2462187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 1988 Sep 25;263(27):13677-82.

Biosynthesis of tRNA in yeast mitochondria. An endonuclease is responsible for
the 3'-processing of tRNA precursors.

Chen JY(1), Martin NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Louisville,
Kentucky 40292.

To study the mechanism involved in the 3'-processing of mitochondrial tRNA
precursors, we examined tRNA processing in a reconstituted system with a yeast
mitochondrial extract. Two mitochondrial tRNA(Glu) precursors synthesized from
SP6 RNA polymerase-directed transcription system were used as substrates. One
contained a 214-nucleotide 5' terminus and 115-123-nucleotide 3' trailer. The
other had the same sized 3' trailer, but contained a mature 5' terminus. An
endonucleolytic activity was identified in a mitochondrial S30 fraction which
cleaves the 3' terminus of the latter tRNA precursor precisely at the in vivo CCA
addition site. No cleavage of the 5'-extended precursor was observed in vitro.
This mitochondrial 3'-processing activity was partially purified using DEAE-CL-6B
chromatography. It removes the 3' trailer sequence from the 5'-matured precursor 
leaving a 3'-hydroxyl group on the processed tRNA and a 5'-phosphate group on the
trailer. The resulting tRNA product serves as a substrate for tRNA
nucleotidyltransferase which catalyzes the addition of CCA residues to the tRNA
to complete its 3' maturation. Thus, yeast mitochondrial 3'-tRNA processing
events resemble those found in eucaryotic cytoplasmic/nuclear systems where a
single endonucleolytic cleavage is responsible for the formation of the 3' end of
the tRNAs. This is in contrast to the multistep 3'-processing events known to
occur in procaryotes.

PMID: 2843529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Mol Biol. 1988 Sep 20;203(2):425-37.

Functional cDNA libraries from Drosophila embryos.

Brown NH(1), Kafatos FC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Harvard University
Biological Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02138.

We have modified current methods to create a very efficient technique for cloning
cDNAs in a defined orientation, into plasmid vectors bearing phage SP6 and T7
polymerase promoters. First strand synthesis is primed at the poly(A) tail with a
26-mer synthetic oligonucleotide linker/primer, the RNA is hydrolyzed and the
cDNA is tailed with 10 to 15 dG residues. The cDNA is then annealed to two
prepared vector fragments specific for the two ends of the cDNA (one bearing a
dC10-15 tail and the other bearing a 14-nucleotide cohesive end complementary to 
the linker/primer). After ligation the second strand is synthesized with the
large fragment of DNA polymerase I. Libraries of up to 8 x 10(6) independent
transformants have been obtained from 1 microgram of Drosophila poly(A)+ RNA. The
design of the method and careful optimization of first strand synthesis have
permitted cloning of several large (4.3 to 6.5 kb), low abundance cDNAs.
Transcription of essentially full-length clones with phage SP6 RNA polymerase
produces RNAs that are efficiently translated in vitro to give complete, unfused 
products, thus permitting rapid characterization of the clones via the encoded
polypeptides. Antisense RNAs can also be produced by transcription with phage T7 
RNA polymerase.

PMID: 3199441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Science. 1988 Sep 16;241(4872):1492-5.

Virus-specific splicing inhibitor in extracts from cells infected with HIV-1.

Gutman D(1), Goldenberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of
Medicine, FL 33101.

Retraction in
    Goldenberg CJ. Science. 1989 Jan 6;243(4887):12.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), in contrast with most other
retroviruses, encodes trans-regulatory proteins for virus gene expression. It is 
shown in this study, by means of an in vitro splicing system, that nuclear
extracts obtained from cells infected with HIV-1 contain a factor (or factors)
that specifically inhibits splicing of a synthetic SP6/HIV pre-messenger RNA
(pre-mRNA)-containing donor and acceptor splice sites in the coding region for
the envelope protein. It is also shown that the SP6/HIV pre-mRNA is not capable
of assembly in a ribonucleoprotein complex, spliceosome, in extracts from
infected cells. These findings raise the possibility that specific inhibition of 
pre-mRNA splicing in the envelope protein coding region by HIV-1 trans-regulatory
factors might be one control mechanism for efficient production of structural
viral proteins and virion assembly.

PMID: 3047873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 1988 Sep 15;263(26):13463-9.

Synthesis and assembly of a catalytically active lysosomal enzyme,
beta-hexosaminidase B, in a cell-free system.

Sonderfeld-Fresko S(1), Proia RL.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Biochemistry Branch, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The synthesis and dimerization of beta-chains during the formation of
catalytically active beta-hexosaminidase B were studied in a cell-free system.
beta-chain mRNA, transcribed from the cloned cDNA with SP6 polymerase, was
translated in a rabbit reticulocyte protein-synthesizing system in the presence
of dog pancreas microsomal membranes and oxidized glutathione. Under these
conditions, the primary beta-chain translation product was translocated into the 
microsomal vesicles and modified by the addition of N-linked oligosaccharide
chains. After transfer into the microsomal vesicles, the beta-polypeptide assumed
a conformation resembling the native state as determined by antibody reactivity. 
Like the authentic precursor enzyme, the microsomally located chains were
assembled into dimers and were catalytically active. In intact human fibroblasts,
dimerization of beta-chains occurred within 15 min after their synthesis,
consistent with a site of assembly in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. The
cell-free expression system was also useful in establishing the functionality of 
beta-chain initiator methionine codons. By expression of beta-chain mRNAs with
altered methionine codons, we demonstrated that polypeptides initiating from any 
of the first three methionine codons in the beta-chain sequence contain a
functional signal sequence and form catalytically active enzymes.

PMID: 2971039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Sep 12;16(17):8587-602.

The nucleotide sequence and gene organization of red clover necrotic mosaic virus
RNA-2.

Lommel SA(1), Weston-Fina M, Xiong Z, Lomonossoff GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Kansas State University, Manhattan 66506.

Red clover necrotic mosaic virus, a member of the dianthovirus group, is
characterized by a genome composed of two nonhomologous single-stranded RNAs of
approximately 4.0 (RNA-1) and 1.4 kb (RNA-2). The complete nucleotide sequence of
the RNA-2 has been determined. RNA-2 is 1448 nucleotides in length with a 5'
terminal m7G cap and no 3' terminal poly-A tail or 5' terminal VPg. An open
reading frame beginning at the first initiation codon at nucleotide 80 and ending
at nucleotide 1030 has been identified which can encode a polypeptide of 35 kDa. 
RNA-2 directs the synthesis of a 35 kDa polypeptide in vitro. SP6 and T7
transcripts from full length RNA-2 cDNA clones directed the synthesis of a
polypeptide with the same electrophoretic mobility as the polypeptide directed
from authentic RNA-2. Clones with various 3' terminal deletions both outside and 
within the 35 kDa open reading frame were transcribed and translated in vitro to 
define the limits of the 35 kDa open reading frame. A second, small open reading 
frame capable of encoding a polypeptide of 4.9 kDa was also indicated from the
sequence; however, there was no evidence for a protein product of that size.
RNA-2 is presumed to be monocistronic and encode a cell-to-cell movement
function. A small but significant amino acid sequence homology was observed with 
the brome mosaic virus RNA-3a polypeptide.

PMCID: PMC338578
PMID: 3047682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochemistry. 1988 Sep 6;27(18):6693-7.

In vivo and in vitro expression of porcine D-amino acid oxidase: in vitro system 
for the synthesis of a functional enzyme.

Fukui K(1), Momoi K, Watanabe F, Miyake Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
Osaka, Japan.

In vivo expression of D-amino acid oxidase (EC 1.4.3.3, DAO), one of the
principal and characteristic enzymes of the peroxisomes of porcine kidney, was
examined by use of cloned complementary DNA [Fukui, K., Watanabe, F., Shibata,
T., & Miyake, Y. (1987) Biochemistry 26, 3612-3618]. RNA blot hybridization
analysis revealed that DAO is expressed abundantly in kidney and liver, is
expressed significantly in brain, but is not expressed in lung of pig. Three mRNA
species were expressed in kidney and liver, but only one was detected in brain.
These results show the presence of tissue-specific regulation of DAO gene
expression. In vitro expression of a functional enzyme was achieved through the
construction of a recombinant plasmid containing an SP6 promoter and a
restriction enzyme fragment of cDNA to generate a DAO-specific RNA transcript.
The in vitro translation product of the capped RNA transcript showed significant 
catalytic activity, which was inhibited strongly by benzoate, a potent inhibitor 
of DAO. The kinetic properties of the in vitro synthesized enzyme were comparable
to those of the purified enzyme from porcine kidney. It is now possible to
synthesize a functional D-amino acid oxidase in vitro and to investigate its
structure-function relationships.

PMID: 2904274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Virology. 1988 Sep;166(1):10-6.

A carboxyl-terminal peptide of the DNA-binding protein ICP8 of herpes simplex
virus contains a single-stranded DNA-binding site.

Leinbach SS(1), Heath LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599.

The DNA-binding protein ICP8 of herpes simplex virus is a multifunctional protein
which is required for viral replication. To identify the single-stranded
DNA-binding domain of the protein, recombinant plasmids containing the 5' or 3'
coding portion of the ICP8 gene or the intact gene were constructed and
transcribed using SP6 RNA polymerase. The resulting RNA was translated in vitro
to produce a 62,000-Da amino-terminal peptide, a 69,000-Da carboxyl-terminal
peptide, or the intact protein. When these were analyzed by single-stranded
DNA-cellulose column chromatography, large amounts of the intact ICP8 bound to
the columns while small amounts of the carboxyl-terminal peptide and undetectable
amounts of the amino-terminal peptide bound. The majority of the
carboxyl-terminal peptide which bound eluted from the columns with the same salt 
concentration as the intact ICP8. The in vitro synthesized intact protein had the
same affinity for single-stranded DNA-cellulose as ICP8 purified from infected
cells. These results suggest that the carboxyl-terminal portion of ICP8 contains 
a single-stranded DNA-binding site.

PMID: 3046118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Gen Virol. 1988 Sep;69 ( Pt 9):2313-25.

Processing and assembly of foot-and-mouth disease virus proteins using subgenomic
RNA.

Clarke BE(1), Sangar DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Wellcome Biotechnology Limited, Beckenham, U.K.

Recombinant DNA clones were constructed in order to study the mechanisms of
proteolytic processing and assembly in foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV). RNA
transcripts from these clones were synthesized using SP6 polymerase and
translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. Efficient translation occurred in the 
absence of all 5' untranslated sequences and processing of the structural
proteins occurred in the presence of functional 3C protease which can function in
trans. The specificity of 3C protease activity is not limited to Glu-Gly bonds.
Translation of correctly processed structural proteins leads to assembly of
subviral structures resembling 'empty' particles. Further studies on the
processing of the FMDV genome show that the primary cleavage (P1-P2) is mediated 
neither by 3C nor the second FMDV protease L. Preliminary evidence suggests that 
an initial very rapid cleavage occurs between 2A and 2B with subsequent cleavage 
of the P1/2A junction probably being carried out by 3C.

PMID: 2842438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Virol. 1988 Sep;62(9):3224-32.

Expression of herpes simplex virus type 1 DNA polymerase gene by in vitro
translation and effects of gene deletions on activity.

Dorsky DI(1), Crumpacker CS.

Author information: 
(1)Charles A. Dana Research Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

A cloned herpes simplex virus type 1 DNA polymerase gene which is biologically
functional was inserted into SP6 and T7 promoter-containing vectors for in vitro 
transcription-translation. pol-specific RNA synthesized in vitro will direct the 
synthesis of a 140-kilodalton polypeptide in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. RNAs
prepared from pol templates linearized at internal restriction sites specified
deleted polypeptides with sizes consistent with colinearity of the pol gene and
the 140-kilodalton primary translation product. The in vitro translated pol gene 
product was enzymatically active, with salt resistance and sensitivity to
acyclovir triphosphate, similar to the enzyme activity in crude extracts of
herpes simplex virus type 1-infected Vero cells. An in-frame deletion of 78
residues (amino acids residues 881 to 959) was introduced into the expression
vectors to investigate the function of a region of the polypeptide (amino acids
residues 881 to 895) which is conserved in nine other DNA polymerases. In a
complementation assay, this mutation abolished biological activity as well as the
enzymatic activity of the in vitro translated product. A BAL31 mutation deleting 
the upstream open reading frame of pol had no effect on biological activity in a 
complementation assay but was found to increase the efficiency of in vitro
translation of pol RNA. Two amino-terminal deletions of 27 and 67 residues were
found to greatly enhance the enzymatic activity of the in vitro translated
product, while all carboxy-terminal deletions examined (the smallest being 164
residues) abolished in vitro enzymatic activity. Expression of the 67-residue
amino-terminal deleted pol gene in Escherichia coli, using a bacteriophage
T7-based system, resulted in accumulation of large amounts of an insoluble fusion
protein. An antiserum prepared against this fusion protein precipitated the
140-kilodalton DNA polymerase from herpes simplex virus type 1-infected cell
lysates.

PMCID: PMC253441
PMID: 2841474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 1988 Aug 25;263(24):11627-30.

Substitution of arginine for glycine 664 in the collagen alpha 1(I) chain in
lethal perinatal osteogenesis imperfecta. Demonstration of the peptide defect by 
in vitro expression of the mutant cDNA.

Bateman JF(1), Lamande SR, Dahl HH, Chan D, Cole WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, 
Australia.

Structurally abnormal type I collagen was identified in tissues and cultured
fibroblasts from a case of lethal perinatal osteogenesis imperfecta.
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of the CNBr peptides demonstrated that the
alpha 1(I)CB7 peptide from the alpha 1(I) chain of type I collagen existed in a
normal form and a mutant form with a more basic charge distribution (Bateman, J. 
F., Mascara, T., Chan, D., and Cole, W. G. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 4445-4451).
Sequencing of cloned alpha 1(I) cDNAs prepared using mRNA from the patient's
fibroblasts demonstrated that one clone had a single base substitution of A for G
which resulted in the substitution of arginine for glycine 664 within the alpha
1(I)CB7 peptide. To determine whether this mutation was responsible for the
peptide map abnormality, in vitro transcription of mRNA from the mutant cDNA was 
performed using an SP6 vector system. The mRNA was then translated into mutant
protein in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate. Peptide analysis of the protein produced
from the mutant cDNA demonstrated the same altered charge distribution of the
alpha 1(I)CB7 peptide as observed with tissue- and cell-derived mutant collagen
peptides. This finding confirmed that the arginine for glycine 664 sequence
abnormality defined in the cDNA clone was the mutation causing the observed
protein peptide map defect. This mutation is consistent with the functional
abnormalities of collagen observed in this case such as reduced helical
stability, reduced secretion, increased degradation, and excessive
posttranslational modification of lysine.

PMID: 3403550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Gene. 1988 Aug 15;68(1):163-5.

Two new tools: multi-purpose cloning vectors that carry kanamycin or
spectinomycin/streptomycin resistance markers.

Kirschman JA(1), Cramer JH.

Author information: 
(1)Agrigenetics Advanced Science Company, Madison, WI 53716.

We have constructed two new multi-purpose cloning vectors, pJKKmf(-) and
pJKSp/Smf(-), that carry resistance to kanamycin (Km) and
spectinomycin/streptomycin (Sp/Sm), respectively. These plasmids are based on
pGEM3Zf(-) and therefore contain a pUC-vector-derived multiple cloning site for
13 restriction sites flanked by T7 and SP6 RNA polymerase promoters, the
alpha-peptide coding region of beta-galactosidase for blue/white colony screening
and the bacteriophage f1 origin of replication for production of single-stranded 
DNA in the presence of a helper phage. We have used these vectors to reclone
sequences from a maize genomic library, to produce radiolabeled RNA probes and to
make single-stranded DNA.

PMID: 2851490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 1988 Aug 5;263(22):11008-14.

Control of ornithine decarboxylase activity in
alpha-difluoromethylornithine-resistant L1210 cells by polyamines and synthetic
analogues.

Pegg AE(1), Madhubala R, Kameji T, Bergeron RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Pennsylvania State
University, Hershey 17033.

The regulation of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) activity by the polyamine
derivatives N1,N8-bis(ethyl)-spermidine and N1,N12-bis(ethyl)spermine was studied
using a line of L1210 cells resistant to alpha-difluoromethylornithine (D-R
cells), which contain very high levels of ODC, and a synthetic mRNA prepared from
a plasmid containing an insert corresponding to ODC mRNA adjacent to an SP6 RNA
polymerase promoter. Studies in which ODC protein was labeled in the D-R cells by
exposure to [35S]methionine indicated that the polyamine derivatives and their
physiological counterparts led to an increased rate of degradation of ODC and to 
a rapid reduction in ODC synthesis without affecting the content of ODC mRNA.
Direct evidence that the polyamine derivatives act by inhibiting the translation 
of the ODC mRNA was obtained by studying their effects on the translation of ODC 
mRNA in reticulocyte lysates. This translation was strongly inhibited by the
addition of N1,N8-bis(ethyl)spermidine, spermidine, N1,N12-bis(ethyl)spermine, or
spermine but was not affected much by putrescine. The inhibition of the
translation of ODC mRNA by either of the bis(ethyl) polyamine derivatives
occurred at concentrations which stimulated total protein synthesis showing the
selectivity of the reduction in ODC. The effects of polyamine derivatives and
polyamines on translation of the plasmid-derived ODC mRNA were identical with
those found with the D-R L1210 cell mRNA. This synthetic ODC mRNA lacks 261 bases
of the 5'-leader sequences and 200 bases plus the poly(A) section from the
3'-nontranslated sequence. Therefore, these regions appear not to influence
sensitivity of the ODC mRNA to inhibition of translation by polyamine
derivatives.

PMID: 3134356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Neurochem. 1988 Aug;51(2):652-5.

Multiple human tyrosine hydroxylase enzymes, generated through alternative
splicing, have different specific activities in Xenopus oocytes.

Horellou P(1), Le Bourdellès B, Clot-Humbert J, Guibert B, Leviel V, Mallet J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

A single human tyrosine hydroxylase (HTH) gene has been shown previously to
generate four species of mRNA by alternative splicing. The four different HTH
mRNAs were independently synthesized in vitro, using the SP6 transcription
system. Each of these mRNA species was able to direct the synthesis of an active 
form of TH following injection into Xenopus oocytes. Quantitation of synthesized 
HTH polypeptides allowed the determination of the relative specific activity of
each individual HTH form. A significant difference in specific activity was found
between each form, suggesting that alternative splicing may play a role in
regulating HTH activity in vivo.

PMID: 2899137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Virol. 1988 Aug;62(8):3068-72.

An internal 5'-noncoding region required for translation of poliovirus RNA in
vitro.

Bienkowska-Szewczyk K(1), Ehrenfeld E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City 84132.

A truncated poliovirus RNA that contains the entire 5'-noncoding region as well
as some capsid protein-coding sequences was produced from cloned cDNA inserted
into an SP6 transcription vector and subsequently was translated in a mixed
rabbit reticulocyte-HeLa cell lysate. Deletions or modifications of regions of
the 5'-noncoding sequences had significant effects upon the efficiency of
translation. The presence of a 60-nucleotide sequence located at positions 567 to
627 appeared to be essential for active ribosome binding and translation of this 
uncapped RNA.

PMCID: PMC253752
PMID: 2839722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Virol. 1988 Aug;62(8):2658-64.

Complex formation with vesicular stomatitis virus phosphoprotein NS prevents
binding of nucleocapsid protein N to nonspecific RNA.

Masters PS(1), Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Nutley, New 
Jersey 07110.

The interactions between the nucleocapsid protein N and either RNA or the
phosphoprotein NS of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) were studied by the
transcription of N and NS mRNAs from SP6 vectors, followed by translation in a
rabbit reticulocyte lysate. Nascent N protein bound tightly to added labeled RNA,
as well as to endogenous RNA in the reticulocyte lysate. This binding was
demonstrated by three independent techniques. First, labeled N protein and
labeled RNA migrated identically as a series of sharp, closely spaced bands in a 
nondenaturing gel system. Second, translated N protein behaved as a stable
ribonucleoprotein complex in CsCl gradients and sedimented to the same density as
the authentic N-RNA template of VSV. Third, translated N protein protected a
series of labeled RNA fragments from digestion by RNase A. None of the three
RNA-binding criteria was satisfied by either translated NS protein or two
deletion mutants of N protein or by other components of the reticulocyte lysate. 
The evidence suggests that the observed binding of RNA by nascent N was not RNA
sequence specific, in contrast to the encapsidation process during VSV
replication. Moreover, the prior formation of N-NS complexes totally abolished
the observed binding of RNA by N. Thus, we propose that NS may be responsible for
conferring the sequence specificity of the RNA binding that occurs during VSV
genome replication.

PMCID: PMC253697
PMID: 2839693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Virol. 1988 Aug;62(8):2651-7.

Resolution of multiple complexes of phosphoprotein NS with nucleocapsid protein N
of vesicular stomatitis virus.

Masters PS(1), Banerjee AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Nutley, New 
Jersey 07110.

The interaction of the nucleocapsid protein N and the phosphoprotein NS of
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) was studied, free of other viral proteins, by
transcription from SP6 vectors, followed by translation in a rabbit reticulocyte 
lysate. N-NS complex formation depended strongly on cotranslation of the two
proteins; when N and NS were mixed following separate translation of each, very
little complex formation occurred. Conditions were found under which at least six
N-NS complexes were separated from each other by electrophoresis in a
nondenaturing gel system, and the following findings were made. (i) These
complexes fell into two groups; complexes 1 through 5 all had a stoichiometry of 
two molecules of N to one molecule of NS, whereas N-NS complex 6 had an equimolar
ratio of the two proteins. (ii) N-NS complexes 1 through 5 predominated at lower 
concentrations of NS relative to N, but N-NS complex 6 was the major or sole
product when NS was equimolar to or in excess of N. (iii) The two sets of
complexes were formed by two distinct types of interactions of NS with N. The
formation of N-NS complexes 1 through 5 was abolished by the removal of as few as
11 amino acid residues from the basic, highly conserved carboxy-terminal domain
of NS, which is essential for the binding of NS to the N-RNA template of VSV. In 
contrast, formation of complex 6 was unaffected by removal of as many as 62 of
the carboxy-terminal amino acids of NS, a region encompassing both the terminal
basic domain and an adjacent domain which is required for VSV RNA polymerase
function. The significance of these observations for the mechanism of VSV genome 
replication is discussed.

PMCID: PMC253696
PMID: 2839692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Eur J Biochem. 1988 Aug 1;175(2):363-74.

Control of the tRNA-tufB operon in Escherichia coli. 2. Mechanisms of the
feedback inhibition of tufB expression studied in vivo and in vitro.

Van Delft JH(1), Talens A, De Jong PJ, Schmidt DS, Bosch L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leiden, The Netherlands.

The mechanism underlying feedback inhibition of tufB expression has been studied 
in vivo by gene-dosage experiments and by gene and operon fusions involving lacZ.
Raising the cellular EF-Tu content, by introducing a multicopy plasmid encoding
EF-TuA into the cell, repressed the level of EF-TuB but left the content of
tRNA(Thr)3, encoded by the tRNA-tufB operon, unaffected. This indicates that
autoregulation of chromosomal tufB expression does not occur by modulating
transcription initiation at the promoter of the tRNA-tufB operon. This conclusion
is further substantiated by experiments with a tRNA':lacZ operon fusion. The
molecular ratio of chromosome-borne tufA and tufB transcripts also remained
unaltered under conditions of excess EF-Tu, though experiments with a
tRNA-tufB':lacZ operon fusion showed a decrease of tufB transcripts. Our data
further exclude drastic effects of the autogenous repressor on processing of the 
contranscript of the operon into monocistronic tufB RNA and on alteration of
EF-TuB turnover. Two possible mechanisms remain, which cannot yet be decided
between. One is modulation of EF-Tu by transcription termination either directly 
or indirectly by affecting antitermination. The second is translational
repression. In vitro translation of transcripts derived from SP6 clones did not
reveal any feedback inhibition of EF-TuB synthesis. Surprisingly, addition of
EF-Tu to a coupled transcription/translation systems was found to block
transcription initiation at the primary promoter of the tRNA-tufB operon by over 
90%. Although this in vitro effect of EF-Tu could not be demonstrated in vivo,
possibly because of a difference in higher-order structure between plasmid-borne 
and chromosome-borne DNA, it indicates that under certain conditions EF-Tu binds 
very specifically to the tRNA-tufB operon promoter or its upstream region.

PMID: 2456927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Dev Biol. 1988 Aug;128(2):349-58.

Photocrosslinking of proteins to maternal mRNA in Xenopus oocytes.

Swiderski RE(1), Richter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury,
Massachusetts 01545.

Ultraviolet irradiation was used to covalently crosslink poly(A) RNA and
associated proteins in Xenopus oocytes and reticulocytes. Each cell type
contained similar as well as unique crosslinked proteins. The somatic cells
contained a single 78-kDa 3' poly(A) tract binding protein while oocyte poly(A), 
however, was bound by this protein and at least three additional proteins. Based 
on the mass of poly(A) RNA, oocytes in their earliest stages of growth contained 
crosslinked proteins that were generally more prevalent than in fully grown
oocytes. An investigation of possible messenger RNA-specific proteins was
undertaken by a series of RNA injection experiments. Two radiolabeled SP6-derived
mRNAs were injected into oocytes; the first, globin mRNA, assembled into
polysomes, while the second, a maternal mRNA termed G10, entered a nontranslating
ribonucleoprotein compartment. Following the induction of oocyte maturation,
additional globin mRNA was recruited onto polysomes while G10 mRNA remained a
nontranslating mRNP. The proteins that can be crosslinked to these injected mRNAs
were detected by 32P nucleotide transfer. Each mRNA associated with shared as
well as unique proteins, some of which were detected only in mature oocytes. The 
possible function of these proteins is discussed.

PMID: 2456235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Virol. 1988 Aug;62(8):2544-51.

Recognition of similar epitopes on varicella-zoster virus gpI and gpIV by
monoclonal antibodies.

Vafai A(1), Wroblewska Z, Mahalingam R, Cabirac G, Wellish M, Cisco M, Gilden D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver
80262.

Two monoclonal antibodies, MAb43.2 and MAb79.0, prepared against varicella-zoster
virus (VZV) proteins were selected to analyze VZV gpIV and gpI, respectively.
MAb43.2 reacted only with cytoplasmic antigens, whereas MAb79.0 recognized both
cytoplasmic and membrane antigens in VZV-infected cells. Immunoprecipitation of
in vitro translation products with MAb43.2 revealed only proteins encoded by the 
gpIV gene, whereas MAb79.0 precipitated proteins encoded by the gpIV and gpI
genes. Pulse-chase analysis followed by immunoprecipitation of VZV-infected cells
indicated reactivity of MAb43.2 with three phosphorylated precursor species of
gpIV and reactivity of MAb79.0 with the precursor and mature forms of gpI and
gpIV. These results indicated that (i) MAb43.2 and MAb79.0 recognize different
epitopes on VZV gpIV, (ii) glycosylation of gpIV ablates recognition by MAb43.2, 
and (iii) gpIV is phosphorylated. To map the binding site of MAb79.0 on gpI, the 
pGEM transcription vector, containing the coding region of the gpI gene, was
linearized, and three truncated gpI DNA fragments were generated. RNA was
transcribed from each truncated fragment by using SP6 RNA polymerase, translated 
in vitro in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate, and immunoprecipitated with MAb79.0 and
human sera. The results revealed the existence of an antibody-binding site within
14 amino acid residues located between residues 109 to 123 on the predicted amino
acid sequences of gpI. From the predicted amino acid sequences, 14 residues on
gpI (residues 107 to 121) displayed a degree of similarity (36%) to two regions
(residues 55 to 69 and 245 to 259) of gp IV. Such similarities may account for
the binding of MAb79.0 to both VZV gpI and gpIV.

PMCID: PMC253683
PMID: 2455814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Eur J Biochem. 1988 Jul 15;175(1):75-86.

Studies on the mechanism of translational enhancement by the 5'-leader sequence
of tobacco mosaic virus RNA.

Sleat DE(1), Hull R, Turner PC, Wilson TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virus Research, John Innes Institute and Agricultural and Food
Research Council Institute of Plant Science Research, Norwich, England.

Translation of foreign mRNAs is enhanced by a cis-acting derivative (omega') of
the 5'-leader sequence (omega) of tobacco mosaic virus RNA (vulgare strain). To
explain this effect we have conducted several experiments in vitro. 1. The
presence of various 5'-terminal sequences, including omega', did not
significantly increase the half-lives of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) 
or neomycin phosphotransferase (NPTII) mRNAs in wheat-germ extract. Also, a long 
leader sequence, unrelated to omega', did not enhance expression of NPTII mRNA in
vitro. 2. The ability of several leader sequences, including omega', to form
multiple initiation complexes with 80S (wheat germ) ribosomes was examined using 
CAT or NPTII mRNAs incubated in the presence of sparsomycin. Formation of disome 
complexes was unrelated to the capacity of a 5'-leader sequence to enhance
translation. 3. Expression of CAT mRNA in both wheat germ extract and
messenger-dependent rabbit reticulocyte lysate was less susceptible to inhibition
by increasing salt concentration when a 5'-proximal omega' sequence was present. 
This effect was less marked when the CAT mRNA was capped. Conversely at high salt
concentrations, capping was less stimulatory for mRNA with a 5'-proximal omega'
sequence. These data suggest that omega' and the cap enhance translation, at
least in part, by a similar mechanism. We propose that both features reduce RNA
secondary structure, thereby rendering the 5' terminus more accessible to
scanning by 40S ribosomal subunits and/or interaction with associated initiation 
factors. This conclusion was supported by computer-based secondary-structure
analyses of our SP6 RNA polymerase transcript sequences. The ability of 5' leader
sequences from brome mosaic virus RNA 3, alfalfa mosaic virus RNA 4, and the
genomic RNAs of turnip yellow mosaic virus, Rous sarcoma virus or tobacco mosaic 
virus (tomato strain) to enhance mRNA translation in eukaryotic systems may also 
be correlated with their respective secondary structures. A different mechanism
probably accounts for the omega'-dependent enhancement of mRNA expression in
Escherichia coli or in E. coli cell-free systems.

PMID: 2841127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Gene. 1988 Jul 15;67(1):137-40.

Vectors for in vitro synthesis of poly(A)+RNA transcripts.

Hoffman LM(1), Donaldson DD.

Author information: 
(1)Agrigenetics Advanced Science Company, Madison, WI 53716.

An RNA expression plasmid containing a maize zein storage protein gene was
modified by the addition of an oligodeoxynucleotide duplex containing oligo(A30) 
in the RNA sense strand to the 3' flank of the gene. By linearizing the plasmid
at either side of the oligo(A) region, transcripts with or without a poly(A) tail
may be synthesized. Poly(A) addition dramatically increases the translation of
SP6-transcribed zein transcripts in Xenopus laevis oocytes. We describe a
derivative of pSP64, pSP64A, containing the oligo(A) region, which may be useful 
for the transcription of polyadenylated RNAs from any template DNA.

PMID: 2458300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Virol. 1988 Jul;62(7):2474-82.

The product of the bovine papillomavirus type 1 modulator gene (M) is a
phosphoprotein.

Thorner L(1), Bucay N, Choe J, Botchan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California, Berkeley 94720.

The M gene of bovine papillomavirus type 1 has been genetically defined as
encoding a trans-acting product which negatively regulates bovine papillomavirus 
type 1 replication and is important for establishment of stable plasmids in
transformed cells. The gene for this regulatory protein has been mapped in part
to the 5' portion of the largest open reading frame (E1) in the virus. We
constructed a trpE-E1 fusion gene and expressed this gene in Escherichia coli.
Rabbits were immunized with purified fusion protein, and antisera directed
against the product were used to identify the M gene product in virus-transformed
cells. In this way a polypeptide with an apparent molecular mass of 23
kilodaltons was detected. The virus-encoded product is phosphorylated and can be 
readily detected by immunoprecipitation assays from cells transformed by the
virus. Cells that harbor viral DNA without M as integrated copies do not produce 
this protein, whereas cells that harbor integrated viral genomes which are
defective for another E1 viral gene important for plasmid replication, R, do
produce this protein. The protein has an anomalously low electrophoretic
mobility. An in vitro translation product of an SP6 RNA product of a sequenced
cDNA predicts a molecular mass of 16 kilodaltons for the protein, and this in
vitro translation product has an electrophoretic mobility identical to that of
the in vivo immunoprecipitated protein. The results of these studies confirm our 
previous genetic studies which indicated that part of the E1 open reading frame
defined a discrete gene product distinct from other putative products which may
be encoded by this open reading frame.

PMCID: PMC253406
PMID: 2836626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. EMBO J. 1988 Jul;7(7):1965-72.

Two distinct genetic loci regulating class II gene expression are defective in
human mutant and patient cell lines.

Yang Z(1), Accolla RS, Pious D, Zegers BJ, Strominger JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138.

Heterokaryons were prepared and analyzed shortly after cell fusion using two
mutant class-II-negative human B cell lines (RJ 2.2.5 and 6.1.6) and a cell line 
(TF) from a patient with a class-II-negative Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome. The
resulting transient heterokaryons were analyzed by using an anti-HLA-DR
monoclonal antibody to assess the cell surface expression of HLA-DR (the major
subtype of class II antigens) by immunofluorescence microscopy and by using
uniformly 32P-labeled SP6 RNA probes in Northern blots and RNase protection
assays to assess mRNA synthesis. We find that class II gene expression in a B
cell line from a Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome patient (TF) is rescued by a B cell
line which expresses class II antigens indicating that this disease, at least in 
part, is caused by a defect(s) in a genetic locus encoding a factor(s) necessary 
for class II gene expression. Secondly, reciprocal genetic complementation was
demonstrated in the heterokaryons 6.1.6 x RJ 2.2.5 and TF x RJ 2.2.5 (but not in 
TF x 6.1.6) by detection of cell surface DR by immunofluorescence microscopy and 
by a novel class II mRNA typing technique which allows characterization of
distinct class II alleles. Thus, the two mutants generated in vitro have defects 
at two different genetic loci encoding specific regulatory factors necessary for 
human class II gene expression. One of these mutant cell lines, but not the
other, complements the defect in the patient cell line, TF.

PMCID: PMC454468
PMID: 2458252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Jun 10;16(11):4995-5011.

Intron sequences and the length of the downstream second exon affect the binding 
of hnRNP C proteins in an in vitro splicing reaction.

Goswami P(1), Goldenberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of
Medicine, FL 33101.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 1989 Jan 25;17(2):830.

The proteins that are in direct contact with the pre-mRNA in an in vitro splicing
reaction were analyzed by UV cross-linking experiments. Six major proteins (120, 
55, 44, 42, 39 and 38 KD) and three minor polypeptides (84, 72 and 63 KD) were
detected. The predominant proteins 44, 42 KD belong to the class of hnRNP C
proteins since they were immunoprecipitated by monoclonal antibodies directed
against hnRNP C proteins. The cross-linked proteins were not detected in the
absence of Mg2+, ATP or when RNA lacking introns were used as substrates in the
splicing reactions. The effect of exon sequences on the binding efficiency for
the photocrosslinked proteins was investigated. Transcripts containing a second
exon of 24 nucleotides for the beta-globin or 107 nucleotides for the mouse
insulin, yielded a reduced amount of cross-linked proteins when compared with
"full length" pre-mRNAs. Sequences within the first exon of the beta-globin
pre-mRNA did not affect the binding efficiency of these proteins. The reduced
binding efficiency of the cross-linked proteins for the truncated beta-globin or 
mouse insulin pre-mRNAs correlated with the lower efficiency for in vitro
splicing. Substitutions with unrelated sequences in the beta-globin second exon
restore the binding of the cross-linked proteins indicating that the length of
the second exon and not specific sequences are relevant for the binding
efficiency of these proteins. The SP6/mouse insulin oligonucleotides cross-linked
to the hnRNP C proteins were isolated and sequenced. A 17-mer was located in the 
second exon (134 nucleotides downstream from the 3' splice site) and a 14-mer in 
the intron region (25 nucleotides downstream the 5' splice site). The beta-globin
oligonucleotides cross-linked to the hnRNP C proteins were a 13-mer in the second
exon (28 nucleotides downstream the 3' splice site) and an 8-mer in the first
exon (81 nucleotides downstream the 5' end of the pre-mRNA). Our results indicate
that the hnRNP C proteins interact with those oligonucleotides located in
different regions of the pre-mRNA. The binding efficiency of those proteins,
however, depends on the length of the second exon and the presence of intron
sequences (secondary and/or tertiary pre-mRNA structure).

PMCID: PMC336712
PMID: 3290845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Science. 1988 Jun 10;240(4858):1520-2.

DNA and RNA sequence determination based on phosphorothioate chemistry.

Gish G(1), Eckstein F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut fuer experimentelle Medizin, Abteilung Chemie, Goettingen,
West Germany.

The difference in reactivity between phosphate and phosphorothioate diesters is
the basis of a chemical degradation scheme for the sequencing of DNA and RNA. The
phosphorothioate groups are incorporated into the nucleic acid in four separate
enzymatic reactions, with three of the natural nucleoside triphosphates and one
alpha-thiotriphosphate in each reaction. Selective strand cleavage is achieved
through alkylation to form the hydrolytically labile phosphorothioate triester.
As an example, the sequence analysis is presented of M13 phage DNA and of RNA
prepared by transcription with SP6 RNA polymerase.

PMID: 2453926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Virology. 1988 Jun;164(2):435-42.

Topography of the simian rotavirus nonstructural glycoprotein (NS28) in the
endoplasmic reticulum membrane.

Chan WK(1), Au KS, Estes MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Epidemiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030.

The simian rotavirus SA11 genome segment 10 codes for a nonstructural
glycoprotein, NS28, that has been hypothesized to be involved in budding of viral
particles into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. Previous studies had
suggested that NS28 is an integral membrane protein of the ER, possibly a
transmembrane protein. We have examined the topography of NS28 inserted in
microsomal membranes following cell-free translation of genome segment 10
transcripts. These transcripts were obtained either by hybrid selection of mRNA
synthesized by the endogenous viral RNA polymerase or by in vitro transcription
of genome segment 10 cDNA using SP6 polymerase. Full-length and truncated gene 10
transcripts were translated in a cell-free system supplemented with dog
pancreatic microsomes. The existence of a cytoplasmic domain of the translation
product was demonstrated by protease protection experiments. An 18,000 (18K) mol 
wt glycosylated polypeptide was protected from digestion with proteinase K and
trypsin, whereas chymotrypsin digestion yielded a 23K mol wt glycosylated
polypeptide. Correlation of these biochemical data with the known sequence of
NS28 suggests that a 10K mol wt hydrophilic, carboxy-terminal fragment (from
amino acid number 86 to amino acid number 175) of this glycoprotein is exposed on
the cytoplasmic side of the ER membrane. A model of how NS28 folds in the ER
membrane is proposed.

PMID: 2835861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Virol. 1988 Jun;62(6):2124-33.

Molecular analysis of Sindbis virus pathogenesis in neonatal mice by using virus 
recombinants constructed in vitro.

Polo JM(1), Davis NL, Rice CM, Huang HV, Johnston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh
27695-7615.

Genetic loci affecting Sindbis virus pathogenesis in neonatal mice have been
examined by using a full-length cDNA clone of the virus (Toto1101). The
full-length cDNA is linked to a bacteriophage SP6 promoter to facilitate the
synthesis of infectious RNA transcripts in vitro. Virus derived from Toto1101
showed reduced virulence (attenuation) in neonatal mice. Replacement of the E1
glycoprotein and 6K genes of Toto1101 with cloned E1 and 6K genes derived from a 
virulent Sindbis virus strain, AR339 (SB), resulted in a new construct, TR2000,
that gave rise to virulent virus. Sequence determinations for the entire
substituted regions of TR2000, Toto1101, and related virulent and attenuated
strains identified three coding differences in E1 between Toto1101 and TR2000.
These differences, individually or in combination, may be responsible for the
attenuated phenotype. Previous studies in this laboratory identified another
attenuating mutation at amino acid position 114 of the E2 glycoprotein (N.L.
Davis, F.J. Fuller, W.G. Dougherty, R.A. Olmsted, and R.E. Johnston, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 83:6771-6775, 1986). Substitution of Arg-114 in the mutant SB-RL
for Ser-114 of SB appears to confer three distinguishing phenotypes: attenuation 
in neonatal mice, increased sensitivity to specific E2 monoclonal antibodies, and
accelerated penetration of BHK cells. Replacement of TR2000 sequences containing 
the codon for amino acid 114 of E2 with corresponding fragments from cDNA clones 
of SB or SB-RL produced two strains of Sindbis virus (TR2100 and TR2200) which
were isogenic except for the E2 114 codon (Ser and Arg, respectively). The three 
diagnostic phenotypes cosegregated according to the origin of the codon for amino
acid 114 of E2, confirming the dramatic effect of this single amino acid
substitution on these three phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC253309
PMID: 2835514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Virol. 1988 Jun;62(6):1956-62.

A multigene family encodes the human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein complex gcII
(gp47-52 complex).

Gretch DR(1), Kari B, Gehrz RC, Stinski MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

The HXLF (HindIII-X left reading frame) gene family is a group of five genes that
share one or two regions of homology and are arranged in tandem within the short 
unique component of the human cytomegalovirus genome (K. Weston and B.G. Barrell,
J. Mol. Biol. 192:177-208, 1986). These genes were cloned into an SP6 expression 
vector in both the sense and antisense orientations. An abundant 1.62-kilobase
(kb) bicistronic mRNA, predicted to originate from HXLF1 and HXLF2, was detected 
in the cytoplasm of infected human fibroblast cells by Northern (RNA) blot
analysis. Less abundant RNAs of 1.0 and 0.8 kb, predicted to originate from the
HXLF5 and HXLF2 genes, respectively, were also detected. Monocistronic,
bicistronic, and polycistronic RNAs synthesized in vitro by using SP6 polymerase 
were translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysates with or without canine pancreatic 
microsomal membranes. The HXLF1 or the HXLF1 and HXLF2 translation products were 
detected when the above mRNAs were used. The HXLF3, HXLF4, and HXLF5 gene
products were not detected by in vitro translation of the SP6-derived
polycistronic mRNA. Nonglycosylated or glycosylated HXLF1 and HXLF2 gene products
were immunoprecipitated by monoclonal antibody 9E10, which is specific for a
virion envelope glycoprotein complex designated gcII (gp47-52 complex). In
addition, the monoclonal antibody 9E10 immunoprecipitated a diffuse glycoprotein 
band, designated gp47-52, from HCMV-infected cell lysates. The amino acid
composition of gp47-52 purified from viron envelopes has the highest similarity
to the predicted amino acid composition of the HXLF1 plus HXLF2 open reading
frames, but it is more similar to HXLF2 than to HXLF1. The Northern blot results 
imply that gp47-52 is synthesized predominantly from the abundant 1.62-kb
bicistronic mRNA encoded by the HXLF1 and HXLF2 genes. However, the glycoprotein 
could also be synthesized by the monocistronic 0.8-kb mRNA encoded by the HXLF2
gene as well as by the mRNAs predicted from the other HXLF genes.

PMCID: PMC253279
PMID: 2835500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Virol. 1988 Jun;62(6):2200-3.

Mapping of monoclonal antibodies to the Sendai virus P protein and the location
of its phosphates.

Vidal S(1), Curran J, Orvell C, Kolakofsky D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Geneva Medical School, Switzerland.

The epitopes of a panel of five monoclonal antibodies to the Sendai virus P
protein were mapped by generating modified forms of the P mRNA via SP6 expression
followed by in vitro translation. The epitopes were found to be clustered in the 
C-terminal region of the protein. Two epitopes were within the last 30 residues, 
two were within the next 65, and one was between residues 308 and 451 of this
568-residue-long protein. By a combination of partial proteolysis and Western
immunoblotting with one of these antibodies, the sites at which phosphates are
added in vitro by the virion-associated kinase were mapped to the second quarter 
of the molecule from the N terminus.

PMCID: PMC253331
PMID: 2452902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 May 25;16(10):4483-98.

In vitro transcription and translational efficiency of chimeric SP6 messenger
RNAs devoid of 5' vector nucleotides.

Jobling SA(1), Cuthbert CM, Rogers SG, Fraley RT, Gehrke L.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.

A plasmid containing the bacteriophage SP6 promoter, designated pHSTO, permits in
vitro transcription of RNAs devoid of vector-derived nucleotides. This vector has
been characterized for relative transcriptional activity using constructs which
alter the conserved nucleotides extending beyond the SP6 transcriptional
initiation site. SP6 polymerase efficiently transcribes cDNA inserts which
contain a guanosine (G) nucleotide at position +1 relative to the SP6 promoter;
however, inserts with an adenosine (A) or pyrimidine at position +1 are not
transcribed. Several cellular and viral cDNAs have been transcribed into
translatable messenger RNA using this vector; however, SP6 polymerase will not
transcribe the A-T rich untranslated leader from alfalfa mosaic virus RNA 4
efficiently unless the viral mRNA cap site is separated from the transcriptional 
initiation site by twelve base pairs of vector DNA. Chimeric messenger RNAs were 
created by linking the untranslated leader sequence of several viral mRNAs to the
coding region of barley alpha-amylase, and the resultant mRNAs were translated in
a wheat germ extract to determine relative translational efficiencies. The
untranslated leader sequences of turnip yellow mosaic virus coat protein mRNA and
black beetle virus RNA 2 did not increase translational efficiency, while the
tobacco mosaic virus leader stimulated translation significantly. The results
indicate that substitution of a cognate untranslated leader sequence with a
leader derived from a highly efficient mRNA does not necessarily predict enhanced
translational efficiency of the chimeric mRNA.

PMCID: PMC336643
PMID: 3260027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 1988 May 5;263(13):6142-5.

Retroviral-mediated transfer and expression of human beta-globin genes in
cultured murine and human erythroid cells.

Weber-Benarous A(1), Cone RD, London IM, Mulligan RC.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142.

We have cloned human beta-globin DNA sequences from a genomic library prepared
from DNA isolated from the human leukemia cell line K562 and have used the
retroviral vector pZip-NeoSV(X)1 to introduce a 3.0-kilobase segment encompassing
the globin gene into mouse erythroleukemia cells. Whereas the endogenous K562
beta-globin gene is repressed in K562 cells, when introduced into mouse
erythroleukemia cells by retroviral-mediated gene transfer, the beta-globin gene 
from K562 cells was transcribed and induced 5-20-fold after treatment of the
cells with dimethyl sulfoxide. The transcripts were correctly initiated, and
expression and regulation of the K562 gene were identical to the expression of a 
normal human beta-globin gene transferred into mouse erythroleukemia cells in the
same way. We have also introduced the normal human beta-globin gene into K562
cells using the same retrovirus vector. SP6 analysis of the RNA isolated from the
transduced cells showed that the normal beta-globin gene was transcribed at a
moderately high level, before or after treatment with hemin. Based on these data,
we suggest that the lack of expression of the endogenous beta-globin gene in K562
cells does not result from an alteration in the gene itself and may not result
from a lack of factor(s) necessary for beta-globin gene transcription.
Retroviral-mediated transfer of the human beta-globin gene may, however, uniquely
influence expression of the gene in K562 cells.

PMID: 3162912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Virology. 1988 May;164(1):256-64.

The P protein and the nonstructural 38K and 29K proteins of Newcastle disease
virus are derived from the same open reading frame.

McGinnes L(1), McQuain C, Morrison T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester 01605.

The nucleotide sequence of cloned cDNA copies of the mRNA encoding the Newcastle 
disease virus (NDV), strain AV, phosphoprotein (P) was determined. The sequence
of 1443 nucleotides contains one long open reading frame which could encode a
protein with a molecular weight of 42,126, and two smaller open reading frames
which could encode proteins with molecular weights of 11,178 and 13,935.
Full-length cDNA clones were constructed in an SP6 vector, mRNA was transcribed
in a cell-free system using the SP6 polymerase, and the mRNA was translated in a 
wheat germ cell-free extract. The P mRNA directed the synthesis of, primarily,
four products. One, with a molecular weight of 53,000 Da, comigrated with
authentic P protein made in infected cells and was precipitable with antisera
with specificity for the NDV P protein. The other products of the cell-free
reaction had molecular weights of 38,000, 29,000 and 12,000. The 29,000- and the 
38,000-Da polypeptides were also precipitable with anti-P protein antibody. Using
truncated cDNA clones, evidence is presented that the 38,000- and 29,000-Da
proteins are derived from initiation at AUG triplets in the same reading frame as
the P protein. Infected cells also contain these polypeptides which may be
analogous to C proteins of other paramyxoviruses. Thus the NDV P protein mRNA is 
different than most other paramyxovirus P protein mRNAs which are translated in
two different reading frames to yield the P and C proteins.

PMID: 3363866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Histochem Cytochem. 1988 May;36(5):543-6.

Localization of calcitonin and calcitonin gene-related peptide mRNAs in rat
parafollicular cells by hybridocytochemistry.

Zabel M(1), Schäfer H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut of Pathology, University of Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

By use of appropriate fragments of CT DNA or a CGRP DNA and SP6 polymerase
system, we produced anti-sense RNA probes labeled with biotinylated 11-UTP. The
labeling and specificity of the RNA probes were confirmed using dot-blot
hybridization. By use of hybridocytochemistry, CT mRNA and CGRP mRNA were
localized in all parafollicular cells in control and
dihydrotachysterin-pre-treated rats. We concluded that all parafollicular cells
simultaneously produce both CT mRNA and CGRP mRNA, either under control
conditions or after stimulation by dihydrotachysterin-induced hypercalcemia.

PMID: 3258608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biol. 1988 May;8(5):2229-32.

Recombinant type 1 transforming growth factor beta precursor produced in Chinese 
hamster ovary cells is glycosylated and phosphorylated.

Brunner AM(1), Gentry LE, Cooper JA, Purchio AF.

Author information: 
(1)Oncogen, Seattle, Washington 98121.

Analyses of cDNA clones coding for simian type 1 transforming growth factor beta 
(TGF-beta 1) suggest that there are three potential sites for N-linked
glycosylation located in the amino terminus of the precursor region. Analysis of 
[3H]glucosamine-labeled serum-free supernatants from a line of Chinese hamster
ovary cells which secrete high levels of recombinant TGF-beta 1 indicate that the
TGF-beta 1 precursor, but not the mature form, is glycosylated. Digestion with
neuraminidase resulted in a shift in migration of the two TGF-beta 1 precursor
bands, which suggests that they contain sialic acid residues. Endoglycosidase H
had no noticeable effect. Treatment with N-glycanase produced two
faster-migrating sharp bands, the largest of which had a molecular weight of 39
kilodaltons. TGF-beta 1-specific transcripts produced by SP6 polymerase
programmed the synthesis of a 42-kilodalton polypeptide which, we suggest, is the
unmodified protein backbone of the precursor. Labeling with 32Pi showed that the 
TGF-beta 1 precursor was phosphorylated in the amino portion of the molecule.

PMCID: PMC363407
PMID: 3164441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Genes Dev. 1988 May;2(5):578-87.

Multiple factors are required for specific RNA cleavage at a poly(A) addition
site.

Gilmartin GM(1), McDevitt MA, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021.

An SP6 RNA containing the adenovirus 5 L3 poly(A) site is processed efficiently
in a HeLa cell nuclear extract to generate correct 3' termini. Accurate 3'
processing has also been demonstrated for the adenovirus E2A and SV40 early
poly(A) sites, although these are processed less efficiently than the L3 site.
Efficient cleavage at the poly(A) site requires the presence of a 5'-cap
structure, as well as the RNA sequence motifs previously shown to be necessary
for 3' processing in vivo, suggesting the presence and action of the appropriate 
factors in the nuclear extract. Fractionation of the nuclear extract has revealed
a requirement for at least two distinct factors for cleavage at the L3 poly(A)
site. One of these factors appears to possess an RNA component due to its
sensitivity to micrococcal nuclease. The activity of this fraction is also
sensitive to alpha-Sm monoclonal antibody, indicating the presence of an snRNP
essential for the cleavage reaction. Additional factors are required for the
subsequent polyadenylation reaction, indicating the involvement of a
multicomponent complex in the processing of an RNA at the poly(A) site.

PMID: 2838381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Virology. 1988 May;164(1):132-40.

Characterization of the in vitro interaction between SV40 T antigen and p53:
mapping the p53 binding site.

Schmieg FI(1), Simmons DT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life and Health Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark 19716.

An efficient in vitro system for generating soluble complexes between simian
virus 40 T antigen and the cellular protein p53 was developed. A p53 cDNA was
inserted 3' to the SP6 promoter in pGEM-1 (Promega-Biotec) and transcribed by SP6
polymerase. In vitro translation of the cRNA generated p53 which was
immunoprecipitable with all five monoclonal antibodies tested (PAb122, PAb421,
PAb242, PAb246, and PAb248). The p53 sedimented at about 8-10 S in sucrose
gradients, possibly corresponding to a tetramer. T-antigen-p53 complexes were
produced by the addition of immunoaffinity-purified T antigen to p53-containing
translation lysates. Equivalent amounts of p53 were immunoprecipitated with the
anti-T-antigen antibodies PAb416, PAb419, and PAb101, suggesting that in vitro
made p53 complexed mostly to a population of T-antigen molecules that had matured
at least 15 min in the cell. The complexes sedimented at 18-20 S in sucrose
gradients. In order to map the p53 binding site on T antigen, p53 was complexed
in vitro to labeled proteolytic fragments of T antigen. A 46K fragment, spanning 
residues 131-517, was immunoprecipitated with the anti-p53 monoclonal PAb122 and 
therefore is likely to contain the p53 binding site. This region contains
T-antigen sequences necessary for the efficient transformation of nonpermissive
cells and for the induction of cellular rRNA synthesis. It also contains the
binding sites for DNA polymerase alpha and ATP. We suggest a possible role for
T-p53 complexes in T-antigen-associated functions.

PMID: 2834865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Brain Res. 1988 May 1;468(1):1-9.

An isolated growth cone-enriched fraction from developing rat brain has substance
P binding sites.

Lockerbie RO(1), Beaujouan JC, Saffroy M, Glowinski J.

Author information: 
(1)Collège de France-INSERM U 114, Chaire de Neuropharmacologie, Paris.

A fraction enriched in neuronal growth cones isolated from developing rat
forebrain was shown to possess binding sites for the substance P analog,
Bolton-Hunter substance P [( 125I]BHSP). Specific binding of this ligand reached 
an equilibrium after 10 min at 20 degrees C, and was reversible and
temperature-dependent. Removal of extracellular Na+ did not block but rather
augmented [125I]BHSP binding suggesting that the labeled analog was not
transported into the growth cone fraction. Scatchard analysis of the binding
indicated a single class of non-interacting binding sites in the growth cone
fraction (Kd: 257 pM; Bmax: 56 fmol/mg protein). From competition studies using
substance P and other tachykinins, their rank order of potency for inhibiting
[125I]BHSP binding was SP greater than physalaemin much greater than eledoisin
greater than kassinin greater than NKB greater than or equal to NKA. Such order
is consistent with the presence of an SP receptor (Neurokinin-1) in the growth
cone fraction. The N-terminal fragments of substance P, SP1-7 and SP1-11 free
acids, and the C-terminal fragment, SP7-11, were devoid of affinity for the
[125I]BHSP binding site. However SP6-11 and SP1-11 methyl esters showed more
potency.

PMID: 2454147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dev Biol. 1988 May;127(1):54-63.

Developmental regulation of micro-injected histone genes in sea urchin embryos.

Vitelli L(1), Kemler I, Lauber B, Birnstiel ML, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II, Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

The developmental behavior of cloned histone genes of Psammechinus miliaris was
studied by injection into eggs of two related sea urchin species followed by
fertilization. All five early histone genes were faithfully expressed in early
blastula embryos as shown by SP6 RNA mapping. A 5-10 times lower expression rate 
was estimated for the injected early H2A gene from its competition strength with 
the endogenous gene. Transcripts of this early H2A gene accumulated during the
cleavage stages and decayed in late embryos in parallel with the endogenous early
H2A mRNA. However, an introduced late H2B gene was incorrectly regulated, since
its mRNA level did not increase from the blastula to the gastrula stage. The
sperm H2B-1 gene, normally inactive in development, was 80 times less well
expressed than the early H2A gene in transformed blastulae. A fusion gene with
the early H2A promoter linked to the structural sperm H2B gene was, however,
efficiently transcribed suggesting that all essential information for an early
expression pattern is contained within the 5' region of the early H2A gene.

PMID: 2452106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Science. 1988 Apr 29;240(4852):662-4.

Aggregation of lysine-containing zeins into protein bodies in Xenopus oocytes.

Wallace JC(1), Galili G, Kawata EE, Cuellar RE, Shotwell MA, Larkins BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 47907.

Zeins, the storage proteins of maize, are totally lacking in the essential amino 
acids lysine and tryptophan. Lysine codons and lysine- and tryptophan-encoding
oligonucleotides were introduced at several positions into a 19-kilodalton zein
complementary DNA by oligonucleotide-mediated mutagenesis. A 450-base pair open
reading frame from a simian virus 40 (SV40) coat protein was also engineered into
the zein coding region. Messenger RNAs for the modified zeins were synthesized in
vitro with an SP6 RNA polymerase system and injected into Xenopus laevis oocytes.
The modifications did not affect the translation, signal peptide cleavage, or
stability of the zeins. The ability of the modified zeins to assemble into
structures similar to maize protein bodies was assayed by two criteria: assembly 
into membrane-bound vesicles resistant to exogenously added protease, and ability
to self-aggregate into dense structures. All of the modified zeins were
membrane-bound; only the one containing a 17-kilodalton SV40 protein fragment was
unable to aggregate. These findings suggest that it may be possible to create
high-lysine corn by genetic engineering.

PMID: 2834822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 1988 Apr 25;263(12):5764-70.

Role of the 3'-poly(A) sequence in translational regulation of mRNAs in Xenopus
laevis oocytes.

Galili G(1), Kawata EE, Smith LD, Larkins BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907.

We investigated the effect of 3'-noncoding and poly(A) sequences on the
translation and stability of membrane-bound mRNA (maize zein) and free mRNA
(Xenopus beta-globin) by injecting SP6 transcripts into stage 6 Xenopus oocytes. 
With zein mRNA, the presence or absence of a 3'-noncoding or poly(A) sequence had
little effect on mRNA stability over 24 h, and the 3'-noncoding sequence played
essentially no role in mRNA translation. With short periods of incubation, e.g.
1-2 h, the presence or absence of a poly(A) tail also had little effect on zein
mRNA translation; but after longer periods, translation of the poly(A-) mRNA was 
significantly reduced. A similar pattern of mRNA translation was observed for
poly(A+) and poly(A-) Xenopus beta-globin mRNAs. These differences in
translational efficiency correlated with the formation of maximally loaded
polysomes (seven-eight ribosomes/mRNA) for the poly(A+) zein mRNA and a failure
to form large polysomes with the poly(A-) zein mRNA. These results are consistent
with a model in which the 3'-poly(A) sequence of mRNAs facilitates reinitiation
of ribosomes during protein synthesis.

PMID: 3356706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Apr 25;16(8):3127-40.

Selective recovery of foreign gene transcripts as virus-like particles in
TMV-infected transgenic tobaccos.

Sleat DE(1), Gallie DR, Watts JW, Deom CM, Turner PC, Beachy RN, Wilson TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virus Research, John Innes Institute, Norwich, UK.

A short origin-of-assembly sequence (OAS) located in the 30kDa movement protein
gene, about 1.0kb from the 3'-end of the common strain of tobacco mosaic virus
(TMV) RNA, nucleates encapsidation of the 6395-nucleotide-long genome by TMV coat
protein in vitro, and presumably also in vivo. Single-stranded RNAs containing a 
foreign reporter gene sequence and the TMV OAS at their 5' - and 3' -ends,
respectively, can be synthesized in vitro from recombinant SP6-transcription
plasmids and will assemble spontaneously in vitro to form TMV-like 'pseudovirus' 
particles. In this paper, we show that foreign gene transcripts derived from the 
nuclear DNA of plants transformed by Agrobacterium tumefaciens, and which contain
the TMV OAS, can be assembled into stable 'pseudovirus' particles in vivo during 
a systemic infection by TMV (helper). This is the first report of structural
complementation between a heritable function bestowed on a transgenic plant and
an infecting virus. As a route to protect, accumulate and recover a specific mRNA
in vivo, in transgenic plant cells, this novel approach may find wider
applications in developmental plant molecular biology.

PMCID: PMC336483
PMID: 2453837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Gene. 1988 Apr 15;64(1):173-7.

Smart2, a cosmid vector with a phage lambda origin for both systematic chromosome
walking and P-element-mediated gene transfer in Drosophila.

Speek M(1), Raff JW, Harrison-Lavoie K, Little PF, Glover DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Imperial College, London, U.K.

We describe a new phage-lambda-replicon-based cosmid vector suitable for both
chromosome walking and P-element-mediated transformation in Drosophila. Its
unique BamHI cloning site is flanked by the promoters for the SP6 and T7-encoded 
RNA polymerases, permitting the synthesis of probes complementary to the ends of 
the cloned inserts for library screening. The selectable marker is tet for
bacterial cell transformation and neo for Drosophila transformation expressed
under the control of the Drosophila hsp70 promoter.

PMID: 2969350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Gene. 1988 Apr 15;64(1):135-45.

Bidirectional chain-termination nucleotide sequencing: transposon Tn5seq1 as a
mobile source of primer sites.

Nag DK(1), Huang HV, Berg DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Washington University Medical
School, St. Louis, MO 63110.

The sequencing of large DNA fragments by the chain-termination method [Sanger et 
al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74 (1977) 5463-5467] has generally required
extensive manipulations to bring all parts of the fragment near a specific
primer-binding site, or the repeated synthesis of new oligodeoxynucleotide
primers. Here we develop a more efficient approach, the use of a transposable
element to insert primer binding sites at random in the DNA of interest. We
constructed a Tn5 derivative called Tn5seq1 with unique DNA segments near each
end so that oligodeoxynucleotides matching them could serve as primers for
sequencing in each direction from any Tn5seq1 insertion site. Our experiments
demonstrate the use of Tn5seq1 for sequencing in pBR322 plasmids and also in
uncloned DNAs of the Escherichia coli chromosome. The unique segments near the
left and right ends of Tn5seq1 are promoters from phages T7 and SP6,
respectively, to permit the efficient transcription of adjacent DNAs in vivo or
in vitro.

PMID: 2840345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 1988 Apr 5;263(10):4907-13.

Translation initiation potential of the 5' proximal AUGs of the polycistronic P/C
mRNA of Sendai virus. A multipurpose vector for site-specific mutagenesis.

Patwardhan S(1), Gupta KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612.

To determine the translation initiation potential of the 5' proximal four AUGs of
the polycistronic P/C mRNA of Sendai virus, we have developed an efficient system
for oligonucleotide-directed site-specific mutagenesis utilizing a plasmid vector
which contains the replication origin of the single-stranded DNA phage f1 and the
phage SP6 promoter. Utilizing uridine containing single-stranded DNA templates of
the plasmid vector carrying the P/C gene we introduced point mutations in all
four of the putative initiator codons (AUGs) of the P/C gene. Based on the
analysis of in vitro translation products from the SP6 polymerase-directed
transcripts of the mutants, the first and second AUG codons were assigned to the 
P and C proteins, respectively. Proteins detected in vitro, Y1 and Y2, initiated 
from the third and fourth AUG codons, respectively, and originated within the C
reading frame. Since the C' protein is encoded in the same reading frame as the C
protein but did not initiate from any of the 5' proximal AUGs, the synthesis of
the C' protein may start from a non-AUG initiator codon in the P/C gene.

PMID: 2832411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Cell Biol. 1988 Apr;106(4):1161-70.

Intracellular targeting of isoproteins in muscle cytoarchitecture.

Schäfer BW(1), Perriard JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich.

Part of the muscle creatine kinase (MM-CK) in skeletal muscle of chicken is
localized in the M-band of myofibrils, while chicken heart cells containing
myofibrils and BB-CK, but not expressing MM-CK, do not show this association. The
specificity of the MM-CK interaction was tested using cultured chicken heart
cells as "living test tubes" by microinjection of in vitro generated MM-CK and
hybrid M-CK/B-CK mRNA with SP6 RNA polymerase. The resulting translation products
were detected in injected cells with isoprotein-specific antibodies. M-CK
molecules and translation products of chimeric cDNA molecules containing the head
half of the B-CK and the tail half of the M-CK coding regions were localized in
the M-band of the myofibrils. The tail, but not the head portion of M-CK is
essential for the association of M-CK with the M-band of myofibrils. We conclude 
that gross biochemical properties do not always coincide with a molecule's
specific functions like the participation in cell cytoarchitecture which may
depend on molecular targeting even within the same cellular compartment.

PMCID: PMC2115002
PMID: 3283147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Ann Inst Pasteur Virol. 1988 Apr-Jun;139(2):217-25.

[cRNA probes (riboprobes) synthesized in vitro for detecting enterovirus by
molecular hybridization].

[Article in French]

Kopecka H(1), Prévot J, Girard M, Fuchs F, Aymard M.

Author information: 
(1)Virologie moléculaire, UA CNRS 545, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Radioactively labelled RNA transcripts made in vitro of various fragments from
cDNA clones of poliovirus type 1 and of hepatitis A virus under the control of
bacteriophage T7 or SP6 promoters have been evaluated for diagnostic purposes.
The RNA transcripts were 2 orders of magnitude more sensitive as hybridization
probes than corresponding cDNA preparations labelled by the nick translation
procedure. A combination of hybridization analysis and sequence comparison showed
that some regions of the genome of a number of enteroviruses are highly
conserved, while others show very little homology; the general order of
conservation is: 5'-non-coding greater than 3'-terminal greater than central (2C)
greater than VP3 greater than VP1. The 350 bases of the poliovirus VP1 region
were highly specific for that virus, while the 450-bases of the 5'NC region
showed extensive cross-reaction with other enteroviruses. However, these probes
did not hybridize with HAV, which was detected only by HAV-specific riboprobes.
The transcripts have been successfully applied as hybridization probes in
diagnostic tests on supernatants of infected cell culture lysates and in clinical
samples, mainly in stool extracts.

PMID: 2849964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Biol Chem. 1988 Mar 25;263(9):4288-92.

Proteolytic processing of the alpha-chain of the lysosomal enzyme,
beta-hexosaminidase, in normal human fibroblasts.

Little LE(1), Lau MM, Quon DV, Fowler AV, Neufeld EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles
90024.

The two subunits of beta-hexosaminidase undergo many post-translational
modifications characteristic of lysosomal proteins, including limited
proteolysis. To identify proteolytic cleavage sites in the alpha-chain, we have
biosynthetically radiolabeled the transient forms, isolated these by
immunoprecipitation, gel electrophoresis, and electroelution, and subjected them 
to automated Edman degradation. The position of the NH2-terminal amino acid was
inferred from the elution cycle of the radioactive amino acid and the primary
sequence encoded in the alpha-chain cDNA. The amino terminus of the precursor
obtained by in vitro translation of SP6 alpha-chain mRNA in the presence of
microsomes was leucine 23. The same amino terminus was found in precursor
alpha-chain synthesized by normal human fibroblasts (IMR90) in a 1- or 3-h pulse 
or secreted by these cells in the presence of NH4Cl. The alpha-chain isolated
after a 3-h pulse followed by a 5-h chase (intermediate form) included a mixture 
of molecular species of which the amino terminus was arginine 87 (most abundant),
histidine 88, or leucine 90. After a 20-h chase (mature form) the latter species 
predominated. This mature form of the alpha-chain remained fully reactive with
antibody raised against the carboxyl-terminal 15 amino acids, indicating little
if any proteolysis at the carboxyl terminus. Thus synthesis and maturation of the
alpha-chain of beta-hexosaminidase includes two major proteolytic cleavages: the 
first, between alanine 22 and leucine 23, removes the signal peptide to generate 
the precursor form, whereas the second occurs between the dibasic amino acids,
lysine 86 and arginine 87. The second cleavage is followed by trimming of 3
additional amino acids to give the mature form of the alpha-chain.

PMID: 2964446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Eur J Biochem. 1988 Mar 15;172(3):679-85.

A homologous in vitro system to analyze transcription of a mouse immunoglobulin
mu heavy-chain gene.

Giller T(1), Brunner L, Pick L, Brack C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms of the regulation of
immunoglobulin (Ig) gene transcription, a cell-free system was developed in which
a cloned mouse Ig mu heavy-chain gene was transcribed using nuclear extracts
prepared from a mouse B cell hybridoma line. To monitor transcription, an RNA.RNA
hybridization assay was developed in which a 32P-labeled, SP6-synthesized RNA
probe complementary to Ig mu RNA was hybridized to unlabeled RNA transcribed in
the nuclear extract. Accurate initiation of transcription, which resulted in the 
protection of the RNA probe from digestion with nuclease S1, was detected by the 
separation of the products on denaturing polyacrylamide gels, followed by
autoradiography. Using this assay, an in-vitro-synthesized RNA was detected. The 
5' end of the in-vitro-transcribed Ig mu RNA maps exactly to the same position as
the 5' end of the corresponding in vivo mRNA and its formation was sensitive to
the addition of low levels of alpha-amanitin (1 microgram/ml), indicating
transcription by RNA polymerase II. It was shown by competition experiments with 
oligonucleotides containing the 'decamer recognition site' that this sequence
interacts with (a) decamer-binding factor(s) and plays a positive role in
transcription. The competition effects of the decamer-containing oligonucleotide 
appeared to be restricted to the decamer motif present in the promoter region. No
effects of the enhancer region were detectable in vitro. Little or no
transcriptional activity was found in transcription experiments using the Ig mu
promoter and nuclear extracts prepared from HeLa cells. This suggests that
tissue-specific factors involved in Ig mu heavy-chain gene transcription are
present in the mouse B cell extracts.

PMID: 2450748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Dev Biol. 1988 Mar;126(1):141-9.

Post-translational control of ribosomal protein L1 accumulation in Xenopus
oocytes.

Baum EZ(1), Hyman LE, Wormington WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254.

A functional ribosomal protein mRNA, encoding the 60 S subunit protein L1, has
been synthesized in vitro using bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase. This mRNA
directs the synthesis of a product indistinguishable from L1 protein purified
from Xenopus ovarian ribosomes. Our results show that L1 synthesis in stage VI
oocytes increases in response to microinjection of exogenous SP6-L1 mRNA, but
excess L1 protein is not stably accumulated. These results indicate that dosage
compensation does not occur at the translational level for this ribosomal protein
mRNA and that the abundance of this protein in fully grown oocytes is subject to 
post-translational regulation.

PMID: 3342930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Feb 25;16(4):1624.

Adenovirus 2 VA RNAI synthesized in SP6 system.

Evstafieva AG(1), Arya B, Pragai B, Toth MI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged.

PMCID: PMC336346
PMID: 3347500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 1988 Feb;8(2):993-5.

Generation of a mutant form of protein synthesis initiation factor eIF-2 lacking 
the site of phosphorylation by eIF-2 kinases.

Pathak VK(1), Schindler D, Hershey JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616.

The phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit of initiation factor eIF-2 leads to an
inhibition of protein synthesis in mammalian cells. We have performed
site-directed mutagenesis on a cDNA encoding the alpha-subunit of human eIF-2 and
have replaced the candidate sites of phosphorylation, Ser-48 and Ser-51, with
alanines. The cDNAs were expressed in vitro by SP6 polymerase transcription and
rabbit reticulocyte lysate translation, and the radiolabeled protein products
were analyzed by high-resolution two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The
wild-type and Ser-48 mutant proteins became extensively phosphorylated by eIF-2
kinases present in the reticulocyte lysate, and when additional heme-controlled
repressor or double-stranded RNA-activated kinase was present, phosphorylation of
the proteins was enhanced. The Ser-51 mutant showed little covalent modification 
by the endogenous enzymes and showed no increase in the acidic variant with
additional eIF-2 kinases, thereby suggesting that Ser-51 is the site of
phosphorylation leading to repression of protein synthesis.

PMCID: PMC363234
PMID: 3352609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Immunol. 1988 Feb 1;140(3):859-65.

Murine B lymphoma cell lines release functionally active interleukin 2 after
stimulation with Staphylococcus aureus.

Walker E(1), Leemhuis T, Roeder W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis
46223.

In this study it is shown that an IL-2-like functional lymphokine activity
derived from the murine B cell lines 2PK-3 and L10A2J after stimulation with
Staphylococcus aureus can be blocked with anti-IL-2 mAb such as 9B11, DMS-1, and 
S4B6. Experiments demonstrate that the stimulation of the IL-2-sensitive cell
line CTLL-2 by the IL-2-like functional activity derived from murine B cell
tumors can also be blocked with the anti-IL-2R mAb PC61. Additionally, in RNA-RNA
hybridization experiments with radiolabeled SP6-derived ssRNA probes developed
from murine IL-2 genomic DNA sequences and specific for IL-2 mRNA, quantitatively
significant amounts of IL-2-specific mRNA in both 2PK-3 and L10A2J are shown
subsequent to stimulating the cells with S. aureus. These results suggest the
murine B cell tumor lines 2PK-3 and L10A2J synthesize and release IL-2 after
stimulation with selected polyclonal activators such as S. aureus.

PMID: 3123551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Virus Res. 1988 Feb;9(2-3):249-61.

Directionality and further mapping of varicella zoster virus transcripts.

Reinhold WC(1), Straus SE, Ostrove JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Virology Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Our laboratory previously identified and preliminarily mapped 58 viral RNA
transcripts in varicella zoster virus (VZV) infected cells (Ostrove et al.,
1985). This study was initiated to more precisely map these transcripts, to
identify additional transcripts, and to determine transcript directionality. To
accomplish this, 32 overlapping BamHI, EcoRI, and SmaI fragments representing
99.7% of the genome were cloned into pGEM-2, a plasmid which contains a multiple 
cloning site flanked by SP6 and T7 RNA polymerase promoters. Each of these clones
was used to produce 32P-labeled double-stranded DNA probes to detect transcripts 
homologous to either strand of the VZV insert, and single-stranded [32P]RNA
probes in order to detect RNAs of either polarity. These probes were hybridized
to Northern blots of VZV-infected cell RNA. In all, 77 RNAs were detected with
both DNA and RNA probes. The direction of transcription and localization of 57 of
the 58 previously identified RNAs and of 20 newly recognised abundant transcripts
were determined. Thirty-three additional low-abundance transcripts were detected 
only by the relatively more sensitive RNA probes. A map indicating the
directionality and approximate locations of the abundant VZV transcripts was
constructed.

PMID: 2833048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Med Chem. 1988 Feb;31(2):416-21.

Dehydro keto methylene and keto methylene analogues of substance P. Synthesis and
biological activity.

Ewenson A(1), Laufer R, Chorev M, Selinger Z, Gilon C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic, Chemistry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

The synthesis of dehydro keto methylene and keto methylene analogues of substance
P using classical peptide synthesis is described. The following analogues were
prepared: [pGlu6,Gly9psi(COCH2)(RS)Leu10]SP6-11 (4) and [pGlu6,-(RS)Phe7
psi(COCH2)(RS)Phe8]SP6-11 (8). The use of an improved deprotection scheme
employing Meerwein's reagent (Et3OBF4) made possible the syntheses of the novel
dehydro keto methylene analogue [pGlu6,(RS)Phe7 psi-(COCH2)delta(E)Phe8]SP6-11
(26) adn the tetrapeptide analogue [pGlu6,(RS)Phe8 psi(COCH2)Gly9]SP6-9(-OMe)
(23). Compound 4 was a weak agonist in provoking contractions of the guinea pig
ileum. Compound 26 was a potent inhibitor of SP degradation in rat hypothalamus
preparations, with an IC50 value of 1.8 microM.

PMID: 2448458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 1988 Jan 25;263(3):1518-23.

3' processing of tRNA precursors in ribonuclease-deficient Escherichia coli.
Development and characterization of an in vitro processing system and evidence
for a phosphate requirement.

Cudny H(1), Deutscher MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington 06032.

In order to determine the mechanism and enzyme(s) responsible for 3' processing
of tRNA precursors, we have developed an in vitro processing system that uses as 
substrates two SP6 RNA polymerase-generated transcripts of the gene for
tRNA(Tyrsu3)+ that contain 49 extra 5'-nucleotides and either 5 or 25 extra
3'-nucleotides. A high speed supernatant fraction from an Escherichia coli strain
deficient in five ribonucleases was found to accurately process both tRNA
precursors in this system to the size of mature tRNA(Tyr). Final 3' end
processing of each precursor occurs in an exonucleolytic manner to generate the
correct 3' terminus; however, a prior endonucleolytic cleavage also is observed
in processing of the longer precursor. The system requires Mg2+ and works
optimally at about 50 mM KCl and pH 8-9. Dialysis of the supernatant fraction
leads to loss of processing activity but can be restored to normal by the
addition of inorganic phosphate or arsenate. Furthermore, nucleoside diphosphates
are a product of the processing reaction. These data indicate that 3' processing 
in RNase-deficient extracts involves a phosphorolytic reaction. On the other
hand, phosphate is not required for processing in RNase+ extracts, although it
does aid in processing of the longer precursor. The usefulness of this in vitro
system for studies of tRNA processing and the identity of the phosphate-requiring
enzyme are discussed.

PMID: 3275667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Nature. 1988 Jan 21;331(6153):280-3.

Characterization of ribosomal frameshifting in HIV-1 gag-pol expression.

Jacks T(1), Power MD, Masiarz FR, Luciw PA, Barr PJ, Varmus HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California Medical Center, San
Francisco 94143.

Based on precedents from other retroviruses, the precursor of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase is predicted to be a
polyprotein with a relative molecular mass (Mr) of 160,000 (160K) encoded by both
the viral pol gene and the upstream gag gene. These two genes lie in different
translational reading frames, with the 3' end of gag overlapping the 5' end of
pol by 205 or 241 nucleotides. Thus, production of the gag-pol fusion protein
would require either messenger RNA processing or translational frameshifting. The
latter mechanism has been shown in the synthesis of the gag-pol proteins of two
other retroviruses, Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) and mouse mammary tumour virus
(MMTV). Here we report that translation of HIV-1 RNA synthesized in vitro by SP6 
RNA polymerase yields significant amounts of a gag-pol fusion protein, indicating
that efficient ribosomal frameshifting also occurs within the HIV-1 gag-pol
overlap region. Site-directed mutagenesis and amino-acid sequencing localized the
site of frameshifting to a UUA leucine codon near the 5' end of the overlap.

PMID: 2447506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 1988 Jan 15;263(2):902-10.

Higher order structures of the 5'-proximal region decrease the efficiency of
translation of the porcine pro-opiomelanocortin mRNA.

Chevrier D(1), Vézina C, Bastille J, Linard C, Sonenberg N, Boileau G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Québec,
Canada.

The SP6 polymerase/promoter system was used to synthesize porcine
pro-opiomelanocortin mRNAs with nucleotide sequence deletions in the 5'- as well 
as 3'-untranslated and coding regions. The translational efficiency of the mutant
mRNAs was evaluated by cell-free translation or by monitoring the rate and extent
of ribosome binding in the presence of sparsomycin. The results of these
experiments indicate that specific nucleotide sequences in the 5'-untranslated
and coding regions of the pro-opiomelanocortin mRNA decrease its rate of
translation. Structure mapping of the mRNA with double-strand and single-strand
specific nucleases suggests that these sequences can form stable secondary
structures.

PMID: 2826467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Plant Mol Biol. 1988 Jan;11(1):45-56. doi: 10.1007/BF00016013.

Processing of mono-, di- and tricistronic transfer RNAs precursors in a spinach
or pea chloroplast soluble extract.

Marion-Poll A(1), Hibbert CS, Radebaugh CA, Hallick RB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, INRA, Route de Saint Cyr, 78000,
Versailles, France.

Monomeric, dimeric and trimeric chloroplast tRNA precursors from Euglena gracilis
were synthesized by Sp6, T7 or T3 RNA polymerases using an in vitro transcription
system. The length of the 3' and 5' ends of these precursors was varied to
facilitate the identification of processing intermediates, and to study the
effect of the structure of the tRNA precursors on the processing reactions. All
the tRNA precursors studied, independent of their structure, are processed to
mature tRNAs in both spinach and pea chloroplast soluble extracts. 5'-and 3'
endonucleases are involved in the cleavage of 5' and 3' ends of the pre-tRNAs.
These two reactions are not ordered in vitro. Other enzymatic activities can be
detected in the chloroplast soluble extract including exonucleases, and
CCA-adding enzyme.

PMID: 24272157  [PubMed]


369. Methods Mol Biol. 1988;4:307-18. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-127-6:307.

Primed synthesis and direct sequencing in the isolation of cDNA clones using
short oligonucleotides.

Haley JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Umea University, Umea,
Sweden.

With the development of improved techniques for the construction of cDNA
libraries representing rare messenger species has come increased demand for
screening techniques to isolate specific cDNAs. A variety of techniques has been 
developed: 1. The use of exact and degenerate oligonucleotides complementary to
RNAs coding for established protein sequence. 2. Bacterial expression of cDNA and
immunological detection of the protein products. 3. Selection by hybrid-arrest or
hybrid-select translation. 4. Differential hybridization using cDNAs obtained
under different physiological conditions. 5. Bacterial expression of cDNA and
selection by biological assay. 6. Transfer of cDNA libraries in eukaryotic
expression vectors into mammalian cell lines and subsequent biological selection.
7. Expression of cloned cDNAs and mRNA in SP6 vectors with subsequent
microinjection of RNA and biological selection of decreasing pools.

PMID: 21424641  [PubMed]


370. Carlsberg Res Commun. 1988;53(4):233-46.

Characterization and in vitro expression of the cytochrome b-559 genes of barley.
II. In vitro transcription and translation.

Krupinska K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Carlsberg Laboratory, Copenhagen Valby.

The two cytochrome b-559 apoproteins of 9.4 kD and 4.5 kD molecular weight have
been expressed in vitro using DNA templates containing either the two genes psbE 
and psbF in tandem or the individual genes. Transcription with E. coli
RNA-polymerase or SP6 RNA-polymerase has been followed by translation in E. coli 
derived lysates. Simultaneous as well as independent synthesis of the apoproteins
is possible. A 9.4 kD in vitro translation product has been identified as
apoprotein I by immunoprecipitation with a monoclonal antibody specific for the
C-terminal part of the 9.4 kD apoprotein of cytochrome b-559. The isolated psbF
gene directs the synthesis of a translation product with a molecular weight of
4.5 kD corresponding to apoprotein II. Expression of the psbE gene requires the
presence of endogenous regulatory sequences 5' upstream of psbE, while this is
not the case for psbF. Additional in vitro translation products of 5.7 and 2.4 kD
molecular weights are synthesized and probably translated from two reading frames
starting with two different out-of-phase ATG codons in the nucleotide sequence of
the psbE gene.

PMID: 3255312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Carlsberg Res Commun. 1988;53(7):395-409.

In vitro transcription and translation of the psbD gene encoding the D-2 protein 
of photosystem II in barley.

Neumann EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Carlsberg Laboratory, Copenhagen Valby.

The plastoquinone-binding polypeptide D-2 of the reaction center complex of
photosystem II in barley has been expressed in vitro using the expression vector 
pGem3 containing the psbD gene of chloroplast DNA as template. The full length
D-2 polypeptide with an apparent mol. weight of 32 kD is a major product when
mRNA is transcribed with SP6 RNA polymerase from an insert containing the psbD
gene with a 36 bp 5' leader sequence and a 3' tail of 99 bp downstream of the
stop codon. Translation of the mRNA had to be done in a rabbit reticulocyte
lysate. Translation also occurred from the internal AUG codons giving rise to
truncated D-2 polypeptides with sizes of 30, 25 and 17 kD. They are
immunoprecipitable with antisera either raised against amino acid residues 235 to
241 or against 345 residues of the D-2 polypeptide. A truncated translation
product of 12 kD probably initiated at codon 247 is not recognized by either
antiserum. An additional immunoprecipitable protein with an apparent molecular
weight of 46 kD is observed by SDS-PAGE and is interpreted as a homomeric
aggregate of D-2 polypeptides. Upon addition of methanol solubilized 2,6
dichloro-p-benzoquinone or other quinones a preferential translation of the
full-length and truncated D-2 polypeptides is observed. The use of in vitro
synthesized D-2 polypeptides for studies of binding quinones, other electron
carriers and chlorophyll chromophores is discussed.

PMID: 3075464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Gene Anal Tech. 1988 Jan-Feb;5(1):9-15.

Efficient in vitro expression of interferon alpha analogs using SP6 polymerase
and rabbit reticulocyte lysate.

Tymms MJ(1), McInnes B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Medicine, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

We have investigated the use of in vitro expression as a quick and convenient
means of screening large numbers of interferon (IFN) analogs generated using in
vitro mutagenesis. The IFN-alpha 1 mRNA generated from DNA template using SP6 RNA
polymerase is efficiently translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysate (RRL). The
antiviral specific activity of this RRL-synthesized IFN-alpha l is equivalent to 
the yeast-synthesized protein. In contrast with the yeast-expression system,
where some IFN-alpha analogs are poorly expressed, all analogs tested were well
expressed in RRL.

PMID: 3056802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1988;300(3):736-9.

[2 new promoters for RNA-polymerase of the phage SP6 are located beyond the gene 
for RNA-polymerase].

[Article in Russian]

Savchenko RS, Zheleznaia LA, Dolgikh DA, Matvienko NI.

PMID: 3048948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. EMBO J. 1988 Jan;7(1):245-51.

Ribosomal initiation from an ACG codon in the Sendai virus P/C mRNA.

Curran J(1), Kolakofsky D.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Genéve,
Switzerland.

The Sendai virus P/C mRNA expresses the P and C proteins from alternate reading
frames. The C reading frame of this mRNA, however, is responsible for three
proteins, C', C and Y, none of which appear to be precursors to each other in
vivo. Using site-directed and deletion mutagenesis of the P/C gene cloned in SP6 
and in vitro translation of the mRNAs, we show that the 5' most proximal
initiation codon of the mRNA is an ACG at position 81, responsible for C'
synthesis. The succeeding initiation codons, all ATGs, are responsible for the P 
protein (position 104), the C protein (position 114) and the Y protein(s) (either
positions 183 or 201). Examination of the relative molar amounts of the C', P and
C proteins found in vivo suggests that an ACG in an otherwise favorable context
is almost as efficient for ribosome initiation as an ATG in a less favored
context, but only 10-20% as efficient as an ATG in a more favored context. The
judicious choice of increasingly more favorable initiation codons in the P/C gene
allows multiple proteins to be made from a single mRNA.

PMCID: PMC454264
PMID: 2834203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Clin Exp Hypertens A. 1988;10(3):467-83.

Measurement of mRNA by solution hybridization with 32P-labelled single stranded
cRNA probe ("SP6 test"). Comparison with a 32P-labelled single stranded cDNA as
hybridization probe ("S1 test") for measurement of AVP mRNA.

Ludwig G(1), Hänze J, Lehmann E, Lang RE, Burbach JH, Ganten D.

Author information: 
(1)German Institute for High Blood Pressure Research, University of Heidelberg,
FRG.

Radioactively labelled cRNA for the rat AVP gene exon C was synthetized from a
pSP64-vector and used for solution hybridization measurement of AVP mRNA ("SP6
test"). For comparison hybridization was carried out with a gel-purified
radioactively labelled cDNA probe synthetized by primer extension of AVP gene
exon C cloned into an M13mp9 phage vector DNA ("S1 test"). Both tests had a
comparable sensitivity of up to 0.2 pg AVP mRNA. Under optimal hybridization
conditions kinetics were similar in both tests. The fast and easy preparation of 
large amounts of labelled cRNA probe and simple determination of absolute amounts
of mRNA by saturation kinetics without need of a mRNA standard makes the "SP6
test" an attractive alternative to the known "S1 test". The "SP6 test" should be 
applicable for a wide variety of genes.

PMID: 2452041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Med Virol. 1988 Jan;24(1):11-8.

Use of cRNA probes for the detection of enteroviruses by molecular hybridization.

Cova L(1), Kopecka H, Aymard M, Girard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire National de la Santé, Département des Maladies Virales, Lyon,
France.

Subgenomic fragments of cDNA from poliovirus type 1 were inserted downstream from
the SP6 or the T7 promoter in a Gemini riboprobe vector and their in vitro
synthesized RNA transcripts were used as radiolabeled probes for the detection of
enteroviral RNAs by molecular hybridization. The cRNA transcripts appeared to be 
more sensitive probes than the corresponding cDNAs. In vitro transcripts of the
5' noncoding region (5' nc riboprobe) were able to detect all of 14 reference
enterovirus strains tested, as well as human rhinovirus 2, by dot blot
hybridization with infected cell lysates. The same riboprobe also detected the
enteroviral RNAs present in 16 of 18 samples of successive passages of stools in 
tissue culture and in some cases even in crude stool extracts. A riboprobe from
the VP 1 region detected specifically poliovirus types 1, 2, and 3 in lysates of 
infected cells and in 50% of the infected stool specimens tested. These probes
could be of particular interest for the epidemic survey of poliovirus infections.

PMID: 2448419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. EMBO J. 1987 Dec 20;6(13):4159-68.

Cleavage and polyadenylation of messenger RNA precursors in vitro occurs within
large and specific 3' processing complexes.

Humphrey T(1), Christofori G, Lucijanic V, Keller W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.

We have investigated the assembly of complexes associated with in vitro cleavage 
and polyadenylation of synthetic pre-mRNAs by native gel electrophoresis.
Incubation of SP6-generated pre-mRNA containing the adenovirus L3 polyadenylation
site in HeLa cell nuclear extract results in the rapid assembly of specific
complexes. Formation of these complexes precedes the appearance of cleaved
intermediates and polyadenylated products and is dependent on an intact
polyadenylation signal within the pre-mRNA. The specific complexes do not form on
RNAs with point mutations in the AAUAAA sequence upstream of the L3
polyadenylation site. Furthermore, such mutant RNAs cannot compete for factors
involved in the assembly of specific complexes on wild-type pre-mRNA. Upon
complex formation a 67-nucleotide region of the L3 pre-mRNA is protected from
RNase T1 digestion. This region contains both the upstream AAUAAA signal and the 
GU-rich downstream sequences. Cleavage and polyadenylation occur within the
specific complexes and the processed RNA is subsequently released. We propose
that the assembly of specific complexes represents an essential step during
pre-mRNA 3' end formation in vitro.

PMCID: PMC553899
PMID: 3127203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochemistry. 1987 Dec 15;26(25):8110-5.

Evidence for a secretory form of the cellular prion protein.

Hay B(1), Prusiner SB, Lingappa VR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco 94143.

The biogenesis of hamster brain prion protein (PrP) has been studied by
expression of RNA transcribed from a full-length PrP cDNA in Xenopus oocytes and 
cell-free systems. Earlier studies in the wheat germ cell-free system showed that
one form of PrP is a transmembrane protein that spans the bilayer at least twice 
[Hay, B., Barry, R. A., Lieberburg, I., Prusiner, S. B., & Lingappa, V. R. (1987)
Mol. Cell. Biol. 7, 914-920]. We now report that PrP can also exist as a secreted
protein. SP6 PrP RNA microinjected into Xenopus oocytes produced two forms of
PrP: one that remained in the cell and another that was secreted into the medium.
Cell-free translation studies in rabbit reticulocyte lysates supplemented with
microsomal membranes gave similar results: while one form of PrP was found as an 
integral membrane protein spanning the membrane at least twice, another form of
PrP was found to be completely translocated to the microsomal membrane vesicle
lumen. Both the membrane and secretory forms of PrP appear to be generated from
the same pool of nascent chains. The mechanism governing the alternative fates of
nascent PrP remains to be elucidated but may have significance for understanding 
the pathogenesis of scrapie and other prion diseases.

PMID: 3126796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Virol. 1987 Dec;61(12):3809-19.

Production of infectious RNA transcripts from Sindbis virus cDNA clones: mapping 
of lethal mutations, rescue of a temperature-sensitive marker, and in vitro
mutagenesis to generate defined mutants.

Rice CM(1), Levis R, Strauss JH, Huang HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110-1093.

We constructed full-length cDNA clones of Sindbis virus that can be transcribed
in vitro by SP6 RNA polymerase to produce infectious genome-length transcripts.
Viruses produced from in vitro transcripts are identical to Sindbis virus and
show strain-specific phenotypes reflecting the source of RNA used for cDNA
synthesis. The cDNA clones were used to confirm the mapping of the causal
mutation of ts2 to the capsid protein. A general strategy for mapping Sindbis
virus mutations is described and was used to identify two lethal mutations in an 
original full-length construct which did not produce infectious transcripts. An
XbaI linker was inserted in the cDNA clone near the transcriptional start of the 
subgenomic mRNA; the resulting virus retains the XbaI recognition sequence, thus 
providing formal evidence that viruses are derived from in vitro transcripts of
cDNA clones. The potential applications of the cDNA clones are discussed.

PMCID: PMC255997
PMID: 3479621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. EMBO J. 1987 Dec 1;6(12):3779-85.

An efficient ribosomal frame-shifting signal in the polymerase-encoding region of
the coronavirus IBV.

Brierley I(1), Boursnell ME, Binns MM, Bilimoria B, Blok VC, Brown TD, Inglis SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK.

The polymerase-encoding region of the genomic RNA of the coronavirus infectious
bronchitis virus (IBV) contains two very large, briefly overlapping open reading 
frames (ORF), F1 and F2, and it has been suggested on the basis of sequence
analysis that expression of the downstream ORF, F2, might be mediated through
ribosomal frame-shifting. To examine this possibility a cDNA fragment containing 
the F1/F2 overlap region was cloned within a marker gene and placed under the
control of the bacteriophage SP6 promoter in a recombinant plasmid. Messenger RNA
transcribed from this plasmid, when translated in cell-free systems, specified
the synthesis of polypeptides whose size was entirely consistent with the
products predicted by an efficient ribosomal frame-shifting event within the
overlap region. The nature of the products was confirmed by their reactivity with
antisera raised against defined portions of the flanking marker gene. This is the
first non-retroviral example of ribosomal frame-shifting in higher eukaryotes.

PMCID: PMC553849
PMID: 3428275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Virol. 1987 Dec;61(12):3950-9.

The cellular secretory pathway is not utilized for biosynthesis, modification, or
intracellular transport of the simian virus 40 large tumor antigen.

Jarvis DL(1), Chan WK, Estes MK, Butel JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Epidemiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030.

Unlike most proteins, which are localized within a single subcellular compartment
in the eucaryotic cell, the simian virus 40 (SV40) large tumor antigen (T-ag) is 
associated with both the nucleus and the plasma membrane. Current knowledge of
protein processing would predict a role for the secretory pathway in the
biosynthesis and transport of at least a subpopulation of T-ag to account for
certain of its chemical modifications and for its ability to reach the cell
surface. We have examined this prediction by using in vitro translation and
translocation experiments. Preliminary experiments established that translation
of T-ag was detectable with as little as 0.1 microgram of the total cytoplasmic
RNA from SV40-infected cells. Therefore, by using a 100-fold excess of this RNA, 
the sensitivity of the assays was above the limits necessary to detect the
theoretical fraction of RNA equivalent to the subpopulation of
plasma-membrane-associated T-ag (2 to 5% of total T-ag). In contrast to a control
rotavirus glycoprotein, the electrophoretic mobility of T-ag was not changed by
the addition of microsomal vesicles to the in vitro translation mixture.
Furthermore, T-ag did not undergo translocation in the presence of microsomal
vesicles, as evidenced by its sensitivity to trypsin treatment and its absence in
the purified vesicles. Identical results were obtained with either cytoplasmic
RNA from SV40-infected cells or SV40 early RNA transcribed in vitro from a
recombinant plasmid containing the SP6 promoter. SV40 early mRNA in infected
cells was detected in association with free, but not with membrane-bound,
polyribosomes. Finally, monensin, an inhibitor of Golgi function, failed to
specifically prevent either glycosylation or cell surface expression of T-ag,
although it did depress overall protein synthesis in TC-7 cells. We conclude from
these observations that the constituent organelles of the secretory pathway are
not involved in the biosynthesis, modification, or intracellular transport of
T-ag. The initial step in the pathway of T-ag biosynthesis appears to be
translation on free cytoplasmic polyribosomes. With the exclusion of the
secretory pathway, we suggest that T-ag glycosylation, palmitylation, and
transport to the plasma membrane are accomplished by previously unrecognized
cellular mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC256015
PMID: 2824825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Nov 25;15(22):9279-98.

The secondary structure of a messenger RNA precursor probed with psoralen is
melted in an in vitro splicing reaction.

Wollenzien PL(1), Goswami P, Teare J, Szeberenyi J, Goldenberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of
Medicine, FL 33101.

The secondary structure of the SP6/mouse insulin precursor RNA was determined by 
psoralen cross-linking experiments. A series of long-range contacts occur within 
the left half of the pre-mRNA that contains the intervening sequence. Multiple
secondary structures for the pre-mRNA exist since some of the interactions share 
common sites. In splicing buffer but without the splicing extract added, many of 
these interactions are stable up to at least 50 degrees C. These interactions,
however, are dissociated during the in vitro splicing reaction. This dissociation
requires ATP and it occurs during the first 30 min. of the splicing reaction.
Pre-mRNAs containing psoralen cross-links in different locations within the RNA
molecule were purified and used as substrates for in vitro splicing. Psoralen
cross-links at any of the double-stranded regions resulted in complete inhibition
of the splicing reaction. This indicates that destabilization of the secondary
structure of the SP6/mouse insulin pre-mRNA is necessary for in vitro splicing.

PMCID: PMC306468
PMID: 3317279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 1987 Nov 15;262(32):15796-802.

Functional activity and regulation of human beta 2-adrenergic receptors expressed
in Xenopus oocytes.

Kobilka BK(1), MacGregor C, Daniel K, Kobilka TS, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710.

The recently cloned human beta-adrenergic cDNA and several mutated forms have
been expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes by injection of RNA made from the cDNA
under the control of the bacteriophage SP6 promoter. The cDNA and gene of the
beta 2-adrenergic receptor possess the unusual feature of having a second
upstream ATG (-101 base pairs) and a 19-codon open reading frame 5' to the
initiator methionine codon of the receptor (Kobilka, B. K., Dixon, R. A. F.,
Frielle, T., Dohlman, H. G., Bolanowski, M., Sigal, I. S., Yang-Feng, T. L.,
Francke, U., Caron, M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 84, 46-50). RNA lacking this upstream AUG and open reading frame was
translated approximately 10-fold more efficiently both in an in vitro rabbit
reticulocyte system and in oocytes. Injected oocytes but not water injected
controls expressed typical beta 2-adrenergic receptors as assessed by ligand
binding (450 fmol/mg membrane protein) and catecholamine-stimulated adenylate
cyclase (approximately 20 fold). Moreover, these receptors displayed typical
agonist-induced homologous desensitization when oocytes were incubated with
isoproterenol at room temperature for 3-24 h. Among a series of mutations,
truncations of the membrane-anchored core of the receptor eliminated receptor
binding and cyclase stimulating activity. In contrast, disruption of one of the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation sites or removal of the
serine/threonine-rich carboxyl terminus had little or no effect on these
functions or on the extent of agonist-induced desensitization relative to that
observed with native receptor. These studies validate the beta 2-adrenergic
nature of the cloned human beta-adrenergic cDNA, document the utility of the
Xenopus oocyte system for studying functional and regulatory properties of
receptors coupled to adenylate cyclase, and suggest the possibility that elements
in the 5' untranslated region of the beta 2-adrenergic receptor RNA may regulate 
its translation in vivo.

PMID: 2824467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Virol Methods. 1987 Nov;18(2-3):121-31.

Identification of negative strand and positive strand RNA of canine distemper
virus in animal tissues using single stranded RNA probes.

Mitchell WJ(1), Russell SE, Clark DK, Rima BK, Appel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)J.A. Baker Institute, Department of Microbiology, New York State College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca 14853.

In this report, we describe a technique for identifying negative strand (genome) 
and positive strand (messenger) RNA of canine distemper virus (CDV) in dog
tissues by using single stranded RNA probes. Plasmids (pSP64-P and pSP65-P) which
contain insert DNA corresponding to the P gene of CDV were transcribed by SP6
polymerase in the presence of radioisotope to produce radiolabeled single
stranded RNA probes. RNA transcribed from pSP65-P is complementary to the
negative strand (genome) and RNA produced from pSP64-P is complementary to the
positive strand (message) of CDV. The binding specificity of the single stranded 
RNA probes was determined on Northern-blots. The use of these RNA probes in
hybridization assays resulted in greater sensitivity and specificity than that
obtained from double stranded DNA probes (either whole plasmids or purified
insert DNA) which were labeled by the nick translation reaction. We also describe
the making of single stranded DNA probes by reverse transcription labeling of
complementary RNA. The complementary RNA was produced by the transcription of
cloned DNA (pSP64-P and pSP65P). Single stranded RNA probes and single stranded
DNA probes were similar in sensitivity. The single stranded RNA and DNA probes
were applied to ethanolacetic acid fixed tissue sections from dogs infected with 
CDV-A75/17. We used 32P-labeled probes in tissue hybridizations and 35S-labeled
probes in in situ hybridizations to identify negative and positive stranded CDV
RNA. In this report we demonstrate that single stranded RNA and DNA probes can be
used successfully in tissue hybridization and in situ hybridization assays to
study viral expression in this virus-host system.

PMID: 3429601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Nov;7(11):4030-7.

Reconstitution of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle.

Patton JR(1), Patterson RJ, Pederson T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury,
Massachusetts 01545.

Although the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (snRNP) was the first
mRNA-splicing cofactor to be identified, the manner in which it functions in
splicing is not precisely understood. Among the information required to
understand how U1 snRNP participates in splicing, it will be necessary to know
its structure. Here we describe the in vitro reconstitution of a particle that
possesses the properties of native U1 snRNP. 32P-labeled U1 RNA was transcribed
from an SP6 promoter-human U1 gene clone and incubated in a HeLa S100 fraction. A
U1 particle formed which displayed the same sedimentation coefficient
(approximately 10S) and buoyant density (1.40 g/cm3) as native U1 snRNP. The
latter value reflects the ability to withstand isopycnic banding in Cs2SO4
without prior fixation, a property shared by native U1 snRNP. The reconstituted
U1 particle reacted with both the Sm and RNP monoclonal antibodies, showing that 
these two classes of snRNP proteins were present. Moreover, the reconstituted U1 
snRNP particle was found to display the characteristic Mg2+ switch of nuclease
sensitivity previously described for native U1 snRNP: an open, nuclease-sensitive
conformation at a low Mg2+ concentration (3 mM) and a more compact,
nuclease-resistant organization at a higher concentration (15 mM). The majority
of the U1 RNA in the reconstituted particle did not contain hypermethylated caps,
pseudouridine, or ribose 2-O-methylation, showing that these enigmatic
posttranscriptional modifications are not essential for reconstitution of the U1 
snRNP particle. The extreme 3' end (18 nucleotides) of U1 RNA was required for
reconstitution, but loop II (nucleotides 64 to 77) was not. Interestingly, the 5'
end (15 nucleotides) of U1 RNA that recognizes pre-mRNA 5' splice sites was not
required for U1 snRNP reconstruction.

PMCID: PMC368073
PMID: 2963210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Gen Genet. 1987 Nov;210(1):60-8.

Secondary structure of the autoregulatory mRNA binding site of ribosomal protein 
L1.

Kearney KR(1), Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53705.

The secondary structure of the autoregulatory mRNA binding site of Escherichia
coli ribosomal protein L1 has been studied using enzymatic methods. The control
region of the E. coli L11 operon was cloned into a vector under control of the
Salmonella phage SP6 promoter, and RNA transcribed using SP6 RNA polymerase. The 
secondary structure of this RNA was probed using structure-specific nucleases,
and by comparison of the data with computer predictions of RNA folding, secondary
structural features were deduced. The proposed model is consistent with elements 
of some previously proposed models, but differs in other features. Finally,
secondary structure information was obtained from two mutant mRNAs and the
structural features correlated with observed phenotypes of the mutants.

PMID: 2448590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Chem. 1987 Oct 25;262(30):14672-82.

Site-directed mutagenesis of core sequence elements 9R', 9L, 9R, and 2 in
self-splicing Tetrahymena pre-rRNA.

Williamson CL(1), Tierney WM, Kerker BJ, Burke JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts 01267.

The intron within the Tetrahymena thermophila nuclear large rRNA precursor is the
best studied example of group I self-splicing introns. In this paper, we examine 
the structural and functional roles of four internal sequence elements which are 
characteristic of group I introns in the RNA-catalyzed processing reactions.
Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis was used to generate mutations in sequence
elements 9R', 9L, 9R and 2 of the Tetrahymena intervening sequence. Self-splicing
activities of variant precursor RNAs were characterized by in vitro splicing
following transcription with T7 or SP6 RNA polymerase. First, we confirm the
proposed base pairing of sequence elements 9R and 9R' by construction and
analysis of compensatory mutations. Mutations in elements 9R (G272A C274G) and
9R' (G100C C102U) each disrupt the pairing and eliminate self-splicing activity. 
A compensatory 9R/9R' mutation (G100C C102U G272A C274G) restores pairing and
normal splicing activity. We conclude that 9R X 9R' pairing is a requirement for 
self-splicing. Second, we show that self-splicing activity is very sensitive to
both nucleotide sequence and RNA secondary structure in the pairing segments of
elements 9L and 2. Mutations within these regions at positions 266, 268, 307, and
309 can increase as well as decrease activity relative to wild type. Third, a
mutation in the highly conserved nonpairing segment of element 9L (U259A A261C)
increases KM for GTP from 29 to 120 microM, but does not otherwise affect
splicing activity. The primary consequence of this mutation is a decrease in GTP 
binding energy of approximately 0.9 kcal/mol. Last, we show that a mutation in
the highly conserved nonpairing segment of element 2 (A301C A302G G303C)
eliminates transesterification activity, but does not affect 3' splice site
hydrolysis.

PMID: 3667597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biol Chem. 1987 Oct 25;262(30):14702-8.

Enzymatic methylation of in vitro synthesized apocytochrome c enhances its
transport into mitochondria.

Park KS(1), Frost B, Tuck M, Ho LL, Kim S, Paik WK.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Research Institute, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19140.

The gene for iso-1-cytochrome c from Saccharomyces cerevisiae was recloned into a
pSP65 vector containing an active bacteriophage SP promoter. The iso-1-cytochrome
c gene was cloned as an 856-base pair XhoI-HindIII fragment. When the resulting
plasmid was digested at the HindIII site 279 bases downstream from the
termination codon of the gene and transcribed in vitro using SP6 RNA polymerase, 
full length transcripts were produced. The SP6 iso-1-cytochrome c mRNA was
translated using a rabbit reticulocyte lysate system, and the protein products
were analyzed on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. One major band with 
a molecular weight of 12,000 was detected by autofluorography and coincided with 
the Coomassie staining band of apocytochrome c from S. cerevisiae. The product
was also shown to be identical with that of standard yeast apocytochrome c on an 
isoelectrofocusing gel. The in vitro synthesized iso-1-apocytochrome c was
enzymatically methylated by adding partially purified
S-adenosyl-L-methionine:cytochrome c-lysine N-methyltransferase (protein
methylase III, EC 2.1.1.59) from S. cerevisiae along with S-adenosyl-L-methionine
to the in vitro translation mixtures. The methylation was shown to be inhibited
by the addition of the methylase inhibitor S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine or the
protein synthesis inhibitor puromycin. The principal type of methylated amino
acid in the protein was found to be epsilon-N-trimethyllysine which accounted for
77% of the total. Finally, the methylation of in vitro synthesized
iso-1-apocytochrome c was found to increase its import into mitochondria isolated
from S. cerevisiae 2-4-fold over unmethylated protein, but not into rat liver
mitochondria. This suggests that methylation facilitates the import of
apocytochrome c into mitochondria by a specific receptor mechanism.

PMID: 2822698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Oct 15;168(2):461-7.

A monoclonal antibody against 2,2,7-trimethylguanosine that reacts with intact,
class U, small nuclear ribonucleoproteins as well as with
7-methylguanosine-capped RNAs.

Bochnig P(1), Reuter R, Bringmann P, Lührmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Insitut für Molekulare Genetik, Otto-Warburg-Laboratorium, Berlin.

A hybridoma secreting a monoclonal antibody (H-20) that recognizes the
2,2,7-trimethylguanosine(m3G)-containing cap structure of U snRNAs was derived
from a mouse which was immunized with a m3G-containing human serum albumin
conjugate. The antibody specifically reacts with intact small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein particles, U snRNPs, and allows the snRNPs U1 to U6 to be
isolated in one step from nuclear extracts of eucaryotic cells by affinity
chromatography on a preparative scale. Antibody-bound snRNPs are desorbed from
the affinity column by elution with excess of the cross-reactive nucleoside
7-methylguanosine (m7G), which guarantees maintenance of their native structure. 
The 20 affinity column also allows the snRNPs U1, U2 and U5 to be separated from 
U4/U6 RNPs by sequential elution of the particles with m7G under differential
salt concentrations. As determined by competitive radioimmunoassay and
protein-A--Sepharose immunoprecipitation, mAb H-20 crossreacts with intact m7G
cap structures. In particular we could show that non-denatured m7G-capped
SP6/beta-globin RNA was precipitated efficiently by the antibody while
GpppG-capped or non-capped RNAs did not react. Thus the monoclonal antibody H-20 
should have a wide application, not only for studying the molecular biology and
immunology of the U snRNPs from diverse organisms, but also for the
characterization and isolation of m7G-capped transcripts.

PMID: 2959477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Gen Physiol. 1987 Oct;90(4):553-73.

Equilibrium properties of mouse-Torpedo acetylcholine receptor hybrids expressed 
in Xenopus oocytes.

Yoshii K(1), Yu L, Mayne KM, Davidson N, Lester HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

This study used messenger RNA encoding each subunit (alpha, beta, gamma and
delta) of the nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptor from mouse BC3H-1 cells and 
from Torpedo electric organ. The mRNA was synthesized in vitro by transcription
with SP6 polymerase from cDNA clones. All 16 possible combinations that include
one mRNA for each of alpha, beta, gamma, and delta were injected into oocytes.
After allowing 2-3 d for translation and assembly, we assayed each oocyte for (a)
receptor assembly, measured by the binding of [125I]alpha-bungarotoxin to the
oocyte surface, and (b) ACh-induced conductance, measured under voltage clamp at 
various membrane potentials. All combinations yielded detectable assembly
(30-fold range among different combinations) and ACh-induced conductances
(greater than 1,000-fold range at 1 microM). On double-logarithmic coordinates,
the dose-response relations all had a slope near 2 for low concentrations of ACh.
Data were corrected for variations in efficiency of translation among identically
injected oocytes by expressing ACh-induced conductance per femtomole of
alpha-bungarotoxin-binding sites. Five combinations were tested for
d-tubocurarine inhibition by the dose-ratio method; the apparent dissociation
constant ranged from 0.08 to 0.27 microM. Matched responses and geometric means
are used for describing the effects of changing a particular subunit (mouse vs.
Torpedo) while maintaining the identity of the other subunits. A dramatic
subunit-specific effect is that of the beta subunit on voltage sensitivity of the
response: gACh(-90 mV)/gACh(+30 mV) is always at least 1, but this ratio
increases by an average of 3.5-fold if beta M replaces beta T. Also, combinations
including gamma T or delta M usually produce greater receptor assembly than
combinations including the homologous subunit from the other species. Finally,
EACh is defined as the concentration of ACh inducing 1 microS/fmol at -60 mV;
EACh is consistently lower for alpha M. We conclude that receptor assembly,
voltage sensitivity, and EACh are governed by different properties.

PMCID: PMC2228871
PMID: 3681261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Cell Biochem. 1987 Oct;35(2):129-36.

Expression of coronavirus E1 and rotavirus VP10 membrane proteins from synthetic 
RNA.

Armstrong J(1), McCrae M, Colman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, England.

Some viruses acquire their envelopes by budding through internal membranes of
their host cell. We have expressed the cloned cDNA for glycoproteins from two
such viruses, the E1 protein of coronavirus, which buds in the Golgi region, and 
VP10 protein of rotavirus, which assembles in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Messenger RNA was prepared from both cDNAs by using SP6 polymerase and either
translated in vitro or injected into cultured CV1 cells or Xenopus oocytes. In
CV1 cells, the E1 protein was localised to the Golgi region and VP10 protein to
the endoplasmic reticulum. In Xenopus oocytes, the E1 protein acquired
post-translational modifications indistinguishable from the sialylated, O-linked 
sugars found on viral protein, while the VP10 protein acquired
endoglycosidase-H-sensitive N-linked sugars, consistent with their localisation
to the Golgi complex and endoplasmic reticulum, respectively. Thus the two
proteins provide models with which to study targeting to each of these
intracellular compartments. When the RNAs were expressed in matured, meiotic
oocytes, the VP10 protein was modified as before, but the E1 protein was
processed to a much lesser extent than in interphase oocytes, consistent with a
cessation of vesicular transport during cell division.

PMID: 2448319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Brain Res. 1987 Sep;388(3):185-9.

Expression and characterization of hydroxyindole O-methyltransferase from a
cloned cDNA in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Ishida I(1), Ohsako S, Nakane M, Deguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for
Neurosciences, Japan.

We have used two kinds of expression systems to test whether the cloned cDNA
encoding hydroxyindole O-methyltransferase (HIOMT) of the bovine pineal gland was
functional or not. First, when mRNA was synthesized in vitro by the SP6 system
and injected into Xenopus oocytes, the enzymatic activity was expressed in the
oocytes. Second, the cloned cDNA was recombined to a vector under the control of 
the simian virus 40 early promoter and transfected to Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells. The enzymatic activity of the crude supernatant of transfected cells
(CHO-HT2) reached to 400 pmol melatonin formed per min per mg of protein, which
value was approximately 9% of that of bovine pineal supernatant. The amounts of
enzyme protein estimated by immunoblotting were proportional to the enzymatic
activity in both CHO and pineal gland. The content of HIOMT protein was 8- to
30-fold larger in pineal gland compared to CHO cells. On the other hand, the
content of mRNA encoding the enzyme measured by dot hybridization with [32P]cDNA,
was in the same range in both CHO cells and pineal glands. These data suggest
that the 11-fold higher enzymatic activity in pineal gland is due to an
accumulation of the enzyme protein, not to a high level of the mRNA and also
indicate that the cloned cDNA can express an intact hydroxyindole
O-methyltransferase enzyme in CHO cells.

PMID: 3676708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Sep;7(9):3138-46.

Molecular cloning and sequence of a cholesterol-repressible enzyme related to
prenyltransferase in the isoprene biosynthetic pathway.

Clarke CF(1), Tanaka RD, Svenson K, Wamsley M, Fogelman AM, Edwards PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles 90024.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1988 Jan;8(1):514.

Differential hybridization and molecular cloning have been used to isolate CR39, 
a cDNA which hybridizes to a 1.2-kilobase (kb) mRNA in rat liver. The level of
CR39 mRNA was increased seven- to ninefold over normal levels by dietary
cholestyramine and mevinolin and decreased about fourfold compared with normal
levels by cholesterol feeding or administration of mevalonate. Similar changes in
the mRNA levels of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase and 
HMG-CoA synthase were observed under the various conditions. In vitro translation
of either CR39 hybrid selected RNA or 1.2-kb CR39 RNA generated by an SP6 in
vitro transcription system produced a polypeptide of 39,000 daltons. As deduced
from the nucleotide sequence of a full-length CR39 cDNA, the rat CR39 polypeptide
contained 344 amino acids and had a molecular weight of 39,615. The predicted
amino acid composition and submit molecular weight of the rat CR39 were very
similar to those of prenyltransferases isolated from chicken, pig, and human. The
sequence of amino acid residues 173 through 203 in the rat CR39 polypeptide
showed that 17 out of 30 matched an active-site peptide of avian liver
prenyltransferase. Thus, alterations in the rate of cholesterogenesis resulted in
the coordinate regulation of three mRNAs encoding HMG-CoA reductase, HMG-CoA
synthase, and CR39, the latter being tentatively identified as prenyltransferase.

PMCID: PMC367948
PMID: 3670308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Sep;7(9):3131-7.

Accurate and efficient 3' processing of U2 small nuclear RNA precursor in a
fractionated cytoplasmic extract.

Kleinschmidt AM(1), Pederson T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury,
Massachusetts 01545.

The small nuclear RNAs U1, U2, U4, and U5 are cofactors in mRNA splicing and,
like the pre-mRNAs with which they interact, are transcribed by RNA polymerase
II. Also like mRNAs, mature U1 and U2 RNAs are generated by 3' processing of
their primary transcripts. In this study we have investigated the in vitro
processing of an SP6-transcribed human U2 RNA precursor, the 3' end of which
matches that of authentic human U2 RNA precursor molecules. Although the SP6-U2
RNA precursor was efficiently processed in an ammonium sulfate-fractionated HeLa 
cytoplasmic S100 extract, the product RNA was unstable. Further purification of
the processing activity on glycerol gradients resolved a 7S activity that
nonspecifically cleaved all RNAs tested and a 15S activity that efficiently
processed the 3' end of pre-U2 RNA. The 15S activity did not process the 3' end
of a tRNA precursor molecule. As demonstrated by RNase protection, the processed 
3' end of the SP6-U2 RNA maps to the same nucleotides as does mature HeLa U2 RNA.

PMCID: PMC367947
PMID: 3670307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Sep;84(17):6030-4.

The 3' untranslated region of the human interferon-beta mRNA has an inhibitory
effect on translation.

Kruys V, Wathelet M, Poupart P, Contreras R, Fiers W, Content J, Huez G.

In vitro-transcribed human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) mRNA, which contains all
the sequence of the natural molecule, is poorly translated in a reticulocyte
lysate or when injected in Xenopus oocytes. This low level of translation is due 
to an inhibition by the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs). Indeed, the
replacement of these sequences by those of Xenopus beta-globin mRNA dramatically 
increases the translational efficiency of the mRNA, especially in oocytes. This
phenomenon is not due to a difference in mRNA stability since both native and
chimeric mRNAs remain undegraded, at least during the translation period
considered. Construction of different chimeric molecules having various
combinations of 5' and 3' UTRs from IFN-beta or Xenopus beta-globin mRNA or a
small sequence of SP6 polylinker as 5' UTR has revealed that the 3' UTR of
IFN-beta in itself has a pronounced inhibitory effect on translation in the two
translation systems from animal cells. Indeed, the addition of this 3' UTR at the
3' end of the coding region of a chicken lysozyme mRNA also causes a large
decrease of its translational capacity in both systems. However, the nature of
the 5' noncoding sequence influences the degree of translation inhibition exerted
by the 3' UTR. Remarkably, we observed no difference in translation level when
the different mRNAs were tested in a wheat germ extract.

PMCID: PMC299001
PMID: 3476924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Biochimie. 1987 Sep;69(9):939-48.

Interaction of ribosomal proteins L25 from yeast and EL23 from E. coli with yeast
26S and mouse 28S rRNA.

el-Baradi TT(1), de Regt VC, Planta RJ, Nierhaus KH, Raué HA.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisch Laboratorium, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The interaction of ribosomal protein EL23 from E. coli and L25 from yeast with
yeast 26S rRNA was analysed by nitrocellulose filter binding and RNase protection
experiments using both intact rRNA and various fragments prepared by in vitro
transcription of cloned yeast rDNA regions in the SP6 system. The results show
that EL23 efficiently and specifically interacts with the region of 26S rRNA
previously identified as the binding site for the yeast ribosomal protein L25. A 
comparison of the oligonucleotides resulting from limited RNase T1 digestion of
the heterologous EL23/26S rRNA complex with those obtained by the same treatment 
of the homologous L25/26S rRNA complex showed that the molecular details of the
two r-protein/rRNA interactions are highly similar if not identical. Using the
synthetic 26S rRNA fragments we could demonstrate that all information for the
formation of a biologically active binding site is located within the region of
the rRNA delimited by the sequences protected by L25 against RNase T1 digestion. 
Part of the sequence at the 3' end of the 5'-distal protected region, however,
was found not to be essential for r-protein binding although it does enhance the 
efficiency of this binding. Binding experiments using synthetic mouse 28S rRNA
fragments showed that neither EL23 nor L25 interact with the structural
equivalent of their respective cognate binding sites present in this mammalian
rRNA. We argue that the structure of the expansion sequence present in this
region of mouse 28S rRNA is a major cause of this failure.

PMID: 3126831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Dev Biol. 1987 Sep;123(1):10-6.

Three translationally regulated mRNAs are stored in the cytoplasm of clam
oocytes.

Swenson KI, Borgese N, Pietrini G, Ruderman JV.

In situ hybridization was used to examine the spatial distributions of three
translationally controlled maternal RNAs in oocytes and two-cell embryos of the
clam Spisula. 3H-labeled single-stranded RNA probes were generated from SP6
recombinant clones containing DNA inserts encoding portions of histone H3 (the
DNA sequence which is presented here), cyclin A, and the small subunit of
ribonucleotide reductase. Hybridization of these probes to oocytes, in which the 
mRNAs are translationally inactive, shows that these mRNAs are stored in the
cytoplasm. There is no evidence for sequestration of any of the RNAs within the
nucleus or any other discrete structure. Instead they appear to be evenly
distributed throughout the cytoplasm.

PMID: 3040499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Virology. 1987 Sep;160(1):55-9.

Expression of a cDNA clone corresponding to the long open reading frame (XBL-I)
of the bovine leukemia virus.

Willems L, Bruck C, Portetelle D, Burny A, Kettmann R.

Nucleotide sequence analysis of a cDNA clone corresponding to the XBL-I open
reading-frame of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) revealed that the AUG initiation
codon was located 44 bases downstream from that of the env gene and was part of
the p34x mRNA splice donor. . .ATGG/GTAA at the end of the pol gene sequence. RNA
from this clone was synthesized in vitro by the SP6 RNA polymerase and translated
into a 34,000 mol wt protein in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. The protein (p34x)
is recognized in Western blots by most sera of BLV-infected sheep and
tumor-bearing cattle, by an anti-synthetic peptide rabbit serum, and by the serum
of a rabbit immunized by XBL-I RNA programmed reticulocyte lysates. Both sera
react with a 34,000 mol wt protein present in nuclei of BLV-infected cells.

PMID: 2820139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Anal Biochem. 1987 Sep;165(2):309-19.

Normalization of multiple RNA samples using an in vitro-synthesized external
standard cRNA.

Toscani A(1), Soprano DR, Cosenza SC, Owen TA, Soprano KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140.

A method for the normalization of multiple RNA samples is described. This method 
exploits the recently developed technology which allows the synthesis of
single-stranded, specific RNA molecules in vitro using either SP6 or T7 RNA
polymerase to prepare an external standard cRNA. When this external standard cRNA
is added to cell samples at the time of lysis, it becomes a stable, integral part
of the RNA content of each sample, which can easily and reproducibly be detected 
and quantitated by either Northern blot or RNase protection. The feasibility of
this approach to normalization has been tested in a mouse 3T3 cell model system. 
In multiple samples, the relative levels of this externally added standard
transcript are shown to closely parallel the relative levels of an internal
standard control transcript as well as the amount of RNA determined by
spectrophotometric analysis. The data obtained demonstrate that an externally
added, in vitro-synthesized transcript can serve as an accurate, universal means 
of normalizing multiple RNA samples, since it is not dependent on sample RNA
concentration, species, cell or tissue type, or experimental manipulation.

PMID: 2447810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Dev Biol. 1987 Sep;123(1):125-35.

Translation of mouse testis poly(A)+ mRNAs for testis-specific protein, protamine
1, and the precursor for protamine 2.

Kleene KC, Flynn J.

Since previous studies have suggested that the mammalian protamine mRNAs are
translated poorly in cell-free systems, we directly measured the efficiency of
translation of mouse protamine 1 mRNA. We found that mouse testis poly(A)+ mRNA
stimulates the synthesis in the wheat germ and reticulocyte cell-free systems of 
three prominant translation products which can be resolved by electrophoresis
through acid urea polyacrylamide gels containing 8 M urea. These translation
products have been identified as testis-specific protein, protamine 1, and the
precursor to protamine 2 by several criteria, including labeling with amino
acids, [35S]cysteine, and [3H]leucine, which are known to be specific to some of 
these proteins from the nucleotide sequences of recombinant DNAs. Surprisingly,
the mobility of the testis-specific protein translation product is slightly
reduced and the mobility of both protamine translation products is drastically
reduced unless the extracts of cell-free translations are coelectrophoresed with 
the appropriate carrier. The fraction of [35S]cysteine- labeled protamine 1
translation product was compared with the fraction of testis poly(A)+ mRNA as
protamine 1 mRNA which we measured in dot blots with the use of an SP6 RNA
polymerase transcript for protamine 1. The results demonstrate that protamine 1
mRNA is translated only slightly less efficiently than the average testis
poly(A)+ mRNA.

PMID: 2442049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cell. 1987 Aug 28;50(5):801-8.

A bacteriophage RNA polymerase transcribes in vitro through a nucleosome core
without displacing it.

Losa R, Brown DD.

Small linear DNA molecules containing histone octamers (nucleosome cores) are
transcribed by SP6 RNA polymerase with only slightly lower efficiency than naked 
DNA templates. The position of the histone octamer on the DNA remains unchanged
even after multiple passages by the polymerase. The histone octamer is not
released even transiently from the DNA by polymerase transit. We conclude that
histone octamers do not impede transcription elongation.

PMID: 3621345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Aug 25;15(16):6705-11.

Enzymatic synthesis of RNA oligonucleotides.

Sharmeen L, Taylor J.

Using SP6 RNA polymerase and various synthetic DNA oligomers as templates (12-65 
b), we have obtained efficient synthesis of RNA transcripts without the need for 
either primer or promoter. Gel analysis of transcripts made from templates of
known size demonstrated a predominant single species, together with some minor
bands. For a given template the major band had the same 5'-nucleotide as
predicted from the 3'-nucleotide of the template. This synthesis procedure makes 
it possible to efficiently and conveniently make labeled or unlabeled RNA from
synthetic DNA oligonucleotides.

PMCID: PMC306133
PMID: 3628005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Biol Chem. 1987 Aug 25;262(24):11847-51.

Translation initiation at an ACG triplet in mammalian cells.

Peabody DS.

The initiator AUC of the mouse dihydrofolate reductase gene (dhfr) was converted 
to ACG by site-directed mutagenesis and assayed for expression in cultured monkey
cells using an SV40 recombinant called SVGT5dhfr26m2. Synthesis of apparently
full-length dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) protein was significantly reduced
compared to wild-type, but not entirely abolished, suggesting that the ACG
triplet was being utilized for translation initiation. In addition, a truncated
form of DHFR was produced, apparently by initiation at the next in-frame AUG
downstream. This result was confirmed in vitro. Transcripts of the dhfr sequence 
were produced by SP6 RNA polymerase in the presence of m7GpppG and translated in 
vitro using reticulocyte lysates and wheat germ extracts. The results paralleled 
those observed in vivo. Synthesis of full-length DHFR was reduced, but not
eliminated, and a new species was produced by initiation at an internal site.
Amino acid sequence analysis of the products of in vitro translation demonstrated
that translation does indeed initiate at the ACG triplet and that it initiates
with methionine. Additional mutations were introduced which altered the sequence 
context of the ACG triplet. Mutation of the translation initiation consensus
sequence by substitution of the A residue at position -3, or of the G at +4
resulted in a significant decrease in initiation at the ACG and an increase in
the level of the internal initiation product. Thus, translation initiation at a
non-AUG triplet depends on a favorable sequence context.

PMID: 3040720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 1987 Aug 15;262(23):11382-8.

Studies on the role of actin's N tau-methylhistidine using
oligodeoxynucleotide-directed site-specific mutagenesis.

Solomon LR, Rubenstein PA.

The primary structure of all actins except that isolated from Naegleria gruberi
contains a unique N tau-methylhistidine (MeHis) at position 73. This modified
residue has been implicated as possibly being important for the
post-translational processing of actin's amino terminus, the binding of actin to 
DNase I, and in the polymerization of G-actin. We have investigated the potential
role of MeHis in each of these processes by utilizing site-directed mutagenesis
to change His-73 of skeletal muscle actin to Arg and Tyr. Wild type and mutant
actins were synthesized in vivo, using non-muscle cells transfected with mutant
cDNAs, and in vitro by translating mutant RNAs synthesized using SP6 RNA
polymerase in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate. We have found that actins containing 
Arg or Tyr at position 73 undergo amino-terminal processing, bind to DNase
I-agarose, and become incorporated into the cytoskeleton of a nonmuscle cell as
efficiently as wild type actin. Furthermore, using an in vitro copolymerization
assay we have found that although there is no difference between the Arg mutant
and the wild type actins, the Tyr mutant has a slightly greater critical
concentration for polymerization. These results show that MeHis is not absolutely
required for any of these processes.

PMID: 3301854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Aug 3;166(3):533-8.

Processing of a plant vacuolar protein precursor in vitro.

Hattori T, Ichihara S, Nakamura K.

A precursor for sporamin A, the storage protein of the tuberous roots of sweet
potato deposited in the vacuole, is synthesized on membrane-bound polysomes and
has an extra peptide of 37 amino acids at the N-terminus of the mature form,
which can be divided into an N-terminal putative signal peptide sequence
(residues -37 to -17) and a segment enriched with charged amino acids (residues
-16 to -1) [Hattori, T., et al. (1985) Plant Mol. Biol. 5, 313-320]. We examined 
the in vitro processing of the sporamin A precursor using a messenger RNA derived
from a full-length cDNA by the SP6 transcription system. When the in vitro
translation in a wheat germ cell-free system was carried out in the presence of
dog pancreas microsomal membranes, the precursor polypeptide (Mr = 24,000) was
processed into an intermediate form still larger than the mature polypeptide (Mr 
= 20,000). The processed intermediate form was also produced by addition of
microsomal membranes from sweet potato and potato in the translation reaction,
although less efficiently compared to dog membranes. Moreover, Escherichia coli
cells expressing sporamin precursor accumulated a polypeptide with the same
electrophoretic mobility as the intermediate form produced in vitro. The
processing by dog membranes is accompanied by translocation of the polypeptide
across the membranes as assayed by resistance to externally added proteases. The 
N-terminal amino acid sequencing analysis of [3H]leucine-labelled intermediate
form produced in vitro by dog membranes indicated that co-translational
processing of the sporamin precursor by endoplasmic reticulum membranes removes
only the signal peptide segment from the extra peptide, and suggested that the
charged segment following the signal peptide is removed post-translationally
during the transport of sporamin into vacuole. The significance of two-step
processing of plant vacuolar protein precursor is discussed in relation to the
two-step processing of precursors for yeast vacuolar proteins and animal
lysosomal proteins.

PMID: 3301345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Aug;84(16):5525-9.

Self-assembly of proglycinin and hybrid proglycinin synthesized in vitro from
cDNA.

Dickinson CD(1), Floener LA, Lilley GG, Nielsen NC.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service, Department of
Agronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907.

An in vitro system was developed that results in the self-assembly of subunit
precursors into complexes that resemble those found naturally in the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Subunits of glycinin, the predominant seed protein of soybeans, were
synthesized from modified cDNAs using a combination of the SP6 transcription and 
the rabbit reticulocyte translation systems. Subunits produced from plasmid
constructions that encoded either Gy4 or Gy5 gene products, but modified such
that their signal sequences were absent, self-assembled into trimers equivalent
in size to those precursors found in the endoplasmic reticulum. In contrast,
proteins synthesized in vitro from Gy4 constructs failed to self-assemble when
the signal sequence was left intact (e.g., preproglycinin) or when the coding
sequence was modified to remove 27 amino acids from an internal hydrophobic
region, which is highly conserved among the glycinin subunits. Various hybrid
subunits were also produced by trading portions of Gy4 and Gy5 cDNAs and all
self-assembled in our system. The in vitro assembly system provides an
opportunity to study the self-assembly of precursors and to probe for regions
important for assembly. It will also be helpful in attempts to engineer
beneficial nutritional changes into this important food protein.

PMCID: PMC298895
PMID: 16593868  [PubMed]


407. EMBO J. 1987 Aug;6(8):2173-83.

Linear oligomeric potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) RNAs are accurately
processed in vitro to the monomeric circular viroid proper when incubated with a 
nuclear extract from healthy potato cells.

Tsagris M(1), Tabler M, Mühlbach HP, Sänger HL.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institut für Biochemie, Abteilung Viroidforschung, D-8033
Planegg-Martinsried, FRG.

A nuclear extract for the processing of oligomeric viroid RNA in vitro has been
prepared from nuclei isolated from healthy potato cells grown in suspension
culture. Linear RNA molecules containing concatameric units of (+) or (-)
strands, respectively, of the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) were synthesized
in vitro with the aid of the SP6 RNA polymerase and used as substrates for
processing. When oligomeric linear PSTV (+)RNAs are incubated with the nuclear
extract, monomeric linear molecules are accurately excised from them, and ligated
to monomeric PSTV (+)RNA circles representing the viroid proper. Oligomeric PSTV 
(-)RNAs are likewise processed but with a much lower efficiency.
Viroid-processing operates although other nucleolytic activities are still
present in the extract. These results substantiate our previous finding that
oligomeric PSTV does not process autocatalytically under in vitro conditions
where certain introns and other RNAs do. This is the first report of an in vitro 
RNA processing system derived from higher plants.

PMCID: PMC553616
PMID: 16453784  [PubMed]


408. Cell Struct Funct. 1987 Aug;12(4):317-25.

Cloning of cDNAs for two beta-tubulin isotypes expressed in murine T cell
lymphoma, L5178Y and analysis of their translation products.

Matsuzaki F, Harada F, Nabeshima Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Yahara I.

Three beta-tubulin isoforms, M beta Ib, M beta Ia and M beta II, were detected by
isoelectric focusing gel electrophoresis (IEF) in extracts of cultured cells of a
mouse T cell lymphoma, L5178Y. To investigate the origin(s) of the isoforms, we
have isolated cDNA clones encoding beta-tubulin from a cDNA library prepared from
poly (A)+ RNA of L5178Y cells. Seventeen cDNA clones carrying the entire coding
sequences of beta-tubulin were isolated and classified into two distinct
isotypes, represented by two clones designated pMT27 and pMT49, according to the 
results of restriction mapping. On the basis of the nucleotide sequences of the
two cDNAs, pMT27 and pMT49 were identified as mouse beta-tubulin isotypes 3 and
5, respectively. By using in vitro translation products of hybrid-selected mRNAs 
and of the SP6 in vitro transcripts of the cDNAs, polypeptides encoded by the two
cDNA clones were analyzed by IEF. We found that pMT27 and pMT49 encode M beta Ib 
and M beta Ia, respectively. In addition, M beta II was detected in translation
products of mRNA specifically hybridized to pMT49, but not in those of the in
vitro transcript of pMT49 DNA. These results suggest that M beta II is the
translation product of mRNA whose 3'-untranslated region is highly homologous to 
that of pMT49.

PMID: 3621364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Comp Neurol. 1987 Aug 1;262(1):125-40.

Comparative distribution of mRNAs for glutamic acid decarboxylase, tyrosine
hydroxylase, and tachykinins in the basal ganglia: an in situ hybridization study
in the rodent brain.

Chesselet MF, Weiss L, Wuenschell C, Tobin AJ, Affolter HU.

Neurotransmitter-related messenger RNAs were detected by in situ hybridization in
sections of rat and mouse brains by using 35S-radiolabelled RNA probes
transcribed from cDNAs cloned in SP6 promoter-containing vectors. The
distribution of messenger RNAs for glutamic acid decarboxylase, tachykinins
(substance P and K), and tyrosine hydroxylase was examined in the striatum,
pallidum, and substantia nigra. Dense clusters of silver grains were observed
with the RNA probe complementary of the cellular messenger RNA for glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (antisense RNA) over most large neurons in the substantia nigra
pars reticulata and medium-sized to large neurons in all pallidal subdivisions. A
few very densely and numerous lightly labelled medium-sized neurons were present 
in the striatum. Among the areas examined, only the striatum contained neurons
labelled with the antisense tachykinin RNA. Most of these neurons were of medium 
size, and a few were large. With the antisense tyrosine hydroxylase RNA, silver
grains were found over neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta and adjacent
A10 and A8 dopaminergic cell groups. No signal was observed with RNAs identical
to the cellular messenger RNA for glutamic acid decarboxylase or tachykinin
(sense RNA). These results show a good correlation with immunohistochemical
studies, suggesting that documented differences in the distribution and the level
of glutamic acid decarboxylase, tyrosine hydroxylase, and substance P
immunoreactivities in neurons of the basal ganglia are related to differences in 
the level of expression of the corresponding genes rather than to translation
accessibility, stability, or transport of the gene products.

PMID: 2887596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Med Chem. 1987 Aug;30(8):1512-5.

Structure-activity studies on the C-terminal hexapeptide of substance P with
modifications at the glutaminyl and methioninyl residues.

Poulos C, Stavropoulos G, Brown JR, Jordan CC.

Analogues of [Orn6]-SP6-11 have been synthesized in which the SCH3 group of the
Met11 side chain is replaced by other functional groups, such as (CH2)2NH2, COOH,
CONH2, and COOR, which have basic, acid, or neutral character and which may act
as either H-bonding donors or H-bonding acceptors. These analogues were tested in
guinea pig ileum and rat colon muscularis mucosae, in vitro. Substitution of Lys,
Gln, or Glu at position 11 caused a marked reduction in biological activity in
both tissues. In contrast, the glutamate benzyl ester analogue had only slightly 
reduced activity in the guinea pig ileum and an increased (4.7 times) activity in
the rat colon. It is concluded that charged groups in the side chain at position 
11 of SP6-11 reduce the biological activity of SP hexapeptide.

PMID: 2441056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Plant Mol Biol. 1987 Jul;8(4):337-43. doi: 10.1007/BF00021313.

The amino terminal region delimited by Met1 and Met 37 is an integral part of the
32 kDa herbicide binding protein.

Eyal Y(1), Goloubinoff P, Edelman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100,
Rehovot, Israel.

The 33.5 kDa precursor of the 32 kDa herbicide binding protein is encoded in the 
chloroplast by the psbA gene. Previous work on the gene and protein did not
pinpoint the initiation site of translation in vivo. To resolve this issue,
constructs containing full length, truncated or mutated psbA from Solanum nigrum 
were used as templates for in vitro transcription in an SP6-promoter directed
system. The resulting RNAs were then translated in a reticulocyte lysate system. 
The SDS-PAGE and partial proteolysis patterns of the translation products
demonstrate that constructs containing the first ATG codon (Met1) of the psbA
open reading frame code for a full length precursor protein (33.5 kDa),
irrespective of whether the second ATG codon (Met37) is replaced by site directed
mutagenesis or not. However, a 5' deleted gene, lacking the codon for Met1 but
containing the codon for Met37, codes for a truncated 29 kDa protein. It is
concluded that the 33.5 kDa precursor protein and its 32 kDa maturation product
initiate at Met1 of the psbA open reading frame.

PMID: 24301196  [PubMed]


412. Blood. 1987 Jul;70(1):293-300.

Equal stabilities of normal beta globin and nontranslatable beta0 -39 thalassemic
transcripts in cell-free extracts.

Stolle CA, Payne MS, Benz EJ Jr.

Patients with beta zero thalassemia arising from premature terminator codon
mutations in the gene for beta globin do not produce beta globin protein; these
individuals also exhibit a decreased amount of beta globin mRNA in their
erythroid cells. The absence of beta globin protein is readily explained by the
inability of the beta zero-39 mRNA to be translated. The decrease in beta globin 
mRNA has been attributed to either decreased cytoplasmic stability of the
nontranslatable decreased cytoplasmic stability of the nontranslatable mRNA or to
an undefined nuclear lesion. To compare directly the relative stabilities of
normal and beta zero-39 thalassemic globin transcripts, we prepared normal and
thalassemic beta globin pre-mRNAs and mRNAs using cloned DNA templates and the
SP6 promoter-polymerase system. The stability of the transcripts was assessed by 
incubation in various cell-free extracts. Our results indicate that although the 
stabilities of the beta globin transcripts varied considerably from one extract
to another the stabilities of the beta zero-39 thalassemic pre-mRNAs and mRNAs
were equal to those of normal beta globin mRNAs in every extract tested.

PMID: 3593968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Jul;7(7):2545-51.

In vitro splicing of the terminal intervening sequence of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae cytochrome b pre-mRNA.

Gampel A, Tzagoloff A.

A region of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
encompassing the entire terminal intron plus flanking exonic sequences has been
cloned in an SP6 vector. A runoff transcript prepared from this construct as well
as the native cytochrome b pre-mRNA containing the terminal intervening sequence 
were found to act as substrates for the autocatalytic excision of the intervening
sequence in vitro. This reaction proceeds under conditions previously shown by
Cech and co-workers to promote protein-independent excision of the Tetrahymena
rRNA intervening sequence. The 5' and 3' termini of the excised intervening
sequence, determined by S1 nuclease mapping and sequence analysis, are consistent
with the known sequence of the cytochrome b mRNA. The same region of the
cytochrome b gene from a yeast mutant, defective in splicing due to a mutation in
a critical sequence inside the terminal intron, has also been cloned in an SP6
vector. The mutant transcript fails to self-splice in the in vitro assay. These
observations provide strong presumptive evidence that in vivo processing of the
terminal intervening sequence of the cytochrome b pre-mRNA occurs by an
autocatalytic mechanism analogous to that shown for other group I introns. In
vivo processing of the terminal intervening sequence of the cytochrome b
pre-mRNA, however, exhibits complete dependence on a protein factor previously
shown to be encoded by the nuclear gene CBP2.

PMCID: PMC365389
PMID: 3302680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. EMBO J. 1987 Jul;6(7):2139-44.

New RNA-mediated reactions by yeast mitochondrial group I introns.

van der Horst G(1), Tabak HF.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Molecular Biology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The group I self-splicing reaction is initiated by attack of a guanosine
nucleotide at the 5' splice site of intron-containing precursor RNA. When
precursor RNA containing a yeast mitochondrial group I intron is incubated in
vitro under conditions of self-splicing, guanosine nucleotide attack can also
occur at other positions: (i) the 3' splice site, resulting in formation of a 3' 
exon carrying an extra added guanosine nucleotide at its 5' end; (ii) the first
phosphodiester bond in precursor RNA synthesized from the SP6 bacteriophage
promoter, leading to substitution of the first 5'-guanosine by a guanosine
nucleotide from the reaction mixture; (iii) the first phosphodiester bond in
already excised intron RNA, resulting in exchange of the 5' terminal guanosine
nucleotide for a guanosine nucleotide from the reaction mixture. An identical
sequence motif (5'-GAA-3') occurs at the 3' splice site, the 5' end of SP6
precursor RNA and at the 5' end of excised intron RNA. We propose that the
aberrant reactions can be explained by base-pairing of the GAA sequence to the
Internal Guide Sequence. We suggest that these reactions are mediated by the same
catalytic centre of the intron RNA that governs the normal splicing reactions.

PMCID: PMC553606
PMID: 2443349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Mol Biol. 1987 Jun 20;195(4):909-17.

Ribosomal proteins EL11 from Escherichia coli and L15 from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae bind to the same site in both yeast 26 S and mouse 28 S rRNA.

el-Baradi TT(1), de Regt VC, Einerhand SW, Teixido J, Planta RJ, Ballesta JP,
Raué HA.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisch Laboratorium, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The heterologous interaction of Escherichia coli ribosomal protein EL11 with
yeast 26 S and mouse 28 S rRNA was studied by analysing the ability of this
protein to form a specific complex with various synthetic rRNA fragments that
span the structural equivalent of the EL11 binding site present in these
eukaryotic rRNAs. The fragments were obtained by SP6 polymerase-directed in-vitro
run-off transcription of parts of the yeast or mouse large rRNA gene cloned
behind the SP6 promoter. EL11 was found to protect an oligonucleotide fragment of
63 nucleotides from both the yeast and mouse transcripts against digestion by
RNase T1. In both cases, the position of this fragment in the L-rRNA sequence
coincides almost exactly with that of the fragment previously found to be
protected by EL11 in E. coli 23 S rRNA. Moreover, the protected yeast fragment
was shown to be able to re-bind to EL11 by a nitrocellulose filter binding assay.
A ribosomal protein preparation from Saccharomyces cerevisiae containing L15
(YL23) as well as the acidic proteins L44', L44 and L45 protects exactly the same
oligonucleotide fragment as does EL11 in both the yeast and mouse transcripts.
Evidence is provided that L15, which is known to be structurally and functionally
equivalent to EL11, is the rRNA-binding protein in this preparation. Thus the
structural equivalent of the EL11 binding site present in yeast 26 S rRNA
constitutes the second example of functional conservation of a ribosomal
protein-binding site on rRNA between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

PMID: 3309345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Jun 15;165(3):553-7.

Isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone encoding testis protamine Z1 from 
the dog-fish Scylliorhinus caniculus.

Berlot-Picard F, Vodjdani G, Doly J.

A clone containing a 445-bp cDNA insert was isolated from a cDNA library
synthesized from dog-fish testes mRNA. The nucleotide sequence was determined and
corresponded to a 50-amino-acid protein. The known five-amino-acid N-terminal
sequence corresponded exactly to our deduced amino acid sequence. After in vitro 
transcription of this cDNA using SP6 RNA polymerase, the translated polypeptide
comigrated with the Z1 scylliorhinine marker. Analysis of the cDNA 3' flanking
region of our Scylliorhinus protamine Z1 revealed an inverted repeat sequence, an
ACAA motif and a CAGGAAAGA box known as regulatory signals for transcription
termination in histone genes. In addition, sequences homologous to the simian
virus (SV 40) and polyoma virus core enhancer elements were identified in the 5' 
and 3' flanking regions.

PMID: 3595601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Jun 15;145(2):942-8.

Synthesis and biological activity of substance P C-terminal hexapeptide
analogues: structure-activity studies.

Janecka A, Koziolkiewicz W, Wasiak T, Cierniewski CS.

The synthesis of six hexapeptide analogues of C-terminal Substance P fragment
containing alpha, beta-dehydrophenylalanine (delta Phe) in the position 7 or 8 is
described. The effect of the structural changes on the hypotensive activity and
antigenic properties of analogues was compared. It was found that substitution of
delta Phe in various analogues of C-terminal hexapeptide of Substance P resulted 
in different effects on the hypotensive activity. The analogues [Glp6, delta
Phe7]SP6-11 and [Glp6, delta Phe8]SP6-11 retained 70% and 45% of hypotensive
activity of the C-terminal hexapeptide of Substance P, respectively but they
showed a completely destroyed antigenic determinant. The analogues containing
additionally Sar or His in the position 9 showed a complete lack of both:
hypotensive activity and expression of the antigenic determinant of Substance P.

PMID: 2439086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Biochemistry. 1987 Jun 2;26(11):3050-7.

Mechanism and requirements of in vitro RNA splicing of the primary transcript
from the T4 bacteriophage thymidylate synthase gene.

Chu FK, Maley GF, Maley F.

The splicing of a procaryotic precursor RNA transcribed from the T4 phage
thymidylate synthase (td) gene with SP6 RNA polymerase was investigated in vitro.
The intron excision-cyclization reaction increased progressively to 60 degrees C.
Exon ligation, though barely detectable at the lower temperatures, was greatly
enhanced at 60 degrees C. Both reactions required Mg2+. The addition of guanosine
to the 5' end of an intron-exon II intermediate via a 3',5'-phosphodiester bond
was essential for the ligation of exon I to exon II. The added guanosine and the 
first intron-encoded uridine are subsequently lost as a dinucleotide from the 5' 
end during cyclization of the linear form of the excised intron RNA. Exon
ligation is intramolecular and occurs more readily in the nascent RNA molecule
(cotranscriptionally) than in the finished transcript (posttranscriptionally).
These data and the identification of various structural elements (P, Q, R, S, E, 
E') in the td intron that are found typically in eucaryotic class I introns
firmly establish the td intron as the first example of class I intron of
procaryotic origin.

PMID: 3038175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Virology. 1987 Jun;158(2):456-60.

Synthesis of the X-protein of hepatitis B virus in vitro and detection of anti-X 
antibodies in human sera.

Pfaff E, Salfeld J, Gmelin K, Schaller H, Theilmann L.

A protein of 154 amino acids, predicted to be encoded by the X-open reading frame
of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome, was synthesized in an in vitro translation
system from SP6 transcripts containing the X-coding sequence. As characterized by
SDS-PAGE and immunoprecipitation this X-protein possesses the expected molecular 
weight of 17 kDa and reacts specifically with rabbit antisera directed against a 
fusion protein from Escherichia coli that contained 145 of the 154 amino acids
from the X-sequence. The X-protein, radiolabeled with [35S]methionine, provided a
sensitive and specific antigen to screen for anti-X antibodies in sera from HBV
patients. Positive signals were obtained preferentially in subjects suffering
from HBV-induced liver cirrhosis or primary hepatocellular carcinoma (PHC), i.e.,
individuals that had been exposed for an extended time period to HBV gene
products. Carefully controlled experiments failed to reveal the presence of
X-related proteins specific to liver specimens from HBV patients.

PMID: 3035793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Jun 1;165(2):437-42.

Molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence of full-length cDNA for sweet potato
catalase mRNA.

Sakajo S, Nakamura K, Asahi T.

A nearly full-length cDNA clone for catalase (pCAS01) was obtained through
immunological screening of cDNA expression library constructed from
size-fractionated poly(A)-rich RNA of wounded sweet potato tuberous roots by
Escherichia coli expression vector-primed cDNA synthesis. Two additional catalase
cDNA clones (pCAS10 and pCAS13), which contained cDNA inserts slightly longer
than that of pCAS01 at their 5'-termini, were identified by colony hybridization 
of another cDNA library. Those three catalase cDNAs contained primary structures 
not identical, but closely related, to one another based on their restriction
enzyme and RNase cleavage mapping analyses, suggesting that microheterogeneity
exists in catalase mRNAs. The cDNA insert of pCAS13 carried the entire catalase
coding capacity, since the RNA transcribed in vitro from the cDNA under the SP6
phage promoter directed the synthesis of a catalase polypeptide in the wheat germ
in vitro translation assay. The nucleotide sequencing of these catalase cDNAs
indicated that 1900-base catalase mRNA contained a coding region of 1476 bases.
The amino acid sequence of sweet potato catalase deduced from the nucleotide
sequence was 35 amino acids shorter than rat liver catalase [Furuta, S., Hayashi,
H., Hijikata, M., Miyazawa, S., Osumi, T. & Hashimoto, T. (1986) Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 83, 313-317]. Although these two sequences showed only 38% homology, the
sequences around the amino acid residues implicated in catalytic function, heme
ligand or heme contact had been well conserved during evolution.

PMID: 2885193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Virol. 1987 May;61(5):1301-9.

Processing of the Semliki Forest virus structural polyprotein: role of the capsid
protease.

Melancon P, Garoff H.

The protease activities responsible for the cotranslational processing of the
Semliki Forest virus structural polyprotein were investigated by using an in
vitro transcription-translation system. Three cleavages released the individual
chains from the nascent polyprotein in the order capsid, p62, 6K (a nonstructural
peptide), and E1. We showed directly that the protease activity responsible for
the release of the capsid protein resides in the capsid itself: by progressive
truncation of the cDNA used for the SP6 transcription, we showed that a precursor
containing as few as 38 residues of the p62 protein left at the C terminus of the
capsid was still very efficiently cleaved in vitro. We further tested the
possibility that serine-219 of the capsid is involved in autoproteolysis by
site-directed in vitro mutagenesis. A change in the sequence
Gly-Asp-Ser(219)-Gly, a tetrapeptide conserved among several animal serine
proteases, to Gly-Asp-Arg-Ser-Thr was shown to completely abolish in vitro
cleavage. This supports the notion that the capsid is a serine protease. The role
of the capsid protease in the processing of the 6K junctions was then
investigated by translations of a hybrid polyprotein in which the capsid and most
of the p62 sequences are replaced by those of the secretory protein lysozyme. The
cleavages and concomitant appearance of the 6K peptide occurred efficiently and
were shown to require the presence of membranes. This demonstrates that the
capsid protease is not required for those cleavages and suggests that a
membrane-associated host protease is responsible for the cleavage.

PMCID: PMC254103
PMID: 3553612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Cell Biol. 1987 May;104(5):1165-72.

Translocation of globin fusion proteins across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane
in Xenopus laevis oocytes.

Simon K, Perara E, Lingappa VR.

We have studied the translocation of a normally cytoplasmic protein domain across
the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum in cell-free systems and in Xenopus
laevis oocytes. Coding regions for the normally cytoplasmic protein globin were
engineered in frame either 3' or 5' to the coding region for the signal sequence 
of either Escherichia coli b-lactamase or bovine preprolactin, respectively, in
SP6 expression plasmids. RNA transcribed from these plasmids was microinjected
into oocytes as well as translated in cell-free systems. We demonstrate that both
in vivo and in vitro, a previously amino-terminal signal sequence can direct
translocation of domains engineered to either side. Moreover, the domain
preceding the signal sequence can be as large as that which follows it. While, in
general, cell-free systems were found to faithfully reflect translocation events 
in vivo, our results suggest that a mechanism for clearance of signal peptides
after cleavage is present in intact cells that is not reconstituted in cell-free 
systems.

PMCID: PMC2114462
PMID: 3553206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Apr 24;15(8):3257-73.

The 5'-leader sequence of tobacco mosaic virus RNA enhances the expression of
foreign gene transcripts in vitro and in vivo.

Gallie DR, Sleat DE, Watts JW, Turner PC, Wilson TM.

A 67-nucleotide portion of the non-coding, 5'-leader sequence of tobacco mosaic
virus RNA [defined as omega' (Gr. omega prime)] has been shown to enhance the
translation of contiguous foreign gene transcripts both in vitro and in vivo.
Chemically-synthesized omega', containing convenient linker sequences, was
inserted into derivatives of an in vitro transcription plasmid (pSP64) between
the bacteriophage-SP6 promoter and sequences coding for either chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) or neomycin phosphotransferase (NPTII). Run-off in vitro 
transcripts, with or without a 5'-cap structure (G(5')ppp(5')G) and/or the omega'
sequence, were tested in mRNA-dependent cell-free translation systems derived
from rabbit reticulocyte lysate, wheat germ extract or Escherichia coli (MRE
600). In all cases, the presence of omega' increased the translational expression
of both reporter genes, typically between 2- to 10-fold. Electroporation of
isolated mesophyll protoplasts from Nicotiana tabacum cv. Xanthi, or
microinjection of oocytes from Xenopus laevis, with SP6-transcripts containing
the CAT-coding region confirmed and extended the value of omega' as a potential
translational enhancer of gene expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC340728
PMID: 3575095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Cell. 1987 Apr 24;49(2):203-10.

Nucleosomes inhibit the initiation of transcription but allow chain elongation
with the displacement of histones.

Lorch Y, LaPointe JW, Kornberg RD.

Promoters were assembled in nucleosomes or ligated to nucleosomes and transcribed
with SP6 RNA polymerase or with mammalian RNA polymerase II and accessory
factors. Neither polymerase would initiate transcription at a promoter in a
nucleosome, but once engaged in transcription, both polymerases were capable of
reading through a nucleosome. In the course of readthrough transcription, the
histones were displaced from the DNA, as shown by the exposure of restriction
sites and by a shift of the template to the position of naked DNA in a gel. It
may be true, in general, that processive enzymes will traverse regions of DNA
organized in nucleosomes and displace histones.

PMID: 3568125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Apr;7(4):1346-51.

In vitro splicing of kappa immunoglobulin precursor mRNA.

Lowery DE, Van Ness BG.

The in vitro splicing of kappa immunoglobulin precursor mRNA was studied as an
example of a naturally occurring mRNA possessing multiple 5' splice sites.
Several kappa mRNAs were generated in vitro by using an SP6 transcription system 
and were spliced in nuclear extracts derived from HeLa cells. Products and
intermediates resulting from in vitro splicing were identified and characterized.
In contrast to the in vivo situation, in which apparently only the 5'-most splice
donor site is used, all of the 5' splice sites were used in vitro with equal
frequency. Neither the presence or absence of variable region coding sequences
nor the deletion of intron sequences had an effect on in vitro splice site
selection.

PMCID: PMC365219
PMID: 3110594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Apr;84(8):2160-4.

Cosmid vectors for rapid genomic walking, restriction mapping, and gene transfer.

Wahl GM, Lewis KA, Ruiz JC, Rothenberg B, Zhao J, Evans GA.

We have designed cosmid vectors for rapid genomic "walking" and restriction
mapping. These vectors contain the transcription promoters from either
bacteriophage SP6, T7, or T3 flanking a unique BamHI cloning site. Mammalian
expression modules encoding the dominant marker neomycin phosphotransferase or
the amplifiable dihydrofolate reductase gene expressed from SV40 promoters were
inserted for use in gene transfer studies. Restriction sites for the enzymes Not 
I and Sfi I, which cut mammalian DNA very infrequently, have been engineered near
the transcriptional promoters to enable the excision of most inserts as single,
full-length fragments. Genomic libraries representative of mouse, human, and
hamster genomes were constructed by inserting 33- to 44-kilobase-pair (kbp) DNA
fragments, generated by partial cleavage of genomic DNA with Mbo I or Sau3A, into
the unique BamHI site. Digestion of recombinant cosmids with restriction enzymes 
that cleave frequently but do not disrupt the transcriptional promoters generates
two small DNA templates for the synthesis of end-specific RNA probes to
facilitate directional "walking." Cosmid restriction maps can be determined
rapidly by one of several methods. The cosmids and methods we describe should
have wide utility in determining the functional and structural organization of
complex eukaryotic genomes and for physically linking distant genetic loci.

PMCID: PMC304608
PMID: 3031668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Cell Biol. 1987 Apr;104(4):855-63.

Isolation and characterization of cDNA clones for rat ribophorin I: complete
coding sequence and in vitro synthesis and insertion of the encoded product into 
endoplasmic reticulum membranes.

Harnik-Ort V, Prakash K, Marcantonio E, Colman DR, Rosenfeld MG, Adesnik M,
Sabatini DD, Kreibich G.

Ribophorins I and II are two transmembrane glycoproteins that are characteristic 
of the rough endoplasmic reticulum and are thought to be part of the apparatus
that affects the co-translational translocation of polypeptides synthesized on
membrane-bound polysomes. A ribophorin I cDNA clone containing a 0.6-kb insert
was isolated from a rat liver lambda gtll cDNA library by immunoscreening with
specific antibodies. This cDNA was used to isolate a clone (2.3 kb) from a rat
brain lambda gtll cDNA library that contains the entire ribophorin I coding
sequence. SP6 RNA transcripts of the insert in this clone directed the in vitro
synthesis of a polypeptide of the expected size that was immunoprecipitated with 
anti-ribophorin I antibodies. When synthesized in the presence of microsomes,
this polypeptide, like the translation product of the natural ribophorin I mRNA, 
underwent membrane insertion, signal cleavage, and co-translational
glycosylation. The complete amino acid sequence of the polypeptide encoded in the
cDNA insert was derived from the nucleotide sequence and found to contain a
segment that corresponds to a partial amino terminal sequence of ribophorin I
that was obtained by Edman degradation. This confirmed the identity of the cDNA
clone and established that ribophorin I contains 583 amino acids and is
synthesized with a cleavable amino terminal insertion signal of 22 residues.
Analysis of the amino acid sequence of ribophorin I suggested that the
polypeptide has a simple transmembrane disposition with a rather hydrophilic
carboxy terminal segment of 150 amino acids exposed on the cytoplasmic face of
the membrane, and a luminal domain of 414 amino acids containing three potential 
N-glycosylation sites. Hybridization measurements using the cloned cDNA as a
probe showed that ribophorin I mRNA levels increase fourfold 15 h after partial
hepatectomy, in confirmation of measurements made by in vitro translation of
liver mRNA. Southern blot analysis of rat genomic DNA suggests that there is a
single copy of the ribophorin I gene in the haploid rat genome.

PMCID: PMC2114439
PMID: 3031084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. DNA. 1987 Apr;6(2):101-8.

Efficient in vitro and in vivo expression of human glucocerebrosidase cDNA.

Reiner O, Wilder S, Givol D, Horowitz M.

A human glucocerebrosidase cDNA clone was isolated from a human chronic
myelogenous leukemia (line K562) cDNA library using a 36-nucleotide-long
synthetic probe (GC-36). The 2.4-kb cDNA contains 184 bp of 5' nontranslated
sequences, the complete coding region, and 546 bp of 3' nontranslated sequences
followed by 100 bp of poly(A). A primer extension experiment indicated that the
cDNA is at least 51 bp shorter than the mRNA at the 5' end. In normal human
placenta as well as in fibroblasts from Gaucher's disease patients, a major mRNA 
species of 2.6 kb hybridizes with the cDNA probe. The amounts of the
glucocerebrosidase mRNA in normal placenta and Gaucher's cells are comparable.
The cDNA was linked to the SP6 promoter and transcribed in vitro. The resultant
RNA, when translated in a cell-free system, yielded a polypeptide of 55 kD, which
is the size expected from the coding sequence. The cDNA was inserted into an SV40
shuttle vector, under the transcription control of the SV40 early promoter.
COS-M6 cells were transfected with this construct and the biological activity of 
the cDNA was assayed by monitoring the increase in glucocerebrosidase activity,
using 4-methyl umbiliferyl glucopyranoside as a substrate. There was a two- to
three-fold increase in enzymatic activity in the transfected cells, compared to
nontransfected cells. These results prove the authenticity of the
glucocerebrosidase cDNA and provide the basis for experiments to understand the
nature of the genetic alterations responsible for Gaucher's disease.

PMID: 2438102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Mar 25;15(6):2653-64.

Nucleotide sequence and expression of the cloned gene of bacteriophage SP6 RNA
polymerase.

Kotani H, Ishizaki Y, Hiraoka N, Obayashi A.

The coding region of the gene for bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase was cloned
into pBR322, and its entire nucleotide sequence was deduced. The predicted amino 
acid sequence for the polymerase consists of 874 amino acid residues with a total
molecular weight of 98,561 daltons. Comparison of the amino acid sequence with
that of T7 RNA polymerase reveals that regions with partial homology are present 
along the sequence. The coding region of SP6 RNA polymerase was inserted into an 
E. coli expression vector. The polymerase gene was efficiently expressed in E.
coli cells, and the enzymatic properties of the expressed polymerase were very
similar to those of the enzyme synthesized in SP6 phage-infected Salmonella
typhimurium cells.

PMCID: PMC340675
PMID: 3031606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 1987 Mar 15;262(8):3844-51.

Molecular cloning and characterization of cDNA for human myeloperoxidase.

Morishita K, Kubota N, Asano S, Kaziro Y, Nagata S.

Partial amino acid sequence of human myeloperoxidase was determined, and a
41-base oligonucleotide containing deoxyinosines at four positions was chemically
synthesized. By using the oligonucleotide as a probe, cDNA clones for human
myeloperoxidase were isolated from a cDNA library constructed with mRNA from
human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells. One of the clones containing a
2.6-kilobase insert was subjected to nucleotide sequence analysis. The sequence
was found to contain an open reading frame, 2,235 nucleotides coding for a
protein of 745 amino acids with a calculated Mr of 83,868. The heavy chain of
myeloperoxidase, consisting of 467 amino acids, was located on the COOH terminus 
half of the protein. The RNA specified by the cDNA was prepared using SP6 RNA
polymerase and translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysates, and the product was
identified as human myeloperoxidase by immunoprecipitation with rabbit anti-human
myeloperoxidase antibody. By Northern hybridization analysis of RNA from leukemic
cells, it was shown that myeloperoxidase mRNA is abundantly expressed in human
promyelocytic HL-60 and mouse myeloid leukemia NFS-60 cells. Furthermore, the
results of Southern hybridization analysis of human genomic DNA suggest that
there are one or two genes for myeloperoxidase in the human haploid genome.

PMID: 3029127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Mar 11;15(5):2279-94.

Studies on SP6 promoter using a new plasmid vector that allows gene insertion at 
the transcription initiation site.

Kang C, Wu CW.

All the phage-promoter containing subcloning vectors available for in vitro
transcription reactions contain a polylinker away from the transcription
initiation site. A new SP6 transcription subcloning vector, pCKSP6, has been
constructed, in which a gene can be inserted precisely at the transcription
initiation site. This was achieved by bringing the BamHI cleavage site into the
initiation site. When DNA ends of both insert gene and BamHI cleaved pCKSP6 are
made blunt-ended using a single strand specific nuclease, the in vitro
transcripts of the recombinant DNA by SP6 RNA polymerase will contain only the
gene sequence immediately after the initiation base G. Mung bean nuclease was
used to generate a series of mutants resulting from step-wise deletion of single 
base pairs around the initiation site. Transcription assays with these SP6
promoter mutants revealed that not only the sequence immediately upstream of the 
initiation site but also the six base pairs from position +1 to +6 are important 
elements for promoter binding and/or transcription initiation activity.
Furthermore, there appears to be a hierarchy of importance of each base pair in
the order of position +1 greater than +2 greater than +3 greater than +4, +5, +6,
-1, -2.

PMCID: PMC340634
PMID: 3031593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Mol Biol. 1987 Mar 5;194(1):1-10.

Characterization of a cDNA defining a gene family encoding TM30p1, a human
fibroblast tropomyosin.

MacLeod AR, Talbot K, Smillie LB, Houlker C.

We have isolated a cDNA that contains the complete coding sequence of a 3.0 X
10(3) base human fibroblast mRNA together with a large part of its 3'
untranslated sequence. The deduced protein sequence is very similar if not
identical to the sequence of horse platelet tropomyosin, a 247 amino acid
protein. In vitro translation of an SP6 transcript of this cDNA reveals that the 
protein product of the 3.0 X 10(3) base mRNA is TM30p1, one of the five proteins 
in human fibroblasts that have been shown to possess the physical and chemical
characteristics of tropomyosin. This mRNA is encoded by a gene family that
consists of a functional gene and multiple RNA-copy pseudogenes. This family of
sequences is distinct from the gene family encoding TM30nm, a cytoskeletal
tropomyosin very similar in electrophoretic mobility to TM30p1, but which shows
significant differences in primary structure.

PMID: 3612796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. EMBO J. 1987 Mar;6(3):549-54.

In vitro expression of a full-length DNA copy of cowpea mosaic virus B RNA:
identification of the B RNA encoded 24-kd protein as a viral protease.

Verver J(1), Goldbach R, Garcia JA, Vos P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Agricultural University, De Dreijen 11, 6703 
BC Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from B component RNA of cowpea mosaic virus 
and cloned into appropriate vectors. Using four clones, together representing the
entire B RNA sequence, a full-length DNA copy was constructed and subsequently
positioned downstream of a phage SP6 or T7 promoter. RNA molecules transcribed
from this full-size DNA copy using SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase were efficiently
translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysates into a 200-kd polypeptide similar to
RNA isolated from viral B components. Moreover this polypeptide was rapidly
cleaved into 32-kd and 170-kd polypeptides, exactly like the 200-kd polypeptide
encoded by viral B RNA. In vitro transcription and translation of a DNA copy in
which an 87-bp-long deletion in the coding sequence for the 24-kd polypeptide was
introduced revealed that the 24-kd polypeptide bears the proteolytic activity
involved in the primary cleavage of the B RNA-encoded polyprotein.

PMCID: PMC553432
PMID: 16453750  [PubMed]


434. Exp Cell Res. 1987 Mar;169(1):262-6.

Human c-fos proto-oncogene mapped to chromosome 14, band q24.3-q31. Possibilities
for oncogene activation by chromosomal rearrangements in human neoplasms.

Ekstrand AJ, Zech L.

The human c-fos proto-oncogene was mapped by in situ hybridization to chromosome 
14, band q24.3-q31. As a probe we used 3H-labelled mouse c-fos RNA transcribed in
vitro by SP6-RNA-polymerase. Of a total of 40 grains on chromosome 14, 19 (47.5%)
were located within the 14q24.3-q31 region (p much less than 0.001). Mechanisms
for c-fos to gain transforming ability by a break in a critical part of the gene 
have recently been described. Thus there are several possibilities for
chromosomal aberrations within the 14q24.3-q31 region to be responsible for c-fos
deregulation and which may result in neoplastic growth. Such specific aberrations
are found in a variety of human neoplasms.

PMID: 3817017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Eur J Immunol. 1987 Mar;17(3):433-6.

Targeting cytotoxic T cells to antigen-specific B lymphocytes.

Rammensee HG, Julius MH, Nemazee D, Langhorne J, Lamers R, Köhler G.

A recent development in immunomanipulation involves the targeting of cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes (CTL) to cell-bound antigens using bispecific antibodies. These
antibodies have been engineered such that specificity is directed against the T
cell receptor (TCR) or TCR-associated T3 molecules, as well as against the chosen
antigen. The present study was aimed to force interactions between T and B cells 
by bridging their receptors. F23.1 antibodies, which are specific for gene
products of the TCR V beta 8 gene family, were conjugated with TNP
(2,4,6-trinitrophenyl) and this construct was used to bridge the receptors of V
beta 8+ T cells with the receptors of TNP-specific B cells. The bridging was
demonstrated by direct killing of both a TNP-specific B hybridoma and of blast
cells from mice transgenic for mu, kappa of the TNP-specific antibody Sp6.
Further, F23.1-TNP constructs in conjunction with V beta 8+ CTL were shown to
specifically deplete Ig-secreting B cells from Sp6 transgenic mice. Conjugates of
TCR-specific antibodies and antigen are theoretically useful in vivo to either
deplete or expand B cells of a given specificity by coupling their receptors to
the TCR of CTL or T helper cells, respectively.

PMID: 3494614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Cell. 1987 Feb 27;48(4):639-45.

Translational regulation of SV40 early mRNA defines a new viral protein.

Khalili K, Brady J, Khoury G.

SP6-initiated in vitro transcripts, representing the three major classes of early
SV40 mRNAs, early-early (EE) and two late-early (LE) transcripts, were assayed by
in vitro translation to compare their relative efficiencies for synthesis of the 
SV40 T antigens. The presence of one or two potential AUG initiator codons in the
leader sequences of the LE RNAs inhibits efficient translation from the
downstream T-antigen initiator AUG. In vitro translation of the capped form of
the shorter SV40 LE RNA resulted in the synthesis of a 2.7-kd protein. In vivo
pulse labeling of SV40-infected CV-1 cells demonstrated the accumulation of a
peptide of similar size at late times after lytic infection, indicating that it
is an authentic viral protein encoded by the early leader sequence of SV40.

PMID: 3028644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cell. 1987 Feb 13;48(3):535-43.

Self-cleaving transcripts of satellite DNA from the newt.

Epstein LM, Gall JG.

Satellite 2 of the newt, Notophthalmus viridescens, is a 330 bp tandemly repeated
sequence scattered throughout the genome. Cytoplasmic transcripts homologous to
satellite 2 are found in a variety of tissues. Most of the transcripts correspond
precisely in length to the DNA repeat unit or to whole multiples of that repeat. 
We show here that dimer-sized satellite 2 transcripts, synthesized with SP6 RNA
polymerase from a plasmid clone, undergo site-specific, self-catalyzed cleavage
in vitro. The reaction proceeds at neutral pH and requires Mg++ but no other
cofactor or energy source. The cleavage products have 5'-hydroxyl and
3'-phosphate groups, at least some of which are in the form of 2',3'-cyclic
phosphates. In this respect the reaction resembles the self-cleavage of certain
small, infectious RNAs found in plants. Furthermore, the in vitro cleavage of
satellite 2 transcripts occurs within a sequence that is homologous to the
conserved cleavage site of the infectious RNAs. The existence of monomer and
multimer transcripts in the cell suggests that the monomer may arise by
site-specific cleavage of long primary transcripts. However, the 5' end of the
cellular monomer is 46 or 47 bases upstream of the in vitro cleavage site,
suggesting that factors in the cell may modify the cleavage reaction.

PMID: 2433049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Nature. 1987 Feb 12-18;325(6105):622-5.

Enhanced translation of chimaeric messenger RNAs containing a plant viral
untranslated leader sequence.

Jobling SA, Gehrke L.

Eukaryotic messenger RNAs are translated with unequal efficiencies in vivo and in
vitro and the molecular basis of this phenomenon is not understood. As an
approach to understanding the role of the 5' untranslated leader sequence in
regulating mRNA translational efficiency, chimaeric mRNAs have been generated by 
joining a heterologous leader to complementary DNA (cDNA) sequences, followed by 
in vitro transcription using SP6 RNA polymerase and in vitro protein synthesis.
We used the untranslated leader from the coat protein mRNA of alfalfa mosaic
virus (AMV RNA 4), a well-translated, highly competitive message, to replace the 
leader sequence of barley alpha-amylase (B alpha A) and human interleukin 1 beta 
(IL-1 beta) cDNAs. Deletion of transcribed vector sequences and replacement of
the native untranslated region with the AMV RNA 4 leader can result in as much as
a 35-fold increase in mRNA translational efficiency; moreover, the translational 
efficiency of the chimaeric mRNAs containing the AMV RNA 4 leader is at least as 
great as that of virion RNA 4. The results suggest that the chimaeric AMV-mRNAs
have either a higher relative affinity or a diminished requirement for a limiting
component(s) of the translational machinery; in addition, it may be feasible,
through use of heterologous leader sequences, to increase expression of
engineered genes or cDNAs without changing the antigenic or biological properties
of the encoded protein.

PMID: 3492677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Feb 11;15(3):1337.

DNA inserted two bases down from the initiation site of a SP6 polymerase
transcription vector is transcribed efficiently in vitro.

Bujarski JJ, Kaesberg P.

PMCID: PMC340536
PMID: 3029707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Cell Biol. 1987 Feb;104(2):175-82.

U1 precursors: variant 3' flanking sequences are transcribed in human cells.

Patton JG, Wieben ED.

Using RNase protection and oligonucleotide hybridization experiments, we have
shown that U1 precursors are derived by transcription of 3' flanking sequences. A
labeled SP6 transcript of one of the true U1 genes (pD2) was able to protect a
subset of the 3' flanking sequences present in HeLa cytoplasmic U1 RNA. However, 
not all U1 precursors were protected using this probe, suggesting that variant U1
precursor 3' tail sequences are expressed in HeLa cells. This conclusion has been
confirmed by hybridization of HeLa RNA samples with specific oligonucleotide
probes representing variant U1 3' flanking sequences. Interestingly, these
variant tail sequences contain the putative Sm antigen binding site, A(U)3-6G.
The conservation of this flanking sequence through evolution suggests a possible 
functional role for these precursor tails in ordering protein binding to U1 RNA.

PMCID: PMC2114412
PMID: 3805120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Feb;7(2):914-20.

Biogenesis and transmembrane orientation of the cellular isoform of the scrapie
prion protein [published errratum appears in Mol Cell Biol 1987 May;7(5):2035].

Hay B, Barry RA, Lieberburg I, Prusiner SB, Lingappa VR.

Considerable evidence suggests that the scrapie prion protein (PrP) is a
component of the infectious particle. We studied the biogenesis and transmembrane
orientation of an integral-membrane form of PrP in a cell-free
transcription-linked translation-coupled translocation system programmed with a
full-length PrP cDNA cloned behind the SP6 promoter. Translation of SP6
transcripts of the cDNA or of native mRNA from either normal or infected hamster 
brain in the absence of dog pancreas membranes resulted in the synthesis of a
single PrP immunoreactive polypeptide (each polypeptide was the same size; Mr,
28,000), as predicted from the known sequence of the coding region. In the
cotranslational presence of membranes, two additional forms were observed. Using 
peptide antisera specific to sequences from the amino- or the carboxy-terminal
domain of PrP together with proteinase K or endoglycosidase H digestion or both, 
we showed that one of these forms included an integrated and glycosylated form of
PrP (Mr = 33,000) which spans the bilayer twice, with domains of both the amino
and carboxy termini in the extracytoplasmic space. By these criteria, the other
form appeared to be an unglycosylated intermediate of similar transmembrane
orientation. The PrP cell-free translation products did not display resistance to
proteinase K digestion in the presence of nondenaturing detergents. These results
suggest that the PrP cell-free translation products most closely resemble the
normal cellular isoform of the protein, since its homolog from infected brain was
proteinase K resistant. The implications of these findings for PrP structure and 
function are discussed.

PMCID: PMC365150
PMID: 3547085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Gene. 1987;51(2-3):247-54.

New vectors for rapid sequencing of DNA fragments by chemical degradation.

Eckert RL.

Nucleotide sequencing by the chemical degradation method requires the labeling of
a single nucleotide at the 3' or 5' terminus of the fragment to be sequenced. In 
the present report, I described the construction of two new sequencing plasmids, 
pSP64CS and pSP65CS, which are ideally suited for use when sequencing a nested
set of deletion fragments by the chemical degradation method. Plasmids pSP64CS
and pSP65CS contain the sequencing element derived from pGV403 required for
specific labeling of individual 3' ends, and the polylinker site derived from
pSP64 or pSP65, respectively. The plasmids also retain the SP6 promoter element
which allows for the efficient in vitro synthesis of complementary RNA. Any DNA
fragment having a blunt end and a second end which is any of the following
restriction sites, HindIII, PstI, SalI, AccI, XbaI, BamHI, SacI, BstEII or EcoRI,
can be directionally sequenced in these plasmids. Fragments having two blunt ends
can also be sequenced. pSP64CS and pSP65CS differ only in the orientation of the 
polylinker/sequencing element relative to the SP6 promoter.

PMID: 3596245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. EMBO J. 1987 Jan;6(1):43-8.

Selection of AUG initiation codons differs in plants and animals.

Lütcke HA, Chow KC, Mickel FS, Moss KA, Kern HF, Scheele GA.

The influence of the nucleotide at position -3 relative to the AUG initiation
codon on the initiation of protein synthesis was studied in two different in
vitro translation systems using synthetic mRNAs. The four mRNAs, transcribed from
cDNAs directed by an SP6 promoter, were identical except for mutations at
nucleotide -3. In each case, translation of mRNAs produced a single protein of Mr
= 12,600. Relative translational efficiencies showed a hierarchy in the
reticulocyte lysate system (100, 85, 61 and 38% for A, G, U and C in position -3,
respectively) but no differences in the wheat germ system. Differential mRNA
degradation or polypeptide chain elongation were excluded as causes of the
differences observed in translation in the reticulocyte lysate. mRNA competition 
increased the differences observed in translational efficiencies in reticulocyte 
lysate but showed no effect in wheat germ. Analysis of 61 plant and 209 animal
mRNA sequences revealed qualitative and quantitative differences between the
consensus sequences surrounding AUG initiation codons. Whereas the consensus
sequence for animals was CACCAUG that for plants was AACAAUGGC. Both the
structural and functional findings suggest that the factors which select AUG
initiation codons in plants and animals differ significantly.

PMCID: PMC553354
PMID: 3556162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Jan;7(1):294-304.

Primary structure requirements for correct sorting of the yeast mitochondrial
protein ADH III to the yeast mitochondrial matrix space.

Pilgrim D, Young ET.

Alcohol dehydrogenase isoenzyme III (ADH III) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the
product of the ADH3 gene, is located in the mitochondrial matrix. The ADH III
protein was synthesized as a larger precursor in vitro when the gene was
transcribed with the SP6 promoter and translated with a reticulocyte lysate. A
precursor of the same size was detected when radioactively pulse-labeled proteins
were immunoprecipitated with anti-ADH antibody. This precursor was rapidly
processed to the mature form in vivo with a half-time of less than 3 min. The
processing was blocked if the mitochondria were uncoupled with carbonyl cyanide
m-chlorophenylhydrazone. Mutant enzymes in which only the amino-terminal 14 or 16
amino acids of the presequence were retained were correctly targeted and imported
into the matrix. A mutant enzyme that was missing the amino-terminal 17 amino
acids of the presequence produced an active enzyme, but the majority of the
enzyme activity remained in the cytoplasmic compartment on cellular
fractionation. Random amino acid changes were produced in the wild-type
presequence by bisulfite mutagenesis of the ADH3 gene. The resulting ADH III
protein was targeted to the mitochondria and imported into the matrix in all of
the mutants tested, as judged by enzyme activity. Mutants containing amino acid
changes in the carboxyl-proximal half of the ADH3 presequence were imported and
processed to the mature form at a slower rate than the wild type, as judged by
pulse-chase studies in vivo. The unprocessed precursor appeared to be unstable in
vivo. It was concluded that only a small portion of the presequence contains the 
necessary information for correct targeting and import. Furthermore, the
information for correct proteolytic processing of the presequence appears to be
distinct from the targeting information and may involve secondary structure
information in the presequence.

PMCID: PMC365069
PMID: 3550419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Intervirology. 1987;28(1):26-39.

Characterization of cloned measles virus mRNAs by in vitro transcription,
translation, and immunoprecipitation.

Hasel KW(1), Day S, Millward S, Richardson CD, Bellini WJ, Greer PA.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University, Department of Biochemistry, Montreal Canada.

A cDNA library was constructed from poly(A)+ RNA prepared from VERO cells
infected with the Edmonston strain of measles virus. Clones corresponding to five
major viral-specific transcripts were identified by northern blot hybridization
analysis. Probes prepared from these five clones detected an additional five
minor viral RNA transcripts. The sizes and hydridization patterns of these minor 
RNA species are consistent with their being bicistronic transcripts arising from 
a viral genomic template with the gene order 3'..NP-9/C-M-F-HA-(L)..5'. To assess
the coding capacity of these cDNA clones they were inserted into pSP64,
transcribed in vitro, the RNA was translated in reticulocyte lysates, and the
protein was immunoprecipitated with specific antisera. From this analysis the
genes for NP, P/C, M, F, and HA were identified. In vitro translation of natural 
mRNAs and SP6 transcripts of cDNAs consistently produced smaller polypeptides
that appear to be initiated at internal AUGs. The relative abundance of these
various cell-free translation products reflects the probability of translational 
initiation at the various in-frame AUGs. The patterns observed suggest that other
factors besides sequences immediately flanking the AUGs have a significant effect
on the selection of translational initiation sites. An increase in translational 
efficiency of the F transcript was achieved by removing 450 bases of the G-C-rich
5' noncoding region.

PMID: 3429193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Acta Biol Hung. 1987;38(2):267-77.

Inhibition of in vitro splicing of a mouse insulin pre-mRNA by covalent
cross-links in the intron region.

Szeberényi J(1), Wollenzien PL, Goldenberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University Medical School of Pécs, Hungary.

Recent studies have indicated that in vitro splicing of a mouse insulin pre-mRNA 
by a HeLa cell nuclear extract is accompanied by the unwinding of substrate RNA. 
The present experiments were performed to determine whether this melting of the
secondary structure of the precursor RNA is essential for the splicing reaction. 
32P-labelled mouse insulin pre-mRNA synthesized in vitro in a SP6 transcription
system was cross-linked with aminomethyltrimethyl psoralen and fractionated by
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. RNA species containing different
intramolecular cross-links were eluted from the gel and the sites of cross-links 
were mapped by primer extension analysis using synthetic oligonucleotide primers.
Under conditions that allow accurate in vitro splicing of intact pre-mRNA,
precursor molecules with psoralen cross-links within their intron region were not
spliced by a HeLa cell nuclear extract. This observation strongly supports the
assumption that unwinding of precursor RNA molecules is necessary for the
splicing reaction.

PMID: 3331218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Oncogene. 1987;2(1):79-84.

Isolation and characterization of the c-fos(rat) cDNA and analysis of
post-translational modification in vitro.

Curran T(1), Gordon MB, Rubino KL, Sambucetti LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Roche Institute of Molecular Biology,
Nutley, New Jersey 07110.

c-fos mRNA accumulates to a level of 0.2% of cellular poly(A)-containing RNA 45
min after treatment of rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells with 1 mM barium
chloride. Several clones of the c-fos(rat) cDNA were isolated from a cDNA library
constructed from this RNA population. Nucleotide sequence analysis of a
full-length cDNA clone reveals striking conservation among the c-fos genes
isolated from rat, mouse and human cells, and confirms the c-fos gene structure
predicted from an analysis of c-fos genomic clones. Translation of an SP6-derived
transcript of the c-fos(rat) cDNA in a messenger-dependent rabbit reticulocyte
lysate yields the complete c-fos protein. It undergoes extensive
post-translational modification in the lysate, particularly in the presence of
additional cAMP. The c-fos protein synthesized in vitro appears to be
phosphorylated by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase.

PMID: 3325886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Gene. 1987;52(2-3):197-206.

A family of lambda phage cDNA cloning vectors, lambda SWAJ, allowing the
amplification of RNA sequences.

Palazzolo MJ, Meyerowitz EM.

This paper describes the construction and characterization of a family of lambda 
phage cDNA cloning vectors that allows high-efficiency directional cDNA cloning
and selective amplification of either sense or antisense cRNA sequences. These
vectors contain several unique restriction sites (EcoRI, XbaI, and SacI)
positioned between two specific phage promoters, SP6 and T7. This system
facilitates the in vitro preparation of single-stranded (ss) RNA molecules that
should be useful in subtractive hybridization and in situ hybridization
procedures. Using subtractive hybridization and this vector system, it should be 
possible to identify sequences present in one cDNA library and not another. In
addition, it should be possible to construct subtracted cDNA libraries in these
vectors and to generate high specific activity, ss, antisense cRNA probes
directly from DNA prepared from the whole subtracted library or from individual
clones.

PMID: 3038683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Mol Cell Immunol. 1987;3(4):199-214.

Activation of help and contrasuppression as essential prerequisites for immune
response.

Andrighetto G(1), Zöller M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunopathology, University of Verona, Italy.

The network theory proposes the immune system as a self-centered defense
mechanism, which continuously maintains a steady state of activity via
idiotypic-anti-idiotypic interactions. In line with this hypothesis, the steady
state of the immune system has been described to represent a status of suppressed
activity, response being manifested by release from suppression. There is
evidence that release from suppression is initiated by activation of
contrasuppressor cells (TCS), which either transfer a state of resistance towards
suppression on helper T-cells (TH) or interact directly with suppressor T-cells
(TS). In the latter case, it was postulated that the nominal antigen of
contrasuppressor T-cells are antibodies and that TS and TCS interact one with the
other via idiotypic-anti-idiotypic structures. The present report examined the
role of TCS in initiation of response and proved that the responding state
requires activation of TH as well as TCS. While antigenic stimulation (TNP)
resulted in concomitant activation of TH and TCS, it was possible to dissect
these two prerequisites for response by application of a monoclonal anti-TNP
antibody (AB) carrying a recurrent idiotype (Sp6) followed by application of a
subimmunogenic dose of the nominal antigen. Clonal analysis of regulatory cells
via limiting dilution (LD) cultures revealed that a subimmunogenic dose of
antigen led to activation of help but failed to activate TCS. On the other hand
application of AB, which did not initiate response, resulted in activation of
TCS, but not in activation of TH, i.e., these were not released from suppression.
However, consecutive activation of TCS via AB and of help via a subimmunogenic
dose of antigen moved the immune system into the responding state. Activation of 
TCS via AB was found to be independent from the mode of application, i.e., free
AB, AB coupled to syngeneic cells, or AB coupled to the nominal antigen, although
most straightforward results were obtained with free AB, since syngeneic cells
exerted an additional suppressive effect, and AB-antigen (TNP) conjugates
activated TNP-specific TH as well as TCS. Furthermore, AB-induced activation of
TCS was independent of the recipient's age. Yet, the effect was most pronounced
when AB were applied neonatally, i.e., after a hyporesponsive stage, animals were
hyperreactive towards the nominal antigen, and this hyperreactivity was initiated
by expansion of TCS. This extends the notion of high idiotypic connectivity in
the neonatal period to the level of regulatory T-cells.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400
WORDS)

PMID: 2978243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. EMBO J. 1987 Jan;6(1):69-74.

Nucleoplasmin cDNA sequence reveals polyglutamic acid tracts and a cluster of
sequences homologous to putative nuclear localization signals.

Dingwall C, Dilworth SM, Black SJ, Kearsey SE, Cox LS, Laskey RA.

Nucleoplasmin is the most abundant protein in the Xenopus oocyte nucleus. It is
involved in histone storage and chromatin assembly and it has been used
extensively to study the transport of proteins into the cell nucleus. We have
isolated lambda gt11 phage containing nucleoplasmin cDNA and have determined the 
sequence of the entire protein coding region of 200 amino acids for one of the
two genes. The translation product of the sp6 transcript of this cDNA has the
same electrophoretic mobility as nucleoplasmin and is able to form pentamers. The
protein sequence shows remarkable clusters of charged residues including a long
polyglutamic acid tract which presumably constitutes the histone binding site.
The short C-terminal domain which specifies nuclear entry contains four regions
which are homologous to putative nuclear localization signals including two
regions of homology to the nuclear migration signal of SV40 large T antigen.

PMCID: PMC553358
PMID: 2884102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Methods Enzymol. 1987;155:397-415.

In vitro RNA synthesis with SP6 RNA polymerase.

Krieg PA, Melton DA.

PMID: 2828872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Int J Biochem. 1987;19(12):1233-6.

The effects of the main body cations on the peptidase(s) activity against
pyroGlu6[125I-Tyr8]SP6-11 in the nuclear and synaptosomal fraction of the cortex 
and hippocampus of rat brain.

Turski WA(1), Lachowicz L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, School of Medicine, Lódz, Poland.

1. Peptidase(s) activity of nuclear and synaptosomal fraction from cortex and
hippocampus of rat brain against pyroGlu6[125I-Tyr8]SP6-11 was evaluated in
different concentration of Ca2+, Mg2+, K+ and Na+ in about "isotonic" conditions.
2. The effects of studied ions on the peptidase activities forming N-terminal and
C-terminal fragments are different especially in synaptosomes of both areas. 3.
The differences of ionic requirements for N- and C-forming activities are
particularly relevant for Ca2+ at the cortex and K+ at the hippocampus. 4. Ca2+
activate forming of N-terminal fragments in the nuclear fraction whereas inhibit 
it in synaptosomes from both areas. 5. The ionic requirements for C-terminal
fragments' formation in synaptosomes of both areas are contradictory.

PMID: 2449372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 1987;(18):253-6.

DNA and RNA sequencing utilizing phosphorothioate chemistry.

Gish G(1), Eckstein F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für experimentelle Medizin, Abteilung Chemie, Göttingen,
FRG.

A method for nucleic acid sequencing has been developed based on the observation 
that phosphorothioate diesters are hydrolysed by treatment with 2-iodoethanol in 
a solution of aqueous ethanol. For DNA sequencing, primed single-stranded M13 DNA
is polymerised with the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I in the presence of
the three normal deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates and one alpha-phosphorothioate
derivative. This is followed by treatment with 2-iodoethanol, precipitation of
the DNA fragments and analysis by polyacrylamide electrophoresis. RNA transcribed
from plasmids containing the SP6 RNA polymerase promoter is sequenced by
including the alpha-phosphorothioate derivative of the ribonucleotide
triphosphates in the polymerisation and treating the product with iodoethane. The
cleavage reaction involves alkylation of the sulfur atom to form the
phosphorothioate triester and hydrolysis catalysed by an adjacent hydroxyl group.

PMID: 2447567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Intervirology. 1987;27(2):102-11.

Analysis of Aleutian disease of mink parvovirus infection using strand-specific
hybridization probes.

Bloom ME(1), Race RE, Wolfinbarger JB.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Hamilton, Mont. 59840.

A 7- to 95-map unit segment of DNA from Aleutian disease of mink parvovirus (ADV)
was subcloned into a bacteriophage SP6 based transcription vector and used to
produce radiolabeled viral RNA transcripts corresponding to either 'plus' or
'minus' sense. The radiolabeled transcripts were reacted against Southern blots
of whole cell DNA from ADV infected cell cultures as hybridization probes. The
'plus' sense RNA probe hybridized both to duplex replicative forms (RFs) as well 
as to single-stranded virion DNA (SS DNA), which is 'minus' in sense. In
contrast, the 'minus' sense RNA probe reacted preferentially with the duplex RFs.
When these probes were tested against DNA extracted from mink infected with the
virulent ADV-Utah I strain, RFs were detected at 10 days after infection in
mesenteric lymph node, liver, spleen and gut, but only in gut and mesenteric
lymph node at 43 days. SS DNA was noted in these tissues at 10, 43 and 60 days,
and was more abundant than RFs. Only SS DNA at very low levels was observed in
bone marrow cells. Serum contained large amounts of SS DNA (probably in virions) 
at 10 days, less at 43 days, and no detectable DNA at 60 days. These findings
suggest that ADV replication may have occurred in the gut as well as
lymphoreticular tissues, and that bone marrow was not a major site of ADV
replication.

PMID: 2444554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cell. 1986 Dec 26;47(6):861-70.

The clam embryo protein cyclin A induces entry into M phase and the resumption of
meiosis in Xenopus oocytes.

Swenson KI, Farrell KM, Ruderman JV.

Fertilized clam embryos synthesize several new cell-cycle-related proteins. The
cloned cDNA and derived amino acid sequences of one of these, cyclin A, are
presented here. Immunoblots with an anti-cyclin A antibody reveal that cyclin A
is undetectable in oocytes, appears within 15 min of fertilization, and is
destroyed near the end of each meiosis and mitosis. We directly tested the
ability of cyclin A to induce M phase by injecting SP6 cyclin A mRNA into Xenopus
oocytes, which are arrested at the G2/M border of first meiosis. The injected
mRNA was translated, with the result that the Xenopus oocytes entered meiosis.
These findings indicate that the rise in cyclin A plays a direct and natural role
in driving cells into M phase.

PMID: 2946420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Dec 22;14(24):9613-30.

Structure of viroid replicative intermediates: physico-chemical studies on SP6
transcripts of cloned oligomeric potato spindle tuber viroid.

Steger G, Tabler M, Brüggemann W, Colpan M, Klotz G, Sänger HL, Riesner D.

The structure and structural transitions of transcripts of cloned oligomeric
viroid were studied in physico-chemical experiments and stability calculations.
Transcripts of (+) and (-) polarity, from unit up to sixfold length, were
synthesized from DNA clones of the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) with the
SP6 transcription system. Their structural properties were investigated by
optical denaturation curves, high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC),
electron microscopy, sedimentation-diffusion equilibrium and velocity
sedimentation. Secondary structures of the RNAs and theoretical denaturation
curves were calculated using an energy optimization program. The secondary
structure of lowest free energy for unit length and oligomeric transcripts is a
rod-like structure similar to that of the mature circular viroids. When this
structure is used as a model for calculations, there is a large degree of
agreement between the theoretical and the experimental denaturation curves. At
high temperatures, however, (+) strand transcripts exhibited a transition which
was more stable than expected from the calculations or than was known from curves
of mature viroids. This transition arises from a rearrangement of the central
conserved region of viroids to a helical region of 28 stable base pairs either
intermolecularly leading to bimolecular complexes, or intramolecularly giving
rise to a branched secondary structure. The rearrangement could be detected by
electron microscopy, HPLC, and analytical ultracentrifugation. The helical region
serves to divide up the oligomeric (+) strand into structural units which may be 
recognized by cleavage and ligation enzymes which process the oligomeric
intermediates to circular mature viroids.

PMCID: PMC341324
PMID: 3808953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biochem J. 1986 Dec 15;240(3):709-15.

Synthesis of the small subunit of ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase from genes
cloned into plasmids containing the SP6 promoter.

Anderson S, Smith SM.

DNA sequences encoding ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit
precursor from Pisum sativum L. have been transcribed from plasmids containing
the SP6 promoter, and translated in a wheat germ cell-free system. The small
subunit precursor polypeptide, its N-terminal leader sequence (transit peptide)
and the mature small subunit have each been synthesized independently from three 
different plasmid constructs. The precursor polypeptide is imported into isolated
pea chloroplasts and processed to the mature small subunit by a stromal
proteinase. The mature polypeptide is neither imported, nor subject to
proteolysis by stromal extracts. The transit peptide alone is very rapidly
degraded by a stromal proteinase activity which can be inhibited by EDTA or
1,10-phenanthroline. The use of these gene constructs helps to establish the
crucial role of the transit peptide in protein import into the chloroplast.

PMCID: PMC1147477
PMID: 3827863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Virology. 1986 Dec;155(2):299-308.

Packaging of recombinant RNA molecules into pseudovirus particles directed by the
origin-of-assembly sequence from tobacco mosaic virus RNA.

Sleat DE(1), Turner PC, Finch JT, Butler PJ, Wilson TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virus Research, John Innes Institute, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4
7UH, UK.

The spontaneous self-assembly mechanism of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) led us to
predict that contiguous foreign RNA sequences of unlimited length would be fully 
encapsidated into ribonuclease-resistant, virus-like particles ("pseudovirions"),
provided the cognate origin-of-assembly sequence from TMV RNA was present. We
describe the construction of SP6-transcription plasmids and in vitro synthesis of
recombinant RNAs bearing a correctly oriented, 3' terminal, origin-of-assembly
from TMV RNA together with 5'-coding regions for chicken egg white prelysozyme,
calf preprochymosin or Xenopus borealis rRNA. In the presence of a "disk"
preparation of TMV coat protein, complete assembly of the prelysozyme coding
sequence into ribonuclease-resistant, rod-shaped pseudovirions was directed
specifically by the 3'-TMV RNA sequence. Helical particles of the predicted
length were visible in the electron microscope and could be separated by sucrose 
gradient centrifugation. This in vitro RNA packaging system may offer a more
efficient, protective route to introduce foreign mRNAs into whole plants or
protoplasts by "pseudoinfection", particularly when studying the transient
expression of mRNAs incapable of replicating or spreading from cell to cell.
However, we have detected some constraints in the assembly elongation process,
especially with highly structured transcripts such as rRNA. The significance of
these observations for current views on the cooperative self-assembly mechanism
of TMV is discussed.

PMID: 18640655  [PubMed]


459. Am J Hum Genet. 1986 Dec;39(6):763-74.

Human acid beta-glucosidase: Northern blot and S1 nuclease analysis of mRNA from 
HeLa cells and normal and Gaucher disease fibroblasts.

Graves PN, Grabowski GA, Ludman MD, Palese P, Smith FI.

Human acid beta-glucosidase (beta-Glc) mRNA was evaluated by dot blot, Northern
blot, and S1 nuclease analyses of extracts of HeLa cells and cultured fibroblasts
from normal individuals and Gaucher disease patients. Dot blot quantitation
indicated an equal concentration of specific mRNA in all sources. Northern blot
analyses demonstrated the presence of three poly (A)+ mRNAs of about 5,600,
2,500, and 2,000 nucleotides in length from all cell extracts. All three mRNAs
were present in normal amounts in fibroblast extracts from several subtypes and
variants of Gaucher disease. The largest poly (A)+ mRNA species was thought to
represent an unspliced nuclear precursor for the two smaller beta-Glc mRNAs. S1
nuclease analyses, using SP6 transcripts of beta-Glc cDNA, indicated that the
2,000 nucleotide mRNA differs from the 2,500 nucleotide form at both the 5' and
3' ends. These results are consistent with the use of an alternate 5' splice site
and 3' polyadenylation signal. These results also suggest that the subtype and
variants of Gaucher disease result from single base alterations that lead to the 
synthesis of defective beta-Glc.

PMCID: PMC1684132
PMID: 3026174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 1986 Dec;6(12):4650-6.

Molecular basis for heterogeneity of the human p53 protein.

Harris N, Brill E, Shohat O, Prokocimer M, Wolf D, Arai N, Rotter V.

The human p53 tumor antigen comprises several physically distinct proteins. Two
p53 proteins, separable by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, are expressed by
the human transformed cell line SV-80. The individual cDNAs which code for these 
proteins were isolated and constructed into the SP6 transcription vector. The
proteins encoded by these clones were identified by in vitro transcription with
the SP6 vector and translation in a cell-free system. p53-H-1 and p53-H-19 cDNA
clones code for the faster- and slower-migrating p53 protein species,
respectively, of SV-80. The in vitro-expressed proteins of p53-H-1 and p53-H-19
had the same antigenic determinants and were structurally indistinguishable from 
their in vivo counterparts. By expressing defined restricted cDNA fragments in
vitro, the region of heterogeneity between the respective cDNAs was located at
the 5' end of the cDNAs. Exchanging the 5' fragments of interest and expressing
the chimeric clones in vitro confirmed that the DNA heterogeneity was responsible
for the difference in the electrophoretic mobility of these proteins. The
sequences of the two cDNAs revealed a single base pair difference (G versus C) in
the coding region of the clones. This sequence difference resulted in an arginine
being coded for in clone p53-H-1 and a proline being coded for at the equivalent 
position in clone p53-H-19. This variation accounted for the change in the
electrophoretic mobility of the individual p53 protein species.

PMCID: PMC367250
PMID: 3025664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Virology. 1986 Dec;155(2):633-43.

Coding strategy of the S genome segment of Hantaan virus.

Schmaljohn CS, Jennings GB, Hay J, Dalrymple JM.

Hantaan virus is the type species of the recently recognized Hantavirus genus of 
Bunyaviridae. The small (S) RNA segment of the negative-sense, tripartite genome 
was molecularly cloned and the nucleotide sequence was determined. The RNA
sequence derived from the cDNA copy was found to contain 1696 nucleotides. A
single open reading frame of sufficient size to encode the virus nucleocapsid
protein was detected in the cDNA corresponding to viral complementary-sense RNA. 
RNA transcripts of the cDNA were synthesized with SP6 polymerase and were used to
program cell-free reticulocyte lysate translation systems. Viral
complementary-sense transcripts served as efficient messages in translation
systems and generated Hantaan nucleocapsid protein. No translation products were 
detected when lysates were programmed with viral-sense transcripts. This coding
assignment of the nucleocapsid protein to the viral complementary-sense RNA of
the S genome segment is consistent with those of other members of this family.
Unlike other Bunyaviridae, which encode both a nucleocapsid protein and a
nonstructural (NSs) protein of similar sizes, a NSs protein has not been
identified for Hantaan virus. Furthermore, other than the nucleocapsid protein
gene sequence, the only potential open reading frame in Hantaan S RNA encoded a
short, 48-amino acid polypeptide which initiated two codons beyond the
termination of the nucleocapsid protein in the same reading frame. These data
demonstrate that the coding strategy of the Hantaan virus S RNA is different than
those reported for other viruses in this family.

PMID: 3024404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Dec;83(23):8873-7.

Identification of a domain within the phosphoprotein of vesicular stomatitis
virus that is essential for transcription in vitro.

Gill DS, Chattopadhyay D, Banerjee AK.

A full-length cDNA copy of the phosphoprotein (NS) mRNA of vesicular stomatitis
virus (New Jersey serotype) was inserted into pGEM4 vector downstream of the
promoter for bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase. Transcription of the cDNA in vitro
resulted in the synthesis of NS mRNA, which was subsequently translated into NS
protein in a cell-free rabbit reticulocyte system. The biological activity of the
expressed NS protein was demonstrated by in vitro synthesis of mRNA by
transcription-reconstitution with purified viral L protein and N-RNA template.
Deletion mapping of the NS gene defined a specific domain between amino acid
residues 213 and 247, which was essential for in vitro transcription. Removal of 
the COOH-terminal 21 amino acids, on the other hand, did not have a significant
effect on transcription. This domain appears to be involved in efficient binding 
of NS protein to the N protein-RNA template.

PMCID: PMC387035
PMID: 3024153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Virology. 1986 Nov;155(1):277-83.

In vitro transcription and translation of cloned cDNAs encoding the 30-kDa
protein gene of TMV.

Oliver MJ, Deom CM, De BK, Beachy RN.

A cDNA clone encoding the nonstructural, 30-kDa protein of the common (U1) strain
of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) was isolated and characterized. cDNA clones
representing the intact gene as well as deletions from the 5' end of the gene
were subcloned into SP6 vectors. Capped RNAs produced by in vitro transcription
reactions were translated in a wheat germ cell-free system. The resultant
proteins were compared to proteins obtained from the in vitro translation of
intermediate length (I2) rods of TMV. Transcripts of the cDNA clones encoded
polypeptides of 30, 28, or 18 kDa that were immunoprecipitated by antibody
prepared against a synthetic peptide representing the carboxy terminus of the
30-kDa protein. cDNA clones containing the intact 30-kDa sequence coded for
30-kDa polypeptides while clones lacking the 30-kDa initiation codon produced
28-kDa polypeptides. Surprisingly, translation of a transcript from a cDNA clone 
containing the 30-kDa gene plus 390 nucleotides 5' of the initiator AUG yielded a
polypeptide with an approximate molecular mass of 18 kDa. The results indicate
that an intact and functional 30-kDa protein gene has been cloned. The
significance of these results, with respect to determining the function of the
30-kDa protein, is discussed.

PMID: 3776102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Virology. 1986 Nov;155(1):214-24.

A major internal initiation site for the in vitro translation of the adenovirus
DNA polymerase.

Hassin D, Korn R, Horwitz MS.

An open reading frame which encodes at least 90% of the adenovirus type 2 DNA
polymerase gene was cloned behind the SP6 promoter and transcribed in vitro using
the SP6 RNA polymerase. The resultant RNA was translated in a rabbit reticulocyte
cell free system. In addition to the translation of a 120-kDa protein
corresponding to the size of the complete open reading frame, the synthesis of a 
62-kDa polypeptide was demonstrated. Data is presented to show that the synthesis
of the 62-kDa polypeptide resulted from internal initiation of translation in
frame in the middle of the message at the 11th or 12th AUG. Capping of the mRNA
resulted in an increase in synthesis of the 120-kDa protein and a concordant
decrease of the internally initiated polypeptide. We propose that there may be
competition between the binding of the translational preinitiation complex at or 
near the 5' end of the mRNA and at the internal initiation site. Because of
inhibition of synthesis of the 120-kDa but not the 62-kDa polypeptide by hybrid
arrested translation using DNA complementary to approximately one third of the 5'
Ad Pol mRNA sequences, scanning of the ribosome from the 5' end of the mRNA to
the internal initiation site seemed unlikely. The sequence proximal to the 12th
AUG is ACCCACCCCAUG which is similar to a noncontinuous sequence 5'AUCCACC(X)nAUG
complementary to the 3' end of the 18 S rRNA. This sequence is a favored ribosome
binding site based on the observation that it is the most commonly observed one
at or near the 5' end of 162 mRNA's analyzed (D. R. Sargan, S. P. Gregory, and P.
H. W. Butterworth, 1982, FEBS Lett. 147, 133-136).

PMID: 3776100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Virol Methods. 1986 Nov;14(3-4):309-19.

Use of [32P]RNA probes for the dot-hybridization detection of potato spindle
tuber viroid.

Lakshman DK, Hiruki C, Wu XN, Leung WC.

A dot-hybridization assay using 32P-labelled RNA probes (+RNA and cRNA)
transcribed from potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) cDNA was described. A
complete cDNA copy of PSTV, originally cloned in pBR 322 (pAV 401) was subcloned 
in the BamHI site of a 'Riboprobe' cloning vectors pSP 64 and pSP 65 in opposite 
orientations. The reconstructed plasmids were designated pDX 1 and pDX 4,
respectively. Transcription of pDX 1 and pDX 4 plasmids by SP6 RNA polymerase
resulted in the generation of PSTV-specific RNA (+RNA) and PSTV complementary RNA
(cRNA), respectively. The cRNA probe was much more sensitive than the +RNA probe 
and the nick-translated cDNA probe from the plasmid pAV 401 for the detection of 
PSTV in clarified plant sap. As little as 1.4 pg of purified PSTV mixed in
clarified sap from uninoculated tomato leaves has been detected using cRNA probe.
A relatively simple procedure using cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) as
nucleic acid precipitant and an enrichment step for the purification of PSTV was 
described.

PMID: 3025243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Virol. 1986 Nov;60(2):394-9.

A single species of pX mRNA of human T-cell leukemia virus type I encodes
trans-activator p40x and two other phosphoproteins.

Nagashima K, Yoshida M, Seiki M.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) contains the pX sequence which codes 
for the trans-activator of the long terminal repeat (LTR) and is thus postulated 
to be associated with leukemogenesis in adult T-cell leukemia. Overlapping open
reading frames (ORF) in the pX sequence were recently found to code for p27x-III 
and p21x-III by ORF III, in addition to p40x coded for by ORF IV. The mechanism
of expression of these newly identified proteins and their possible association
with trans-activation were studied. On transfection of an expression plasmid that
contains a cDNA sequence of the pX mRNA, products from both ORFs III and IV were 
detected in the cells. The RNA was synthesized in vitro from the cDNA clone by
SP6 RNA polymerase and translated in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate. As translation
products, two proteins, p27x-III and p21x-III, were detected in addition to p40x.
Elimination of the first and second ATG codons in ORF III resulted in loss of the
ability to code for p27x-III and p21x-III, respectively, which indicated that the
translations from these two ATG codons were independent. A mutant that lacked
both ATG codons was fully active in trans-activation of chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene expression directed by the LTR. These results indicate
that a 2.1-kilobase pX mRNA of HTLV-I independently encodes three proteins, p40x,
p27x-III, and p21x-III, by different ORFs and that the last two proteins are not 
involved in trans-activation of the unintegrated LTR.

PMCID: PMC288905
PMID: 3021974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. EMBO J. 1986 Nov;5(11):2805-8.

Highly selective agonists for substance P receptor subtypes.

Wormser U, Laufer R, Hart Y, Chorev M, Gilon C, Selinger Z.

The existence of a third tachykinin receptor (SP-N) in the mammalian nervous
system was demonstrated by development of highly selective agonists. Systematic
N-methylation of individual peptide bonds in the C-terminal hexapeptide of
substance P gave rise to agonists which specifically act on different receptor
subtypes. The most selective analog of this series,
succinyl-[Asp6,Me-Phe8]SP6-11, elicits half-maximal contraction of the guinea pig
ileum through the neuronal SP-N receptor at a concentration of 0.5 nM. At least
60,000-fold higher concentrations of this peptide are required to stimulate the
other two tachykinin receptors (SP-P and SP-E). The action of selective SP-N
agonists in the guinea pig ileum is antagonized by opioid peptides, suggesting a 
functional counteraction between opiate and SP-N receptors. These results
indicate that the tachykinin receptors are distinct entities which may mediate
different physiological functions.

PMCID: PMC1167226
PMID: 2431898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. EMBO J. 1986 Nov;5(11):2749-58.

Accurate in vitro splicing of two pre-mRNA plant introns in a HeLa cell nuclear
extract.

Brown JW, Feix G, Frendewey D.

Two plant introns along with flanking exon sequences have been isolated from an
amylase gene of wheat and a legumin gene of pea and cloned behind the phage SP6
promoter. Pre-mRNAs produced by in vitro transcription with SP6 RNA polymerase
were tested for their ability to be spliced in a HeLa cell nuclear extract. The
plant introns were accurately spliced and the predicted splice junctions were
used. Lariat RNAs were observed as both intermediates and final products during
the splicing reaction. The branch points were mapped to adenosine residues lying 
within sequences that showed good homology to the animal branch point consensus. 
Consensus sequences for the 5' and 3' splice junctions and for putative branch
point sequences of plants were derived from an analysis of 168 plant intron
sequences.

PMCID: PMC1167218
PMID: 2431897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Oct 10;14(19):7513-28.

In vitro processing of a plant pre-mRNA in a HeLa cell nuclear extract.

Hartmuth K, Barta A.

In order to determine whether there is a general difference in the splicing
mechanism of animal and plant pre-mRNAs, we cloned part of the gene for the small
subunit of the ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase containing both introns into
the SP64 vector. RNA was synthesized with SP6 polymerase and used as substrate
for in vitro processing in a HeLa cell nuclear splicing extract. Analyses of the 
processed RNA demonstrate that both introns of the plant pre-mRNA are efficiently
removed in an ordered fashion yielding a faithfully ligated mRNA. Two branch
points were identified for intron A and three for intron B. The branched
nucleotides are adenosine residues in all cases and are located within a distance
from the 3' splice site found to be crucial for lariat formation in animal
pre-mRNAs. The implications of these results are discussed in light of our
previous observation, that a functional pre-mRNA of the human growth hormone gene
was not processed in plant tissue in vivo.

PMCID: PMC311777
PMID: 3640337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Protein Eng. 1986 Oct-Nov;1(1):59-65.

The cloning and expression of an anti-peptide antibody: a system for rapid
analysis of the binding properties of engineered antibodies.

Roberts S(1), Rees AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, UK.

The cloning of the light and heavy chain genes of an antilysozyme monoclonal
antibody is described and the application of site-directed mutagenesis for
reconstruction of complete cDNAs from incomplete cDNA clones is discussed. The
behaviour of the RNA transcripts produced from these cDNAs after their subcloning
into an appropriate Salmonella typhimurium, SP6, vector and subsequent injection 
into Xenopus oocytes has been analysed. The antibody secreted by oocytes after
RNA injection has been quantitated and its antigen-binding properties compared
with wild-type hybridoma antibody. The results show that this route for
expression of antibodies, though limited in its capacity to produce more than a
few micrograms of protein, is potentially a means for rapid evaluation of the
antigen-binding properties of engineered antibodies.

PMID: 3507688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Endocrinology. 1986 Oct;119(4):1741-9.

Regulation of gene expression in rat hepatocytes and hepatoma cells by insulin:
quantitation of messenger ribonucleic acid's coding for tyrosine
aminotransferase, tryptophan oxygenase, and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.

Schubart UK.

The effect of insulin on the abundance of mRNAs coding for tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT; EC 2.6.1.5), tryptophan oxygenase (TO; EC 1.13.1.12), and 
P-enolpyruvate carboxykinase(GTP) (PEPCK; EC 4.1.1.32) was examined in primary
cultures of adult rat hepatocytes and in FTO-2B rat hepatoma cells by Northern
blot analysis using RNA probes made from SP6-cDNAs. Insulin (10(-11)-10(-7) M),
which has been reported to induce TAT and decrease the activity of TO, did not
change the levels of TAT mRNA and TO mRNA in hepatocytes regardless of the
presence of other inducers. In the same cells, dexamethasone increased TAT mRNA
up to 19-fold and TO mRNA up to 15-fold, and 8pClPhS-cAMP (CPT-cAMP) raised the
level of TAT mRNA up to 36-fold. The abundance of TO mRNA was not altered by
CPT-cAMP. In contrast to TAT mRNA and TO mRNA, the level of PEPCK mRNA was
dramatically decreased by insulin in the same hepatocytes. The sensitivity to
this inhibitory effect of insulin was enhanced by dexamethasone and reduced by
CPT-cAMP. FTO-2B hepatoma cells, which do not express detectable levels of TO
mRNA, showed responses similar to those of hepatocytes, except that insulin
caused a moderate reduction in TAT mRNA, but only in the presence of CPT-cAMP.
The PEPCK mRNA in FTO-2B cells was suppressed by insulin in a manner closely
resembling the effects in hepatocytes in the present study and in H4IIE hepatoma 
cells previously reported.

PMID: 2875868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cell. 1986 Sep 12;46(6):905-11.

Cap trimethylation of U snRNA is cytoplasmic and dependent on U snRNP protein
binding.

Mattaj IW.

Trimethyl capping of U2 snRNA has been studied using U2 genes with mutations
located in either the 5' flanking or the coding region. A monomethyl
(7-methylguanosine) cap is added to U2 cotranscriptionally, trimethylation being 
posttranscriptional. The immediate 5' flanking sequences have no influence on
trimethylation; furthermore, trimethylation is not affected by changing the
position and sequence of the cap site. The efficiency of trimethylation is
reduced by deleting the Sm binding site from U2 RNA, but it is not altered by
other mutations in the coding sequence. Insertion of artificial Sm binding sites 
either into a mutant U2 from which the natural binding site has been deleted or
into SP6 transcripts generated in vitro allows these RNAs to become
trimethylated. The trimethylase activity in Xenopus laevis oocytes is
cytoplasmic.

PMID: 2944599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Sep;83(18):6873-7.

Translocation of the precursor of 5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase
into chloroplasts of higher plants in vitro.

Della-Cioppa G(1), Bauer SC, Klein BK, Shah DM, Fraley RT, Kishore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Monsanto Company, Plant Molecular Biology Group, Division of Biological
Sciences, 700 Chesterfield Village Parkway, St. Louis, MO 63198.

5-enolPyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase (EPSP synthase; 3-phosphoshikimate
1-carboxyvinyl-transferase; EC 2.5.1.19) is a chloroplast-localized enzyme of the
shikimate pathway in plants. This enzyme is the target for the nonselective
herbicide glyphosate (N-phosphonomethylglycine). We have previously isolated a
full-length cDNA clone of EPSP synthase from Petunia hybrida. DNA sequence
analysis suggested that the enzyme is synthesized as a cytosolic precursor
(pre-EPSP synthase) with an amino-terminal transit peptide. Based on the known
amino terminus of the mature enzyme, and the 5' open reading frame of the cDNA,
the transit peptide of pre-EPSP synthase would be maximally 72 amino acids long. 
To confirm this prediction and to assay directly for translocation of pre-EPSP
synthase into chloroplasts in vitro, we cloned the full-length cDNA into an SP6
transcription system to produce large amounts of mRNA for in vitro translation.
The translation products, when analyzed by NaDodSO(4)/PAGE autoradiography,
indicate a relative molecular mass for pre-EPSP synthase of approximately 55 kDa.
Uptake studies with intact chloroplasts, in vitro, indicate that pre-EPSP
synthase was rapidly taken up into chloroplasts and proteolytically cleaved to
the mature approximately 48-kDa enzyme. The transit peptide was shown to be
essential for import of the precursor enzyme into the chloroplast. To our
knowledge, post-translational import into chloroplasts of a precursor enzyme
involved in amino acid biosynthesis has not been reported previously.
Furthermore, enzymatic analysis of translation products indicates that pre-EPSP
synthase is catalytically active and has a similar sensitivity to the herbicide
glyphosate as the mature enzyme. To our knowledge, pre-EPSP synthase represents
the only example of a catalytically competent chloroplast-precursor enzyme.

PMCID: PMC386612
PMID: 16593759  [PubMed]


474. EMBO J. 1986 Sep;5(9):2241-50.

Immunochemical detection of proteins related to the human c-myc exon 1.

Gazin C, Rigolet M, Briand JP, Van Regenmortel MH, Galibert F.

Published sequence data of the human c-myc gene indicate the presence of a coding
capacity for a polypeptide of 188 residues within the first exon. Using
antibodies raised against five synthetic peptides corresponding to different
non-over-lapping parts of this polypeptide, two proteins of 32 kd and 58 kd
antigenically related to the synthetic peptides have been detected in extracts of
human cells. The confidence of this detection has been reinforced by showing that
epitopes corresponding to different peptides were indeed located on the same
molecule and that the 58 kd protein appears to be a dimeric form of the 32 kd
protein. That these proteins originate from the first exon was indicated by:
hybrid-arrested translation experiments followed by immunodetection of the
translation products; in vitro translation of messenger RNA derived from cloned
exon 1 by SP6 polymerase transcription.

PMCID: PMC1167107
PMID: 2430795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. FEBS Lett. 1986 Sep 1;205(1):6-10.

A single RNA species injected in Xenopus oocyte directs the synthesis of active
tyrosine hydroxylase.

Horellou P, Guibert B, Leviel V, Mallet J.

Tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
catecholamine, is a tetramer composed of four subunits of the same molecular
mass. A full length cDNA clone encoding tyrosine hydroxylase has been inserted
into the SP6 expression system. Translation of the corresponding RNA in Xenopus
oocyte results in enzymatic activity, demonstrating that a single gene contains
all the necessary genetic information to code for a functional enzyme. The
potential of this system in the analysis of posttranslational tyrosine
hydroxylase modifications is discussed.

PMID: 2427363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1986 Aug 22;867(4):244-51.

Synthesis of epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor in vitro using SP6 RNA
polymerase-transcribed template mRNA.

Clark AJ, Beguinot L, Ishii S, Ma DP, Roe BA, Merlino GT, Pastan I.

The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor plays a key role in the control
cellular proliferation, and its homology to the avian erythroblastosis virus erb 
B oncogene implicates its involvement in cellular transformation. The
establishment of a correlation between the various structural domains of the EGF 
receptor and their functional counterparts would greatly advance our
understanding of these processes. To this end, we have constructed an expression 
vector containing the SP6 viral promoter and an adjacent cDNA fragment encoding
the full-length EGF receptor. Upon addition of SP6 RNA polymerase, this DNA is
capable of generating large amounts of EGF receptor mRNA; this RNA can then be
translated in vitro into immunoprecipitable EGF receptor protein. The
translational efficiency of this EGF receptor RNA was found to be relatively low:
approx. 100-fold lower than globin RNA synthesized using SP6 RNA polymerase. Use 
of these tools should now permit the synthesis and analysis of mutated EGF
receptor protein in an effort to clarify the role of this receptor in growth
control.

PMID: 3017432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Immunobiology. 1986 Aug;172(1-2):54-71.

Influence of a minor recurrent idiotype on the regulation of immune response:
route dependence.

Zöller M, Lopatta D, Andrighetto G.

Sp6, a BALB/c hybridoma, produces anti-TNP IgM antibodies (AB), which carry a
minor recurrent idiotype (ID). Despite the fact that only about 20% of BALB/c
anti-TNP AB carry the Sp6 ID, injection of Sp6-coated spleen cells (Sp6-SC)
significantly influenced the anti-TNP B cell response. Repeated intratrail (i.t.)
or intravenous (i.v.) injections of Sp6-SC resulted only in a minor increase of
the anti-TNP background response. When mice consecutively were challenged with
TNP-horse red blood cells (HRBC), i.t. injections of Sp6-SC resulted in a
2-3-fold increase in the number of anti-TNP plaque-forming cells (PFC), while
i.v. injection of Sp6-SC displayed no effect on a primary anti-TNP response. But,
after i.v. as well as i.t. application of Sp6-SC, it was not possible to obtain
hapten-specific suppression by i.v. injection of TNP-haptenized lymphocytes. In
vitro characterization of the underlying mechanism revealed that the helper
effect, which only was observed after i.t. injection, was due to a Lyt-1+
population, not adhering to Sp6-coated plates, while counterregulation of
hapten-specific suppression was found in a Lyt-2+ population, adhering to
Sp6-coated plates. Hence, depending on the route of priming, injection of AB with
a recurrent ID can augment the response towards the nominal antigen either
directly via activation of helper cells or indirectly via activation of
counterregulatory cells.

PMID: 2876952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Virology. 1986 Jul 30;152(2):455-8.

In vitro translation of cucumoviral satellites. II. CARNA 5 from cucumber mosaic 
virus strain S and SP6 transcripts of cloned (S)CARNA 5 cDNA produce
electrophoretically comigrating protein products.

Avila-Rincon MJ, Collmer CW, Kaper JM.

This report shows that (S)CARNA 5, the satellite of cucumber mosaic virus (CMV)
strain S, directs the synthesis of two small proteins in a wheat germ cell-free
translation system. The two proteins are produced by the translation of both
(S)CARNA 5 purified from CMV virions and the (+) strand purified from
double-stranded (S)CARNA 5. In addition, two protein products that comigrate
electrophoretically with those above are produced when transcripts synthesized in
vitro from full-length (S)CARNA 5 cDNA cloned in the plasmid pSP65 are
substituted for (S)CARNA 5 in the translation system. The two proteins therefore 
must derive from a single (S)CARNA 5 sequence.

PMID: 3487880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Plant Mol Biol. 1986 Jul;6(4):281-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00015234.

Biologically active transcripts of cloned DNA of the coat protein messenger of
two plant viruses.

Langereis K(1), Neeleman L, Bol JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of Leiden, Wassenaarseweg 64,
2333 AL, Leiden, The Netherlands.

To initiate infection, a mixture of the three genomic RNAs of alfalfa mosaic
virus (AIMV) has to be supplemented with a small amount of coat protein or RNA 4,
the subgenomic messenger for coat protein. The possibility to replace RNA 4 in
the inoculum by in vitro synthesized transcripts of a cloned DNA copy of the coat
protein cistron was investigated using the SP6 transcription system. Transcripts 
with or without the cap structure m(7)G(5')ppp(5')G were both translated in vitro
in viral coat protein, but only capped transcripts yielded an infectious mixture 
when added to the AIMV genomic RNAs. This indicates that the cap structure is
essential to the in vivo translatin of RNA 4. Similar results were obtained with 
RNAs transcribed in vitro from a DNA copy of the putative coat protein cistron of
tobacco streak virus (TSV). re]19850822 rv]19851203 ac]19860114.

PMID: 24307327  [PubMed]


480. EMBO J. 1986 Jul;5(7):1543-50.

The transmembrane segment of the human transferrin receptor functions as a signal
peptide.

Zerial M, Melancon P, Schneider C, Garoff H.

The human transferrin receptor (TR) is a protein comprising 760 amino acid
residues that spans the membrane once with its N terminus towards the cytoplasm. 
It is synthesized without a cleavable signal peptide. We have tested whether the 
signal responsible for its membrane insertion is present within its transmembrane
peptide using a combined recombinant DNA/in vitro translation approach. The
complete TR coding region was first reconstructed from overlapping TR cDNA clones
and then engineered into an SP6-based transcription vector. In vitro
transcription and subsequent translation in the presence of rough microsomes
yielded TR molecules that were glycosylated and correctly inserted into the
membrane. Two kinds of experiments demonstrated that the spanning region of the
TR polypeptide contained the signal for translocation across the membrane of the 
rough endoplasmic reticulum. First, we deleted the spanning region of TR and
showed that this deletion mutant could not be inserted. Second, we showed that
two cytoplasmic proteins (the mouse dihydrofolate reductase and the chimpanzee
alpha-globin) could be inserted into the microsomal membrane in the expected
orientation when the TR transmembrane segment was added to their N termini. Thus,
the spanning peptide was shown to be both necessary and sufficient for chain
translocation. Further analyses demonstrated that the translocation event was
dependent on the signal recognition particle.

PMCID: PMC1166978
PMID: 3017701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Cell Biol. 1986 Jul;6(7):2582-92.

Ribonucleoprotein complex formation during pre-mRNA splicing in vitro.

Bindereif A, Green MR.

The ribonucleoprotein (RNP) structures of the pre-mRNA and RNA processing
products generated during in vitro splicing of an SP6/beta-globin pre-mRNA were
characterized by sucrose gradient sedimentation analysis. Early, during the
initial lag phase of the splicing reaction, the pre-mRNA sedimented
heterogeneously but was detected in both 40S and 60S RNP complexes. An RNA
substrate lacking a 3' splice site consensus sequence was not assembled into the 
60S RNP complex. The two splicing intermediates, the first exon RNA species and
an RNA species containing the intron and the second exon in a lariat
configuration (IVS1-exon 2 RNA species), were found exclusively in a 60S RNP
complex. These two splicing intermediates cosedimented under a variety of
conditions, indicating that they are contained in the same RNP complex. The
products of the splicing reaction, accurately spliced RNA and the excised IVS1
lariat RNA species, are released from the 60S RNP complex and detected in smaller
RNP complexes. Sequence-specific RNA-factor interactions within these RNP
complexes were evidenced by the preferential protection of the pre-mRNA branch
point from RNase A digestion and protection of the 2'-5' phosphodiester bond of
the lariat RNA species from enzymatic debranching. The various RNP complexes were
further characterized and could be distinguished by immunoprecipitation with
anti-Sm and anti-(U1)RNP antibodies.

PMCID: PMC367814
PMID: 2946939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Med Chem. 1986 Jul;29(7):1284-8.

[pGlu6,Pro9]SP6-11, a selective agonist for the substance P P-receptor subtype.

Laufer R, Gilon C, Chorev M, Selinger Z.

Substitution of a single amino acid residue, proline for glycine-9 in
[pGlu6]SP6-11, a hexapeptide analogue of substance P, confers on the peptide
selective agonist activity toward the SP-P receptor subtype. [pGlu6,Pro9]SP6-11
had 20% and 75% of the activity of [pGlu6]SP6-11 in stimulating, respectively, K+
release from rat parotid slices and contraction of the isolated guinea pig ileum,
via the SP-P receptor subtype. In contrast, [pGlu6,Pro9]SP6-11 had substantially 
reduced activity on SP-E systems such as the hamster urinary bladder and rat
duodenum, being about 20-fold less potent than [pGlu6]SP6-11 and 200-670-fold
less potent than neurokinin B. In the guinea pig ileum [pGlu6,Pro9]SP6-11 had
very low activity on the neuronal tachykinin receptor, being 325 times less
potent than [pGlu6]SP6-11 and 1000 times less potent than neurokinin B. Because
of its discrimination between the muscular and neuronal receptors in the guinea
pig ileum (muscular/neuronal potency ratio = 600), [pGlu6,Pro9]SP6-11 can be used
to specifically desensitize the muscular receptor of this tissue. This procedure 
enables a selective and sensitive bioassay of the neuronal receptor.

PMID: 2433445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Med Chem. 1986 Jul;29(7):1281-4.

Synthesis and biological activity of substance P C-terminal hexapeptide
analogues: structure-activity studies.

Poulos C, Brown JR, Jordan CC.

A series of analogues of the C-terminal hexapeptide of substance P, modified at
the glutaminyl residue, was synthesized and their relative activities as
spasmogens were determined in the guinea pig ileum and rat colon muscularis
mucosae preparations in vitro. In general, when compared to SP6-11, the loss of
the carboxamide group has little effect on activity in the colon and reduces
activity on the ileum. The exception to this is the Orn6 analogue which retains
activity on both preparations and is proposed as a useful tool for
structure-activity studies. It is concluded that the hydrogen-bonding potential
of the position 6 substituent may be an important determinant of biological
activity.

PMID: 2433444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Virology. 1986 Jun;151(2):172-85.

Satellite tobacco ringspot virus RNA: biological activity of DNA clones and their
in vitro transcripts.

Gerlach WL(1), Buzayan JM, Schneider IR, Bruening G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agricultural and Environmental
Sciences, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA.

The satellite RNA of tobacco ringspot virus (STobRV RNA) replicates in
association with tobacco ringspot virus (TobRV), apparently by means of
intermediates that are multimeric, tandem repeats of STobRV RNA (M. C. Kiefer, S.
D. Daubert, I. R. Schneider, and G. Bruening, 1982, Virology 121, 262-273) and
which are capable of autolytic cleavage to produce active monomeric RNA (G. A.
Prody, J. T. Bakos, J. M. Buzayan, I. R. Schneider, and G. Bruening, Science, in 
press). We have prepared plasmids that contain circularly permuted dimeric and
trimeric cDNA forms of the 359 residue monomeric STobRV RNA sequence. The dimeric
and trimeric DNA inserts contain contiguous, unpermuted monomeric and dimeric
STobRV RNA sequences, respectively. Monomeric RNAs of both the encapsidated, (+),
and the complementary, (-), polarities were prepared in vitro: transcripts of
cloned sequences were initiated at the bacteriophage SP6 promoter, and these
autolytically processed to generate RNA with the electrophoretic mobility of
monomeric STobRV RNA. Monomeric (+)RNA transcripts and double-stranded DNA with a
permuted trimeric sequence were biologically active, as judged by their ability
to engender encapsidated STobRV RNA when inoculated to plants in the presence of 
TobRV. Biological activity was not detected with monometric RNA transcripts of
the (-) polarity or with single-stranded DNAs that contained permuted dimeric
sequences of either polarity.

PMID: 18640636  [PubMed]


485. Biochem Int. 1986 Jun;12(6):921-31.

Purification and properties of RNA polymerase of phage KB1.

Verma M.

Bacteriophage KB1 belongs to group C of Bradely's classification After infection 
a bacteriophage specific RNA polymerase is induced in infected cells. KB1 RNA
polymerase is a stable enzyme and is easily purified to homogeneity in good
overall yield. The activity resides in a single polypeptide chain of molecular
weight about 90,000. Synthesis of RNA by KB1 RNA polymerase requires a DNA
template and Mg++ and like SP6 RNA polymerase, is strongly stimulated by either
bovine serum albumin or spermidine. Thiol reactive reagents inhibit the enzyme,
suggesting the presence of essential sulfhydryl residues. The enzyme possess a
stringent promoter specificity. The KB1 RNA polymerase is also highly active in
synthesis of poly(rG) with poly(dI).(dC) as template. My experiments suggest that
the catalytic portion of the polymerase can be separated from the RNA polymerase 
holoenzyme.

PMID: 3527171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. EMBO J. 1986 Jun;5(6):1319-26.

Generation of histone mRNA 3' ends by endonucleolytic cleavage of the pre-mRNA in
a snRNP-dependent in vitro reaction.

Gick O, Krämer A, Keller W, Birnstiel ML.

Incubation of SP6 generated mouse histone H4 mRNA precursors in nuclear extracts 
of HeLa cells yields processed mRNA species which end on the 3' adenosine of the 
conserved terminal ACCA sequence not unlike ten different histone mRNAs isolated 
from sea urchin embryos which end either on the 3' C or A. In the presence of 20 
mM EDTA, the cleaved off 3' spacer portions of the RNA transcripts are readily
detected, hence the 3' ends of histone mRNAs arise as a consequence of
endonucleolytic cleavage(s) of the precursor RNA. The in vitro cleavage reaction 
is specifically inhibited by human antisera of the Sm-serotype, but not by
control sera and can be rescued by the addition of a preparation of partially
purified small nuclear RNPs to the antibody-depleted extract. Interestingly, the 
snRNP preparation is sufficient to elicit 3' processing of pre-mRNA in the
absence of added nuclear extract.

PMCID: PMC1166943
PMID: 3015597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 May 12;14(9):3687-701.

Assembly in an in vitro splicing reaction of a mouse insulin messenger RNA
precursor into a 60-40S ribonucleoprotein complex.

Kaltwasser G, Spitzer SG, Goldenberg CJ.

An SP6/mouse insulin RNA precursor containing two exons and one intron can be
spliced in a partially purified nuclear extract isolated from MOPC-315 mouse
myeloma cells. We have detected the putative RNA splicing intermediate
(intron-3'exon) in a lariat form, the excised intron in a lariat form, and the
mRNA spliced product. The in vitro splicing reaction of gel-purified RNA
precursors requires ATP and Mg2+ and was accompanied by the formation of a 60-40S
ribonucleoprotein complex. The formation of the 60S complex requires ATP. At
least two Sm snRNPs containing U1 and U2 RNAs are components of the 60-40S
complex. The assemble of those snRNPs occurs early during the splicing reaction
and it requires ATP and intron containing pre-mRNAs.

PMCID: PMC339808
PMID: 2940512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Mol Biol. 1986 May 5;189(1):143-65.

New reactions of the ribosomal RNA precursor of Tetrahymena and the mechanism of 
self-splicing.

Inoue T, Sullivan FX, Cech TR.

The availability of Tetrahymena pre-rRNA of discrete size, produced by
transcription of recombinant plasmids with bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase, has 
permitted a more detailed investigation of the self-splicing reaction. The
predicted splicing intermediate, the product of cleavage by guanosine at the 5'
splice site, was identified. This intermediate was tested in the intermolecular
exon ligation reaction and found to be competent to undergo the second step of
splicing. These results and others that evaluated the reactivity of the 5' and 3'
splice sites independently show that splicing occurs in two separable steps. The 
3' splice site was found to be susceptible to site-specific hydrolysis leaving a 
hydroxyl terminus. This is interpreted as an indication that the 3' splice site
is activated for nucleophilic attack in general and for exon ligation in
particular. Preliminary evidence for specific hydrolysis at the 5' splice site
was also obtained. All of the newly characterized intervening sequence
RNA-mediated reactions as well as those found previously are divided into three
categories: transesterification by guanosine at sites following two or three
pyrimidine nucleotides (and, as a minor reaction, at sites following other
guanosine residues); transesterification by oligopyrimidines or by the 5' exon
(which terminates with C-U-C-U-C-UOH) at the site following the 3'-terminal
guanosine residue of the intervening sequence; and specific hydrolysis at the
splice sites. One of the products of the reactions at the 3' splice site is a
molecule that contains the 5' exon still attached to the intervening sequence. It
has a 3'-terminal GOH and undergoes cyclization both at the normal cyclization
site within the intervening sequence and at the 5' splice site. The finding that 
the splice site can act as a cyclization site, combined with the earlier
observation that the normal cyclization site is subject to attack by guanosine
mononucleotide, leads us to propose that all these reactions may be occurring in 
the same active site. Translocation (a conformational change) would then bring
different oligopyrimidine sequences into the active site for attack by guanosine.
On the basis of the experimental results, a model for the local structure at the 
active site is described. A key feature of the model is the interaction between
the U at the end of the oligopyrimidine sequence, a G residue within the internal
guide sequence in the intervening sequence, and another G residue that can be
either the attacking group for transesterification or the 3'-terminal G of the
intervening sequence.

PMID: 2431151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Virol. 1986 May;58(2):459-67.

Mechanism of in vitro synthesis of covalently linked dimeric RNA molecules by the
poliovirus replicase.

Lubinski JM, Kaplan G, Racaniello VR, Dasgupta A.

Four RNA fragments of approximately 1,000 to 1,200 nucleotides, representing both
the 5' and 3' termini of poliovirus plus- and minus-strand RNAs, were generated
by transcription of poliovirus cDNA by using bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase.
The copying of these templates by the poliovirus replicase invariably produced
RNA products approximately twice the size of the templates. In experiments with
templates uniformly labeled with 32P it was shown that some of the apparently
double-length products were generated by extension from an internal site of the
template. Filter hybridization of the labeled in vitro-synthesized products with 
various unlabeled templates suggested a second mechanism by which double-length
molecules could be synthesized; the results can be best explained by de novo
synthesis of the first strand by copying of the template RNA, followed by
snap-back of the newly synthesized RNA, generating a template-primer structure
for the synthesis of the second strand. Highly purified poliovirus replicase was 
able to support the synthesis of double-length RNA products in response to these 
templates. These reactions did not require host factor. In contrast, synthesis of
genome-length copies of poliovirion RNA by the same replicase was absolutely
dependent on added host factor. The synthesis of double-length RNA products did
not require either the 3'-terminal poly(A) of plus RNA or sequences within the 3'
termini of both plus- and minus-strand RNAs.

PMCID: PMC252932
PMID: 2422394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cell. 1986 Apr 25;45(2):157-66.

Characterization of the intron in the phage T4 thymidylate synthase gene and
evidence for its self-excision from the primary transcript.

Chu FK, Maley GF, West DK, Belfort M, Maley F.

The td gene contains a 735 bp open reading frame within its 1017 bp intron. A 12 
nucleotide stretch may form a stable secondary structure with the putative
Shine-Dalgarno sequence of the intron open reading frame and thus impair its
translation. SP6 RNA polymerase transcripts of the td gene synthesized in vitro
at 40 degrees C encompass a 2.7 kb primary transcript, a 1.7 kb mRNA, and a 1 kb 
intron RNA. The excised intron RNA consisted of linear and cyclized forms. RNAase
H studies and resistance of the cyclized intron to linearization by HeLa cell
debranching enzyme suggest it to be circular. Self-splicing of isolated td
primary transcript occurred only marginally at 28 degrees C, but increased
progressively to 50 degrees C, and required the presence of both Mg++ and a
guanosine cofactor. An internal guide sequence is evident which may align the 5' 
splice site with the 3' end, presumably for precise exon ligation.

PMID: 3698096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Apr 25;14(8):3521-6.

Sequences of three promoters for the bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase.

Brown JE, Klement JF, McAllister WT.

Fragments of SP6 DNA generated by cleavage with Hpa II or Taq I were cloned into 
the Cla I site of pBR322 and the recombinant plasmids were screened for the
presence of SP6 promoter activity by transcription in vitro with purified SP6 RNA
polymerase. Three plasmids having promoter activity and small inserts of SP6 DNA 
were characterized. Hybridization studies showed that all three cloned promoters 
arose from different regions of the SP6 genome. Comparison of the consensus
promoter sequence (5' ATTTAGGtgGACACTATAGAAGgaG 3') with the consensus sequences 
of promoters recognized by the T3 and T7 RNA polymerases reveals a common core
sequence (5'-CACTA-3') extending from -7 to -3, as well as other features that
may be important in selective promoter recognition by the phage RNA polymerases.

PMCID: PMC339790
PMID: 3010240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Virology. 1986 Apr 15;150(1):196-206.

High resolution mapping of carnation mottle virus-associated RNAs.

Carrington JC(1), Morris TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Berkeley, California 
94720, USA.

The genomic coordinates from which carnation mottle virus (CarMV) subgenomic RNA 
5'-ends originate have been determined by high resolution S, nuclease protection 
and primer-extension mapping techniques. The two, 3'-proximal subgenomic RNAs
initiate at nucleotides 2532 and 2315 (counting from the genome 5' terminus).
These RNAs contain 1472 and 1689 nucleotides, respectively. There is substantial 
nucleotide sequence homology surrounding the transcriptional start sites of the
two subgenomic RNAs. The 1.5-kb RNA uses the first AUG to initiate translation of
viral coat protein. The first AUG on the 1.7-kb RNA begins a short open reading
frame of 183 nucleotides. This region encodes a Mr = 6746 polypeptide found by in
vitro translation of authentic subgenomic RNA as well as synthetic SP6
transcripts. By SP6 transcription and cell-free translation, we have also mapped 
coding sequences for a previously identified CarMV gene product, p27, to the 5'
terminus of the viral genome.

PMID: 18640617  [PubMed]


493. Virology. 1986 Apr 15;150(1):55-64.

Detection of single base substitutions in influenza virus RNA molecules by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis of RNA-RNA or DNA-RNA heteroduplexes.

Smith FI, Parvin JD, Palese P.

Single point mutations in the NS gene of influenza virus were detected by
electrophoresis of double-stranded RNA heteroduplexes in denaturing gradient
gels. The heteroduplex RNAs were made by hybridization of virion RNA with
SP6-derived RNA probes of varying length. Mutations located at different
positions along the NS gene (890 nucleotides long) were all detected in a
predictable fashion. The method of heteroduplex analysis was also successfully
used in detecting single point mismatches in DNA-RNA hybrids.

PMID: 3952989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochem J. 1986 Apr 15;235(2):385-90.

Quantification of tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) mRNA in human
endothelial-cell cultures by hybridization with a t-PA cDNA probe.

van Zonneveld AJ, Chang GT, van den Berg J, Kooistra T, Verheijen JH, Pannekoek
H, Kluft C.

We describe the construction of a recombinant DNA plasmid, consisting of the
vector pBR322 and full-length tissue-type plasminogen-activator (t-PA) cDNA, by
using polyadenylated RNA from cultured Bowes melanoma cells as substrate. A
1280-base-pair PstI restriction fragment, covering the 3' untranslated region and
part of the coding region for the t-PA L-chain, was used as a radiolabelled probe
to determine the size and the number of t-PA mRNA molecules in cultured
endothelial cells of different origin from the same individual. Northern blotting
showed that in all these cells a t-PA mRNA is synthesized of about 2500
nucleotides, indicating that transcriptional initiation, splicing and
polyadenylation is similar. The number of t-PA mRNA molecules per cell measured, 
by using a dot-blotting technique and t-PA mRNA made in vitro, with a plasmid DNA
preparation harbouring a specific promotor of the Salmonella typhimurium
bacteriophage SP6, t-PA cDNA and SP6 RNA polymerase as standard, is approx.
10,000 in all cultured endothelial cells from adult vessels. However, the amount 
of t-PA antigen synthesized and/or secreted differs by a factor of 6-20.
Relatively large amounts of t-PA antigen secreted were detected in conditioned
medium from vena-cava-derived cells, whereas low amounts were found in
conditioned medium from arteria-iliaca-derived cells.

PMCID: PMC1146698
PMID: 3091007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Experientia. 1986 Apr 15;42(4):417-8.

Hypotensive activity of histidine-containing analogues of C-terminal hexapeptide 
of substance P.

Janecka A, Koziolkiewicz W, Wasiak T, Cierniewski CS, Babinska A.

Four new hexapeptide analogues of C-terminal Substance P fragment with increased 
solubility in aqueous solutions are described. The peptides contain histidine in 
positions 6, 8, 9 and 10, respectively. The effect of the structural changes on
the hypotensive activity and antigenic properties of analogues was compared. It
was found that substitution of amino acid residues in various positions in the
C-terminal hexapeptide of Substance P resulted in different effects on the
hypotensive and antigenic properties, respectively. Only the [His6] SP6-11
analogue had an unchanged antigenic structure when compared with the C-terminal
region of Substance P, but it showed an almost total loss of hypotensive
activity. The [His9] SP6-11 analogue retained 50% of the hypotensive activity of 
the C-terminal hexapeptide but showed a markedly reduced expression of the
antigenic epitope localized in this region of Substance P.

PMID: 2420636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Cell Immunol. 1986 Apr 1;98(2):544-51.

Activation of idiotype-specific suppressor T cells by injection of antibody
carrying a recurrent idiotype.

Zöller M, Lopatta D, Andrighetto G.

Intravenous injection of spleen cells (SC) coated with an antitrinitrophenyl
(anti-TNP) IgM monoclonal antibody, Sp6 (Sp6-SC), which carries a recurrent
idiotype, resulted in activation of a Lyt-2-positive population which did adhere 
to Sp6-coated plates. No effect of Sp6-SC injection could be observed in vivo on 
an anti-TNP B-cell response when mice were primed with an immunogenic dose of
TNP-horse red blood cells (HRBC), but an anti-TNP response was observed when
Sp6-SC-injected mice were primed with a subimmunogenic dose of TNP-HRBC.
Furthermore, after intravenous (iv) injection of Sp6-SC, it was no longer
possible to suppress a primary anti-TNP response by iv injection of
TNP-haptenized thymocytes. In vitro analysis showed that the Sp6-induced
suppressor T cell (Ts) population had no measurable influence on TNP-specific
naive B cells, nor did it suppress TNP-specific helper T cells (THTNP), but it
did lead to counterregulation of TNP-specific suppressor T cells (TsTNP). Hence, 
iv injection of antibody carrying a recurrent idiotype resulted in activation of 
a Ts population which functioned as inhibitor of suppression, thus displaying a
helper effect.

PMID: 2944620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. DNA. 1986 Apr;5(2):167-71.

Rapid RNA sequencing using double-stranded template DNA, SP6 polymerase, and
3'-deoxynucleotide triphosphates.

Parvin JD, Smith FI, Palese P.

A simple and efficient nucleic acid sequencing method is described in which RNA
transcription by the SP6 polymerase is specifically terminated using
3'-deoxynucleotide triphosphates. Initial difficulties in resolving the RNA
ladder were overcome by replacing guanosine triphosphate by inosine triphosphate 
in the reaction mixture and electrophoresing gels at high temperature (50 degrees
C). This method presents advantages over current sequencing techniques:
Unprocessed plasmid DNA is the template and preparation of inserts and/or
single-stranded templates is unnecessary. Use of the specific promoter for SP6
polymerase removes the need for a primer in sequencing reactions.

PMID: 2423310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Mar;83(5):1300-4.

Isolation of cDNA clones coding for the catalytic subunit of mouse cAMP-dependent
protein kinase.

Uhler MD, Carmichael DF, Lee DC, Chrivia JC, Krebs EG, McKnight GS.

mRNA coding for the catalytic (C) subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (ATP: 
protein phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.1.37) was partially purified from bovine
testis by polysome immunoadsorption and oligo(dT)-chromatography. This enriched
mRNA preparation was used to prepare and differentially screen a cDNA library.
One of the selected cDNA clones was shown to hybrid-select mRNA coding for a
40-kDa protein that was specifically precipitated with antibodies to the C
subunit. This bovine cDNA clone was then used to isolate a series of mouse cDNA
clones that are complementary to the entire mouse C subunit mRNA. The mouse
clones code for a protein of 351 amino acids that shows 98% homology to the
bovine C subunit and hybridize to a single mRNA of 2.4 kilobases in mouse heart
and brain. Southern blot analysis of total genomic DNA suggests that there is a
single mouse gene coding for the C subunit. mRNA levels for both the C subunit
and the type I regulatory subunit in various mouse tissues and cell lines were
quantitated and compared by using single-stranded RNA probes prepared with SP6
polymerase.

PMCID: PMC323063
PMID: 3456589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cell. 1986 Feb 28;44(4):629-37.

The human glucose transporter can insert posttranslationally into microsomes.

Mueckler M, Lodish HF.

RNA transcripts encoding the complete human glucose transporter (GT) or fragments
of GT corresponding to the NH2-terminal 340 amino acids (GT-N) or the
COOH-terminal 148 amino acids (GT-C) were synthesized in vitro from SP6 plasmids.
The corresponding polypeptides were synthesized in reticulocyte or wheat germ
cell-free systems and their insertion into pancreatic microsomes was assessed by 
endoglycosidase H and trypsin digestion or alkaline extraction of membranes. The 
following observations were made: both GT and GT-N can insert posttranslationally
into microsomes; GT contains at least two distinct signal sequences; both co- and
posttranslational insertion of GT-N are mediated by a signal recognition particle
(SRP)-SRP receptor-dependent mechanism; and SRP is required both for targeting
the polypeptide to the membrane and for initiating the actual insertion process. 
We propose a model for the biosynthesis of GT and proteins of similar membrane
topology which does not require a tight ribosome-membrane interaction.

PMID: 3004742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nature. 1986 Feb 20-26;319(6055):640-6.

Cloning of cDNA encoding the murine IgG1 induction factor by a novel strategy
using SP6 promoter.

Noma Y, Sideras P, Naito T, Bergstedt-Lindquist S, Azuma C, Severinson E, Tanabe 
T, Kinashi T, Matsuda F, Yaoita Y, et al.

Complementary DNA encoding the IgG1 induction factor, the first lymphokine
directed to B lymphocytes, from a murine T-cell line has been cloned using a new 
strategy. The putative primary amino-acid sequence was deduced from the
nucleotide sequence determined. The lymphokine synthesized by the direction of
this cloned cDNA has many other functions, such as production of B-cell growth
factor-1 and induction of Ia on B cells.

PMID: 3005865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cell. 1986 Feb 14;44(3):381-9.

A bacteriophage RNA polymerase transcribes through a Xenopus 5S RNA gene
transcription complex without disrupting it.

Wolffe AP, Jordan E, Brown DD.

Conditions are described for programming with active transcription complexes
essentially all the Xenopus 5S RNA genes added to an extract of Xenopus oocyte
nuclei. We call this rate enhancement. Transcription by SP6 RNA polymerase of
either strand of a Xenopus 5S RNA gene is unimpeded by the presence of a complete
transcription complex associated with the internal control region of the gene.
Furthermore, the transcription complex remains stably associated with the 5S RNA 
gene following multiple transits by the prokaryotic polymerase.

PMID: 3943130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Feb 11;14(3):1511-24.

Synthetic oligonucleotide tails inhibit in vitro and in vivo translation of SP6
transcripts of maize zein cDNA clones.

Galili G, Kawata EE, Cuellar RE, Smith LD, Larkins BA.

A maize zein cDNA clone was used to synthesize mRNA with the SP6 in vitro
transcription system. Although we obtained full-length transcripts of the cDNA
sequence, these were inefficient templates for protein synthesis. Removal of the 
5' oligo(G) sequence that was synthesized during the cDNA cloning procedure
allowed efficient translation of the mRNAs in a wheat germ cell-free protein
synthesis system or in Xenopus laevis oocytes. The alteration in translational
efficiency did not result from an interaction of the 5' oligo(G) homopolymer tail
with the 3' oligo(C) sequence, as transcripts with or without the oligo(C) tail
were translated similarly in both protein synthesis systems. Ribosome interaction
with the mRNA may be affected due either to the secondary structure of the
oligo(G) sequence itself, or an unusual secondary structure between the oligo(G) 
sequence and another region in the mRNA. Synthetic oligonucleotides at the 5' end
of cloned cDNA sequences may generally be inhibitory for translation of mRNAs
transcribed in vitro.

PMCID: PMC339520
PMID: 3456558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Virol. 1986 Feb;57(2):647-55.

Identification of a new glycoprotein of herpes simplex virus type 1 and genetic
mapping of the gene that codes for it.

Richman DD, Buckmaster A, Bell S, Hodgman C, Minson AC.

A type-specific monoclonal antibody, LP10, precipitated a glycoprotein with a
molecular weight of approximately 59,000 from purified herpes simplex virus type 
1. Although this glycoprotein was similar in size to glycoprotein D (gD), it was 
shown to be less abundant in both virions and infected cells, to migrate more
rapidly in its precursor form, to incorporate glucosamine but not mannose, and to
have a more stable precursor in tunicamycin-treated cells than the gD precursor
(pgD). Immunoassays of cells infected with insertion recombinants and intertypic 
recombinants localized the gene coding for the target antigen of LP10 to the
unique short (Us) region at map units 0.892 to 0.924 excluding gD. The target
antigen of LP10 was then definitively mapped to the Us4 open reading frame by
immunoprecipitation of a polypeptide synthesized by in vitro translation of a
Us4-specific transcript prepared by using an SP6 cloning This newly identified
glycoprotein product of the Us4 gene of herpes simplex virus type 1 is distinct
from the previously identified gB1, gC1, gE1, and gH1.

PMCID: PMC252780
PMID: 3003396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1986 Feb;3(4):795-803.

The conformational analysis of substance P analogs using high-field NMR
techniques.

Kawaki H(1), Otter A, Beierbeck H, Kotovych G, Stewart JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

High-field nuclear magnetic resonance measurements were carried out on substance 
P fragments SP4-11' [pGlu5]-SP5-11 and [pGlu6]SP6-11 both at 400 and at 500 MHz. 
A spectral simulation was carried out on two of these peptides and the coupling
constants were interpreted in terms of the conformations. The JNH-CHa coupling
constants are all approximately 8 Hz, with the exception of glycine, indicating
no preferred conformation for the backbone. For the amino acids other than p-Glu,
a comparison of the coupling constant data suggests the same relative rotamer
populations for the side chains. Proton longitudinal relaxation time data were
measured for all three peptides and support the above conclusions.

PMID: 2482046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Med Chem. 1986 Feb;29(2):295-9.

Ketomethylene pseudopeptide analogues of substance P: synthesis and biological
activity.

Ewenson A, Laufer R, Chorev M, Selinger Z, Gilon C.

Two pseudopeptide analogues [Bz-(RS)Phe8 psi (COCH2)Gly9]SP8-11 (I) and
[pGlu6,(RS)Phe8 psi (COCH2)Gly9]SP6-11 (II) of the substance P related C-terminal
hexapeptide [pGlu6]SP6-11 were prepared as follows. The pseudodipeptidic unit
H(RS)Phe psi (COCH2)GlyOH was synthesized by using a modified Dakin-West reaction
between Bz-Phe-OH and monomethyl succinoyl chloride. The N alpha-protected
pseudopeptidic unit was then incorporated into the appropriate peptide by using
various coupling methods. The two pseudopeptide analogues were purified,
characterized, and tested for their biological activity and inhibitory effect on 
SP degrading enzymes. Analogue II was a full agonist contracting the isolated
guinea pig ileum with a potency of 70% compared to the parent hexapeptide
[pGlu6]SP6-11. It was also a potent inhibitor of SP degrading activity in rat
diencephalon membranes with a Ki of 20 microM whereas analogue I was a weak
inhibitor.

PMID: 2419559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 1986 Jan 25;261(3):1286-92.

Signal recognition particle mediates the insertion of a transmembrane protein
which has a cytoplasmic NH2 terminus.

Holland EC, Drickamer K.

The mechanism by which rat liver asialoglycoprotein receptor (rat hepatic lectin,
RHL) is inserted into membranes has been investigated. RHL is a prototype for
transmembrane proteins which are oriented with their NH2 termini in the cytoplasm
and their COOH termini outside the cell. Such transmembrane proteins are
synthesized without cleavable NH2-terminal signal sequences. An in vitro
translation system has been developed in which RHL is translated from RNA
produced in a bacteriophage SP6 in vitro transcription system. RHL produced in
this way can be inserted cotranslationally in the correct orientation into dog
pancreas microsomes. This insertion process has been shown to be dependent on the
signal recognition particle and its receptor (the docking protein) in the
microsomal membranes. A detailed mechanism for the insertion of this type of
transmembrane protein into the lipid bilayer is proposed.

PMID: 3003063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Jan 24;14(2):693-702.

Construction of a retroviral cDNA version of the int-1 mammary oncogene and its
expression in vitro.

Rijsewijk FA, van Lohuizen M, van Ooyen A, Nusse R.

The int-1 mammary oncogene is activated by proviruses of the Mouse Mammary Tumor 
Virus in many different mammary tumors. We have inserted a genomic fragment
containing the protein-encoding domain of the gene into the retroviral shuttle
vector pZIPneoSV(X)1. After one round of virus replication we recovered
recombinant proviral DNA containing a correctly spliced copy of int-1. In vitro
transcription of this cDNA version of int-1 using SP6 polymerase and translation 
in a reticulocyte lysate yielded a protein of approximately 37,000 daltons. High 
expression of int-1 in NIH-3T3 cells infected with recombinant virus did not lead
to morphological transformation.

PMCID: PMC339458
PMID: 3003692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell. 1986 Jan 17;44(1):137-45.

Deletion mapping of Sindbis virus DI RNAs derived from cDNAs defines the
sequences essential for replication and packaging.

Levis R, Weiss BG, Tsiang M, Huang H, Schlesinger S.

Defective-interfering (DI) genomes of a virus contain sequence information
essential for their replication and packaging. They need not contain any coding
information and therefore are a valuable tool for identifying cis-acting,
regulatory sequences in a viral genome. To identify these sequences in a DI
genome of Sindbis virus, we cloned a cDNA copy of a complete DI genome directly
downstream of the promoter for the SP6 bacteriophage DNA dependent RNA
polymerase. The cDNA was transcribed into RNA, which was transfected into chicken
embryo fibroblasts in the presence of helper Sindbis virus. After one to two
passages the DI RNA became the major viral RNA species in infected cells. Data
from a series of deletions covering the entire DI genome show that only sequences
in the 162 nucleotide region at the 5' terminus and in the 19 nucleotide region
at the 3' terminus are specifically required for replication and packaging of
these genomes.

PMID: 3753584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 1986 Jan 15;261(2):800-5.

Import and processing of hybrid proteins by mammalian mitochondria in vitro.

Nguyen M, Argan C, Lusty CJ, Shore GC.

Normal and hybrid proteins were synthesized following transcription of pSP64
recombinant plasmids with SP6 polymerase and translation of resultant mRNAs in a 
rabbit reticulocyte lysate. The precursor to the rat liver mitochondrial matrix
enzyme, ornithine carbamyltransferase (Mr = approximately 40,000), was
efficiently imported by rat heart mitochondria in vitro and processed to mature
protein. Import of the precursor to a second matrix enzyme, carbamyl-phosphate
synthetase I (Mr = approximately 165,000), could not be demonstrated. However, a 
33-kDa hybrid protein, bearing the precarbamyl-phosphate synthetase I signal
sequence (38 amino acids) and 55 amino acids from the amino terminus of the
mature enzyme, followed by the carboxyl-terminal 209 amino acids of ornithine
carbamyltransferase, was imported and processed under identical conditions. The
topogenic function of the preornithine carbamyltransferase signal sequence (32
amino acids) was confirmed by constructing a hybrid protein bearing the signal
sequence and five amino acids of mature enzyme, followed by 250 amino acids of
the cytosolic enzyme of Escherichia coli, asparagine synthetase; the hybrid was
transported to the matrix compartment of heart mitochondria where processing,
albeit incorrect, took place. A hybrid asparagine synthetase bearing the
pre-ornithine carbamyltransferase signal sequence plus 28 amino acids of mature
ornithine carbamyltransferase, however, was imported and processed with apparent 
fidelity.

PMID: 2867093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Gene. 1986;49(1):9-22.

A cosmid vector for systematic chromosome walking.

Cross SH, Little PF.

We describe the construction of a cosmid, LoristB, that contains SP6 and T7
phage-encoded RNA polymerase promoter sequences that are oriented towards and
immediately adjacent to HindIII and BamHI cloning sites. We describe techniques
for rapidly generating RNA probes from these promoters that must be complementary
to the extreme left or right ends of the cloned DNA and can be used for library
screening. Probe preparation requires neither prior knowledge of restriction
sites nor fragment isolation. We also make extensive use of cos mapping
restriction-mapping protocols that we have devised for our cosmid vectors for
generation and alignment of steps in a cosmid walk.

PMID: 3552884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Gene. 1986;46(1):57-64.

Plasmids allowing transcription of cloned DNA by Salmonella typhimurium phage SP6
RNA polymerase to produce RNAs with authentic 5'-terminal sequences.

Nam HG, Loechel S, Fried HM.

We wished to determine whether there is any specific sequence downstream of the
start point of the SP6 promoter which is required for its function in the plasmid
pSP64 (Melton et al., 1984). Lack of such specificity would permit in vitro
synthesis of an RNA molecule having a 5'-terminal sequence identical to its
wild-type in vivo counterpart. To test its requirement, we replaced all of the
SP6 sequence downstream of the transcription start point with heterologous
nucleotides (nt) and found that any sequence will suffice to permit efficient and
accurate transcription. These results permitted construction of plasmids for
synthesis of 'authentic' transcripts from cloned DNA. In one case, by an
oligodeoxynucleotide-mediated site-specific deletion, we placed the start point
of yeast gene TCM1 at nt + 2 of the SP6 promoter and produced in vitro TCM1 mRNA 
with a wild-type 5'-terminal sequence. We also constructed a vector, pSP64 delta 
1, in which the SalI/AccI/HincII recognition sites of pSP64 reside at nt + 2
through + 7. Plasmids such as pSP64 delta 1 may be more useful in some cases as
insertion of any DNA fragment at one of these three sites will yield a transcript
in which only two to four nt are derived from the vector.

PMID: 3026927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Endocr Res. 1986;12(3):293-304.

Studies on high-affinity [3H]substance P binding sites in bovine pineal gland.

Govitrapong P, Ebadi M.

The presence of substance P in numerous mammalian pineal glands prompted us to
search for its binding sites in the bovine pineal gland. The binding assays to
pineal membrane were carried out in polypropylene microcentrifuge tubes in a
final volume of 500 microliters of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing
aliquots of 200-500 micrograms protein, 0.02% BSA, 6 micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4
micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, and 50
microliters of [3H]substance P (3H-SP, 45.7 Ci/mmol to yield a final
concentration of 0.02-20 nM) to start the reactions, which were incubated for 20 
min at 20 degrees C. The reactions were terminated by centrifugation in a Fisher 
Microcentrifuge Model 235A for 30 seconds at 13,000 X g, and the pellets were
washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 0.02% BSA, 6 
micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4 micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml
bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2. The
bottoms of the tubes were cut, the membrane pellets were dissolved in 5 ml of
Triton X-100/toluene fluor (1:3) scintillation fluid, and the radioactivity was
counted. The specific [3H]-substance P binding at 1-2 nM was 40-50% of the total 
binding, and the non-specific binding was assessed by using 2 microM of
unlabelled substance P. These studies identified in bovine pineal gland a high
affinity receptor site for [3H]SP with a KD value of 0.43 nM and a Bmax value of 
71.14 fmol/mg protein. The relative affinity of various substance P analogues or 
fragments was: substance P greater than physalaemin greater than SP2-11 greater
than SP3-11 greater than SP4-11 greater than SP6-11 greater than substance K =
eledoisin greater than kassinin greater than SP7-11 greater than SP free acid.
Substance P did not alter the basal or the norepinephrine-induced stimulation of 
the activity of serotonin N-acetyltransferase in rat pineal gland in culture.

PMID: 2430788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Immunol. 1986 Jan;136(2):516-20.

Identification of an antigenic determinant within the phylogenetically conserved 
triprolyl region of myelin basic protein.

Potter NT, Hashim GA, Day ED.

Synthetic peptide SP6 (RTPPPSG), comprising amino acid residues 98-103-Gly of
myelin basic protein (MBP), and a series of peptide analogs were used to probe
the structural requirements for antigenicity of a highly conserved region of a
self protein. By means of a liquid-phase radioimmunoassay, antibody responses
directed toward this determinant in both multi-specific anti-MBP and monospecific
anti-peptide antisera were measured. The specificities of the antibodies present 
in the anti-MBP and anti-peptide antisera were examined by an equilibrium
competitive inhibition radioimmunoassay by using the set of related peptides, as 
well as intact MBP from different species. Although the fine specificities of the
reagent antisera differed, competitive inhibition analyses with intact MBP
revealed a cross-reactive determinant involving residues 99-100 (Thr-Pro). This
suggests that the neighborhood of the triprolyl region of MBP, despite its strong
phylogenetic conservation, serves as an immunogen for humoral responses whether
presented as a hapten-carrier conjugate or in the context of intact MBP. The
latter supports the contention that the general antigenicity of a protein need
not require sequence differences between the immunizing protein and its
counterpart in the host.

PMID: 2416809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Clin Chem. 1985 Dec;31(12):2043-4.

Suitability of SP6 RNA polymerase transcripts for in vitro viral diagnosis.

Buffone GJ, Darlington GJ, Wilson DR, Schimbor CM.

PMID: 4064299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Neuropeptides. 1985 Dec;6(6):573-80.

Detection of preprocholecystokinin and preproenkephalin A mRNAs in rat brain by
hybridization histochemistry using complementary RNA probes.

Siegel RE, Young WS 3rd.

The distributions of mRNAs encoding preprocholecystokinin and preproenkephalin A 
in the rat brain were examined by in situ hybridization histochemistry.
Complementary RNA probes 0.5-1.0 kilobase in length were synthesized in vitro
with 35S-ribonucleotides using SP6 polymerase and a transcription vector
containing the SP6 promotor. Following hybridization to fixed tissue sections,
signals were detected by autoradiography after relatively short exposure times.
These studies demonstrate that neuropeptide mRNAs can be detected within specific
cells in the brain and that the patterns of hybridization match the localization 
of the peptides visualized by immunohistochemistry. Minimum numbers of mRNA
copies encoding the peptides were determined by quantitative autoradiography.

PMID: 3841195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Biol. 1985 Dec;5(12):3337-44.

Nucleotide sequence and expression in vitro of cDNA derived from mRNA of int-1, a
provirally activated mouse mammary oncogene.

Fung YK, Shackleford GM, Brown AM, Sanders GS, Varmus HE.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1986 Apr;6(4):1362.

The mouse int-1 gene is a putative mammary oncogene discovered as a target for
transcriptionally activating proviral insertion mutations in mammary carcinomas
induced by the mouse mammary tumor virus in C3H mice. We have isolated molecular 
clones of full- or nearly full-length cDNA transcribed from int-1 RNA (2.6
kilobases) in a virus-induced mammary tumor. Comparison of the nucleotide
sequence of the cDNA clones with that of the int-1 gene (A. van Ooyen and R.
Nusse, Cell 39:233-240, 1984) shows the following. The coding region of the int-1
gene is composed of four exons. The splice donor and acceptor sites conform to
consensus; however, at least two closely spaced polyadenylation sites are used,
and the transcriptional initiation site remains ambiguous. The major open reading
frame is preceded by an open frame 10 codons in length. The mRNA encodes a
41-kilodalton protein with several striking features--a strongly hydrophobic
amino terminus, a cysteine-rich carboxy terminus, and four potential
glycosylation sites. There are no differences in nucleotide sequence between the 
known exons of the normal and a provirally activated allele. The length of the
deduced open reading frame was further confirmed by in vitro translation of RNA
transcribed from the cDNA clones with SP6 RNA polymerase.

PMCID: PMC369161
PMID: 3018519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985 Dec;82(24):8424-8.

In vitro synthesis of infectious poliovirus RNA.

Kaplan G, Lubinski J, Dasgupta A, Racaniello VR.

Replication of the infectious RNA genome of poliovirus is accomplished in cells
by the viral RNA polymerase through negative-strand RNA intermediates.
Full-length negative-strand poliovirus RNA was synthesized in vitro by
transcription of infectious poliovirus cDNA with bacteriophage SP6 DNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase. When provided with this negative-strand RNA as template, the
poliovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase synthesized full-length positive-strand
molecules. The positive-strand RNAs synthesized in vitro were infectious when
transfected into HeLa cells. In contrast, positive-strand copies of poliovirus
RNA synthesized in vitro by SP6 polymerase, using a poliovirus cDNA template,
were not infectious. Production of infectious positive-strand RNA by the
poliovirus polymerase was not observed when magnesium or negative-strand RNA
template was omitted from the reaction mixture. Infectivity of the product RNA
was not destroyed by DNase treatment. The specific infectivity in HeLa cells of
in vitro-synthesized positive-strand RNA was 4 X 10(4) plaque-forming
units/micrograms of RNA.

PMCID: PMC390928
PMID: 3001703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cell. 1985 Dec;43(3 Pt 2):677-83.

Poly(A) site cleavage in a HeLa nuclear extract is dependent on downstream
sequences.

Hart RP, McDevitt MA, Nevins JR.

Efficient utilization of the early SV40 poly(A) site in vivo requires sequences
between 5 bp and 18 bp downstream of the cleavage site. We have used a HeLa
nuclear extract to examine the sequence requirements for in vitro cleavage. DNA
segments containing the SV40 poly(A) site were cloned into an SP6 vector. SP6
RNAs, accurately cleaved and polyadenylated, were detected by primer extension.
Cleavage was enhanced by the presence of a cap on the primary transcript, and was
inhibited by the addition of 10 microM 7meGpppG. In close agreement with the in
vivo results, efficient processing at the poly(A) site in vitro required the
specific downstream sequences in the SP6 RNA transcript. These experiments
indicate that the sequence in the RNA precursor downstream of the cleavage site, 
shown to be important for efficient processing in vivo, is recognized in vitro.

PMID: 2866847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell. 1985 Nov;43(1):177-88.

GCN4 protein, synthesized in vitro, binds HIS3 regulatory sequences: implications
for general control of amino acid biosynthetic genes in yeast.

Hope IA, Struhl K.

The yeast GCN4 gene product is necessary for the transcriptional induction of
many amino acid biosynthetic genes in response to conditions of amino acid
starvation. We synthesized radioactively pure GCN4 protein by in vitro
translation of mRNA produced by in vitro transcription with SP6 RNA polymerase.
GCN4 protein binds specifically to the 20 bp region of the HIS3 gene that is
critical for transcriptional regulation in vivo and contains the TGACTC sequence 
common to coregulated genes. A synthetic GCN4 mutant protein lacking the 40
C-terminal amino acids fails to bind DNA; this correlates with a gcn4 mutant gene
that is nonfunctional in vivo. Finally, GCN4 protein binds to the promoter
regions of coordinately regulated genes, but not to analogous regions of other
genes. We suggest that GCN4 protein is a specific transcription factor, and we
describe a molecular model for the general control of amino acid biosynthetic
genes.

PMID: 3907851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell Biol. 1985 Nov;5(11):3222-30.

Photochemical cross-linking of cap binding proteins to eucaryotic mRNAs: effect
of mRNA 5' secondary structure.

Pelletier J, Sonenberg N.

We used UV light-induced cross-linking to study the interactions of cap binding
proteins with the 5' cap structure of eucaryotic mRNAs. Thymidine kinase gene
(herpes simplex virus type 1) transcripts prepared in vitro using the SP6 RNA
polymerase transcription system were capped and methylated posttranscriptionally 
with [alpha-32P]GTP and S-adenosyl-L-methionine to yield cap-labeled transcripts.
Irradiation of capped transcripts with crude rabbit reticulocyte initiation
factors in the presence of ATP-Mg2+ resulted in the cap-specific cross-linking of
two polypeptides with molecular masses of 24 and 80 kilodaltons (kDa). The
cross-linking characteristics of these polypeptides resemble those of the
cap-binding proteins previously detected by a chemical cross-linking assay (N.
Sonenberg, D. Guertin, D. Cleveland, and H. Trachsel, Cell 27:563-572, 1981).
However, the relative efficiency of the cross-linking of these two polypeptides
to the cap structure was different from that in previous studies, and there was
no detectable cross-linking of the previously described 50-kDa polypeptide. In
addition, we present data indicating that the insertion of secondary structure
into the 5' noncoding region of tk mRNA, 6 nucleotides from the cap structure,
decreases the cap-specific cross-linking of the 80-kDa but not the 24-kDa
polypeptide. In contrast, the insertion of secondary structure 37 nucleotides
from the cap structure had no significant effect on the cross-linking of either
the 24- or the 80-kDa cap-specific polypeptide. These results demonstrate that
the position of mRNA 5'-proximal secondary structure relative to the cap
structure can influence the cap-specific interaction between the mRNA and a
translation initiation factor.

PMCID: PMC369138
PMID: 3837842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Virol. 1985 Nov;56(2):628-32.

In vitro synthesis of an infectious RNA from cDNA clones of human rhinovirus type
14.

Mizutani S, Colonno RJ.

Development of a novel infectious cDNA assay is described for human rhinovirus
type 14. A full-length cDNA clone of the human rhinovirus type 14 genome RNA was 
assembled and transcribed in vitro by using the SP6 transcription system.
Transfection of HeLa cells with the nascent RNA resulted in the production of
rhinovirus indistinguishable from the parental virus by both immunological and
polyacrylamide gel analysis.

PMCID: PMC252623
PMID: 2997483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Eur J Immunol. 1985 Nov;15(11):1117-24.

Transformation of B and non-B cell lines with the 2,4,6,-trinitrophenyl
(TNP)-specific immunoglobulin genes.

McCubrey J, McKearn JP, Köhler G.

The rearranged mu and kappa genes from the 2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (TNP)-specific
hybridoma Sp6 have been introduced into B cells from three different stages of
differentiation as well as 5 non-B cell lines to determine the levels and modes
of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene expression. In pre-B cells transformed with the mu
and kappa genes, low levels of Sp6-specific mu RNA were produced and
approximately 210-fold less mu and 800-fold less kappa proteins were produced
than in the hybridoma Sp6. The Ig proteins were present intracellularly, but were
not detected on the cell membrane. In mature surface sIg+ B cell transformants,
higher levels of mu Sp6 and kappa Sp6 proteins and RNA were produced than in the 
pre-B cell transformants (12 X mu, 70 X kappa). These transformants displayed the
mu Sp6 and kappa Sp6 proteins on the cell membrane and also secreted the
transfected Ig product. Plasma cell transformants produced the highest amounts of
mu Sp6 and kappa Sp6 proteins. These transformants secreted pentameric IgM but
did not display detectable amounts of these proteins on the cell membrane. T cell
and one fibroblast transformant produced Ig as normal sized mu Sp6 and kappa Sp6 
proteins. All other mu Sp6 and kappa Sp6 non-B cell transformants (melanoma,
teratoma and macrophage) failed to produce enough Ig to determine whether the Ig 
proteins were of the correct molecular weights. The T cell and fibroblast
transformants that produced Ig proteins did not secrete or display detectable Ig 
on the cell membrane. The expression of Ig did not inhibit the expression of the 
T cell antigen Thy-1 in the T cell transformants.

PMID: 2415367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Endocrinology. 1985 Nov;117(5):1996-2000.

Effects of substance P and substance P-(6-11) on hormone release from isolated
perfused pancreas: their opposite actions on rat and canine islets.

Chiba Y, Kawai K, Okuda Y, Munekata E, Yamashita K.

The effects of substance P (SP) and SP-(6-11) (SP6-11) on hormone secretion from 
the isolated perfused pancreas were compared in rats and dogs under the same
conditions. In the rat, SP inhibited insulin secretion in a dose-dependent manner
in a concentration range of 0.1-10 nM. Glucagon secretion was inhibited at a
minimal dose of 10 nM SP. No significant effect on somatostatin secretion was
obtained. SP6-11 exhibited the identical inhibitory potency as SP on both insulin
and glucagon release from the rat pancreas. In the canine pancreas, by contrast, 
1 and 10 nM SP and SP6-11, respectively, potentiated the release of insulin,
glucagon, and somatostatin. Potentiation by SP6-11 was less than that by SP.
These results demonstrate species differences in the effects of SP and SP6-11 on 
the release of pancreatic hormones.

PMID: 2412802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 1985 Oct 25;13(20):7375-94.

The effect of capping and polyadenylation on the stability, movement and
translation of synthetic messenger RNAs in Xenopus oocytes.

Drummond DR, Armstrong J, Colman A.

Synthetic RNAs coding for chicken lysozyme, calf preprochymosin and Xenopus
globin were transcribed in vitro using Sp6 RNA polymerase. The effects of capping
and adding a poly(A) tail on the stability, movement and translation of these
RNAs in Xenopus oocytes was examined. Capping and polyadenylation increased
stability of the transcripts, with at least 40% remaining intact 48 h after
injection into oocytes. Capped poly(A)- transcripts moved more rapidly in oocytes
than either capped poly(A)+ transcripts or naturally occurring mRNAs. The
translational efficiency of most of the synthetic RNAs in oocytes increased with 
both capping and polyadenylation. The exception was one Xenopus globin transcript
which had an unusual 3' end of 20As and 30Cs, where further polyadenylation
decreased translational efficiency. Polyadenylation was essential for detectable 
expression of the synthetic RNAs in cultured cells, but decreased translation of 
the synthetic RNAs in vitro.

PMCID: PMC322050
PMID: 3932972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochemistry. 1985 Oct 8;24(21):5716-23.

Transcription from bacteriophage T7 and SP6 RNA polymerase promoters in the
presence of 3'-deoxyribonucleoside 5'-triphosphate chain terminators.

Axelrod VD, Kramer FR.

RNA synthesis by T7 RNA polymerase or SP6 RNA polymerase is 100-1000 times more
sensitive to the presence of the 3'-deoxyribonucleoside 5'-triphosphate chain
terminators than is RNA synthesis by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase or Q beta
replicase. These ribonucleotide analogues do not alter the specificity of each
polymerase for its own promoters nor do they alter the site at which synthesis is
initiated. Transcription by T7 RNA polymerase or SP6 RNA polymerase in the
presence of relatively low concentrations of these chain terminators offers a
useful route for determining the nucleotide sequence of any DNA segment that is
inserted immediately downstream from a homologous bacteriophage promoter. This
sequencing procedure was used to explore the effects that different dinucleotides
have on the specificity of initiation at two different T7 RNA polymerase
promoters.

PMID: 3002422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nucleic Acids Res. 1985 Sep 11;13(17):6223-36.

A novel transcription property of SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases: dependence on
template structure.

Schenborn ET, Mierendorf RC Jr.

The in vitro synthesis of extraneous RNA sequences by SP6 and T7 RNA polymerases 
from specific DNA templates is described. Transcription of templates prepared by 
digestion with restriction enzymes that leave 3' protruding ends resulted in the 
production of significant amounts of long, template-sized RNA transcripts which
hybridized to vector DNA. Sequences copied from the noncoding template strand
were among the extraneous transcripts. The presence of these sequences in probe
preparations were detected in Southern and RNase protection hybridization assays.
In contrast, transcription of DNA templates with blunt or 5' protruding ends
yielded few RNA products as extraneous sequences.

PMCID: PMC321948
PMID: 2995921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. EMBO J. 1985 Sep;4(9):2191-9.

Infectivity studies on different potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) RNAs
synthesized in vitro with the SP6 transcription system.

Tabler M(1), Sänger HL.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Viroidforschung, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, D-8033,
Martinsried, FRG.

We have constructed two sets of clones in which one to six head-to-tail connected
DNA copies of the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) RNA genome were inserted
into the plasmid pSP62- Pl downstream of the promoter for SP6 RNA polymerase. In 
vitro transcription of these constructs with the promoter-specific SP6 RNA
polymerase yielded the corresponding oligomeric single-stranded linear PSTV RNA
molecules of (+) and (-) polarity. Except for short vector-derived terminal
sequences these in vitro synthesized PSTV RNA forms are equivalent to the RNA
intermediates of the PSTV replication cycle which are present in vivo only in
extremely low concentrations. From each DNA template molecule up to 600 RNA
copies could be transcribed in vitro and yields > 100 microg were obtained. When 
mechanically inoculated to tomato seedlings the PSTV (+) RNA oligomers were as
infectious as the natural PSTV (+) RNA monomers. Surprisingly, the corresponding 
oligomeric PSTV (-) RNAs wer approximately 10(4)-fold less infectious. However,
when these (-) RNAs were partially protected prior to inoculation by mixing or
hybridizing them with non-infectious (+) RNA fragments or by 'capping' their 5'
terminus, an increase in the number of infections was observed. The in vitro
synthesis of infectious RNA from cloned cDNA means that, in principle, it should 
be possible to develop vector systems from pathogens with RNA genomes.

PMCID: PMC554485
PMID: 15938052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Cell Biol. 1985 Sep;101(3):1094-9.

Translation of mRNA injected into Xenopus oocytes is specifically inhibited by
antisense RNA.

Harland R, Weintraub H.

The bacteriophage SP6 promoter and RNA polymerase were used to synthesize sense
and antisense RNAs coding for the enzymes thymidine kinase (TK) and
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT). Injection of antisense CAT RNA into
frog oocytes inhibited expression of sense CAT mRNA. Similarly, antisense TK RNA 
inhibited expression of sense TK mRNA. Antisense RNAs were stable in oocytes and 
had no detectable effect on either the expression of endogenous proteins or on
the expression of nonhomologous RNA transcripts. CAT activity expressed from a
plasmid transcribed in the oocyte nucleus was also inhibited by antisense RNA
injected into the oocyte cytoplasm. The data suggest that antisense RNA will be
useful in identifying the function of specific mRNA sequences during early
development of the frog.

PMCID: PMC2113735
PMID: 2411734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Bacteriol. 1985 Aug;163(2):724-9.

Purification and characterization of glutamate synthase from Azospirillum
brasilense.

Ratti S, Curti B, Zanetti G, Galli E.

Growth conditions for Azospirillum brasilense Sp6 were devised for maximal
expression of glutamate synthase. The enzyme levels were largely affected by the 
type and concentration of the nitrogen source. A 10-fold increase in the
synthesis of the enzyme was observed at a limiting concentration of ammonia. The 
enzyme was purified to homogeneity by a procedure which was fairly rapid and
allowed a good recovery of enzyme (30%). Azospirillum glutamate synthase is a
complex iron-sulfur flavoprotein with a stoichiometry of 1 flavin adenine
dinucleotide:1 flavin mononucleotide:8 Fe:8 S per protomer with a molecular
weight of 185,000. The protomer is composed of two dissimilar subunits with
molecular weights of 135,000 and 50,000. Kinetic parameters were determined. Km
values for NADPH, 2-oxoglutarate, and L-glutamine were 6.25, 29, and 450 microM, 
respectively. The optimum pH was about 7.5. Complete reduction of the enzyme
under anaerobic conditions was obtained either by NADPH (in the presence of a
regenerating system) or dithionite or by photochemical reduction (in the presence
of EDTA and 5-deazariboflavin). No stable long-wavelength intermediates were
observed.

PMCID: PMC219181
PMID: 4019412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 1985 Aug;5(8):1887-93.

In vitro expression of human p53 cDNA clones and characterization of the cloned
human p53 gene.

Wolf D, Laver-Rudich Z, Rotter V.

The human p53 gene was cloned and characterized by using a battery of p53 DNA
clones. A series of human cDNA clones of various sizes and relative localizations
to the mRNA molecule were isolated by using the human p53-H14 (2.35-kilobase)
cDNA probe which we previously cloned. One such isolate, clone p53-H7 (2.65
kilobases), spans the entire human mature p53 mRNA molecule. Construction of the 
human cDNA clones in the pSP65 RNA transcription vector facilitated the
generation of p53 transcripts by the SP6 bacteriophage RNA polymerase. The
p53-specific RNA transcripts obtained without further processing were translated 
into p53 proteins in a cell-free system. By using this rapid in vitro
transcription-translation assay, we found that whereas clone p53-H7 (2.65
kilobases) coded for a mature-sized p53 protein, a shorter cDNA clone, p53-H13
(1.8 kilobases), dictated the synthesis of a smaller-sized p53 protein (45
kilodaltons). The p53 proteins synthesized in vitro immunoprecipitated
efficiently with human-specific anti-p53 antibodies. Genomic analysis of human
DNA revealed the presence of a single p53 gene residing within two EcoRI
fragments. Heteroduplex analysis between the full-length cDNA clone p53-H7 and
the cloned p53 gene indicated the presence of seven major exons.

PMCID: PMC366904
PMID: 3018534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Reprod Med. 1985 Jul;30(7):530-4.

Acupuncture for the induction of cervical dilatation in preparation for
first-trimester abortion and its influence on HCG.

Ying YK, Lin JT, Robins J.

Cervical dilatation in preparation for first-trimester abortion using acupuncture
at loci SP6 and LI4 was studied in 20 patients, who were compared to a control
group in whom no preparation was used. Ninety percent of the patients had
successful acupuncture procedures. As judged by Hegar dilators, the increase in
cervical dilatation in those 18 patients was significantly greater than in the
controls. No significant side effects were observed. The effect of acupuncture on
serum human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) as a pregnancy marker was evaluated in
12 patients. No statistically significant difference in the change in HCG was
noted in terms of the controls, indicating an absence of abortifacient activity
with acupuncture.

PMID: 4032390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985 Jul;82(14):4852-6.

Mouse-Torpedo hybrid acetylcholine receptors: functional homology does not equal 
sequence homology.

White MM, Mayne KM, Lester HA, Davidson N.

The nicotinic acetylcholine (AcCho) receptor (AcChoR) is a multisubunit protein
complex of stoichiometry alpha 2 beta gamma delta. The several subunits show
homology with each other within a given species; in addition, homology is found
between analogous subunits between species. We have used the phage SP6 RNA
polymerase transcription system to produce single-species RNA in vitro for
various AcChoR subunits from cDNAs. Injection of an equimolar mixture of RNA for 
the alpha, beta, gamma, and delta subunits of Torpedo californica AcChoR into
Xenopus oocytes results in the appearance of functional receptors in the oocyte
membrane. No response to AcCho is detected when the beta or gamma subunit RNA is 
omitted, and a small response is seen when the delta subunit RNA is omitted.
Replacement of Torpedo delta subunit RNA by the mouse BC3H-1 cell line AcChoR
delta subunit RNA leads to the formation of functional receptors that show a
3-4-fold greater response to AcCho than does the full Torpedo complex. No
response is seen when the mouse delta RNA replaces Torpedo gamma RNA. By amino
acid homology profile comparisons, the mouse delta subunit appears to be
moderately but not highly similar to the Torpedo delta subunit; the apparent
similarity to the Torpedo gamma subunit is only slightly less. Therefore, the
features of the primary sequence that determine the functional delta character of
the mouse polypeptide are not revealed by simple homology comparisons.

PMCID: PMC391003
PMID: 3860826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell. 1985 May;41(1):49-56.

Molecular cloning of cDNA for human von Willebrand factor: authentication by a
new method.

Lynch DC, Zimmerman TS, Collins CJ, Brown M, Morin MJ, Ling EH, Livingston DM.

We have identified a 2.4 kb partial cDNA clone (pDL34) for human von Willebrand
factor (vWf) mRNA. pDL34 was selected by screening an endothelial cell cDNA
library with a radiolabeled reverse transcript of mRNA obtained by specific
immunoisolation of vWf polysomes from endothelial cells. pDL34 selectively
hybridized to an endothelial cell-associated 9.5 kb mRNA. To confirm its
identity, SP6 RNA polymerase was used to generate in vitro transcripts of the
cDNA. This synthetic RNA, truncated at its 5' end, directed the synthesis of
several unique polypeptides in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. These polypeptides
were immunoprecipitated by polyclonal and monoclonal anti-vWf antibodies. These
results indicate that pDL34 contains an authentic partial copy of vWf mRNA. In
vitro transcription of partial cDNA clones and translation of the resulting RNAs 
may be a useful general method of verifying the identity of various cDNA clones
in circumstances where antibodies are available and protein sequence is not.

PMID: 3873280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Virology. 1985 Apr 30;142(2):441-7.

Cell-free synthesis and processing of an infectious dimeric transcript of potato 
spindle tuber viroid RNA.

Robertson HD(1), Rosen DL, Branch AD.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

A full-length cloned cDNA insert containing the sequence of potato spindle tuber 
viroid (PSTV) was dimerized and placed in the plasmid vector pSP65 adjacent to a 
promoter for bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase. In vitro transcription of this
region yielded a single linear RNA chain 760 bases in length containing two
copies of PSTV RNA with about 20 bases of vector sequence at each end. Bioassay
on tomato plants revealed that this transcript has infectivity comparable to that
of PSTV itself, yielding circular progeny RNAs indistinguishable from PSTV grown 
in vivo Comparative RNA fingerprinting analysis revealed that the viroid sequence
in the dimeric transcript breeds true (compared to control viroid strains of
different sequence grown in parallel) but loses the vector-specific sequences
during growth in plants. Incubation of 32P-labeled dimeric PSTV RNA at neutral pH
and 39 degrees gave a 1-5% yield of three RNA segments, one comigrating with
unit-length linear PSTV and two smaller fragments. Reaction of the unit-length
cleavage product with wheat germ RNA ligase gave a high yield of circular
molecules indistinguishable from PSTV circles arising in vivo, suggesting that
the cleavage reaction yields 2',3' cyclic phosphate termini and could represent a
part of the in vivo PSTV replication cycle.

PMID: 18639847  [PubMed]


35. Cell. 1985 Apr;40(4):759-66.

Self-splicing of yeast mitochondrial ribosomal and messenger RNA precursors.

van der Horst G, Tabak HF.

We have previously shown linear and circular splicing intermediates resembling
intermediates that result from self-splicing of ribosomal precursor RNA of
Tetrahymena to be present in mitochondrial RNA. Here we show that splicing of
yeast mitochondrial precursor RNA also occurs in vitro in the absence of
mitochondrial proteins. The large ribosomal RNA gene, consisting of the intron
and part of the flanking exon regions, was inserted behind the SP6 promoter in a 
recombinant plasmid and was transcribed in vitro. The resulting RNA shows
self-catalyzed splicing via incorporation of GTP at the 5'-end of the excised
intron, 5'- to 3'-exon ligation, and intron circularization. When purified
mitochondrial RNA is incubated under similar conditions with alpha-32P-GTP, the
excised ribosomal intron RNA is also labeled, as well as several other RNA
species. Some of these RNAs are derived from excised introns from the multiply
split gene coding for cytochrome oxidase subunit I.

PMID: 2580635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Plant Mol Biol. 1985 Mar;5(2):91-101. doi: 10.1007/BF00020091.

Phytochrome regulation of phytochrome mRNA abundance.

Colbert JT(1), Hershey HP, Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, Madison, WI,
U.S.A..

Pure phytochrome RNA sequence synthesized in an SP6-derived in vitro
transcription system has been used as a standard to quantitate phytochrome mRNA
abundance in Avena seedlings using a filter hybridization assay. In 4-day-old
etiolated Avena seedlings phytochrome mRNA represents ~0.1% of the total
poly(A)(+) RNA. Irradiation of such seedlings with a saturating red-light pulse
or continuous white light induces a decline in this mRNA that is detectable
within 30 min and results in a 50% reduction by ~60 min and >90% reduction within
5 h. The effect of the red-light pulse is reversed, approximately to the level of
the far-red control, by an immediately subsequent far-red pulse. In seedlings
maintained in extended darkness after the red-light pulse, the initial rapid
decline in phytochrome mRNA level is followed by a slower reaccumulation such
that 50-60% of the initial abundance is reached by 48 h. White-light grown
seedlings transferred to darkness exhibit a similar accumulation of phytochrome
mRNA that is accelerated by removal of residual Pfr with a far-red light pulse at
the start of the dark period. The data establish that previously reported
phytochrome-regulated changes in translatable phytochrome mRNA levels result from
changes in the physical abundance of this mRNA rather than from altered
translatability.

PMID: 24306568  [PubMed]


37. Nucleic Acids Res. 1985 Feb 25;13(4):1103-18.

Single stranded DNA SP6 promoter plasmids for engineering mutant RNAs and
proteins: synthesis of a 'stretched' preproparathyroid hormone.

Mead DA, Skorupa ES, Kemper B.

The intergenic region of bacteriophage f1 has been subcloned into the
bacteriophage SP6 promoter plasmids, pSP64 and pSP65, in both orientations.
Coinfection of E. coli with these SP6 promoter/phage f1 chimeric plasmids and the
interference resistance phage, IR1, results in the replication and secretion of
the pSP6.f1 plasmids as single stranded DNA. Bovine preProPTH cDNAs in both the
native form and a form containing an insertion of 117 base pairs in the protein
coding region have been inserted in these plasmids. The RNA transcribed from the 
SP6.f1/preProPTH cDNA constructs was efficiently translated in the wheat germ or 
reticulocyte cell free systems without addition of a 7-methylguanosine cap to the
RNA. In the presence of dog pancreatic or chicken oviduct microsomal membranes,
conversion of the resultant pre-proteins to pro-proteins was observed.
Confirmation of the "mutated" preProPTH cDNA was determined by
dideoxyribonucleotide DNA sequencing of single stranded plasmid DNA. These
vectors are suitable for the efficient biosynthesis of large amounts of single or
double stranded DNA, and translationally active RNA. The combined properties of
single stranded DNA replication and the SP6 promoter simplify the engineering of 
mutant RNAs and their corresponding proteins. In addition, single stranded DNA or
RNA corresponding to either complementary strand may be synthesized as nucleic
acid hybridization probes.

PMCID: PMC341059
PMID: 3858795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Life Sci. 1985 Feb 25;36(8):777-80.

Stereospecificity of SP1 and SP2 substance P receptors.

Piercey MF, Dobry-Schreur PJ, Masiques N, Schroeder LA.

Previous studies with N-terminal fragments of substance P (SP) have suggested the
existence of two separate SP receptor populations. SP1 receptors are found in
guinea pig ilea and rat colons. SP2 receptors are found in mouse spinal cords and
rat salivary glands. We have now found that substitution of Gly9 in substance P's
C-terminal hexapeptide leads to an analog (L-Pro9 SP6-11) which selectively and
potently stimulates SP2 receptors. In contrast, substitution of the same residue 
with D-Proline results in a potent and selective agonist for SP1 receptors. The
data dramatically confirm the distinction between SP1 and SP2 receptors and
demonstrate that the two receptors have distinct stereochemical architectures.

PMID: 2579310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nature. 1985 Feb 21-27;313(6004):703-6.

Production of phenocopies by Krüppel antisense RNA injection into Drosophila
embryos.

Rosenberg UB, Preiss A, Seifert E, Jäckle H, Knipple DC.

The demonstration that a specific messenger RNA can be functionally inactivated
in vivo by hybridization to complementary polynucleotide sequences suggests a
direct approach to the study of gene function in cells of higher organisms. The
experiments described here were designed to inhibit, by complementary RNA
sequences, a specific gene function affecting the fate of the Drosophila embryo. 
We used the SP6 vector in vitro transcription system to transcribe parts of the
normally untranscribed (nonsense) strand of the Krüppel (Kr) gene into
complementary Kr RNA (Kr antisense RNA). Wild-type Drosophila embryos, injected
with this RNA, developed into phenocopies of Kr mutant embryos.

PMID: 2579337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 1985 Jan 25;260(2):1280-6.

A gene encoding rat cholecystokinin. Isolation, nucleotide sequence, and promoter
activity.

Deschenes RJ, Haun RS, Funckes CL, Dixon JE.

The gene for rat cholecystokinin (CCK) was isolated from a rat genomic DNA
library. The transcription unit spans 7 kilobases and is interrupted by two
introns. The initiator methionine codon lies 2 bases into exon 2; therefore, exon
1 is a noncoding exon. The transcription initiation site was determined using
avian myeloblastosis reverse transcriptase, a cDNA primer, and mRNA isolated from
a rat medullary thyroid carcinoma. A "TATA"-like sequence precedes the
transcription initiation site at position -34. The polyadenylation site for the
gene was mapped by a nuclease protection assay using a cRNA generated by
transcription of the exon 3 region of the CCK gene with SP6 bacteriophage RNA
polymerase. The sequence AT-TAAA is found 22 bases 5' to the site determined to
be the polyadenylation addition site. Two regions of simple repetitive DNA occur 
within the CCK lambda clone, one within intron 2 and the other 4 kilobases 3' to 
the gene. Sequence analysis of the repetitive element 3' distal to the gene
revealed two copies of the sequence 5'-(AC)n-3', where n is 22 and 25. A 114-base
pair sequence of predominantly repeating purine-pyrimidine nucleotides separates 
these two d(AC) repeats. Transcriptional control elements were investigated by
fusing regions of the CCK gene to the structural gene encoding chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase. Promoter activity was determined by transfecting COS-7 cells
with plasmids containing the gene fusions, followed by determining
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity in cellular extracts. The region
necessary for expression of the CCK gene fusions in COS-7 cells is within 144
bases 5' to the initiation of transcription.

PMID: 2981840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Gen Genet. 1985;199(1):70-5.

A transcription termination signal immediately precedes the coding sequence for
the chloramphenicol-inducible plasmid gene cat-86.

Ambulos NP Jr, Mongkolsuk S, Lovett PS.

The plasmid gene cat-86 specifies chloramphenicol-inducible, chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase in Bacillus subtilis. The inducible regulation is independent
of the promoter that is used to activate cat-86 and is independent of the cat-86 
coding sequence. We have proposed that the regulation of cat-86 results from the 
transcription of a pair of inverted-repeat sequences that immediately precede the
coding sequence. These transcripts are predicted to sequester the cat-86 ribosome
binding site in a stable RNA stem-loop which, in theory, should block the
ribosome binding site from pairing with 16S rRNA. Inducible expression of cat-86 
may therefore result in part from regulation of the translation of cat-86 mRNA.
However, chloramphenicol-induction correlates with increased levels of cat-86
mRNA and the RNA stem-loop preceding the cat-86 coding sequence structurally
resembles a rho-independent transcription terminator. We have therefore tested
the inverted-repeats as a potential site of transcription termination.
Transcription studies performed in vitro using SP6 RNA polymerase and in vivo by 
S1 mapping demonstrate that a substantial fraction of the potential cat-86
transcripts terminate at a site immediately 3' to the inverted-repeats. The
results of the in vivo experiments suggest that the termination signal may be
partially relieved by growth of cells in chloramphenicol.

PMID: 3923300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Gene. 1985;36(1-2):15-25.

Properties of rat and mouse beta-glucuronidase mRNA and cDNA, including evidence 
for sequence polymorphism and genetic regulation of mRNA levels.

Watson G, Felder M, Rabinow L, Moore K, Labarca C, Tietze C, Vander Molen G,
Bracey L, Brabant M, Cai JD, et al.

cDNA clones containing partial sequences for beta-glucuronidase (beta G) were
constructed from rat preputial gland RNA and identified by their ability to
selectively hybridize beta G mRNA. One such rat clone was used to isolate several
cross-hybridizing clones from a mouse-cDNA library prepared from kidney RNA from 
androgen-treated animals. Together, the set of mouse clones spans about 2.0 kb of
the 2.6-kb beta G mRNA. Using these cDNA clones as probes, a genomic polymorphism
for DNA restriction fragment size was found that proved to be genetically linked 
to the beta G gene complex. A fragment of beta G cDNA was subcloned into a vector
carrying an SP6 polymerase promoter to provide a template for the in vitro
synthesis of single-stranded RNA complementary to beta G mRNA. This provided an
extremely sensitive probe for the assay of beta G mRNA sequences. Using either
nick-translated cDNA or transcribed RNA as a hybridization probe, we found that
mouse beta G RNA levels are strongly induced by testosterone, and that induction 
by testosterone is pituitary-dependent. During the lag period preceding
induction, during the induction period itself, and during deinduction following
removal of testosterone, beta G mRNA levels paralleled rates of beta G synthesis 
previously measured by in vivo pulse-labelling experiments. Genetic variation in 
the extent of induction affected either the level of beta G mRNA or its
efficiency of translation depending on the strain of mice tested.

PMID: 3840761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Gene. 1985;40(2-3):317-23.

Rapid and reliable dideoxy sequencing of double-stranded DNA.

Korneluk RG, Quan F, Gravel RA.

We report a simple and reliable protocol for nucleotide sequencing using the
Sanger dideoxy technique on linearized double-stranded DNA molecules with
specific oligonucleotide primers. The method is demonstrated for restriction
fragments cloned into the plasmid vectors pSP64 and pSP65 using two
vector-specific primers, the M13 reverse primer and a new SP6 primer, flanking
the multiple cloning site. Template DNA may be prepared by a rapid alkaline lysis
procedure. Mild linearization conditions with the appropriate restriction
endonuclease avoid the appearance of artifact bands.

PMID: 3007296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1985 Jan;25(1):69-75.

Specificity of antisera obtained to substance P and its C-terminal hexapeptide.

Babinska A, Cierniewski CS, Koziolkiewicz W, Janecka A.

Synthetic fragments and analogs were used to characterize specificity of antisera
to SP and SP6-11. [Tyr8] SP and [Lys6] SP6-11 were both used as radioiodinated
ligands. The latter was conjugated with Bolton-Hunter reagents before labelling. 
In both systems, the C-terminal pentapeptide SP7-11 was the shortest fragment
showing antigenic identity with Substance P molecule. Substitution of different
amino acid residues in SP6-11 by His or Gly showed that all but Glu6 take part in
the structure of the antigenic determinant.

PMID: 2579923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Arzneimittelforschung. 1985;35(9):1374-7.

Arterial blood pressure response in conscious rabbits to administration of
C-terminal fragment of substance P into the cerebral ventricles, intravenously
and intragastrically.

Meltzer B, Traczyk WZ, Kubicki J.

The blood pressure was measured in the common carotid artery in a cutaneous
bridge in conscious rabbits. The synthetic hexapeptide SP6-11 of C-terminal
fragment of Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro-Gln-Gln-Phe-Phe-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2 (Substance P) was
administered to animals accustomed to the experimental environment in three
separate trials: into the cerebral ventricles, intravenously and
intragastrically. Introduction of 2 nmol/kg hexapeptide into the cerebral
ventricles via a chronically implanted cannula in the lateral ventricle caused an
increase in the blood pressure, reaching a peak 10 min after administration. This
maximum increase averaged 34.5 mmHg. Intravenous injection of 2 nmol/kg caused
after 1 min a rapid fall in the blood pressure, the decrease averaging 42.7 mmHg 
at this time. Administration of 2 mg/kg into the stomach caused a slight decrease
in blood pressure. Although the decrease was only slight it was statistically
significant after 10 min.

PMID: 2417608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Biochem. 1985;17(10):1097-101.

The preliminary evaluation of degradation of substance P(SP) fragment's analogue 
less than Glu SP6-11 in the subcellular fractions from different areas of rat
brain.

Turski WA, Lachowicz L, Koziolkiewicz W.

Peptidase(s) activity of different subcellular fractions isolated from cortex,
hippocampus, midbrain, thalamus with hypothalamus, cerebellum and medulla
oblongata exerted against less than Glu SP6-11 (3H-Phen8) was evaluated in
"low-ionic" and similar (in composition) to both extracellular and intracellular 
conditions. The incubation of less than Glu SP6-11 with different fractions
leaves the hexapeptide undegraded in the studied conditions in most cases.
Peptidases activity results in the formation of the first of all C-terminal and
exceptionally "internal" labelled products. Labelled N-terminal products were not
seen. The most effective degradation in vitro of less than Glu SP6-11 takes
place, in the majority of cases, in "low ionic" conditions when compared to those
similar to extra or intracellular ones. The biggest total (per 1 g of wet mass)
and specific activities against less than Glu SP6-11 can be shown in the
hippocampus areas.

PMID: 2415410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gen Pharmacol. 1985;16(3):293-5.

Effects of analogues of substance P fragments on the MAO activity in rat brain.

Turska E, Lachowicz L, Koziolkiewicz W, Wasiak T.

The influence in vitro of analogues of Sp5-11 and SP6-11 substance P fragments on
the activity of monoamine oxidase (MAO) in homogenates and crude mitochondrial
fractions of rat brain was examined. The rat brain was divided into: I--cerebral 
cortex, II--hippocampus, III--midbrain, IV--thalamus with hypothalamus,
V--cerebellum and VI--medulla oblongata. The obtained results proved that the
analogues of SP fragments inhibit selectively the activity of the enzyme in the
homogenates of cerebral cortex, hippocampus, midbrain and cerebellum. In the
crude mitochondrial fractions the applied analogues of SP fragments caused a
slight increase of the enzyme activity. The most significant changes in the
activity of MAO were observed in hippocampus homogenate fraction.

PMID: 2410326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. EMBO J. 1984 Dec 20;3(13):3049-53.

Study of the genetic organisation of a plant viral RNA genome by in vitro
expression of a full-length DNA copy.

Vos P, Verver J, van Wezenbeek P, van Kammen A, Goldbach R.

The genetic approach for elucidating functions encoded by RNA plant viruses has
been hampered by the lack of methods to select desired mutants following random
mutagenesis. An alternative might be to copy RNA genomes into DNA and use methods
for site-directed mutagenesis to modify specific regions of the DNA copy.
Transcription of the DNA copy will subsequently produce viral RNA with desired
mutations. We have constructed a full-length DNA copy of the smaller of the two
cowpea mosaic virus (CPMV) RNAs, referred to as M RNA. The DNA copy was
positioned downstream from the promoter of bacteriophage SP6 and using SP6 RNA
polymerase, this copy and two derivatives of it containing a specific deletion
and insertion, respectively, have been transcribed into RNA molecules which are
efficiently translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. The results obtained show 
that the subsequent in vitro transcription and translation of DNA copies may be a
powerful tool to unravel the genetic properties of viral RNA genomes.

PMCID: PMC557815
PMID: 6549293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell. 1984 Dec;39(3 Pt 2):631-41.

RNA splicing in neurospora mitochondria: self-splicing of a mitochondrial intron 
in vitro.

Garriga G, Lambowitz AM.

We have used Neurospora nuclear mutant cyt-18-1, which accumulates a number of
unspliced mitochondrial precursor RNAs, to identify rapidly mitochondrial introns
that are self-splicing in vitro. Incubation of deproteinized whole mitochondrial 
RNA from the mutant with 32P-GTP resulted in strong labeling of a 1.3 kb RNA,
subsequently identified as cytochrome b (cob) intron 1, and weaker labeling of
additional RNAs. Self-splicing of cob intron 1, including precise cleavage and
ligation, was confirmed using an in vitro transcript synthesized from the SP6
promoter. The in vitro splicing reaction was shown to be analogous to that for
the Tetrahymena nuclear rRNA intron. Since splicing of cob intron 1 is inhibited 
in a recessive nuclear mutant, we infer that this essentially RNA-catalyzed
splicing reaction must be facilitated by a protein in vivo.

PMID: 6096015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Neurosci Res. 1984 Dec;2(1-2):97-104.

Pharmacological characterization of novel mammalian tachykinins, neurokinin alpha
and neurokinin beta.

Kimura S, Goto K, Ogawa T, Sugita Y, Kanazawa I.

Pharmacological studies were performed with neurokinin alpha and beta, new
tachykinins isolated from porcine spinal cord, on smooth muscle preparations
exhibiting two subtypes of substance P receptor (SP-P and SP-E receptors). The
results showed that both neurokinin alpha and beta possessed the typical
tachykinin activities and they exhibited SP-E-type ligand characteristics. The
potency studies of SP6-11 and (Val8)SP6-11 have revealed that (VAL8)SP6-11 was
comparable to SP6-11 in contracting the guinea-pig ileum (SP-P system), but
greater than SP6-11 and also substance P in potentiating nerve
stimulation-induced contraction of the rat vas deferens (SP-E system). The
contractile response of the rat duodenum to neurokinin alpha was slow at onset
and long-lasting compared with those to neurokinin beta and substance P. The
residual immunoreactivity of each tachykinin in the organ bath decreased in
parallel with the fading of the contractile response. The order of the half-life 
of each immunoreactive peptide was as follows: neurokinin alpha greater than
neurokinin beta greater than substance P. The results were discussed from the
viewpoints of structural significance in manifestation of pharmacological
properties and in inactivation process, as well as the physiological roles of
these novel mammalian tachykinins.

PMID: 6085651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nucleic Acids Res. 1984 Nov 26;12(22):8539-51.

Processing and nucleo-cytoplasmic transport of histone gene transcripts.

Georgiev O, Mous J, Birnstiel ML.

Precursors of Xenopus and sea urchin histone mRNAs were synthesized in vitro with
the SP6 transcription system, and their maturation and nucleo-cytoplasmic
transport was studied by frog oocyte injection. 3' processing is most rapid for
homologous histone messenger sequences and does not require either genuine 5' or 
specific 3' ends of the precursor, but capping of the 5' terminus strongly
influences the efficiency of 3' processing. No generation of 5' histone mRNA ends
can be detected when precursors containing 5' spacer sequence extensions are
injected into the oocyte nucleus. This finding may have some implications for the
question whether histone gene transcription could be polycistronic. Using a novel
oocyte technique, we have separated nuclei from cytoplasm and have studied the
time course of exit of the processed RNA from the oocyte nucleus into the
cytoplasm. The results suggest that RNA maturation and nucleo-cytoplasmic
transport are not temporally coupled processes.

PMCID: PMC320397
PMID: 6095202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 1984 Nov 26;12(22):8437-56.

Secondary structure of splice sites in adenovirus mRNA precursors.

Munroe SH.

In order to investigate the possible role of RNA secondary structure in
determining the efficiency and specificity of mRNA splicing, the structures of
sequences at three acceptor splice sites in adenovirus were studied. Transcripts 
spanning intron-exon junctions were synthesized using SP6 RNA polymerase and
analyzed using single and double-strand specific nucleases. Distinctive patterns 
of nuclease cleavage were observed for each of the 3 sites examined. At both
sites in the E2a region sequences adjacent to the splice sites were particularly 
susceptible to digestion with T1 and S1 nucleases. In contrast, a splice site for
hexon mRNA was largely resistant to these nucleases. The results obtained suggest
that the conformation of the RNA at some, but not all, acceptor sites may enhance
the accessibility of these sites to factors involved in splicing nuclear RNA and 
confirm the presence of a large, previously predicted hairpin structure centered 
on the acceptor site at 67 map units.

PMCID: PMC320384
PMID: 6095200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nucleic Acids Res. 1984 Sep 25;12(18):7057-70.

Functional messenger RNAs are produced by SP6 in vitro transcription of cloned
cDNAs.

Krieg PA, Melton DA.

We describe a method for the synthesis of microgram quantities of eucaryotic
messenger RNAs. Injection into the cytoplasm of frog oocytes and addition to
wheat germ extracts show that these synthetic RNAs function efficiently as
messenger RNAs. We confirm that a 5' cap on the mRNA is essential for translation
in injected oocytes and show that most of the 3' flanking region, including the
poly A tail, can be deleted without the abolition of protein synthesis. The
method of mRNA synthesis involves in vitro transcription of cDNAs which have been
cloned into SP6 vectors (described in the accompanying paper). This method
enables one to produce large amounts of mRNA and consequently protein from any
cDNA clone.

PMCID: PMC320142
PMID: 6207484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 1984 Sep 25;12(18):7035-56.

Efficient in vitro synthesis of biologically active RNA and RNA hybridization
probes from plasmids containing a bacteriophage SP6 promoter.

Melton DA, Krieg PA, Rebagliati MR, Maniatis T, Zinn K, Green MR.

A simple and efficient method for synthesizing pure single stranded RNAs of
virtually any structure is described. This in vitro transcription system is based
on the unusually specific RNA synthesis by bacteriophage SP6 RNA polymerase which
initiates transcription exclusively at an SP6 promoter. We have constructed
convenient cloning vectors that contain an SP6 promoter immediately upstream from
a polylinker sequence. Using these SP6 vectors, optimal conditions have been
established for in vitro RNA synthesis. The advantages and uses of SP6 derived
RNAs as probes for nucleic acid blot and solution hybridizations are
demonstrated. We show that single stranded RNA probes of a high specific activity
are easy to prepare and can significantly increase the sensitivity of nucleic
acid hybridization methods. Furthermore, the SP6 transcription system can be used
to prepare RNA substrates for studies on RNA processing (1,5,9) and translation
(see accompanying paper).

PMCID: PMC320141
PMID: 6091052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Immunol. 1984 Aug;21(8):727-30.

Immunogenic and antigenic properties of the COOH-terminal hexapeptide of
substance P.

Babinska A, Cierniewski CS, Kosiolkiewicz W, Janecka A.

Substance P (SP) and its COOH-terminal fragment (6-11) were coupled to bovine
serum albumin by glutaraldehyde and used to elicit antibodies. Anti-SP and
anti-SP6-11 antibodies bound to the same extent 125I-[Tyr8]-SP and
125I-[T-Lys6]-SP6-11. The latter was obtained after conjugation of the
[Lys6]-SP6-11 with cold Bolton-Hunter reagent and then labelling by the
chloramine-T method. In contrast to 125I-[Tyr8]-SP, 125I-[Tyr8]-SP6-11 was poorly
bound by both anti-SP and anti-SP6-11 antibodies. Synthetic fragments of SP
shorter than SP7-11 did not react with anti-SP6-11 antibodies. It is concluded
that the antigenic determinant is within the COOH-terminal pentapeptide, and that
Phe7, Phe8, Leu10 and Met11 contribute significantly to both anti-SP and
anti-SP6-11 immunoreactivity.

PMID: 6205258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984 Jul;81(14):4577-81.

Cloning, characterization, and DNA sequence of a human cDNA encoding neuropeptide
tyrosine.

Minth CD, Bloom SR, Polak JM, Dixon JE.

In vitro translation of the RNA isolated from a human pheochromocytoma
demonstrated that this tumor contained a mRNA encoding a 10.5-kDa protein, which 
was immunoprecipitated with antiserum raised against porcine neuropeptide Y.
Double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from total RNA and inserted into the Pst I
site of pUC8. Transformants containing the neuropeptide Y cDNA were identified
using the mixed hybridization probe
d[A-(A,G)-(A,G)-T-T-(A,G,T)-A-T-(A,G)-T-A-(A,G)-T-G]. The probe sequences were
based on the known amino acid sequence, His-Tyr-Ile-Asn-Leu, found in porcine
neuropeptide Y. The nucleotide sequence of the cDNA was determined and contained 
86 and 174 bases in the 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions, respectively. The coding
sequence consisted of 291 bases, suggesting a precursor to neuropeptide Y that
was 97 amino acids long (10,839 Da). The deduced amino acid sequence of the
precursor suggested that there were at least two sites of proteolytic processing,
which would generate three peptides having 28 (signal peptide), 36 (human
neuropeptide Y), and 30 (COOH-terminal peptide) amino acid residues. A partial
NH2-terminal sequence obtained by Edman degradation of the immunoprecipitated in 
vitro translation product identified the positions of methionine and leucine in
the first 30 residues of the prepropeptide. A highly sensitive single-stranded
complementary mRNA hybridization probe specific for neuropeptide Y mRNA was
prepared using the bacteriophage SP6 promoter. This probe was used to identify a 
mRNA corresponding to neuropeptide Y of approximately 800 bases.

PMCID: PMC345634
PMID: 6589611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Peptides. 1984 Jul-Aug;5(4):769-76.

Hydrolysis of substance p and neurotensin by converting enzyme and neutral
endopeptidase.

Skidgel RA, Engelbrecht S, Johnson AR, Erdös EG.

Angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) and neutral endopeptidase ("enkephalinase";
NEP), were purified to homogeneity from human kidney. NEP cleaved substance P
(SP) at Gln6-Phe7,-Phe8, and Gly9-Leu10 and neurotensin (NT) at Pro10-Tyr11 and
Tyr11-Ile12. NEP hydrolyzed 0.1 mM SP, NT and their C-terminal fragments at the
following rates (mumol/min/mg): SP1-11 = 7.8, SP4-11 = 11.7, SP5-11 = 15.4,
SP6-11 = 15.6, SP8-11 = 6.7, NT1-13 = 2.9, and NT8-13 = 4.0. Purified ACE rapidly
inactivated SP as measured in bioassay. HPLC analysis showed that ACE cleaved SP 
at Phe8-Gly9 and Gly9-Leu10 to release C-terminal tri- and dipeptide (ratio =
4:1). The hydrolysis was Cl- dependent and inhibited by captopril. ACE released
mainly C-terminal tripeptide from SP methyl ester, but only dipeptide from SP
free acid. Modification of arginine residues in ACE with cyclohexanedione or
butanedione similarly inhibited hydrolysis of SP, bradykinin and Bz-Gly-Phe-Arg
(80-93%) indicating an active site arginine is required for hydrolysis of SP. ACE
hydrolyzed NT at Tyr11-Ile12 to release Ile12-Leu13. SP, NT and their derivatives
(0.1 mM) were cleaved by ACE at the following rates (mumol/min/mg): SP1-11 = 1.2,
SP methyl ester = 0.7, SP free acid = 8.5, SP4-11 = 2.4, SP5-11 = 0.9, SP6-11 =
1.4, SP8-11 = 0, NT1-13 = 0.2, and NT8-13 = 1.3. Peptide substrates were used as 
inhibitors of ACE (substrate = FA-Phe-Gly-Gly) and NEP (substrate =
Leu5-enkephalin).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6208535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cell. 1984 Apr;36(4):993-1005.

Normal and mutant human beta-globin pre-mRNAs are faithfully and efficiently
spliced in vitro.

Krainer AR, Maniatis T, Ruskin B, Green MR.

Human beta-globin mRNA precursors (pre-mRNAs) synthesized in vitro from a
bacteriophage SP6 promoter/beta-globin gene fusion are accurately and efficiently
spliced when added to a HeLa cell nuclear extract. Under optimal conditions, the 
first intervening sequence (IVS 1) is removed by splicing in up to 90% of the
input pre-mRNA. Splicing requires ATP and in its absence the pre-mRNA is neither 
spliced nor cleaved at splice junctions. Splicing does not require that the
pre-mRNA contain a correct 5' or 3' end, a 3' poly A tail, or a 5'-terminal cap
structure. However, capping of the pre-mRNA significantly affects the specificity
of in vitro processing. In the absence of a cap approximately 30%-40% of the
pre-mRNA is accurately spliced, and a number of aberrantly cleaved RNAs are also 
detected. In contrast, capped pre-mRNAs are spliced more efficiently and produce 
fewer aberrant RNA species. The specificity of splice-site selection in vitro was
tested by analyzing pre-mRNAs that contain beta-thalassemia splicing mutations in
IVS 1. Remarkably, these mutations cause the same abnormal splicing events in
vitro and in vivo. The ability to synthesize mutant pre-mRNAs and study their
splicing in a faithful in vitro system provides a powerful approach to determine 
the mechanisms of RNA splice-site selection.

PMID: 6323033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Acta Physiol Scand. 1984 Jan;120(1):21-6.

Interaction of substance P with dispersed pancreatic acinar cells from the guinea
pig. Relationships between structure, binding and biological activity.

Sjödin L, Brodin E, Srivastava G.

Binding of 125I-[Tyr8]-SP to isolated pancreatic acinar cells was inhibited in a 
concentration-dependent way by SP, [Tyr8]-SP and longer C-terminal fragments of
SP. SP6-11 was the shortest sequence to bind significantly to SP-receptors as
well as to stimulate amylase release from dispersed pancreatic acini. SP7-11 and 
shorter fragments did not inhibit binding of 125I-[Tyr8]-SP and did not stimulate
secretion of amylase significantly. SP augmented the stimulatory effect of
cholecystokinin on amylase release. Two SP-antagonists, [D-Pro2, D-Trp7,9]-SP and
[D-Pro2,4, D-Lys3, D-Gln5,6, D-Trp7,9]-SP inhibited binding of 125I-[Tyr8]-SP in 
a concentration dependent manner and tended at a high concentration to reduce
release of amylase evoked by submaximal concentrations of SP.

PMID: 6202096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Oct;80(20):6351-5.

Functional immunoglobulin M production after transfection of cloned
immunoglobulin heavy and light chain genes into lymphoid cells.

Ochi A, Hawley RG, Hawley T, Shulman MJ, Traunecker A, Köhler G, Hozumi N.

The rearranged immunoglobulin heavy (mu) and light (kappa) chain genes cloned
from the Sp6 hybridoma cell line producing immunoglobulin M specific for the
hapten 2,4, 6-trinitrophenyl were inserted into the transfer vector pSV2-neo and 
introduced into various plasmacytoma and hybridoma cell lines. The transfer of
the mu and kappa genes resulted in the production of pentameric, hapten-specific,
functional IgM.

PMCID: PMC394295
PMID: 6312453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biomed Biochim Acta. 1983;42(1):73-81.

Effect of substance P sequences on isolated neurons of Lymnaea stagnalis.

Richter R, Oehme P.

Effects of peptides and of acetylcholine (Ach) on electrical properties of nerve 
cells were compared using isolated neurons from brain of the freshwater mollusc, 
Lymnaea stagnalis. The peptides included certain partial sequences of Substance P
(SP) and eledoisin (E). The essential C-terminal pentapeptide of eledoisin
(E7-11) did not significantly influence the resting membrane potential (MP). SP
hexapeptide (SP6-11) caused a dramatic depolarization. SP nonapeptide (SP3-11)
had a qualitatively similar effect, but of less magnitude. Both SP6-11 and SP3-11
had a maximal effect on MP when used at a concentration of 10(-6) M. Ach also
caused depolarization of the membrane, but recovery subsequent to wash-out was
shorter after Ach than after peptide. Ach depolarization was blocked by
d-tubocurarine chloride whereas SP6-11-induced depolarization was not
antagonized. Unlike Ach, an eledoisin related peptide (EH) was found to decrease 
discharge rate of spontaneously discharging neurons, and whereas Ach increased
membrane conductance, EH did not. These results would further suggest that Ach
and these neurotropic peptides act via different mechanisms.

PMID: 6192812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 1982 May 25;257(10):5772-8.

Bacteriophage SP6-specific RNA polymerase. I. Isolation and characterization of
the enzyme.

Butler ET, Chamberlin MJ.

SP6 is a small, virulent bacteriophage which grows on Salmonella typhimurium LT2.
It is morphologically similar to Escherichia coli bacteriophage T7 and its
relatives, but appears to be genetically distinct. After infection a
bacteriophage-specific RNA polymerase is induced in infected cells. SP6 RNA
polymerase is a stable enzyme and is easily purified to homogeneity in good
overall yield. The activity resides in a single polypeptide chain of Mr = 96,000.
Synthesis of RNA by SP6 RNA polymerase requires a DNA template and Mg2+ ion and
is strongly stimulated by either bovine serum albumin of spermidine.
Thiol-reactive reagents inhibit the enzyme, suggesting the presence of essential 
sulfhydryl residues. RNA synthesis requires native SP6 RNA as template; DNAs from
other bacteriophages including T3 and T7 are inert; hence, SP6 RNA polymerase
possesses a stringent promoter specificity similar to, but distinct from that of 
the other phage RNA polymerases. The SP6 RNA polymerase is also highly active in 
synthesis of poly(rG) with poly(dI) . (dC) as template. This reaction is unlikely
to involve promoter-like sites, but it appears to reflect a general catalytic
capacity of the polymerase, since cleavage of the SP6 RNA polymerase with
trypsin, which completely eliminates SP6-transcribing activity, has little effect
on poly(rG) synthesis. Hence, it appears that the catalytic portion of the
polymerase can be separated from the RNA polymerase holoenzyme.

PMID: 7040372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 1982 May 25;257(10):5779-88.

Bacteriophage SP6-specific RNA polymerase. II. Mapping of SP6 DNA and selective
in vitro transcription.

Kassavetis GA, Butler ET, Roulland D, Chamberlin MJ.

DNA from bacteriophage SP6 grown on Salmonella typhimurium LT2 is a linear duplex
with a unique DNA sequence having a molecular weight of 2.9 x 10(6) (43.500 base 
pairs). Restriction endonuclease cleavage maps on SP6 DNA for Ava II, Kpn I, Bgl 
II, Eco RI, and HindIII have been determined. SP6 DNA is transcribed selectively 
in vitro by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase, predominantly from three strong
promoter sites located near the left end of the standard physical map, reading
rightward to a termination site near 6,000 base pairs. Transcription in vitro by 
purified SP6-specific RNA polymerase gives rise to at least 10 discrete RNA
species, all of which are read rightward. Promoter sites for these species are
located throughout the rightmost 90% of the SP6 DNA molecule, although precise
mapping has not yet been carried out. The general form of the SP6 transcriptional
map is similar to the T7- and T3-like phages, although no gross sequence
homologies are evident from DNA-RNA hybridization experiments.

PMID: 6279614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Brain Res. 1981 Oct 5;222(1):65-74.

Extinction of hippocampal theta rhythm evoked by mid-brain stimulation after
intracerebroventricular administration of substance P fragment and enkephalin
administration in rabbits.

Kosinski S, Gregorowicz K, Antkowiak K.

Repetitive stimulation of the midbrain reticular formation with electrical
stimuli causes extinction of the hippocampal theta rhythm. This phenomenon was
used as an indicator of the effect of intracerebroventricular administration of
the C-terminal hexapeptide substance P fragment (SP6-11), Leu- and Met-enkephalin
on hippocampal electrical activity in the experiments performed on rabbits.
Intracerebroventricular administration of SP6-11 caused an increase in the number
of trains of pulses required to produce the extinction of the theta rhythm. Both 
of the enkephalins had opposite effects, the effect of Met-enkephalin being more 
than twice as strong as Leu-enkephalin. Control administration of C-terminal
pentapeptide substance P fragment (SP7-11) and 0.9% NaCl solution had no
significant effect on the tested phenomenon.

PMID: 6170389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Physiol. 1981 Jul;241(1):G74-81.

Effect of substance P and its C-terminal hexapeptide on gastric and pancreatic
secretion in the dog.

Konturek SJ, Jaworek J, Tasler J, Cieszkowski M, Pawlik W.

In five dogs with gastric fistulas, Heidenhain pouches, and pancreatic fistulas, 
the effects of substance P (SP) and its C-terminal hexapeptide (SP6-11) on
gastric acid and pancreatic secretions were determined under basal conditions and
in response to secretory stimulation. SP or SP6-11 infused alone in graded doses 
(0.25-2.0 nmol.kg-1.h-1) caused a slight but significant increase in pancreatic
secretions in fasted dogs, but, when given during the secretory stimulation, they
caused significant inhibition of these secretions. They reduced gastric acid
response to pentagastrin and peptone meal without affecting the serum gastrin
level. They caused dose-dependent inhibition of secretin-induced pancreatic
bicarbonate secretion and suppressed the pancreatic protein response to
caerulein, feeding, and duodenal acidification. SP6-11 was equipotent on a molar 
basis with SP in the inhibition of gastric or pancreatic secretion, indicating
that the C-terminal portion of SP exhibits a full spectrum of the biological
action of the intact molecule. The inhibitory effects of SP and SP6-11 on the
stomach and pancreas were observed at a dose range that was without any
significant influence on the blood pressure, indicating that they are not caused 
by the interference of the blood flow to the pancreas.

PMID: 6166208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Gen Virol. 1981 Feb;52(Pt 2):387-90.

Morphological study of virus-like particles in two transplantable tumours from
BDX rats.

Calafat J, Janssen H, Kuzumaki N.

Virus-like particles were found in two transplantable tumours, Sp56 and Sp6, from
BDX rats. Sp56, a neurogenic sarcoma, contains abundant C-type particles in all
stadia nof morphogeneis. This tumour reacts with anti-Friend leukaemia virus gp70
and anti-Rauscher leukaemia virus p30 sera. Sp6, a fibrosarcoma, has abundant
virus-like particles in the cytoplasm, very often associated with centrioles or
basal bodies of a cilium. These particles consist of two concentric shells with a
diam. of 60 to 65 nm. Released particles were found outside the cell with a diam.
of 85 to 100 nm characterized by an envelope and an eccentrically located
electron-dense nucleoid, surrounded by an intermediate layer. These virus-like
particles show no cross-reaction with antisera against murine C- or B-type
particles, but show ultrastructural similarity with virus particles recently
described in Chinese hamster cells and in mouse cell lines infected with two
retrovirus isolates from South-East Asian mice.

PMID: 7288400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Bacteriol. 1981 Jan;145(1):632-7.

Effects of furazlocillin, a beta-lactam antibiotic which binds selectively to
penicillin-binding protein 3, on Escherichia coli mutants deficient in other
penicillin-binding proteins.

Schmidt LS, Botta G, Park JT.

Furazlocillin binds selectively to penicillin-binding protein 3 (PBP-3), prevents
septation of Escherichia coli, and allows the cells to form long filaments
without lysis. The effect of furazlocillin on the morphology, autolysis, and
murein synthesis of E. coli mutants deficient in either PBP-1A, PBP-1Bs, or PBP-2
was studied. The results reveal that PBP-1A and PBP-1Bs functions are not
equivalent since furazlocillin affects the morphology, autolysis, and murein
synthesis of PBP1A- mutants quite differently from that of PBP-1Bs mutants.
Different "PBP-2-" mutants were found to respond to furazlocillin in dramatically
different ways: strain LS-1 cells formed elongated rods with a central bulge
which eventually lysed, whereas SP6 cells formed stable "barbells" in which the
two daughter cells were well separated but remained connected by a thick central 
region.

PMCID: PMC217315
PMID: 7007327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1981 Jan;14(1):11-5.

Substance P, hexapeptide pGlu6(SP6-11), analgesia and serotonin depletion.

Mészáros J, Tarchalska B, Gajewska S, Janicki P, Duriasz H, Szreniawski Z.

Substance P caused marked analgesic activity in rats after intraventricular
administration and in mice after intraperitoneal injection. The hexapeptide
pGlu6(SP6-11) was active in mice, but not in rats. Depletion of serotonin with
p-chlorophenylalanine abolished the antinociceptive activity in mice, but not in 
rats, whereas lesion of raphe nuclei blocked the activity of substance P in the
latter animals. Although different routes of administration were used, the
results seem to indicate different mechanisms of analgesic activity of both
peptides in rats and mice, as well as the different role of serotonergic
transmission in pain control mechanisms in both species.

PMID: 6162166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Acta Physiol Pol. 1980 Nov-Dec;31(6):637-45.

Effect of intracerebroventricular administration of substance P and its
hexapeptide fragment on the estrus cycle in female rats.

Jakubowska-Naziemblo B, Wlodzimierska B, Traczyk WZ.

The purpose of the reported experiments was the study of the effects of
intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) administration of substance P (SP 1--11) and its
hexapeptide C-terminal fragments SP 6--11 and (pGlu6)SP6--11 on the length of the
estrus cycle. In the animals with a regular sequence of estrus aliquots of 250
pmol of the three peptides: SP 1--11, SP 6--11 and (pGlu6)SP 6--11 on the carier 
dextrane were infused into the left lateral cerebral ventricle through a
chronically implanted cannula. For control, dextran solution in 0.9% NaCl was
infused in a similar way. I.c.v. infusion of dextran in 0.9% NaCl, SP 1--11 and
(pGlu6)SP 6--11 caused no significant changes in the length of the estrus cycle
during which the infusion was done. Infusion of SP 6--11 prolonged the diestrus
phase in most animals. This observation indicates that SP 6--11 exerted an effect
on the hypothalamic mechanism controlling the secretion of gonadotropins by the
hypophysis.

PMID: 6166149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Brain Res. 1980 Oct 6;198(2):403-10.

Influence of cerebral ventricles perfusion with hexapeptide derivatives of
substance P on evoked tongue jerks in rats.

Luczynska M, Traczyk WZ.

The effects of perfusion through cerebral ventricles with two hexapeptides,
C-terminal derivatives of substance P, on evoked tongue jerks (ETJ), were studied
on male rats. During perfusion, stimulation of the infraorbital nerve caused
retractive movements (ETJ) of the stretched tongue, the amplitudes of which were 
recorded. The mean amplitudes of ETJ recorded during each 10 min period of
perfusion with McIlwain-Rodnight's solution and solution containing hexapeptides 
were compared. The biologically most active C-terminal hexapeptide derivative of 
substance P (pyro-Glu6)SP6-11, perfused through cerebral ventricles in a
concentration of 5 nmol/ml increased the ETJ. This effect was dose-dependent. A
10 times higher concentration in the perfusion fluid of the less biologically
active hexapeptide SP6-11 was not effective. The possibility that substance P,
and its active fragments present in the fluid in cerebral ventricles, could
modulate the reflex centers in the medulla is discussed.

PMID: 6157453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Virol. 1979 Jun;30(3):875-82.

In vivo assembly of a biological membrane of defined size, shape, and lipid
composition.

Brewer GJ.

At restrictive temperature, mutant ts1 of bacteriophage PM2 makes membrane
vesicles inside infected Alteromonas espejiana. A shift from restrictive to
permissive temperature resulted in rapid maturation to infectious virions. The
membrane vesicles were isolated from cellular membranes by sucrose density
gradient centrifugation. Analysis of the unique peak at rho = 1.190 g/cm3 showed 
spheres of two diameters, 50 nm and 54 nm. The wild-type virus is icosahedral
with an average diameter of 60 nm. Gel electrophoresis indicated the absence in
the vesicles of the coat and spike proteins. sp27 and sp43, respectively, and the
presence of only one viral structural protein, sp6.6. DNA was also present. The
lipid in the vesicles was composed of phosphatidylglycerol and
phosphatidylethanolamine in a proportion similar to that of the wild-type virus, 
whose ratio is nearly the inverse of that found in the host membrane. Thus,
membrane vesicles made by mutant ts1 resembled the membrane of the wild-type
virus in size, shape, and lipid composition, but contained only one of the four
structural proteins of the virus. This hydrophobic protein, sp6.6 may be
responsible for stimulating membrane morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC353398
PMID: 480469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Bacteriol. 1965 Dec;90(6):1655-63.

Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages.

Brodetsky AM, Romig WR.

Brodetsky, Anna M. (University of California, Los Angeles), and W. R. Romig.
Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages. J. Bacteriol. 90:1655-1663.
1965.-A group of six phages, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, and SP13, which use the
Marburg strain of Bacillus subtilis as host was characterized. These phages,
referred to as group 1, were examined for the following properties: host range,
plaque morphology, stability, adsorption kinetics, one-step growth
characteristics, calcium requirements, serum neutralization, thermal
inactivation, and inactivation by ultraviolet irradiation. Five unrelated B.
subtilis phages, SP3, SP10, PBS1, SP alpha, and SP beta, were included in the
studies. When first isolated, none of the group 1 phages was able to replicate
efficiently on B. subtilis SB19, a mutant of the "transforming" B. subtilis 168. 
Host range mutants capable of growth in SB19 were isolated for all of the group 1
phages except SP13, and are designated the "star" phages (SP5* through SP9*). For
characterization, SB19 was used as host for the star phages, and another B.
subtilis mutant, 168B, was host for SP13.

PMCID: PMC315874
PMID: 4955056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


