
1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2015 Dec;98(12):1162-8.

The Effect of Food Avoidance in Adult Patients with Chronic Idiopathic Urticaria.

Thaiwat S, Nakakes A, Sangasapaviliya A.

BACKGROUND: Recent findings show food allergy is rarely the cause of chronic
urticaria. However; reports showed up to 5% of chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU)
was food induced urticaria (FIU) and the remission rate with food avoidance in
CIU was varied. According to recent studies, skin prick test (SPT) is not a gold 
standard for investigating the culprit food allergen in CIU. The clinical
response for food avoidance is still unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the present study is to investigate the association of 
food allergen and SP7 the clinical response after positive food avoidance in
adult Thai patients with CIU.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: We conducted a prospective study that included 76 patients, 
who presented with CIU at the Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine,
Phramongkutklao Hospital, between September 1, 2009 and May 31, 2010. Personal
data, general physical examination, and detailed history were obtained. Twenty
food allergens were used to perform SPT at the allergy clinic. The positive food 
allergens were enrolled to avoid the culprit food allergens for two to four weeks
and evaluated the clinical response.
RESULTS: Fifty-one of 76 patients (67.1%) gave history compatible with FIU.
Shrimp (54.9%) and fish (49.0%) were the two most commonly suspected allergens by
the patients. Fifteen of 76 patients (19.7%) had positive SPT In comparison to
the SPT negative group in terms of clinical severity and effect on their daily
lives, there was no significant difference. We then matched the SPT results with 
the patient's history. Five of 76 (6.6%) patients had results of SPT matching the
patients' history. The five allergens in these patients were fish, milk, tomato, 
shrimp, and yeast. Fifty-one of 76 (67.1%) patients had negative SPT results but 
the patients suspected that certain foods were the cause of their urticaria.
Fifteen of 76 (19.7%) patients had positive SPT results but the patients had
never suspected any food allergen. Among these SPT positive patients, 13 food
allergens were the culprits, the first three most common SPT allergens in this
group were peanut, oyster and tomato. Upon SPT positive food avoidance, 12 of 15 
(80%) SPT+ patients had significant improvement of symptom score in term of
clinical severity and effect on their daily lives.
CONCLUSION: Although SPT still yielded a low sensitivity for the diagnosis of
FIU, the present study showed a very good response by food avoidance in patients 
who were SPT positive.

PMID: 27004300  [PubMed - in process]


2. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0012-1606(16)30138-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.03.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Osterix/sp7 limits cranial bone initiation sites and is required for formation of
sutures.

Kague E(1), Roy P(2), Asselin G(3), Hu G(4), Stanley A(5), Albertson C(3),
Simonet J(4), Fisher S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Current address:
Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, University of São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. Electronic address: ekague@ib.usp.br. (2)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Current address: Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA. (3)Department of
Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA. (4)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (5)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate
Program, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

During growth, individual skull bones overlap at sutures, where osteoblast
differentiation and bone deposition occur. Mutations causing skull malformations 
have revealed some required genes, but many aspects of suture regulation remain
poorly understood. We describe a zebrafish mutation in osterix/sp7, which causes 
a generalized delay in osteoblast maturation. While most of the skeleton is
patterned normally, mutants have specific defects in the anterior skull and upper
jaw, and the top of the skull comprises a random mosaic of bones derived from
individual initiation sites. Osteoblasts at the edges of the bones are highly
proliferative and fail to differentiate, consistent with global changes in gene
expression. We propose that signals from the bone itself are required for orderly
recruitment of precursor cells and growth along the edges. The delay in bone
maturation caused by loss of Sp7 leads to unregulated bone formation, revealing a
new mechanism for patterning the skull and sutures.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26992365  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 15;6:22953. doi: 10.1038/srep22953.

Targeted disruption of sp7 and myostatin with CRISPR-Cas9 results in severe bone 
defects and more muscular cells in common carp.

Zhong Z(1,)(2), Niu P(1,)(2), Wang M(1,)(2), Huang G(1,)(2), Xu S(1,)(2), Sun
Y(1,)(2), Xu X(1,)(2), Hou Y(2), Sun X(3), Yan Y(1,)(2,)(4), Wang H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Circadian Clocks, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu,
China. (2)School of Biology &Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, China. (3)Heilongjiang River Fisheries
Research Institute of Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin, China.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA.

The common carp (Cyprinus carpio) as one of the most important aquaculture fishes
produces over 3 million metric tones annually, approximately 10% the annual
production of the all farmed freshwater fish worldwide. However, the tetraploidy 
genome and long generation-time of the common carp have made its breeding and
genetic studies extremely difficult. Here, TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9, two versatile
genome-editing tools, are employed to target common carp bone-related genes sp7, 
runx2, bmp2a, spp1, opg, and muscle suppressor gene mstn. TALEN were shown to
induce mutations in the target coding sites of sp7, runx2, spp1 and mstn. With
CRISPR-Cas9, the two common carp sp7 genes, sp7a and sp7b, were mutated
individually, all resulting in severe bone defects; while mstnba mutated fish
have grown significantly more muscle cells. We also employed CRISPR-Cas9 to
generate double mutant fish of sp7a;mstnba with high efficiencies in a single
step. These results demonstrate that both TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9 are highly
efficient tools for modifying the common carp genome, and open avenues for
facilitating common carp genetic studies and breeding.

PMCID: PMC4791634
PMID: 26976234  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 1;11(3):e0150070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150070.
eCollection 2016.

Computational Characterization of Osteoporosis Associated SNPs and Genes
Identified by Genome-Wide Association Studies.

Qin L(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wu G(1), Chen J(1), Ye W(1), Yang J(2), Huang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079,
China. (2)College of Computer Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan,
430079, China.

OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have revealed many SNPs and
genes associated with osteoporosis. However, influence of these SNPs and genes on
the predisposition to osteoporosis is not fully understood. We aimed to identify 
osteoporosis GWASs-associated SNPs potentially influencing the binding affinity
of transcription factors and miRNAs, and reveal enrichment signaling pathway and 
"hub" genes of osteoporosis GWAS-associated genes.
METHODS: We conducted multiple computational analyses to explore function and
mechanisms of osteoporosis GWAS-associated SNPs and genes, including SNP
conservation analysis and functional annotation (influence of SNPs on
transcription factors and miRNA binding), gene ontology analysis, pathway
analysis and protein-protein interaction analysis.
RESULTS: Our results suggested that a number of SNPs potentially influence the
binding affinity of transcription factors (NFATC2, MEF2C, SOX9, RUNX2, ESR2,
FOXA1 and STAT3) and miRNAs. Osteoporosis GWASs-associated genes showed
enrichment of Wnt signaling pathway, basal cell carcinoma and Hedgehog signaling 
pathway. Highly interconnected "hub" genes revealed by interaction network
analysis are RUNX2, SP7, TNFRSF11B, LRP5, DKK1, ESR1 and SOST.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided the targets for further experimental assessment
and further insight on osteoporosis pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4773152
PMID: 26930606  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nat Neurosci. 2016 Feb 29. doi: 10.1038/nn.4258. [Epub ahead of print]

Chd7 cooperates with Sox10 and regulates the onset of CNS myelination and
remyelination.

He D(1,)(2), Marie C(3), Zhao C(1), Kim B(2), Wang J(1), Deng Y(1), Clavairoly
A(3), Frah M(3), Wang H(1), He X(1), Hmidan H(3), Jones BV(4), Witte D(5), Zalc
B(3), Zhou X(6), Choo DI(7), Martin DM(8,)(9), Parras C(3), Lu QR(1,)(2,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Integrative Biology Graduate Training Program, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC
University Paris 06, Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Institut 
du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, ICM, Paris, France. (4)Division of
Radiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. 
(5)Division of Pathology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (6)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas
Maryland Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (7)Division of Pediatric
Otolaryngology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, 
USA. (8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
USA. (9)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. (10)Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Mutations in CHD7, encoding ATP-dependent chromodomain helicase DNA-binding
protein 7, in CHARGE syndrome lead to multiple congenital anomalies, including
craniofacial malformations, neurological dysfunction and growth delay. Mechanisms
underlying the CNS phenotypes remain poorly understood. We found that Chd7 is a
direct transcriptional target of oligodendrogenesis-promoting factors Olig2 and
Smarca4/Brg1 and is required for proper onset of CNS myelination and
remyelination. Genome-occupancy analyses in mice, coupled with transcriptome
profiling, revealed that Chd7 interacted with Sox10 and targeted the enhancers of
key myelinogenic genes. These analyses identified previously unknown Chd7
targets, including bone formation regulators Osterix (also known as Sp7) and
Creb3l2, which are also critical for oligodendrocyte maturation. Thus, Chd7
coordinates with Sox10 to regulate the initiation of myelinogenesis and acts as a
molecular nexus of regulatory networks that account for the development of a
seemingly diverse array of lineages, including oligodendrocytes and osteoblasts, 
pointing to previously uncharacterized Chd7 functions in white matter
pathogenesis in CHARGE syndrome.

PMID: 26928066  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):284-91. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.001.
Epub 2016 Feb 25.

Extracellular Vesicles Derived from Osteogenically Induced Human Bone Marrow
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Can Modulate Lineage Commitment.

Martins M(1), Ribeiro D(1), Martins A(1), Reis RL(1), Neves NM(2).

Author information: 
(1)3B's Research Group-Biomaterials, Biodegradable and Biomimetics, University of
Minho, Headquarters of the European Institute of Excellence on Tissue Engineering
and Regenerative Medicine, Avepark, Barco, 4805-017 Guimarães, Portugal;
ICVS/3B's PT Government Associated Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. (2)3B's
Research Group-Biomaterials, Biodegradable and Biomimetics, University of Minho, 
Headquarters of the European Institute of Excellence on Tissue Engineering and
Regenerative Medicine, Avepark, Barco, 4805-017 Guimarães, Portugal; ICVS/3B's PT
Government Associated Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. Electronic address: 
nuno@dep.uminho.pt.

The effective osteogenic commitment of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(hBMSCs) is critical for bone regenerative therapies. Extracellular vesicles
(EVs) derived from hBMSCs have a regenerative potential that has been
increasingly recognized. Herein, the osteoinductive potential of osteogenically
induced hBMSC-EVs was examined. hBMSCs secreted negatively charged nanosized
vesicles (~35 nm) with EV-related surface markers. The yield of EVs over 7 days
was dependent on an osteogenic stimulus (standard chemical cocktail or RUNX2
cationic-lipid transfection). These EVs were used to sequentially stimulate
homotypic uncommitted cells during 7 days, matching the seeding density of EV
parent cells, culture time, and stimuli. Osteogenically committed hBMSC-EVs
induced an osteogenic phenotype characterized by marked early induction of BMP2, 
SP7, SPP1, BGLAP/IBSP, and alkaline phosphatase. Both EV groups outperformed the 
currently used osteoinductive strategies. These data show that naturally secreted
EVs can guide the osteogenic commitment of hBMSCs in the absence of other
chemical or genetic osteoinductors.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788762
PMID: 26923821  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dev Growth Differ. 2016 Feb;58(2):167-79. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12267. Epub 2016 Feb
18.

Comparison of fetal cartilage-derived progenitor cells isolated at different
developmental stages in a rat model.

Kim M(1,)(2), Kim J(3), Park SR(3), Park do Y(4), Kim YJ(2), Choi BH(5), Min
BH(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science & Technology, 206 Worldcup-ro Yongtong-gu,
Suwon, 16499, Korea. (2)Cell Therapy Center, Ajou University Hospital, 164
Worldcup-ro Yongtong-gu, Suwon, 16499, Korea. (3)Inha Research Institute for
Medical Sciences, Inha University College of Medicine, 100 Inha-ro Nam-gu,
Incheon, 22212, Korea. (4)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, 206
Worldcup-ro Yongtong-gu, Suwon, 16499, Korea. (5)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Inha University College of Medicine, 100 Inha-ro Nam-gu, Incheon,
22212, Korea. (6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, 206
Worldcup-ro Yongtong-gu, Suwon, 16499, Korea.

Fetal cartilage-derived progenitor cells (FCPCs) could be a useful cell source in
cell-based therapies for cartilage disorders. However, their characteristics can 
vary depending on the developmental stages. The aim of this study was to compare 
the characteristics of rat FCPCs from the hind limb on embryonic day 14 (E14),
E16 and E20 regarding proliferation, pluripotency, and differentiation.
Morphologically, rat fetal cartilage tissue showed an increase in cartilaginous
differentiation features (Safranin-O, type II collagen) and decrease in
pluripotency marker (Sox2) in the order of E14, E16 and E20. E14 FCPCs showed
significantly higher doubling time compared to E16 and E20 FCPCs. While the E14
FCPCs expressed pluripotent genes (Sox2, Oct4, Nanog), the E16 and E20 FCPCs
expressed chondrogenic markers (Sox9, Col2a1, Acan). E20 FCPCs showed the highest
ability to both chondrogenic and adipogenic differentiation and E14 FCPCs showed 
relatively better activity in osteogenic differentiation. Further analysis showed
that E20 FCPCs expressed both adipogenic (C/ebpß) and osteogenic (Runx2, Sp7,
Taz) transcription factors as well as chondrogenic transcription factors. Our
results show an inverse relationship overall between the expression of
pluripotency genes and that of chondrogenic and lineage-specific genes in FCPCs
under development. Due to its exceptional proliferation and chondrogenic
differentiation ability, fetal cells from epiphyseal cartilage (E20 in rats) may 
be a suitable cell source for cartilage regeneration.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 26889876  [PubMed - in process]


8. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Dec 15;7(12):2561-72. eCollection 2015.

Sustained release poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) microspheres of bone
morphogenetic protein 2 plasmid/calcium phosphate to promote in vitro bone
formation and in vivo ectopic osteogenesis.

Qiao C(1), Zhang K(2), Sun B(1), Liu J(1), Song J(1), Hu Y(1), Yang S(1), Sun
H(1), Yang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Stomatology, Jilin University Changchun,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College
of Chemistry, Jilin University Changchun, China.

Bone regeneration often requires continuous stimulation to promote local bone
formation. In the present study, calcium phosphate (CaPi) was used to promote
transfection of human bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) cDNA plasmid, and poly
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) was used to prepare microspheres of pBMP-2/CaPi 
(i.e., PLGA@pBMP-2/CaPi) using W/O/W double emulsion solvent evaporation method. 
We showed that PLGA@pBMP-2/CaPi microspheres were spherical with smooth surface, 
and the particle size ranged from 0.5 to 35 µm. Encapsulation efficiency was up
to 30~50%. The release of BMP-2 cDNA from microspheres continued more than 30
days and constituted, less than 7.5% of total plasmid amount within the first 24 
h. Real-time PCR results showed that co-culturing of PLGA@pBMP-2/CaPi with bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) increased calcium deposition and
gene expressions of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), runt-related transcription factor
2 (RUNX2), SP7, and collagen type I (COLL I) in a time-dependent manner. Finally,
X-ray analysis demonstrated that in vivo delivery of PLGA@pBMP-2/CaPi
microspheres into the tibialis anterior muscles of rats promoted the generation
of osteoblasts, bone tissue, and bone structure. The findings suggested that
PLGA@pBMP-2/CaPi microspheres can promote ectopic osteogenesis in non-bone
tissues, with strong prospects in promoting bone regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4731657
PMID: 26885257  [PubMed]


9. Bone. 2016 Apr;85:91-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.01.024. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Successful induction of sclerostin in human-derived fibroblasts by 4
transcription factors and its regulation by parathyroid hormone, hypoxia, and
prostaglandin E2.

Fujiwara M(1), Kubota T(2), Wang W(2), Ohata Y(2), Miura K(2), Kitaoka T(2),
Okuzaki D(3), Namba N(4), Michigami T(5), Kitabatake Y(2), Ozono K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan; First Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Department of 
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
(3)DNA-chip Development Center for Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; 
Department of Pediatrics, JCHO Osaka Hospital, Osaka 553-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Bone and Mineral Research, Osaka Medical Center and Research
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka 594-1101, Japan. (6)Department of 
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
Electronic address: keioz@ped.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Sclerostin, coded by SOST, is a secretory protein that is specifically expressed 
in osteocytes and suppresses osteogenesis by inhibiting WNT signaling. The
regulatory mechanism underlying SOST expression remains unclear mainly due to the
absence of an adequate human cell model. Thus, we herein attempted to establish a
cell model of human dermal fibroblasts in order to investigate the functions of
sclerostin. We selected 20 candidate transcription factors (TFs) that induce SOST
expression by analyzing gene expression patterns in the human sarcoma cell line, 
SaOS-2, between differentiation and maintenance cultures using microarrays. An
effective set of TFs to induce SOST expression was sought by their viral
transduction into fibroblasts, and a combination of four TFs: ATF3, KLF4, PAX4,
and SP7, was identified as the most effective inducer of SOST expression.
Quantitative PCR demonstrated that the expression levels of SOST in fibroblasts
treated with the 4 TFs were 199- and 1439-fold higher than those of the control
after 1-week and 4-week cultures, respectively. The level of sclerostin in the
conditioned medium, as determined by ELISA, was 21.2pmol/l 4weeks after the
transduction of the 4 TFs. Interestingly, the production of Dickkopf1 (DKK1),
another secreted inhibitor of WNT signaling, was also increased by transduction
of these 4 TFs. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) significantly suppressed the induced
SOST by 38% and sclerostin by 82% that of the vehicle. Hypoxia increased the
induced SOST by 62% that of normoxia. Furthermore, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
increased SOST expression levels to 16-fold those of the vehicle. In conclusion, 
the efficient induction of SOST expression and sclerostin production was achieved
in human dermal fibroblasts by the transduction of ATF3, KLF4, PAX4, and SP7, and
the induced SOST and sclerostin were regulated by PTH, hypoxia, and PGE2. This
model may contribute to elucidating the regulatory mechanisms underlying SOST
expression and advancing drug development for metabolic bone diseases.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26851122  [PubMed - in process]


10. Arch Microbiol. 2016 Apr;198(3):257-67. doi: 10.1007/s00203-016-1187-7. Epub 2016
Jan 20.

Development of sequence-characterized amplified region (SCAR) markers as a
quality standard of inoculants based on Azospirillum.

Reddy Priya P(1), Selastin Antony R(1), Gopalaswamy G(1), Balachandar D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University,
Coimbatore, 641003, India. (2)Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University, Coimbatore, 641003, India. dbalu@tnau.ac.in.

An attempt was made in this work to develop a strain-level molecular marker for
unambiguous authentication of two Azospirillum inoculants, viz. A. lipoferum
(strain Az204) and A. brasilense (strain Sp7). The sequence-characterized
amplified region (SCAR) markers obtained from DNA fingerprints were designed for 
discrete detection of the strains. The SCAR primers could successfully amplify
the target strain without cross-reaction with other Azospirillum strains, native 
isolates and other inoculants. The detection limit of SCAR primer for Az204 was
8.00 pg of DNA (approximately 10(5) cells per mL), and for Sp7, it was 0.49 pg of
DNA (equal to 10(4) cells per mL). A simplified Sephadex G100-based crude DNA
extraction protocol developed in this study was found suitable for SCAR
marker-based strain authentication. Further, SCAR primers were assessed for
simultaneous authentication as well as quantification of commercially prepared
Azospirillum inoculants by quantitative real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and
most-probable-number PCR (MPN-PCR). The RT-PCR assay can be able to quantify the 
commercial formulations as equal to culturable MPN method, while MPN-PCR failed
for Az204. The SCAR marker-based strain authentication and presumptive
quantification developed in the present work can contribute to improving the
quality standard of commercial inoculants.

PMID: 26792777  [PubMed - in process]


11. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Feb;408(6):1565-71. doi: 10.1007/s00216-015-9264-3. Epub 
2016 Jan 14.

Evidence for ferritin as dominant iron-bearing species in the rhizobacterium
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 provided by low-temperature/in-field Mössbauer
spectroscopy.

Kovács K(1), Kamnev AA(2), Pechouek J(3), Tugarova AV(4), Kuzmann E(1), Machala 
L(3), Zboril R(3), Homonnay Z(1), Lázár K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Eötvös Loránd University, P.O. Box 32, Budapest, 1512,
Hungary. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and
Microorganisms, Russian Academy of Sciences, Saratov, 410049, Russia.
aakamnev@ibppm.sgu.ru. (3)Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials,
Departments of Experimental Physics and Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Palacký University in Olomouc, Olomouc, 771 46, Czech Republic. (4)Institute of
Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Saratov, 410049, Russia. (5)Centre for Energy Research, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 49, Budapest, 1525, Hungary.

For the ubiquitous diazotrophic rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense, which has
been attracting the attention of researchers worldwide for the last 35 years
owing to its significant agrobiotechnological and phytostimulating potential, the
data on iron acquisition and its chemical speciation in cells are scarce. In this
work, for the first time for azospirilla, low-temperature (at 80 K, 5 K, as well 
as at 2 K without and with an external magnetic field of 5 T) transmission
Mössbauer spectroscopic studies were performed for lyophilised biomass of A.
brasilense (wild-type strain Sp7 grown with (57)Fe(III) nitrilotriacetate complex
as the sole source of iron) to enable quantitative chemical speciation analysis
of the intracellular iron. In the Mössbauer spectrum at 80 K, a broadened
quadrupole doublet of high-spin iron(III) was observed with a few percent of a
high-spin iron(II) contribution. In the spectrum measured at 5 K, a dominant
magnetically split component appeared with the parameters typical of ferritin
species from other bacteria, together with a quadrupole doublet of a
superparamagnetic iron(III) component and a similarly small contribution from the
high-spin iron(II) component. The Mössbauer spectra recorded at 2 K (with or
without a 5 T external field) confirmed the assignment of ferritin species. About
20 % of total Fe in the dry cells of A. brasilense strain Sp7 were present in
iron(III) forms superparamagnetic at both 5 and 2 K, i.e. either different from
ferritin cores or as ferritin components with very small particle sizes.
Graphical abstract Low-temperature Mössbauer spectroscopic data for lyophilised
biomass of the rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 provide quantitative
information on various cellular FeIII and FeII chemical species.

PMID: 26769130  [PubMed - in process]


12. Bone. 2016 Mar;84:169-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.01.004. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Inhibition of TGFß signaling decreases osteogenic differentiation of
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva fibroblasts in a novel in vitro model of
the disease.

Micha D(1), Voermans E(2), Eekhoff ME(3), van Essen HW(4), Zandieh-Doulabi B(5), 
Netelenbos C(6), Rustemeyer T(7), Sistermans EA(8), Pals G(9), Bravenboer N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: d.micha@vumc.nl. (2)Department of Clinical
Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: elisevoermans@hotmail.com. (3)Internal Medicine, Endocrinology Section, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
EMW.Eekhoff@vumc.nl. (4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical
Center, MOVE Research Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
HW.vanEssen@vumc.nl. (5)Department of Oral Cell Biology, Academic Centre for
Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), University of Amsterdam and VU University, MOVE
Research Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
bzandiehdoulabi@acta.nl. (6)Internal Medicine, Endocrinology Section, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
cnetelen@planet.nl. (7)Department of Dermatology, VU University Medical Centre,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: t.rustemeyer@vumc.nl.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: e.sistermans@vumc.nl. (9)Department of Clinical 
Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: g.pals@vumc.nl. (10)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University
Medical Center, MOVE Research Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: n.bravenboer@vumc.nl.

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva is a rare genetic disorder characterized by
progressive heterotopic ossification. FOP patients develop soft tissue lumps as a
result of inflammation-induced flare-ups which leads to the irreversible
replacement of skeletal muscle tissue with bone tissue. Classical FOP patients
possess a mutation (c.617G>A; R206H) in the ACVR1-encoding gene which leads to
dysregulated BMP signaling. Nonetheless, not all FOP patients with this mutation 
exhibit equal severity in symptom presentation or disease progression which
indicates a strong contribution by environmental factors. Given the
pro-inflammatory role of TGFß, we studied the role of TGFß in the progression of 
osteogenic differentiation in primary dermal fibroblasts from five classical FOP 
patients based on a novel method of platelet lysate-based osteogenic
transdifferentiation. During the course of transdifferentiation the osteogenic
properties of the cells were evaluated by the mRNA expression of Sp7/Osterix,
Runx2, Alp, OC and the presence of mineralization. During transdifferentiation
the expression of osteoblast markers Runx2 (p<0.05) and Alp were higher in
patient cells compared to healthy controls. All cell lines exhibited increase in 
mineralisation. FOP fibroblasts also expressed higher baseline Sp7/Osterix levels
(p<0.05) confirming their higher osteogenic potential. The pharmacological
inhibition of TGFß signaling during osteogenic transdifferentiation resulted in
the attenuation of osteogenic transdifferentiation in all cell lines as shown by 
the decrease in the expression of Runx2 (p<0.05), Alp and mineralization. We
suggest that blocking of TGFß signaling can decrease the osteogenic
transdifferentiation of FOP fibroblasts.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26769004  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Cell Sci. 2016 Mar 1;129(5):1018-30. doi: 10.1242/jcs.176883. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

Pannexin 3 and connexin 43 modulate skeletal development through their distinct
functions and expression patterns.

Ishikawa M(1), Williams GL(2), Ikeuchi T(3), Sakai K(4), Fukumoto S(5), Yamada
Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA
Operative Dentistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai
980-8575, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA Division of Biology & Biomedical Sciences, Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Laboratory of Cell and
Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA. (4)Laboratory of Cell and
Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya
466-8550, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Dentistry, Sendai 980-8576, Japan. (6)Laboratory of Cell and
Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA yoshi.yamada@nih.gov.

Pannexin 3 (Panx3) and connexin 43 (Cx43; also known as GJA1) are two major gap
junction proteins expressed in osteoblasts. Here, we studied their functional
relationships in skeletal formation by generating Panx3(-/-) and
Panx3(-/-);Cx43(-/-) mice and comparing their skeletal phenotypes with Cx43(-/-) 
mice. Panx3(-/-) mice displayed defects in endochondral and intramembranous
ossification, resulting in severe dwarfism and reduced bone density. The skeletal
abnormalities of Panx3(-/-);Cx43(-/-) mice were similar to those in Panx3(-/-)
mice. The gross appearance of newborn Cx43(-/-) skeletons showed no obvious
abnormalities, except for less mineralization of the skull. In Panx3(-/-) mice,
proliferation of chondrocytes and osteoblasts increased and differentiation of
these cells was inhibited. Panx3 promoted expression of osteogenic proteins such 
as ALP and Ocn (also known as ALPL and BGLAP, respectively), as well as Cx43, by 
regulating Osx (also known as SP7) expression. Panx3 was induced in the early
differentiation stage and reduced during the maturation stage of osteoblasts,
when Cx43 expression increased in order to promote mineralization. Furthermore,
only Panx3 functioned as an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+) channel to promote 
differentiation, and it could rescue mineralization defects in Cx43(-/-)
calvarial cells. Our findings reveal that Panx3 and Cx43 have distinct functions 
in skeletal formation.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26759176  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 25;291(13):6754-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.678235. Epub 2016
Jan 12.

Anabolic and Antiresorptive Modulation of Bone Homeostasis by the Epigenetic
Modulator Sulforaphane, a Naturally Occurring Isothiocyanate.

Thaler R(1), Maurizi A(2), Roschger P(3), Sturmlechner I(3), Khani F(4), Spitzer 
S(3), Rumpler M(3), Zwerina J(3), Karlic H(3), Dudakovic A(4), Klaushofer K(3),
Teti A(2), Rucci N(5), Varga F(6), van Wijnen AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of
Social Health Insurance Vienna (WGKK) and Austrian Social Insurance for
Occupational Risks (AUVA) Trauma Center Meidling, First Medical Department,
Hanusch Hospital, 1140 Vienna, Austria, Department of Orthopedic Surgery and
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, and.
(2)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of
L'Aquila, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy. (3)From the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of
Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of Social Health Insurance Vienna (WGKK) and
Austrian Social Insurance for Occupational Risks (AUVA) Trauma Center Meidling,
First Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, 1140 Vienna, Austria. (4)Department
of Orthopedic Surgery and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, and. (5)Department of Biotechnological and Applied
Clinical Sciences, University of L'Aquila, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy rucci@univaq.it.
(6)From the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of
Social Health Insurance Vienna (WGKK) and Austrian Social Insurance for
Occupational Risks (AUVA) Trauma Center Meidling, First Medical Department,
Hanusch Hospital, 1140 Vienna, Austria, franz.varga@osteologie.at. (7)Department 
of Orthopedic Surgery and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, and vanwijnen.andre@mayo.edu.

Bone degenerative pathologies like osteoporosis may be initiated by age-related
shifts in anabolic and catabolic responses that control bone homeostasis. Here we
show that sulforaphane (SFN), a naturally occurring isothiocyanate, promotes
osteoblast differentiation by epigenetic mechanisms. SFN enhances active DNA
demethylation viaTet1andTet2and promotes preosteoblast differentiation by
enhancing extracellular matrix mineralization and the expression of osteoblastic 
markers (Runx2,Col1a1,Bglap2,Sp7,Atf4, andAlpl). SFN decreases the expression of 
the osteoclast activator receptor activator of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)
in osteocytes and mouse calvarial explants and preferentially induces apoptosis
in preosteoclastic cells via up-regulation of theTet1/Fas/Caspase 8 and Caspase
3/7 pathway. These mechanistic effects correlate with higher bone volume (~20%)
in both normal and ovariectomized mice treated with SFN for 5 weeks compared with
untreated mice as determined by microcomputed tomography. This effect is due to a
higher trabecular number in these mice. Importantly, no shifts in mineral density
distribution are observed upon SFN treatment as measured by quantitative
backscattered electron imaging. Our data indicate that the food-derived compound 
SFN epigenetically stimulates osteoblast activity and diminishes osteoclast bone 
resorption, shifting the balance of bone homeostasis and favoring bone
acquisition and/or mitigation of bone resorptionin vivo Thus, SFN is a member of 
a new class of epigenetic compounds that could be considered for novel strategies
to counteract osteoporosis.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4807263 [Available on 2017-03-25]
PMID: 26757819  [PubMed - in process]


15. Development. 2016 Feb 15;143(4):648-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.125625. Epub 2016 Jan
11.

Chondrocytic ephrin B2 promotes cartilage destruction by osteoclasts in
endochondral ossification.

Tonna S(1), Poulton IJ(2), Taykar F(2), Ho PW(2), Tonkin B(2), Crimeen-Irwin
B(2), Tatarczuch L(3), McGregor NE(2), Mackie EJ(3), Martin TJ(1), Sims NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia 
The University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine at St Vincent's Hospital,
Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia. (2)St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research,
Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia. (3)The University of Melbourne, Faculty of
Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, Parkville 3010, Australia. (4)St Vincent's 
Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia The University
of Melbourne, Department of Medicine at St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy, Victoria 
3065, Australia nsims@svi.edu.au.

The majority of the skeleton arises by endochondral ossification, whereby
cartilaginous templates expand and are resorbed by osteoclasts then replaced by
osteoblastic bone formation. Ephrin B2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase expressed by
osteoblasts and growth plate chondrocytes that promotes osteoblast
differentiation and inhibits osteoclast formation. We investigated the role of
ephrin B2 in endochondral ossification using Osx1Cre-targeted gene deletion.
Neonatal Osx1Cre.Efnb2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mice exhibited a transient osteopetrosis demonstrated
by increased trabecular bone volume with a high content of growth plate cartilage
remnants and increased cortical thickness, but normal osteoclast numbers within
the primary spongiosa. Osteoclasts at the growth plate had an abnormal morphology
and expressed low levels of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase; this was not
observed in more mature bone. Electron microscopy revealed a lack of sealing
zones and poor attachment of Osx1Cre.Efnb2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) osteoclasts to growth plate
cartilage. Osteoblasts at the growth plate were also poorly attached and impaired
in their ability to deposit osteoid. By 6 months of age, trabecular bone mass,
osteoclast morphology and osteoid deposition by Osx1Cre.Efnb2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) osteoblasts
were normal. Cultured chondrocytes from Osx1Cre.Efnb2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) neonates showed
impaired support of osteoclastogenesis but no significant change in Rankl
(Tnfsf11) levels, whereas Adamts4 levels were significantly reduced. A population
of ADAMTS4(+) early hypertrophic chondrocytes seen in controls was absent from
Osx1Cre.Efnb2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) neonates. This suggests that Osx1Cre-expressing cells,
including hypertrophic chondrocytes, are dependent on ephrin B2 for their
production of cartilage-degrading enzymes, including ADAMTS4, and this might be
required for attachment of osteoclasts and osteoblasts to the cartilage surface
during endochondral ossification.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26755702  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2015 Oct-Dec;29(4):813-22.

Osteogenic differentiation and gene expression of dental pulp stem cells under
low-level laser irradiation: a good promise for tissue engineering.

Ballini A(1), Mastrangelo F(2), Gastaldi G(2), Tettamanti L(3), Bukvic N(4),
Cantore S(1), Cocco T(1), Saini R(5), Desiate A(6), Gherlone E(2), Scacco S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neuroscience and Sense Organs,
University of Bari Aldo Moro Bari, Italy. (2)Unit of Dentistry, IRCCS San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita e Salute San Raffaele University, Milano,
Italy. (3)Department of Periodontology and Oral Implantology, Rural Dental
College Loni Maharashtra, India. (4)University Hospital Bari-Policlinics, Medical
Genetics Unit Bari, Italy. (5)Department of Oral Science, Insubria University of 
Varese, Varese, Italy. (6)Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine, University of
Bari Aldo Moro Bari, Italy.

The effects of low-level laser therapy (LLLT) has been the focus of recent
studies as being assumed responsible for promoting photostimulatory and
photobiomodulatory effects in vivo and in vitro, increasing cell metabolism,
improving cell regeneration and invoking an anti-inflammatory response. A
positive effect of LLLT on the bone proliferation of some cell types has been
observed, but little is known about its effect on dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs).
Here, we accurately describe the technical procedure to isolate mesenchymal
DPSCs, and assay their osteogenic capacity when irradiated with an LLLT source.
These preliminary results show that LLLT irradiation influences the in vitro
proliferation of DPSCs and increases the expression of essential proteins for
bone formation, although it is necessary to carry out further experiments on
other cell types and to uniform the methodological designs.

PMID: 26753641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 7;6:18732. doi: 10.1038/srep18732.

Irisin promotes osteoblast proliferation and differentiation via activating the
MAP kinase signaling pathways.

Yong Qiao X(1,)(2), Nie Y(1,)(2), Xian Ma Y(1,)(2), Chen Y(1,)(2), Cheng
R(1,)(2), Yao Yinrg W(1,)(2), Hu Y(1,)(2), Ming Xu W(2), Zhi Xu L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, People's Republic of China. (2)The Joint
Laboratory for Reproductive Medicine of Sichuan University-The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, People's Republic of China.

Physical exercise is able to improve skeletal health. However, the mechanisms are
poorly known. Irisin, a novel exercise-induced myokine, secreted by skeletal
muscle in response to exercise, have been shown to mediate beneficial effects of 
exercise in many disorders. In the current study, we demonstrated that irisin
promotes osteoblast proliferation, and increases the expression of osteoblastic
transcription regulators, such as Runt-related transcription factor-2,
osterix/sp7; and osteoblast differentiation markers, including alkaline
phosphatase, collagen type 1 alpha-1, osteocalcin, and osteopontin in vitro.
Irisin also increase ALP activity and calcium deposition in cultured osteoblast. 
These osteogenic effects were mediated by activating the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (p-p38 MAPK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK).
Inhibition of p38 MAPK by SB023580 or pERK by U0126 abolished the proliferation
and up-regulatory effects of irisin on Runx2 expression and ALP activity.
Together our observation suggest that irisin directly targets osteoblast,
promoting osteoblast proliferation and differentiation via activating P38/ERK MAP
kinase signaling cascades in vitro. Whether irisin can be utilized as the
therapeutic agents for osteopenia and osteoporosis is worth to be further
pursued.

PMCID: PMC4704023
PMID: 26738434  [PubMed - in process]


18. Res Microbiol. 2016 Apr;167(3):190-201. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2015.12.004. Epub
2015 Dec 18.

The cyclic-di-GMP diguanylate cyclase CdgA has a role in biofilm formation and
exopolysaccharide production in Azospirillum brasilense.

Ramírez-Mata A(1), López-Lara LI(2), Xiqui-Vázquez ML(3), Jijón-Moreno S(4),
Romero-Osorio A(5), Baca BE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Microbiológicas, Instituto de Ciencias, 
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Edif. 103J, Av. San Claudio S/N, Col. 
San Manuel, Puebla Pue CP 72570, Mexico. Electronic address:
aramirezmata@gmail.com. (2)Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Microbiológicas,
Instituto de Ciencias, Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Edif. 103J, Av.
San Claudio S/N, Col. San Manuel, Puebla Pue CP 72570, Mexico. Electronic
address: 13_isela13@hotmail.com. (3)Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias
Microbiológicas, Instituto de Ciencias, Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de
Puebla, Edif. 103J, Av. San Claudio S/N, Col. San Manuel, Puebla Pue CP 72570,
Mexico. Electronic address: luisa.xiqui@hotmail.com. (4)Centro de Investigaciones
en Ciencias Microbiológicas, Instituto de Ciencias, Benemérita Universidad
Autónoma de Puebla, Edif. 103J, Av. San Claudio S/N, Col. San Manuel, Puebla Pue 
CP 72570, Mexico. Electronic address: jims_pcm@hotmmail.com. (5)Centro de
Investigaciones en Ciencias Microbiológicas, Instituto de Ciencias, Benemérita
Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Edif. 103J, Av. San Claudio S/N, Col. San Manuel,
Puebla Pue CP 72570, Mexico. Electronic address: angy.4behappy@gmail.com.
(6)Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Microbiológicas, Instituto de Ciencias, 
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Edif. 103J, Av. San Claudio S/N, Col. 
San Manuel, Puebla Pue CP 72570, Mexico. Electronic address:
beatriz.baca@correo.buap.mx.

In bacteria, proteins containing GGDEF domains are involved in production of the 
second messenger c-di-GMP. Here we report that the cdgA gene encoding diguanylate
cyclase A (CdgA) is involved in biofilm formation and exopolysaccharide (EPS)
production in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7. Biofilm quantification using crystal
violet staining revealed that inactivation of cdgA decreased biofilm formation.
In addition, confocal laser scanning microscopy analysis of green-fluorescent
protein-labeled bacteria showed that, during static growth, the biofilms had
differential levels of development: bacteria harboring a cdgA mutation exhibited 
biofilms with considerably reduced thickness compared with those of the wild-type
Sp7 strain. Moreover, DNA-specific staining and treatment with DNase I, and
epifluorescence studies demonstrated that extracellular DNA and EPS are
components of the biofilm matrix in Azospirillum. After expression and
purification of the CdgA protein, diguanylate cyclase activity was detected. The 
enzymatic activity of CdgA-producing cyclic c-di-GMP was determined using GTP as 
a substrate and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD(+)) and Mg(2)(+) as cofactors.
Together, our results revealed that A. brasilense possesses a functional c-di-GMP
biosynthesis pathway.

Copyright © 2016 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26708984  [PubMed - in process]


19. J Periodontol. 2016 Apr;87(4):461-9. doi: 10.1902/jop.2015.150302. Epub 2015 Dec 
22.

Serotonin Inhibits Osteoblast Differentiation and Bone Regeneration in Rats.

Nam SS(1), Lee JC(2), Kim HJ(3), Park JW(1), Lee JM(1), Suh JY(1), Um HS(4), Kim 
JY(3), Lee Y(3), Kim YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Korea. (2)Department of Dental Biomaterials Science, School of
Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of
Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National University. (4)Department
of Periodontology, Gangneung-Wonju National University College of Dentistry,
Gangneung, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although increasing evidence indicates that serotonin (SER;
5-hydroxytrypamine [5-HT]) is involved in the regulation of bone metabolism,
conflicting data exist regarding whether SER promotes or inhibits osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. Regeneration of functional bone is required
for proper osseointegration of dental implants. Noticeably, the use of selective 
SER reuptake inhibitors was recently associated with the failure of
osseointegrated dental implants. The present study examines the direct role of
peripheral SER on the regulation of bone regeneration.
METHODS: The effect of SER on osteoblast differentiation and bone regeneration
was examined using rat calvarial cell cultures in vitro and a rat critical-sized 
calvarial defect model in vivo.
RESULTS: Rat calvarial cells expressed SER receptors Htr1 (5-HT1) and Htr2
(5-HT2), which are known to transmit signals in bone cells. In vitro, SER
significantly reduced osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of rat
calvarial cells with concomitant reduction of osteoblast marker genes including
alkaline phosphatase (Alpl), osterix (Sp7), and osteocalcin (Bglap). Histologic
and radiologic analyses using the rat critical-sized calvarial defect model
revealed that the existence of SER significantly inhibited ß-phase tricalcium
phosphate-induced bone regeneration.
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that SER in the local bone microenvironment might
play a negative role in osteoblast differentiation and bone formation in rats.

PMID: 26693696  [PubMed - in process]


20. Development. 2016 Jan 15;143(2):339-47. doi: 10.1242/dev.126227. Epub 2015 Dec
10.

Dual function of Bmpr1a signaling in restricting preosteoblast proliferation and 
stimulating osteoblast activity in mouse.

Lim J(1), Shi Y(2), Karner CM(2), Lee SY(2), Lee WC(2), He G(3), Long F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63110, USA Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110, USA. (3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital 
of Xiangya, Central South University, Hunan 410013, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63110, USA Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Medicine,
Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St
Louis, MO 63110, USA flong@wustl.edu.

Exogenous bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmp) are well known to induce ectopic bone
formation, but the physiological effect of Bmp signaling on normal bone is not
completely understood. By deleting the receptor Bmpr1a in osteoblast lineage
cells with Dmp1-Cre, we observed a dramatic increase in trabecular bone mass in
postnatal mice, which was due to a marked increase in osteoblast number that was 
likely to be driven by hyperproliferation of Sp7(+) preosteoblasts. Similarly,
inducible deletion of Bmpr1a in Sp7(+) cells specifically in postnatal mice
increased trabecular bone mass. However, deletion of Smad4 by the same approaches
had only a minor effect, indicating that Bmpr1a signaling suppresses trabecular
bone formation through effectors beyond Smad4. Besides increasing osteoblast
number in the trabecular bone, deletion of Bmpr1a by Dmp1-Cre also notably
reduced osteoblast activity, resulting in attenuation of periosteal bone growth. 
The impairment in osteoblast activity correlated with reduced mTORC1 signaling in
vivo, whereas inhibition of mTORC1 activity abolished the induction of protein
anabolism genes by BMP2 treatment in vitro. Thus, physiological Bmpr1a signaling 
in bone exerts a dual function in both restricting preosteoblast proliferation
and promoting osteoblast activity.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4725340 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26657771  [PubMed - in process]


21. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2016 Feb;52(2):228-34. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9965-0. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Effect of Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (Pg-LPS) on the expression 
of EphA2 in osteoblasts and osteoclasts.

Gao A(1), Wang X(2), Yu H(2), Li N(2), Hou Y(2), Yu W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, School of Stomatology, Jilin University, 763
Heguang Road, Changchun, Jilin, 130021, People's Republic of China.
aichao0220@163.com. (2)Department of Periodontics, School of Stomatology, Jilin
University, 763 Heguang Road, Changchun, Jilin, 130021, People's Republic of
China. (3)The Key Laboratory of Tooth Development and Bone Remodeling, School of 
Stomatology, Jilin University, 763 Heguang Road, Changchun, Jilin, 130021,
People's Republic of China. yu-wei-xian@163.com.

Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg) as the major pathogenic bacterium of chronic
periodontitis can cause alveolar bone resorption. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is its
main virulence factor. The Eph family plays an important role in maintaining bone
homeostasis. In this study, the effects of P. gingivalis lipopolysaccharide
(Pg-LPS) on the expression of EphA2 in osteoblasts and osteoclasts were
investigated. MC3T3-E1 cells and RAW264.7 cells were separately cultured in
osteoblast-conditioned medium and osteoclast-conditioned medium to induce their
differentiation into osteoblasts and osteoclasts, respectively. MC3T3-E1 cells
were treated with 1 µg/mL of Pg-LPS 3, 7, and 14 d later, while RAW264.7 cells
were treated with 10 µg/mL of Pg-LPS 1, 3, and 5 d later. The results have shown 
that Pg-LPS increased the expression of EphA2 both in osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, decreased the expression of osteogenic-related genes (ALP, Sp7), and
increased the expression of osteoclast-related genes (MMP9, c-fos, ACP5, CtsK,
and NFATc1). Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining illustrated that
Pg-LPS promoted osteoclast differentiation and decreased the activity of alkaline
phosphatase. Therefore, analysis indicates that, when treated with Pg-LPS, the
expression of EphA2 is upregulated while the activity of osteoblasts and
osteoclasts was reduced and increased, respectively. Our data suggest that EphA2 
is closely related to the formation of osteoblasts and resorption of osteoclast
and is likely to play an role in bone resorption induced in chronic
periodontitis. These findings may provide information on new targets for
prevention and treatment of chronic periodontitis.

PMID: 26559065  [PubMed - in process]


22. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Sep 15;7(9):1588-601. eCollection 2015.

The effect of synthetic a-tricalcium phosphate on osteogenic differentiation of
rat bone mesenchymal stem cells.

Liu J(1), Zhao L(1), Ni L(2), Qiao C(1), Li D(1), Sun H(1), Zhang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Stomatology, Jilin University
Changchun 130021, China. (2)State Key laboratory Inorganic Synthesis and
Preparative Chemistry, Jinlin University Changchun 130012, China.

The reconstruction of large bone defects has been the focus in bone tissue
engineering research. By acting as synthetic frameworks for cell growth and
tissue formation, biomaterials can play a critical role in bone tissue
engineering. Among various biomaterials, calcium phosphate based materials
include hydroxyapatite (HA), a-tricalcium phosphate (a-TCP), and ß-tricalcium
phosphate (ß-TCP) are widely used as scaffold materials in bone tissue
engineering. However, little is known about the effect of a-TCP alone on the
osteogenic differentiation of the BMSCs. To this end, we synthesized a-TCP using 
a novel co-precipitation method. The synthetic a-TCP was then incubated with rat 
BMSCs under osteogenic inductive medium culture conditions, followed by the
analysis of the mRNA levels of various osteogenesis-related genes, including ALP,
Rux2, COL-I, and SP7, using a quantitative RT-PCR method. Following incubation of
BMSCs with 20 µg/ml a-TCP, cells reached confluency after 7 days. Additionally,
the MTT analysis showed that a-TCP at concentration of 10-20 µg/ml had good
biocompatibility with BMSCs, showing no significant inhibition of rat BMSCs
proliferation. Furthermore, the synthetic a-TCP (20 µg/ml), when incubated with
rat BMSCs in the osteogenic culture medium, increased the mRNA levels of various 
osteogenesis-related genes, including ALP, Rux2, COL-I, and SP7. Finally,
treatment of synthetic a-TCP (20 µg/ml) potentiated calcium nodule formations
after incubation with rat BMSCs in osteogenic culture medium for 21 days, as
compared with non-treated control. Taken together, the results in the present
study suggested that a-TCP alone likely promotes rat BMSCs osteogenic
differentiation through up-regulating ALP, Col-I, Runx2, and SP7 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4626420
PMID: 26550458  [PubMed]


23. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Oct 16. pii: S0014-4827(15)30115-4. doi:
10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.10.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparative Epigenetic Influence of Autologous versus Fetal Bovine Serum on
Mesenchymal Stem Cells through In Vitro Osteogenic and Adipogenic
Differentiation.

Fani N(1), Ziadlou R(2), Shahhoseini M(3), Baghaban Eslaminejad M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran; Department of Stem
Cells and Developmental Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute 
for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran; Department of Tissue
Engineering and applied cell sciences, School of Advanced Technologies in
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of
Genetics at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for
Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran; Department of Stem Cells and
Developmental Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Genetics at
Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive
Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
m.shahhoseini@royaninstitute.org. (4)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental
Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology
and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
eslami@royaninstitute.org.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) derived from bone marrow (BM) represent a useful
source of adult stem cells for cell therapy and tissue engineering. MSCs are
present at a low frequency in the BM; therefore expansion is necessary before
performing clinical studies. Fetal bovine serum (FBS) as a nutritional supplement
for in vitro culture of MSCs is a suitable additive for human cell culture, but
not regarding subsequent use of these cells for clinical treatment of human
patients due to the risk of viral and prion transmission as well as xenogeneic
immune responses after transplantation. Recently, autologous serum (AS) has been 
as a supplement to replace FBS in culture medium. We compared the effect of FBS
versus AS on the histone modification pattern of MSCs through in vitro
osteogenesis and adipogenesis. Differentiation of stem cells under various serum 
conditions to a committed state involves global changes in epigenetic patterns
that are critically determined by chromatin modifications. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with real-time PCR showed significant changes 
in the acetylation and methylation patterns in lysine 9 (Lys9) of histone H3 on
the regulatory regions of stemness (Nanog, Sox2, Rex1), osteogenic (Runx2, Oc,
Sp7) and adipogenic (Ppar-<U+03B3>, Lpl, adiponectin) marker genes in undifferentiated
MSCs, FBS and AS. All epigenetic changes occurred in a serum dependent manner
which resulted in higher expression level of stemness genes in undifferentiated
MSCs compared to differentiated MSCs and increased expression levels of
osteogenic genes in AS compared to FBS. Adipogenic genes showed greater
expression in FBS compared to AS. These findings have demonstrated the epigenetic
influence of serum culture conditions on differentiation potential of MSCs, which
suggest that AS is possibly more efficient serum for osteogenic differentiation
of MSCs in cell therapy purposes.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26481420  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2015 Dec;25(6):274-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2015.09.003. Epub
2015 Sep 11.

PAPP-A2 expression by osteoblasts is required for normal postnatal growth in
mice.

Amiri N(1), Christians JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University
Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon
Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada. Electronic
address: jkchrist@sfu.ca.

OBJECTIVE: Pregnancy associated plasma protein-A2 (PAPP-A2) is a protease that
cleaves insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5), the most abundant
IGFBP in bone. Deletion of Pappa2 reduces postnatal growth and bone length in
mice. The aim of this study was to determine whether locally produced PAPP-A2 is 
required for normal bone growth.
DESIGN: We deleted Pappa2 primarily in osteoblasts by crossing conditional Pappa2
deletion mice with mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the Sp7
(Osterix) promoter. Effects of disrupting Pappa2 in Sp7-expressing cells were
examined by measuring body mass and tail length at 3, 6, 10 and 12 weeks of age
and bone dimensions at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Body mass, tail length, and linear bone dimensions were significantly
reduced at all ages by osteoblast-specific Pappa2 deletion. Mice homozygous for
the conditional Pappa2 deletion allele and carrying the Cre transgene were
smaller than controls carrying the Cre transgene, whereas mice homozygous for the
conditional Pappa2 deletion allele were not smaller than controls when comparing 
mice not carrying the transgene. This result unambiguously demonstrates that
PAPP-A2 produced by Sp7 expressing cells is required for normal growth. However, 
constitutive Pappa2 deletion had greater effects than osteoblast-specific Pappa2 
deletion for many traits, indicating that post-natal growth is also affected by
other sources of PAPP-A2. Immunohistochemistry revealed that PAPP-A2 localized in
the epiphysis and metaphysis as well as osteoblasts, consistent with a role in
bone growth.
CONCLUSION: Locally-produced PAPP-A2 is required for normal bone growth.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26385171  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Sep 5. pii: S0960-0760(15)30064-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.09.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Selective regulation of Mmp13 by 1,25(OH)2D3, PTH, and Osterix through distal
enhancers.

Meyer MB(1), Benkusky NA(2), Onal M(2), Pike JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic
address: mmeyer@biochem.wisc.edu. (2)University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison,
WI 53706, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13, collagenase-3) is a vital component for
chondrocyte and osteoblast maturation, and is aberrantly expressed in numerous
disease states. At the transcriptional level, Mmp13 is controlled by many
different growth factors and hormones. Most notably, Mmp13 is regulated by the
vitamin D hormone (1,25(OH)2D3), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and several
cytokines. These activities occur through participation by the transcription
factors VDR, RUNX2, FOS, JUN, and Osterix (OSX), respectively. Recently, we
discovered that Mmp13 is regulated by elements quite distal to the
transcriptional start site -10, -20, and -30kb upstream. These enhancers, along
with minor contributions from the region proximal to the promoter, are
responsible for the ligand inducible and, most strikingly, the basal activities
of Mmp13 gene regulation. Here, we found that the actions of PTH and OSX do not
occur through the -10kb VDR bound enhancer. Rather, the -30kb RUNX2 bound
enhancer and the promoter proximal regions were essential for activity. Through
RUNX2 deletion and OSX overexpression in cells, we showed a specific role for OSX
in Mmp13 regulation. Finally, we created an in vivo CRISPR deleted -10kb enhancer
mouse model. Despite normal bone density and growth, they fail to up-regulate
Mmp13 in response to 1,25(OH)2D3. These data are consistent with those obtained
through UAMS osteoblast cell culture and further define the specific roles of
distal enhancers in the regulation of Mmp13.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4779429 [Available on 2017-03-05]
PMID: 26348136  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Biores Open Access. 2015 Jan 1;4(1):121-30. doi: 10.1089/biores.2015.0002.
eCollection 2015.

Induction of Osteogenic Differentiation in Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells by
Crosstalk with Osteoblasts.

Glueck M(1), Gardner O(2), Czekanska E(2), Alini M(3), Stoddart MJ(3), Salzmann
GM(4), Schmal H(4).

Author information: 
(1)AO Research Institute Davos , Davos Platz, Switzerland . ; Department of
Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, University Medical Center, Albert-Ludwigs
University Freiburg , Germany . (2)AO Research Institute Davos , Davos Platz,
Switzerland . ; Cardiff University , Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom . (3)AO
Research Institute Davos , Davos Platz, Switzerland . (4)Department of
Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, University Medical Center, Albert-Ludwigs
University Freiburg , Germany .

Natural bone healing following fractures is initiated by osteoblasts (OBs) and
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), a cell combination with possible potential in
tissue engineering techniques for bony defects. The aim of the study was to
investigate MSC/OB-crosstalk, in order to determine optimal cell culture
conditions for osteogenic differentiation. Human OBs and MSCs interactions were
investigated in an in vitro trans-well co-culture study over a time period of 28 
days. Calcification was determined by optical density (OD) at 450<U+2009>nm and Alizarin
red staining. Messenger RNA expression was assessed by quantitative PCR.
Osteogenic medium containing 1% fetal bovine serum resulted in superior levels of
calcification in MSCs in co-culture with OBs compared to 2% or 5% fetal bovine
serum (p<0.05). Comparing MSCs and OBs alone with the MSC/OB co-culture,
calcification, as measured by OD 450<U+2009>nm, increased over time in all groups. The
highest values were recorded in the co-culture (p<0.05). Osteogenic
differentiation potential showed significant interindividual differences. In
order to predict differentiation potential, OD 450<U+2009>nm measurements and mRNA
expression of alkaline phosphatase were correlated with the population doubling
rate during the expansion period. For OBs and MSCs, statistically significant
associations of proliferation and differentiation potential were found (p<0.001).
The addition of transforming growth factor beta resulted in up-regulation of
collagen type I and Sp7 mRNA, and down-regulation of alkaline phosphatase mRNA.
The results suggest the idea of soluble paracrine factors being secreted by OBs
to induce osteogenic differentiation of MSCs.

PMCID: PMC4497645
PMID: 26309789  [PubMed]


27. Mikrobiologiia. 2015 Mar-Apr;84(2):244-9.

[Immunochemical Detection of Azospirilla in Soil with Genus-Specific Antibodies].

[Article in Russian]

Shirokov AA, Krasov AI, Selivanov NY, Burygin GL, Shchegolev SY, Matora LY.

Immunoelectrophoresis and immunodiffusion analysis with antibodies to whole
intact cells of the type strain of nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 revealed at least three conservative surface immunogenic proteins 
of azospirilla. Cross-reactions with these proteins made it possible to use the
above antibodies for detection of azospirilla as a genus-specific probe
conjugated with horseradish peroxidase as an enzymatic label. Direct
immune-enzyme analysis of soil suspensions (typical chernozem, Saratov oblast)
confirmed applicability of the conjugates based on genus-specific antibodies to
the surface proteins of azospirilla for direct detection of this bacterial genus 
in environmental samples. These results provide a basis for broad application of 
this method for analysis of Azospirillum occurrence in soil.

PMID: 26263631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 10;10(8):e0135285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135285.
eCollection 2015.

Association of the I264T variant in the sulfide quinone reductase-like (SQRDL)
gene with osteoporosis in Korean postmenopausal women.

Jin HS(1), Kim J(2), Park S(3), Park E(2), Kim BY(4), Choi VN(2), Yoo YH(5), Kim 
BT(6), Jeong SY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Life and Health
Sciences, Hoseo University, Asan, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Medical
Genetics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University Graduate School of Medicine,
Suwon, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College
of Health, Kyungwoon University, Gumi, Republic of Korea. (4)Division of
Intractable Disease, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National Institute of
Health, Korea Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, Cheongju, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Mitochondria Hub Regulation 
Center, College of Medicine, Dong-A University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Family Practice and Community Health, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

To identify novel susceptibility variants for osteoporosis in Korean
postmenopausal women, we performed a genome-wide association analysis of 1180
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in 405 individuals with
osteoporosis and 722 normal controls of the Korean Association Resource cohort. A
logistic regression analysis revealed 72 nsSNPs that showed a significant
association with osteoporosis (p<0.05). The top 10 nsSNPs showing the lowest
p-values (p = 5.2×10-4-8.5×10-3) were further studied to investigate their
effects at the protein level. Based on the results of an in silico prediction of 
the protein's functional effect based on amino acid alterations and a sequence
conservation evaluation of the amino acid residues at the positions of the nsSNPs
among orthologues, we selected one nsSNP in the SQRDL gene (rs1044032, SQRDL
I264T) as a meaningful genetic variant associated with postmenopausal
osteoporosis. To assess whether the SQRDL I264T variant played a functional role 
in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis, we examined the in vitro effect of the nsSNP
on bone remodeling. Overexpression of the SQRDL I264T variant in the
preosteoblast MC3T3-E1 cells significantly increased alkaline phosphatase
activity, mineralization, and the mRNA expression of osteoblastogenesis markers, 
Runx2, Sp7, and Bglap genes, whereas the SQRDL wild type had no effect or a
negative effect on osteoblast differentiation. Overexpression of the SQRDL I264T 
variant did not affect osteoclast differentiation of the primary-cultured
monocytes. The known effects of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) on bone remodeling may
explain the findings of the current study, which demonstrated the functional role
of the H2S-catalyzing enzyme SQRDL I264T variant in osteoblast differentiation.
In conclusion, the results of the statistical and experimental analyses indicate 
that the SQRDL I264T nsSNP may be a significant susceptibility variant for
osteoporosis in Korean postmenopausal women that is involved in osteoblast
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4530967
PMID: 26258864  [PubMed - in process]


29. Clin Oral Investig. 2016 Apr;20(3):503-11. doi: 10.1007/s00784-015-1533-1. Epub
2015 Jul 30.

Osteoblast differentiation is enhanced by a nano-to-micro hybrid titanium surface
created by Yb:YAG laser irradiation.

Mariscal-Muñoz E(1), Costa CA(1), Tavares HS(1), Bianchi J(1), Hebling J(2),
Machado JP(3), Lerner UH(4,)(5), Souza PP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathology, Faculty of Dentistry at Araraquara,
Univ. Estadual Paulista-UNESP, Araraquara, São Paulo, 14801-903, Brazil.
(2)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry at
Araraquara, Univ. Estadual Paulista-UNESP, Araraquara, São Paulo, 14801-903,
Brazil. (3)National Institute for Space Research-INPE, São José dos Campos, São
Paulo, 12227-010, Brazil. (4)Umeå University, Umeå, S-901 87, Sweden.
(5)Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, S-405 30, Sweden.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pathology, Faculty of Dentistry at Araraquara,
Univ. Estadual Paulista-UNESP, Araraquara, São Paulo, 14801-903, Brazil.
souza.ppc@foar.unesp.br.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to analyze the capacity of a new modified
laser surface to stimulate calvarial osteoblasts isolated from neonatal mouse
bones to differentiate and form mineralized nodules.
METHODS: Titanium discs were subjectezd or not to laser irradiation according to 
specific parameters and characterized. Osteoblasts isolated from neonatal mouse
calvaria were cultured over the discs, and the capacity of these cells to
proliferate (MTT assay), form mineralized nodules (Alizarin red assay), and
enhance alkaline phosphatase activity (ALPase activity) was analyzed. Real-time
PCR was used for quantification of gene expression.
RESULTS: Laser-irradiated titanium discs (L) presented a rough
nano-to-micrometric oxidized surface contrasting with the smooth pattern on
polished discs (P). The Ra on the micrometric level increased from 0.32<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.01 µm
on P surfaces to 10.57<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.39 µm on L surfaces. When compared with P, L promoted 
changes in osteoblast morphology, increased mineralized nodule formation in
osteoblasts cultured on the surfaces for 14 days, and enhanced ALPase activity at
days 7 and 14. Transcription factors triggering osteoblast differentiation (Runx2
and Sp7) and genes encoding the bone extracellular matrix proteins collagen
type-1 (Col1a1), osteopontin (Spp1), and osteocalcin (Bglap) were upregulated in 
cells on L surfaces compared with those on P surfaces at days 1-14.
CONCLUSION: Laser treatment of titanium surfaces created a rough surface that
stimulated osteoblast differentiation.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Laser treatment of titanium generates a reproducible and
efficient surface triggering osteoblast differentiation that can be of importance
for osteointegration.

PMID: 26224513  [PubMed - in process]


30. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2015 Apr 4;55(4):476-83.

[Detection of CRISPR and its relationship to drug resistance in Shigella].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L, Wang Y, Duan G, Xue Z, Guo X, Wang P, Xi Y, Yang H.

OBJECTIVE: To detect clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) in Shigella, and to analyze its relationship to drug resistance.
METHODS: Four pairs of primers were used for the detection of convincing CRISPR
structures CRISPR-S2 and CRISPR-S4, questionable CRISPR structures CRISPR-S1 and 
CRISPR-S3 in 60 Shigella strains. All primers were designed using sequences in
CRISPR database. CRISPR Finder was used to analyze CRISPR and susceptibilities of
Shigella strains were tested by agar diffusion method. Furthermore, we analyzed
the relationship between drug resistance and CRISPR-S4.
RESULTS: The positive rate of convincing CRISPR structures was 95%. The four
CRISPR loci formed 12 spectral patterns (A-L), all of which contained convincing 
CRISPR structures except type K. We found one new repeat and 12 new spacers. The 
multi-drug resistance rate was 53. 33% . We found no significant difference
between CRISPR-S4 and drug resistant. However, the repeat sequence of CRISPR-S4
in multi- or TE-resistance strains was mainly R4.1 with AC deletions in the 3'
end, and the spacer sequences of CRISPR-S4 in multi-drug resistance strains were 
mainly Sp5.1, Sp6.1 and Sp7.
CONCLUSION: CRISPR was common in Shigella. Variations df repeat sequences and
diversities of spacer sequences might be related to drug resistance in Shigella.

PMID: 26211322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Prikl Biokhim Mikrobiol. 2015 May-Jun;51(3):313-8.

[Determination of Azospirillum Brasilense Cells With Bacteriophages via
Electrooptical Analysis of Microbial Suspensions].

[Article in Russian]

Gulii OI, Karavayeva OA, Pavlii SA, Sokolov OI, Bunin VD, Ignatov OV.

The dependence-of changes in the electrooptical properties of Azospirillum
brasilense cell suspension Sp7 during interaction with bacteriophage FAb-Sp7 on
the number and time of interactions was studied. Incubation of cells with
bacteriophage significantly changed the electrooptical signal within one minute. 
The selective effect of bacteriophage FAb on 18 strains of bacteria of the genus 
Azospirillum was studied: A. amazonense Ami4, A. brasilense Sp7, Cd, Sp107,
Sp245, Jm6B2, Brl4, KR77, S17, S27, SR55, SR75, A. halopraeferans Au4, A.
irakense KBC1, K A3, A. lipoferum Sp59b, SR65 and RG20a. We determined the limit 
of reliable determination of microbial cells infected with bacteriophage: - 10(4)
cells/mL. The presence of foreign cell cultures of E. coli B-878 and E. coli XL-1
did not complicate the detection of A brasilense Sp7 cells with the use of
bacteriophage FAb-Sp7. The results demonstrated that bacteriophage (FAb-Sp7 can
be used for the detection of Azospirillum microbial cells via t electrooptical
analysis of cell suspensions.

PMID: 26204775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biotechnol Lett. 2015 Nov;37(11):2349-55. doi: 10.1007/s10529-015-1921-2. Epub
2015 Jul 22.

Improved properties of bone and cartilage tissue from 3D inkjet-bioprinted human 
mesenchymal stem cells by simultaneous deposition and photocrosslinking in
PEG-GelMA.

Gao G(1,)(2), Schilling AF(3), Hubbell K(2), Yonezawa T(4,)(5), Truong D(6), Hong
Y(6), Dai G(7), Cui X(8,)(9,)(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences, Wuhan University 
of Technology, 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan, China. (2)Stemorgan Therapeutics, Albany, 
NY, USA. (3)Clinic for Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der
Isar, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular
and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Innovation, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan. (6)Department of
Bioengineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA. (7)Center
for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY, USA. (8)School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life
Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan, China.
xfc.cui@gmail.com. (9)Stemorgan Therapeutics, Albany, NY, USA. xfc.cui@gmail.com.
(10)Clinic for Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany. xfc.cui@gmail.com. (11)Center for
Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, NY, USA. xfc.cui@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Bioprinting of bone and cartilage suffers from low mechanical
properties. Here we have developed a unique inkjet bioprinting approach of
creating mechanically strong bone and cartilage tissue constructs using
poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate, gelatin methacrylate, and human MSCs.
RESULTS: The printed hMSCs were evenly distributed in the polymerized PEG-GelMA
scaffold during layer-by-layer assembly. The procedure showed a good
biocompatibility with >80% of the cells surviving the printing process and the
resulting constructs provided strong mechanical support to the embedded cells.
The printed mesenchymal stem cells showed an excellent osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiation capacity. Both osteogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation as determined by specific gene and protein expression analysis
(RUNX2, SP7, DLX5, ALPL, Col1A1, IBSP, BGLAP, SPP1, Col10A1, MMP13, SOX9, Col2A1,
ACAN) was improved by PEG-GelMA in comparison to PEG alone. These observations
were consistent with the histological evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: Inkjet bioprinted-hMSCs in simultaneously photocrosslinked PEG-GelMA
hydrogel scaffolds demonstrated an improvement of mechanical properties and
osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation, suggesting its promising potential
for usage in bone and cartilage tissue engineering.

PMID: 26198849  [PubMed - in process]


33. Plant Biotechnol J. 2016 Feb;14(2):808-819. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12431. Epub 2015 Jul
1.

FT overexpression induces precocious flowering and normal reproductive
development in Eucalyptus.

Klocko AL(1), Ma C(1), Robertson S(1), Esfandiari E(1), Nilsson O(2), Strauss
SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Forest Ecosystems & Society, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR, USA. (2)Department of Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Umeå Plant
Science Centre, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Umeå, Sweden.

Eucalyptus trees are among the most important species for industrial forestry
worldwide. However, as with most forest trees, flowering does not begin for one
to several years after planting which can limit the rate of conventional and
molecular breeding. To speed flowering, we transformed a Eucalyptus
grandis × urophylla hybrid (SP7) with a variety of constructs that enable
overexpression of FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT). We found that FT expression led to very
early flowering, with events showing floral buds within 1-5 months of
transplanting to the glasshouse. The most rapid flowering was observed when the
cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter was used to drive the Arabidopsis thaliana 
FT gene (AtFT). Early flowering was also observed with AtFT overexpression from a
409S ubiquitin promoter and under heat induction conditions with Populus
trichocarpa FT1 (PtFT1) under control of a heat-shock promoter. Early flowering
trees grew robustly, but exhibited a highly branched phenotype compared to the
strong apical dominance of nonflowering transgenic and control trees.
AtFT-induced flowers were morphologically normal and produced viable pollen
grains and viable self- and cross-pollinated seeds. Many self-seedlings inherited
AtFT and flowered early. FT overexpression-induced flowering in Eucalyptus may be
a valuable means for accelerating breeding and genetic studies as the transgene
can be easily segregated away in progeny, restoring normal growth and form.

© 2015 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26132805  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0130627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130627.
eCollection 2015.

mTORC1 Signaling Promotes Osteoblast Differentiation from Preosteoblasts.

Chen J(1), Long F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China; Orthopedic Institute, Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Department of
Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America;
Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
United States of America.

Preosteoblasts are precursor cells that are committed to the osteoblast lineage. 
Differentiation of these cells to mature osteoblasts is regulated by the
extracellular factors and environmental cues. Recent studies have implicated mTOR
signaling in the regulation of osteoblast differentiation. However, mTOR exists
in two distinct protein complexes (mTORC1 and mTORC2), and the specific role of
mTORC1 in regulating the progression of preosteoblasts to mature osteoblastis
still unclear. In this study, we first deleted Raptor, a unique and essential
component of mTORC1, in primary calvarial cells. Deletion of Raptor resulted in
loss of mTORC1 but an increase in mTORC2 signaling without overtly affecting
autophagy. Under the osteogenic culture condition, Raptor-deficient cells
exhibited a decrease in matrix synthesis and mineralization. qPCR analyses
revealed that deletion of Raptor reduced the expression of late-stage markers for
osteoblast differentiation (Bglap, Ibsp, and Col1a), while slightly increasing
early osteoblast markers (Runx2, Sp7, and Alpl). Consistent with the findings in 
vitro, genetic ablation of Raptor in osterix-expressing cells led to osteopenia
in mice. Together, our findings have identified a specific role for mTORC1 in the
transition from preosteoblasts to mature osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC4474698
PMID: 26090674  [PubMed - in process]


35. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129856.
eCollection 2015.

Analysis of Osteoblast Differentiation on Polymer Thin Films Embedded with Carbon
Nanotubes.

Lee JW(1), Park JW(2), Khang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Gachon University,
Incheon, South Korea. (2)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0132874.

Osteoblast differentiation can be modulated by variations in order of nanoscale
topography. Biopolymers embedded with carbon nanotubes can cause various orders
of roughness at the nanoscale and can be used to investigate the dynamics of
extracellular matrix interaction with cells. In this study, clear relationship
between the response of osteoblasts to integrin receptor activation, their
phenotype, and transcription of certain genes on polymer composites embedded with
carbon nanotubes was demonstrated. We generated an ultrathin nanocomposite film
embedded with carbon nanotubes and observed improved adhesion of pre-osteoblasts,
with a subsequent increase in their proliferation. The expression of genes
encoding integrin subunits a5, av, ß1, and ß3 was significantly upregulated at
the early of time-point when cells initially attached to the carbon
nanotube/polymer composite. The advantage of ultrathin nanocomposite film for
pre-osteoblasts was demonstrated by staining for the cytoskeletal protein
vinculin and cell nuclei. The expression of essential transcription factors for
osteoblastogenesis, such as Runx2 and Sp7 transcription factor 7 (known as
osterix), was upregulated after 7 days. Consequently, the expression of genes
that determine osteoblast phenotype, such as alkaline phosphatase, type I
collagen, and osteocalcin, was accelerated on carbon nanotube embedded polymer
matrix after 14 days. In conclusion, the ultrathin nanocomposite film generated
various orders of nanoscale topography that triggered processes related to
osteoblast bone formation.

PMCID: PMC4468207
PMID: 26076355  [PubMed - in process]


36. Curr Opin Hematol. 2015 Jul;22(4):330-6. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000153.

The critical and specific transcriptional regulator of the microenvironmental
niche for hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

Omatsu Y(1), Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Immunobiology and Hematology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University bJapan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Kyoto, Japan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: It has been assumed that the special microenvironments known
as niches in the marrow play an essential role in maintaining hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells (HSPCs), and the identity of the HSPC niche has been a
subject of long-standing debate. Recent studies identified cells, which create
microenvironments meeting the criteria for HSPC niches and the critical
transcriptional regulators of their development and maintenance.
RECENT FINDINGS: Osterix as well as Ebf2 and Bmi1 are critical but not specific
transcriptional regulators of HSPC niche development. The transcription factor
Foxc1 is expressed preferentially in a population of adipo-osteogenic
progenitors, termed CXCL12-abundant reticular (CAR) cells, which create HSPC
niches and are largely equivalent to stem cell factor and Lepr-expressing cells, 
in developing and adult bone marrow. Foxc1 is essential for CAR cell development 
and maintenance of bone marrow niches for HSPCs upregulating CXCL12 and SCF
expression and inhibition of adipogenic processes in CAR cell progenitors.
SUMMARY: Foxc1 is the first critical and specific transcriptional regulator that 
is required for development and maintenance of cells creating HSPC niches,
including a specialized population of adipo-osteogenic progenitors in bone
marrow.

PMID: 26049754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Bone. 2016 Jan;82:122-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.048. Epub 2015 May 5.

Sclerostin antibody treatment improves fracture outcomes in a Type I diabetic
mouse model.

Yee CS(1), Xie L(2), Hatsell S(2), Hum N(3), Murugesh D(4), Economides AN(2),
Loots GG(1), Collette NM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA; School of Natural Sciences,
University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, USA. (2)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, 
Tarrytown, NY, USA. (3)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA. (4)School
of Natural Sciences, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, USA. (5)School
of Natural Sciences, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, USA.
Electronic address: collette2@llnl.gov.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) patients have osteopenia and impaired fracture
healing due to decreased osteoblast activity. Further, no adequate treatments are
currently available that can restore impaired healing in T1DM; hence a
significant need exists to investigate new therapeutics for treatment of
orthopedic complications. Sclerostin (SOST), a WNT antagonist, negatively
regulates bone formation, and SostAb is a potent bone anabolic agent. To
determine whether SOST antibody (SostAb) treatment improves fracture healing in
streptozotocin (STZ) induced T1DM mice, we administered SostAb twice weekly for
up to 21days post-fracture, and examined bone quality and callus outcomes at
21days and 42days post-fracture (11 and 14weeks of age, respectively). Here we
show that SostAb treatment improves bone parameters; these improvements persist
after cessation of antibody treatment. Markers of osteoblast differentiation such
as Runx2, collagen I, osteocalcin, and DMP1 were reduced, while an abundant
number of SP7/osterix-positive early osteoblasts were observed on the bone
surface of STZ calluses. These results suggest that STZ calluses have poor
osteogenesis resulting from failure of osteoblasts to fully differentiate and
produce mineralized matrix, which produces a less mineralized callus. SostAb
treatment enhanced fracture healing in both normal and STZ groups, and in
STZ+SostAb mice, also reversed the lower mineralization seen in STZ calluses.
Micro-CT analysis of calluses revealed improved bone parameters with SostAb
treatment, and the mineralized bone was comparable to Controls. Additionally, we 
found sclerostin levels to be elevated in STZ mice and ß-catenin activity to be
reduced. Consistent with its function as a WNT antagonist, SostAb treatment
enhanced ß-catenin activity, but also increased the levels of SOST in the callus 
and in circulation. Our results indicate that SostAb treatment rescues the
impaired osteogenesis seen in the STZ induced T1DM fracture model by facilitating
osteoblast differentiation and mineralization of bone.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4635060 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 25952969  [PubMed - in process]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 May 12;112(19):6152-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1420713112. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts into functional osteoblasts by defined
factors.

Yamamoto K(1), Kishida T(2), Sato Y(1), Nishioka K(2), Ejima A(2), Fujiwara H(3),
Kubo T(3), Yamamoto T(4), Kanamura N(4), Mazda O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology, Dental Medicine, and. (2)Departments of Immunology.
(3)Orthopedics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto
602-8566, Japan. (4)Dental Medicine, and. (5)Departments of Immunology,
mazda@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp.

Osteoblasts produce calcified bone matrix and contribute to bone formation and
remodeling. In this study, we established a procedure to directly convert human
fibroblasts into osteoblasts by transducing some defined factors and culturing in
osteogenic medium. Osteoblast-specific transcription factors, Runt-related
transcription factor 2 (Runx2), and Osterix, in combination with Octamer-binding 
transcription factor 3/4 (Oct4) and L-Myc (RXOL) transduction, converted ~ 80% of
the fibroblasts into osteocalcin-producing cells. The directly converted
osteoblasts (dOBs) induced by RXOL displayed a similar gene expression profile as
normal human osteoblasts and contributed to bone repair after transplantation
into immunodeficient mice at artificial bone defect lesions. The dOBs expressed
endogenous Runx2 and Osterix, and did not require continuous expression of the
exogenous genes to maintain their phenotype. Another combination, Oct4 plus L-Myc
(OL), also induced fibroblasts to produce bone matrix, but the OL-transduced
cells did not express Osterix and exhibited a more distant gene expression
profile to osteoblasts compared with RXOL-transduced cells. These findings
strongly suggest successful direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into functional
osteoblasts by RXOL, a technology that may provide bone regeneration therapy
against bone disorders.

PMCID: PMC4434770
PMID: 25918395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2283-90. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3647. Epub 2015 Apr
20.

Puerarin enhances proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of human bone
marrow stromal cells via a nitric oxide/cyclic guanosine monophosphate signaling 
pathway.

Lv H(1), Che T(2), Tang X(1), Liu L(1), Cheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Hospital of Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R. China. (2)Baiyuan Gene Technology Co.
Ltd, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R. China.

Puerarin, a major active isoflavone extracted from the Traditional Chinese
Medicine Radix Puerariae, has been studied for its comprehensive biological
effects. However, to date, its effect on bone formation and the underlying
mechanism of action have not been well investigated. The present study
investigated the effect of puerarin on cell proliferation and osteoblastic
maturation in cultured human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSC) in vitro. Puerarin
(2.5-100 µM) increased hBMSC growth in a dose-dependent manner, as indicated by
an MTT assay, and stimulated osteoblastic maturation as indicated by assessment
of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, as well as calcium deposition into the
extracellular matrix detected by alizarin red S staining. Furthermore, polymerase
chain reaction analysis showed that the expression of osteoblastic markers,
including Runt-related transcription factor 2/core-binding factor alpha 1,
osterix and osteocalcin, were increased in hBMSCs following incubation with
puerarin. Further experiments indicated that puerarin increased the nitric oxide 
(NO) production and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) content in hBMSCs. The 
effects of puerarin were mimicked by 17ß-estrodiol (10(-8) M) and were abolished 
in the presence of estrogen receptor antagonist ICI182780 (10(-7) M). A NO
synthase inhibitor, Nx-nitro-L-arginine methylester (6 x 10(-3) M), significantly
attenuated puerarin-induced increases in NO production and cGMP content, in
parallel with a reduction of cell proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation 
as well as the expression of osteoblastic markers. These results suggested that
puerarin may prevent osteoporosis by exerting stimulatory effects on bone
formation and the NO/cGMP pathway, which has an important role in
puerarin-induced hBMSC proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation.

PMID: 25892538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mikrobiologiia. 2014 May-Jun;83(3):336-45.

[Comparative assessment of inductive effects of Azospirillum lectins with
different antigenic properties on the signal systems of wheat seedling roots].

[Article in Russian]

Alen'kina SA, Petrova LP, Sokolova MK, Chernyshova MP, Trutneva KA, Bogatyrev VA,
Nikitina VE.

The lectins of associative nitrogen-fixing bacteria Azospirillum brasilense Sp7
and its mutant A. brasilense Sp7.2.3 were shown to have different effects on the 
components of the wheat seedling root signal system, namely to regulate the
levels of cAMP, nitric oxide, diacylglycerol, and salicylic acid, as well as to
induce the activities of superoxide dismutase and lipoxygenase. Our results make 
it possible to consider azospirilla lectins as inducers of the signal systems in 
wheat seedling roots, since they cause development of several flows of primary
signals. These data are of general biological importance, since lectins are
present in all living organisms and most ot the functions of lectins remain
insufficiently understood.

PMID: 25844444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 May 15;407:85-97. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.03.010. Epub 
2015 Mar 20.

Src enhances osteogenic differentiation through phosphorylation of Osterix.

Choi YH(1), Han Y(1), Lee SH(1), Cheong H(2), Chun KH(3), Yeo CY(4), Lee KY(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea. (2)Research Institute,
National Cancer Center, 323 Ilsan-ro, Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do
410-769, South Korea. (3)Gachon Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of 
Pharmacy, Gachon University, Incheon 406-799, South Korea. (4)Department of Life 
Science and Division of Life & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University,
Seoul 120-750, South Korea. (5)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug
Development, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea.
Electronic address: kwanglee@chonnam.ac.kr.

Osterix, a zinc-finger transcription factor, is required for osteoblast
differentiation and new bone formation during embryonic development. The c-Src of
tyrosine kinase is involved in a variety of cellular signaling pathways, leading 
to the induction of DNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and cytoskeletal
reorganization. Src activity is tightly regulated and its dysregulation leads to 
constitutive activation and cellular transformation. The function of Osterix can 
be also modulated by post-translational modification. But the precise molecular
signaling mechanisms between Osterix and c-Src are not known. In this study we
investigated the potential regulation of Osterix function by c-Src in osteoblast 
differentiation. We found that c-Src activation increases protein stability,
osteogenic activity and transcriptional activity of Osterix. The siRNA-mediated
knockdown of c-Src decreased the protein levels and transcriptional activity of
Osterix. Conversely, Src specific inhibitor, SU6656, decreased the protein levels
and transcriptional activity of Osterix. The c-Src interacts with and
phosphorylates Osterix. These results suggest that c-Src signaling modulates
osteoblast differentiation at least in part through Osterix.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25802190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Bone. 2015 Jul;76:18-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.03.003. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Contributions of Caucasian-associated bone mass loci to the variation in bone
mineral density in Vietnamese population.

Ho-Pham LT(1), Nguyen SC(2), Tran B(3), Nguyen TV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bone and Muscle Research Division, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Ton Duc Thang 
University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; Department of Internal Medicine, Pham Ngoc
Thach University of Medicine, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Electronic address:
hophamthuclan@tdt.edu.vn. (2)Osteoporosis and Bone Biology, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Australia. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Pham Ngoc Thach 
University of Medicine, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; Centre for Health Research,
School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney, Australia. (4)Bone and Muscle
Research Division, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Ton Duc Thang University, Ho Chi 
Minh City, Vietnam; Osteoporosis and Bone Biology, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Australia; Centre for Health Technologies, University of Technology,
Sydney, Australia; School of Public Health and Community Medicine, UNSW,
Australia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Bone mineral density (BMD) is under strong genetic
regulation, but it is not clear which genes are involved in the regulation,
particularly in Asian populations. This study sought to determine the association
between 29 genes discovered by Caucasian-based genome-wide association studies
and BMD in a Vietnamese population.
METHODS: The study involved 564 Vietnamese men and women aged 18 years and over
(average age: 47 years) who were randomly sampled from the Ho Chi Minh City. BMD 
at the femoral neck, lumbar spine, total hip and whole body was measured by DXA
(Hologic QDR4500, Bedford, MA, USA). Thirty-two single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 29 genes were genotyped using Sequenom MassARRAY technology. The
magnitude of association between SNPs and BMD was analyzed by the linear
regression model. The Bayesian model average method was used to identify SNPs
that are independently associated with BMD.
RESULTS: The distribution of genotypes of all, but two, SNPs was consistent with 
the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium law. After adjusting for age, gender and weight, 3
SNPs were associated with BMD: rs2016266 (SP7 gene), rs7543680 (ZBTB40 gene), and
rs1373004 (MBL2/DKK1 gene). Among the three genetic variants, the SNP rs2016266
had the strongest association, with each minor allele being associated with ~0.02
g/cm(2) increase in BMD at the femoral neck and whole body. Each of these genetic
variant explained about 0.2 to 1.1% variance of BMD. All other SNPs were not
significantly associated with BMD.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genetic variants in the SP7, ZBTB40 and
MBL2/DKK1 genes are associated with BMD in the Vietnamese population, and that
the effect of these genes on BMD is likely to be modest.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0120374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120374.
eCollection 2015.

Osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells in mineralized
alginate matrices.

Westhrin M(1), Xie M(2), Olderøy MØ(2), Sikorski P(2), Strand BL(3), Standal
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kristian Gerhard Jebsen Center for Myeloma Research, Department of Cancer
Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Trondheim, Norway. (2)Department of Physics, Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology, Trondheim, Norway. (3)Department of Biotechnology, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. (4)Kristian Gerhard
Jebsen Center for Myeloma Research, Department of Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway;
Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway.

Mineralized biomaterials are promising for use in bone tissue engineering.
Culturing osteogenic cells in such materials will potentially generate biological
bone grafts that may even further augment bone healing. Here, we studied
osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) in an alginate
hydrogel system where the cells were co-immobilized with alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) for gradual mineralization of the microenvironment. MSC were embedded in
unmodified alginate beads and alginate beads mineralized with ALP to generate a
polymer/hydroxyapatite scaffold mimicking the composition of bone. The initial
scaffold mineralization induced further mineralization of the beads with
nanosized particles, and scanning electron micrographs demonstrated presence of
collagen in the mineralized and unmineralized alginate beads cultured in
osteogenic medium. Cells in both types of beads sustained high viability and
metabolic activity for the duration of the study (21 days) as evaluated by
live/dead staining and alamar blue assay. MSC in beads induced to differentiate
in osteogenic direction expressed higher mRNA levels of osteoblast-specific genes
(RUNX2, COL1AI, SP7, BGLAP) than MSC in traditional cell cultures. Furthermore,
cells differentiated in beads expressed both sclerostin (SOST) and dental matrix 
protein-1 (DMP1), markers for late osteoblasts/osteocytes. In conclusion, Both
ALP-modified and unmodified alginate beads provide an environment that enhance
osteogenic differentiation compared with traditional 2D culture. Also, the
ALP-modified alginate beads showed profound mineralization and thus have the
potential to serve as a bone substitute in tissue engineering.

PMCID: PMC4358956
PMID: 25769043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Bone Miner Metab. 2016 Jan;34(1):79-85. doi: 10.1007/s00774-014-0645-z. Epub
2015 Mar 12.

Strong effect of SNP rs4988300 of the LRP5 gene on bone phenotype of Caucasian
postmenopausal women.

Horváth P(1), Balla B(2), Kósa JP(2), Tóbiás B(2), Szili B(2), Kirschner G(2),
Gyori G(3), Kató K(2), Lakatos P(2), Takács I(2).

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Korányi Sándor u. 
2/a, Budapest, 1089, Hungary. horv.peter88@gmail.com. (2)1st Department of
Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Korányi Sándor u. 2/a, Budapest, 1089, 
Hungary. (3)Department of Radiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

The purpose of this study was to identify relationships between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes of the Wnt pathway and bone mineral density
(BMD) of postmenopausal women. We chose this pathway due to its importance in
bone metabolism that was underlined in several studies. DNA samples of 932
Hungarian postmenopausal women were studied. First, their BMD values at different
sites (spine, total hip) were measured, using a Lunar Prodigy DXA scanner.
Thereafter, T-score values and the patients' body mass indices (BMIs) were
calculated, while information about the fracture history of the sample population
was also collected. We genotyped nine SNPs of the following three genes: LRP5,
GPR177, and SP7, using a Sequenom MassARRAY Analyzer 4 instrument. The genomic
DNA samples used for genotyping were extracted from the buccal mucosa of the
subjects. Statistical analyses were carried out using the SPSS 21 and R package. 
The results of this analysis showed a significant association between SNP
rs4988300 of the LRP5 gene and total hip BMD values. We could not reveal any
associations between the markers of GPR177, SP7, and bone phenotypes. We found no
effect of these genotypes on fracture risk. We could demonstrate a significant
gene-gene interaction between two SNPs of LRP5 (rs4988300 and rs634008,
p = 0.009) which was lost after Bonferroni correction. We could firmly
demonstrate a significant association between rs4988300 of the LRP5 gene and bone
density of the hip on the largest homogeneous postmenopausal study group analyzed
to date. Our finding corroborates the relationship between LRP5 genotype and bone
phenotype in postmenopausal women, however, the complete mechanism of this
relationship requires further investigations.

PMID: 25762437  [PubMed - in process]


45. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Oct;230(10):2426-36. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24972.

Phosphorylation of Runx2, induced by cyclic mechanical tension via ERK1/2
pathway, contributes to osteodifferentiation of human periodontal ligament
fibroblasts.

Ren D(1), Wei F(2), Hu L(2), Yang S(2), Wang C(1), Yuan X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (2)Department
of Orthodontics, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, the 4th Military
Medical University, Qingdao, China.

Occlusal force is an important stimulus for maintaining periodontal homeostasis. 
This is attributed to the quality of human periodontal ligament fibroblasts
(hPDLFs) that could transfer occlusal force into biological signals modulating
osteoblst differentiation. However, few studies investigated the mechanism of
occlusal force-induced osteodifferentiation of hPDLFs. In our study, we used the 
cyclic mechanical tension (CMT) at 10% elongation with 0.5<U+2009>Hz to mimic occlusal
force, and explored its effects on osteogenesis of hPDLFs. Firstly, elevated
expressions of several osteoblast marker genes (Runx2, ATF4, SP7, OCN, and BSP), 
as well as activated ERK1/2 pathway were detected during CMT loading for 1, 3, 6,
12, 18, and 24<U+2009>h. To gain further insight into how CMT contributed to those
effects, we focused on the classic ERK1/2-Runx2 pathway by inhibiting ERK1/2 and 
overexpressing Runx2. Our results reflected that Runx2 overexpression alone could
induce osteodifferentiation of hPDLFs. Meanwhile, CMT loading could intensify
while combined ERK1/2 blockage could weaken this process. Furthermore, we found
that CMT promoted Runx2 transcription and phosphorylation via ERK1/2; protein
level of phospho-Runx2 (p-Runx2), rather than Runx2, was in parallel with mRNA
expressions of SP7, OCN, and BSP. Taken together, our study proved that p-Runx2, 
elevated by CMT via ERK1/2 pathway, is the predominate factor in promoting
osteoblast differentiation of hPDLFs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25740112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Eur Cell Mater. 2015 Mar 4;29:155-75; discussion 175-6.

Local origins impart conserved bone type-related differences in human osteoblast 
behaviour.

Shah M(1), Gburcik V, Reilly P, Sankey RA, Emery RJ, Clarkin CE, Pitsillides AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Science, Royal Veterinary College,
London, NW1 0TU, UK.mshah@rvc.ac.uk.

Osteogenic behaviour of osteoblasts from trabecular, cortical and subchondral
bone were examined to determine any bone type-selective differences in samples
from both osteoarthritic (OA) and osteoporotic (OP) patients. Cell growth,
differentiation; alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) mRNA and activity, Runt-related
transcription factor-2 (RUNX2), SP7-transcription factor (SP7), bone
sialoprotein-II (BSP-II), osteocalcin/bone gamma-carboxyglutamate (BGLAP),
osteoprotegerin (OPG, TNFRSF11B), receptor activator of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>ß ligand 
(RANKL, TNFSF11) mRNA levels and proangiogenic vascular endothelial growth
factor-A (VEGF-A) mRNA and protein release were assessed in osteoblasts from
paired humeral head samples from age-matched, human OA/OP (n = 5/4) patients.
Initial outgrowth and increase in cell number were significantly faster (p <
0.01) in subchondral and cortical than trabecular osteoblasts, in OA and OP, and 
this bone type-related differences were conserved despite consistently faster
growth in OA. RUNX2/SP7 levels and TNAP mRNA and protein activity were, however, 
greater in trabecular than subchondral and cortical osteoblasts in OA and OP.
BSP-II levels were significantly greater in trabecular and lowest in cortical
osteoblasts in both OA and OP. In contrast, BGLAP levels showed divergent bone
type-selective behaviour; highest in osteoblasts from subchondral origins in OA
and trabecular origins in OP. We found virtually identical bone type-related
differences, however, in TNFRSF11B:TNFSF11 in OA and OP, consistent with greater 
potential for paracrine effects on osteoclasts in trabecular osteoblasts.
Subchondral osteoblasts (OA) exhibited highest VEGF-A mRNA levels and release.
Our data indicate that human osteoblasts in trabecular, subchondral and cortical 
bone have inherent, programmed diversity, with specific bone type-related
differences in growth, differentiation and pro-angiogenic potential in vitro.

PMID: 25738584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. FEBS Lett. 2015 Mar 24;589(7):857-64. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.02.021. Epub
2015 Feb 26.

Phosphorylation of Serine422 increases the stability and transactivation
activities of human Osterix.

Xu Y(1), Yao B(1), Shi K(1), Lu J(1), Jin Y(1), Qi B(2), Li H(3), Pan S(4), Chen 
L(5), Ma C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong
Road 140, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oral Pathology, Affiliated
Hospital of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong Road 136, Nanjing
210029, P.R. China. (3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Affiliated
Hospital of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong Road 136, Nanjing
210029, P.R. China. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China. (5)Molecular 
Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology, Odense University
Hospital, Winslowparken 25. Sal 1, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark. (6)Department of
Developmental Genetics, Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong Road 140, Nanjing
210029, P.R. China. Electronic address: cyma@njmu.edu.cn.

Osterix (Osx) is an essential regulator for osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation. Although phosphorylation has been reported to be involved in the
regulation of Osx activity, the precise underlying mechanisms remain to be
elucidated. Here we identified S422 as a novel phosphorylation site of Osx and
demonstrated that GSK-3ß interacted and co-localized with Osx. GSK-3ß increased
the stability and transactivation activity of Osx through phosphorylation of the 
newly identified site. These findings expanded our understanding of the
mechanisms of posttranslational regulation of Osx and the role of GSK-3ß in the
control of Osx transactivation activity.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25728276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2015 Mar;10(4):547-60. doi: 10.2217/nnm.14.134.

Nanoscale stimulation of osteoblastogenesis from mesenchymal stem cells:
nanotopography and nanokicking.

Pemberton GD(1), Childs P, Reid S, Nikukar H, Tsimbouri PM, Gadegaard N, Curtis
AS, Dalby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for cell Engineering, Institute for Molecular, Cell & Systems Biology, 
College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciencies, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
G12 8QQ, UK.

AIM: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have large regenerative potential to replace
damaged cells from several tissues along the mesodermal lineage. The potency of
these cells promises to change the longer term prognosis for many degenerative
conditions currently suffered by our aging population. We have endeavored to
demonstrate our ability to induce osteoblatogenesis in MSCs using high-frequency 
(1000-5000 Hz) piezo-driven nanodisplacements (16-30 nm displacements) in a
vertical direction.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Osteoblastogenesis has been determined by the upregulation
of osteoblasic genes such as osteonectin (ONN), RUNX2 and Osterix, assessed via
quantitative real-time PCR; the increase of osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin
(OPN) at the protein level and the deposition of calcium phosphate determined by 
histological staining.
RESULTS: Intriguingly, we have observed a relationship between nanotopography and
piezo-stimulated mechanotransduction and possibly see evidence of two differing
osteogenic mechanisms at work. These data provide confidence in
nanomechanotransduction for stem cell differentiation without dependence on
soluble factors and complex chemistries.
CONCLUSION: In the future it is envisaged that this technology may have
beneficial therapeutic applications in the healthcare industry, for conditions
whose overall phenotype maybe characterized by weak or damaged bones (e.g.,
osteoporosis and bone fractures), and which can benefit from having an increased 
number of osteoblastic cells in vivo.

PMID: 25723089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Bone. 2015 May;74:106-13. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.01.006. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Identification of novel osteogenic compounds by an ex-vivo sp7:luciferase
zebrafish scale assay.

de Vrieze E(1), Zethof J(2), Schulte-Merker S(3), Flik G(2), Metz JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Animal Physiology, Institute for Water and Wetland
Research, Faculty of Science, Radboud University Nijmegen, Heyendaalseweg 135,
6525 AJ, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: e.devrieze@science.ru.nl.
(2)Department of Organismal Animal Physiology, Institute for Water and Wetland
Research, Faculty of Science, Radboud University Nijmegen, Heyendaalseweg 135,
6525 AJ, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & UMC Utrecht,
Utrecht 3584 CT, The Netherlands; Institute for Cardiovascular Organogenesis and 
Regeneration, Faculty of Medicine, WWU Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany;
Cells-in-Motion Cluster of Excellence (EXC 1003 - CiM), University of Münster,
Germany.

Tight interactions among different cell types contributing to bone formation are 
of key importance in the maintenance of bone homeostasis. Based on the high
similarity in responses to (anti)osteogenic signals between zebrafish scales and 
mammalian bone, we developed and validated a model to screen large numbers of
compounds using ex-vivo cultured scales of a sp7:luciferase transgenic zebrafish.
This model combines the high predictive value of explant cultures with quick,
sensitive, and quantifiable readout converging the effects via various pathways
including WNT-signaling, to SP7/osterix promoter activity. Sp7 is pivotal in
osteoblast differentiation and activity and its promoter activity provides an
excellent surrogate for sp7 expression. Bmp-2a was shown to dose-dependently
increase sp7-driven luciferase activity ex vivo. Next, we identified novel
effects on bone for 51.7% of the compounds from a small library of WNT-signaling 
modulators, including a strong osteogenic effect for niclosamide. From all
previously characterized compounds, the effect on bone was correctly predicted
for 70% of compounds, resulting in a 7% false positive- and 21% false negative
rate. The proposed sp7:luciferase zebrafish scale model is unique, powerful and
efficient new tool to assess compounds with osteogenic effects, prior to further 
testing in rodents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25600250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Syndromol. 2014 Dec;5(6):268-75. doi: 10.1159/000369108. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Novel Deletion of SERPINF1 Causes Autosomal Recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Type VI in Two Brazilian Families.

Minillo RM(1), Sobreira N(2), de Faria Soares Mde F(1), Jurgens J(2), Ling H(3), 
Hetrick KN(3), Doheny KF(3), Valle D(2), Brunoni D(1), Perez AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São
Paulo, Brazil. (2)McKusick-Nathan Institute of Genetic Medicine, Institute of
Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA.
(3)Center for Inherited Disease Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA.

Autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) accounts for 10% of all OI
cases, and, currently, mutations in 10 genes (CRTAP, LEPRE1, PPIB, SERPINH1,
FKBP10, SERPINF1, SP7, BMP1, TMEM38B, and WNT1) are known to be responsible for
this form of the disease. PEDF is a secreted glycoprotein of the serpin
superfamily that maintains bone homeostasis and regulates osteoid mineralization,
and it is encoded by SERPINF1, currently associated with OI type VI (MIM 172860).
Here, we report a consanguineous Brazilian family in which multiple individuals
from at least 4 generations are affected with a severe form of OI, and we also
report an unrelated individual from the same small city in Brazil with a similar 
but more severe phenotype. In both families the same homozygous SERPINF1 19-bp
deletion was identified which is not known in the literature yet. We described
intra- and interfamilial clinical and radiological phenotypic variability of OI
type VI caused by the same homozygous SERPINF1 19-bp deletion and suggest a
founder effect. Furthermore, the SERPINF1 genotypes/phenotypes reported so far in
the literature are reviewed.

PMCID: PMC4281578
PMID: 25565926  [PubMed]


51. Izv Akad Nauk Ser Biol. 2013 Nov-Dec;(6):760-4.

[Change in the content of salicylic acid and activities of phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase and catalase in wheat seedling roots under the influence of
Azospirilium lectins].

[Article in Russian]

Alen'kina SA, Trutneva KA, Nikitina VE.

The time course of changes in the endogenous content of salicylic acid, the ratio
between the acid's free and bound forms, and changes in the activities of
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and catalase in wheat seedling roots under the effect
of lectins of two strains of the associative nitrogen-fixing bacterium
Azospirillum (A. brasilense Sp7 and its mutant defective in lectin activity, A.
brasilense Sp7.2.3) is investigated. Differences in plant response to the action 
of the lectins from these two strains are established. On the basis of the
obtained data, a model is proposed for lectin-assisted induction of resistance,
according to which the lectin effect on the roots of seedlings results in the
accumulation of free salicylic acid, which inhibits catalase activity, ultimately
leading to accumulation of hydrogen peroxide and formation of induced resistance.

PMID: 25518563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mikrobiologiia. 2014 Jan-Feb;83(1):41-8.

[Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles by Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

[No authors listed]

Plant-associated nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria Azospirillum brasilense were shown
to reduce the gold of chloroauric acid to elemental gold, resulting in formation 
of gold nanoparicles. Extracellular phenoloxidizing enzymes (laccases and Mn
peroxidases) were shown to participate in reduction of Au+3 (HAuCl4) to Au(0).
Transmission electron microscopy revealed accumulation of colloidal gold
nanoparticles of diverse shape in the culture liquid of A. brasilense strains
Sp245 and Sp7. The size of the electron-dense nanospheres was 5 to 50 nm, and the
size of nanoprisms varied from 5 to 300 nm. The tentative mechanism responsible
for formation of gold nanoparticles is discussed.

PMID: 25507456  [PubMed - in process]


53. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e114435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114435.
eCollection 2014.

Cellular responses during morphological transformation in Azospirillum brasilense
and Its flcA knockout mutant.

Hou X(1), McMillan M(2), Coumans JV(3), Poljak A(4), Raftery MJ(5), Pereg L(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Science and Technology, University of New England, Armidale, New
South Wales, Australia; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Shanxi Medical
University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China. (2)School of Science and Technology,
University of New England, Armidale, New South Wales, Australia. (3)School of
Science and Technology, University of New England, Armidale, New South Wales,
Australia; School of Rural Medicine, University of New England, Armidale, New
South Wales, Australia. (4)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Analytical
Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; The
School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. (5)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Analytical Centre,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

FlcA is a response regulator controlling flocculation and the morphological
transformation of Azospirillum cells from vegetative to cyst-like forms. To
understand the cellular responses of Azospirillum to conditions that cause
morphological transformation, proteins differentially expressed under
flocculation conditions in A. brasilense Sp7 and its flcA knockout mutant were
investigated. Comparison of 2-DE protein profiles of wild-type (Sp7) and a flcA
deletion mutant (Sp7-flcA<U+0394>) revealed a total of 33 differentially expressed 2-DE 
gel spots, with 22 of these spots confidently separated to allow protein
identification. Analysis of these spots by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and MASCOT database searching identified 48 proteins
(=10% emPAI in each spot). The functional characteristics of these proteins
included carbon metabolism (beta-ketothiolase and citrate synthase), nitrogen
metabolism (Glutamine synthetase and nitric oxide synthase), stress tolerance
(superoxide dismutase, Alkyl hydroperoxidase and ATP-dependent Clp protease
proteolytic subunit) and morphological transformation (transducer coupling
protein). The observed differences between Sp7 wild-type and flcA- strains
enhance our understanding of the morphological transformation process and help to
explain previous phenotypical observations. This work is a step forward in
connecting the Azospirillum phenome and genome.

PMCID: PMC4264754
PMID: 25502569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Korean J Orthod. 2014 Nov;44(6):320-9. doi: 10.4041/kjod.2014.44.6.320. Epub 2014
Nov 24.

Compressive force regulates ephrinB2 and EphB4 in osteoblasts and osteoclasts
contributing to alveolar bone resorption during experimental tooth movement.

Hou J(1), Chen Y(2), Meng X(3), Shi C(2), Li C(2), Chen Y(4), Sun H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin
University, Changchun, China. ; Department of Orthodontics, School and Hospital
of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun, China. (2)Department of Oral
Pathology, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun,
China. (3)Department of Endodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin
University, Changchun, China. (4)Department of Orthodontics, School and Hospital 
of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the involvement of ephrinB2 in periodontal tissue
remodeling in compression areas during orthodontic tooth movement and the effects
of compressive force on EphB4 and ephrinB2 expression in osteoblasts and
osteoclasts.
METHODS: A rat model of experimental tooth movement was established to examine
the histological changes and the localization of ephrinB2 in compressed
periodontal tissues during experimental tooth movement. RAW264.7 cells and ST2
cells, used as precursor cells of osteoclasts and osteoblasts, respectively, were
subjected to compressive force in vitro. The gene expression of EphB4 and
ephrinB2, as well as bone-associated factors including Runx2, Sp7, NFATc1, and
calcitonin receptor, were examined by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: Histological examination of the compression areas of alveolar bone from 
experimental rats showed that osteoclastogenic activities were promoted while
osteogenic activities were inhibited. Immunohistochemistry revealed that ephrinB2
was strongly expressed in osteoclasts in these areas. Quantitative real-time PCR 
showed that mRNA levels of NFATc1, calcitonin receptor, and ephrinB2 were
increased significantly in compressed RAW264.7 cells, and the expression of
ephrinB2, EphB4, Sp7, and Runx2 was decreased significantly in compressed ST2
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that compressive force can regulate EphB4 and
ephrinB2 expression in osteoblasts and osteoclasts, which might contribute to
alveolar bone resorption in compression areas during orthodontic tooth movement.

PMCID: PMC4250666
PMID: 25473648  [PubMed]


55. Odontology. 2016 Jan;104(1):1-9. doi: 10.1007/s10266-014-0182-1. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Bone morphogenetic protein 7 induces cementogenic differentiation of human
periodontal ligament-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Torii D(1), Tsutsui TW(1), Watanabe N(2), Konishi K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The Nippon Dental University School of Life
Dentistry at Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Human Genetics, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of
Microbiology, The Nippon Dental University School of Life Dentistry at Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. konikiyo@tky.ndu.ac.jp.

Bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP-7) is a multifunctional differentiation factor 
that belongs to the transforming growth factor superfamily. BMP-7 induces gene
expression of protein tyrosine phosphatase-like, member A/cementum attachment
protein (PTPLA/CAP) and cementum protein 1 (CEMP1), both of which are markers of 
cementoblasts and cementocytes. In the previous study, we reported that BMP-7
treatment enhanced PTPLA/CAP and CEMP1 expression in both normal and immortal
human periodontal ligament (PDL) cells. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of 
the gene expression of these molecules, in this study, we identified a functional
transcription activator binding region in the promoter region of PTPLA/CAP and
CEMP1 that is responsive to BMP signals. Here, we report that some short motifs
termed GC-rich Smad-binding elements (GC-SBEs) that are located in the human
PTPLA/CAP promoter and CEMP1 promoter are BMP-7 responsive as analyzed with
luciferase promoter assays. On the other hand, we found that transcription of
Sp7/Osterix and PTPLA/CAP was up-regulated after 1 week of BMP-7 treatment on
purified normal human PDL cells as a result of gene expression microarray
analysis. Furthermore, transcription of Sp7/Osterix, runt-related transcription
factor 2 (RUNX2), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was up-regulated after 2 weeks
of BMP-7 treatment, whereas gene expression of osteo/odontogenic markers such as 
integrin-binding sialoprotein (IBSP), collagen, type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1), dentin 
matrix acidic phosphoprotein 1 (DMP1), and dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP) was 
not up-regulated in purified normal or immortal human PDL cells as a result of
qRT-PCR. The results suggest that BMP-7 mediates cementogenesis via GC-SBEs in
human PDL cells and that its molecular mechanism is different from that for
osteo/odontogenesis.

PMID: 25464857  [PubMed - in process]


56. Bone. 2015 Feb;71:145-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.007. Epub 2014 Oct 25.

Loss of bone sialoprotein leads to impaired endochondral bone development and
mineralization.

Holm E(1), Aubin JE(2), Hunter GK(3), Beier F(4), Goldberg HA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1. Electronic
address: eholm@uwo.ca. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8. Electronic address:
jane.aubin@utoronto.ca. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
N6A 5C1; School of Dentistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1. Electronic
address: graeme.hunter@schulich.uwo.ca. (4)Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5C1. Electronic address: fbeier@uwo.ca.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1; School of
Dentistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1. Electronic address: hagoldbe@uwo.ca.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is an anionic phosphoprotein in the extracellular matrix 
of mineralized tissues, and a promoter of biomineralization and osteoblast
development. Previous studies on the Bsp-deficient mouse (Bsp(-/-)) have
demonstrated a significant bone and periodontal tissue phenotype in adulthood.
However, the role of BSP during early long bone development is not known. To
address this, early endochondral ossification in the Bsp(-/-) mouse was studied. 
Embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5) wild-type (WT) tibiae showed early stages of
ossification that were absent in Bsp(-/-) mice. At E16.5, mineralization had
commenced in the Bsp(-/-) mice, but staining for mineral was less intense and
more dispersed compared with that in WT controls. Tibiae from Bsp(-/-) mice also 
demonstrated decreased mineralization and shortened length at postnatal day 0.5
(P0.5) compared to WT bones. There was no detectable difference in the number of 
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-positive foci at P0.5, although the P0.5
Bsp(-/-) tibiae had decreased Vegfa expression compared with WT tissue. Due to
the shortened tibiae the growth plates were examined and determined to be of
normal overall length. However, the length of the resting zone was increased in
P0.5 Bsp(-/-) tibiae whereas that of the proliferative zone was decreased, with
no change in the hypertrophic zone length of Bsp(-/-) mice. A reduction in cells 
positive for Ki-67, an S-phase cell-cycle marker, was noted in the proliferative 
zone. Decreased numbers of TUNEL-positive hypertrophic chondrocytes were also
apparent in the Bsp(-/-) tibial growth plates, suggesting decreased apoptosis.
Expression of the osteogenic markers Alp1, Col1a1, Sp7, Runx2, and Bglap was
reduced in the endochondral bone of the neonatal Bsp(-/-) compared to WT tibiae. 
These results suggest that BSP is an important and multifaceted protein that
regulates both chondrocyte proliferation and apoptosis as well as transition from
cartilage to bone during development of endochondral bone.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25464126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Neoplasia. 2014 Nov 20;16(11):939-49. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.005. eCollection
2014.

Galectin-3 inhibits osteoblast differentiation through notch signaling.

Nakajima K(1), Kho DH(1), Yanagawa T(2), Harazono Y(1), Gao X(1), Hogan V(1), Raz
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology and Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. (2)Department of Orthopedic
Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma University, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

Patients with bone cancer metastasis suffer from unbearable pain and bone
fractures due to bone remodeling. This is caused by tumor cells that disturb the 
bone microenvironment. Here, we have investigated the role of tumor-secreted
sugar-binding protein, i.e., galectin-3, on osteoblast differentiation and report
that it downregulates the expression of osteoblast differentiation markers, e.g.,
RUNX2, SP7, ALPL, COL1A1, IBSP, and BGLAP, of treated human fetal osteoblast
(hFOB) cells. Co-culturing of hFOB cells with human breast cancer BT-549 and
prostate cancer LNCaP cells harboring galectin-3 has resulted in inhibition of
osteoblast differentiation by the secreted galectin-3 into culture medium. The
inhibitory effect of galectin-3 was found to be through its binding to Notch1 in 
a sugar-dependent manner that has led to accelerated Notch1 cleavage and
activation of Notch signaling. Taken together, our findings show that soluble
galectin-3 in the bone microenvironment niche regulates bone remodeling through
Notch signaling, suggesting a novel bone metastasis therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4240919
PMID: 25425968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mikrobiologiia. 2014 Jan-Feb;83(1):41-8.

[Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles by Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Kupriashina MA, Vetchinkina EP, Burov AM, Ponomareva EG, Nikitina VE.

Plant-associated nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria Azospirillum brasilense were shown
to reduce the gold of chloroauric acid to elemental gold, resulting in formation 
of gold nanoparicles. Extracellular phenoloxidizing enzymes (laccases and Mn
peroxidases) were shown to participate in reduction of Au+3 (HAuCl4) to Au(0).
Transmission electron microscopy revealed accumulation of colloidal gold
nanoparticles of diverse shape in the culture liquid of A. brasilense strains
Sp245 and Sp7. The size of the electron-dense nanospheres was 5 to 50 nm, and the
size of nanoprisms varied from 5 to 300 nm. The tentative mechanism responsible
for formation of gold nanoparticles is discussed.

PMID: 25423733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;28(8):1009-16.

[Preliminary study on microRNA regulated osteogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation of mouse stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xing R, Kong Q, Xiang Z, Yang J, Luo J, Deng L, Xie H.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the specific microRNA (miRNA) in osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiations of C3H10Tl/2 cells.
METHODS: C3H10Tl/2 cells were induced to differentiate into osteoblasts and
chondrocytes. Specific miRNA more than 2 fold change and 2 average normalized
probe signal between C3H10Tl/2 and C3H10Tl/2-derived osteoblast, and' between
C3Hl0Tl/2 and C3H10Tl/2-derived chondrocytes were screened out by miRNA
microarray, and verified by real-time fluorescence quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR).
RESULTS: Alkaline phosphatase expression of osteogenic induced group was
significantly higher than that of control group at 7 days after induced (P <
0.05). RT-qPCR results showed the expressions of Runx2, serine protease (Sp7),
collagen type I, and osteopontin (OPN) genes were significantly increased at 7,
14, and 21 days after induced when compared with before induced (P < 0.05).
Western blot results showed the expressions of Runx2, Sp7, collagen type I, and
OPN proteins of osteogenic induced group were significantly higher than those of 
control group at 21 days after induced (P < 0.05). The expressions of SOX9,
collagen type II, Aggrecan, and Has2 were significantly increased at 5, 10, and
15 days after induced when compared with before induced (P < 0.05). The
expressions of SOX9, collagen type 2, Aggrecan, and Has2 proteins of chondrogenic
induced group were significantly higher than those of control group at 15 days
after induced (P < 0.05). Totally, 10 osteogenic and 3 chondrogenic miRNA more
than 2 fold change and 2 average normalized probe signal were screened out by
miRNA microarray. RT-qPCR results of these specific miRNAs were similar to
microarray results except miR-455-3p.
CONCLUSION: Specific miRNAs are screened out by microarray and it is a good
foundation for the future study on miRNA functional verification and target gene 
prediction.

PMID: 25417318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015 Mar;71(2):1225-33. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0332-7.

Dual role of P2 receptors during osteoblast differentiation.

Rodrigues-Ribeiro R(1), Alvarenga ÉC, Calio ML, Paredes-Gamero EJ, Ferreira AT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, R. Botucatu,
862, São Paulo, 04062-023, Brazil.

P2 receptors activated by ATP are expressed in the skeletal system. However, the 
role of P2 receptors in osteoblast differentiation remains unclear.METHODS:
Participation of P2 receptors in differentiation was investigated in the
preosteoblast MC3T3-M1 cell line. Preosteoblasts were stimulated for 7 or 14 days
in the presence of osteogenic medium containing ATP and its analogs, and then
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, gene expression analyses, and protein
expression were assessed.
RESULTS: We observed that ATP and its analogs promoted increased ALP activity
after 7 days of treatment. In contrast, these agonists promoted reductions in ALP
activity after 14 days. Some antagonists, such as PPADS (P2 antagonist), MRS2179 
(P2Y1 antagonist), MRS2578 (P2Y6 antagonist), and AZ11645373 (P2X7 antagonist)
reduced the increases in ALP activity after 7 days. However, only AZ11645373
inhibited the reduction in ALP activity after 14 days. The expression of the
P2Y2, P2Y6, P2X4, and P2X7 receptors was observed. Furthermore, treatment with
ATP modulated the expression of P2 receptors, increasing P2X4 expression and
reducing P2Y6 and P2X7 expression. Similar results were observed after 14 days.
In addition, ATP treatment for 7 days increased the expression of transcription
factors associated with osteoblast differentiation, such as Runx2, SP7, and Dix5,
whereas SP7 and Dix5 expression was reduced at 14 days. These results suggest
that P2 receptor activation modulates the differentiation of osteoblasts and is
dependent upon the stage of differentiation. These results also suggest that
several P2 receptors are involved in this process.

PMID: 25384617  [PubMed - in process]


61. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 18;111(46):16502-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419349111. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Osteoblast regulation via ligand-activated nuclear trafficking of the oxytocin
receptor.

Di Benedetto A(1), Sun L(2), Zambonin CG(3), Tamma R(4), Nico B(4), Calvano
CD(3), Colaianni G(4), Ji Y(2), Mori G(5), Grano M(4), Lu P(2), Colucci S(4),
Yuen T(2), New MI(6), Zallone A(4), Zaidi M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, Neurosciences and Sensory Organs,
University of Bari Aldo Moro Medical School, Bari 70126, Italy; Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia 71122, Italy;
(2)Mount Sinai Bone Program and Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029; (3)Department of Chemistry, University of Bari Aldo
Moro, Bari 70126, Italy; and. (4)Department of Basic Medical Science,
Neurosciences and Sensory Organs, University of Bari Aldo Moro Medical School,
Bari 70126, Italy; (5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Foggia, Foggia 71122, Italy; (6)Departments of Pediatrics and
maria.new@mssm.edu mone.zaidi@mountsinai.org. (7)Mount Sinai Bone Program and
Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029;
Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029 maria.new@mssm.edu mone.zaidi@mountsinai.org.

We report that oxytocin (Oxt) receptors (Oxtrs), on stimulation by the ligand
Oxt, translocate into the nucleus of osteoblasts, implicating this process in the
action of Oxt on osteoblast maturation. Sequential immunocytochemistry of intact 
cells or isolated nucleoplasts stripped of the outer nuclear membrane showed
progressive nuclear localization of the Oxtr; this nuclear translocation was
confirmed by monitoring the movement of Oxtr-EGFP as well as by immunogold
labeling. Nuclear Oxtr localization was conclusively shown by Western
immunoblotting and MS of nuclear lysate proteins. We found that the passage of
Oxtrs into the nucleus was facilitated by successive interactions with
ß-arrestins (Arrbs), the small GTPase Rab5, importin-ß (Kpnb1), and transportin-1
(Tnpo1). siRNA-mediated knockdown of Arrb1, Arrb2, or Tnpo1 abrogated Oxt-induced
expression of the osteoblast differentiation genes osterix (Sp7), Atf4, bone
sialoprotein (Ibsp), and osteocalcin (Bglap) without affecting Erk
phosphorylation. Likewise and again, without affecting pErk, inhibiting Arrb
recruitment by mutating Ser rich clusters of the nuclear localization signal to
Ala abolished nuclear import and Oxtr-induced gene expression. These studies
define a previously unidentified mechanism for Oxtr action on bone and open
possibilities for direct transcriptional modulation by nuclear G protein-coupled 
receptors.

PMCID: PMC4246276
PMID: 25378700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Kidney Int. 2015 Mar;87(3):593-601. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.347. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Primary osteoblast-like cells from patients with end-stage kidney disease reflect
gene expression, proliferation, and mineralization characteristics ex vivo.

Pereira RC(1), Delany AM(2), Khouzam NM(1), Bowen RE(3), Freymiller EG(4),
Salusky IB(1), Wesseling-Perry K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California, USA. (2)Center for Molecular Medicine, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Los Angeles, California, USA. (3)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
California, USA. (4)UCLA School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2015 Mar;87(3):499-501.
    Kidney Int. 2015 Sep;88(3):640-1.
    Kidney Int. 2015 Sep;88(3):640.

Osteocytes regulate bone turnover and mineralization in chronic kidney disease.
As osteocytes are derived from osteoblasts, alterations in osteoblast function
may regulate osteoblast maturation, osteocytic transition, bone turnover, and
skeletal mineralization. Thus, primary osteoblast-like cells were cultured from
bone chips obtained from 24 pediatric ESKD patients. RNA expression in cultured
cells was compared with RNA expression in cells from healthy individuals, to RNA 
expression in the bone core itself, and to parameters of bone histomorphometry.
Proliferation and mineralization rates of patient cells were compared with rates 
in healthy control cells. Associations were observed between bone osteoid
accumulation, as assessed by bone histomorphometry, and bone core RNA expression 
of osterix, matrix gla protein, parathyroid hormone receptor 1, and RANKL. Gene
expression of osteoblast markers was increased in cells from ESKD patients and
signaling genes including Cyp24A1, Cyp27B1, VDR, and NHERF1 correlated between
cells and bone cores. Cells from patients with high turnover renal osteodystrophy
proliferated more rapidly and mineralized more slowly than did cells from healthy
controls. Thus, primary osteoblasts obtained from patients with ESKD retain
changes in gene expression ex vivo that are also observed in bone core specimens.
Evaluation of these cells in vitro may provide further insights into the abnormal
bone biology that persists, despite current therapies, in patients with ESKD.

PMCID: PMC4344911
PMID: 25354236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Carbohydr Res. 2014 Dec 5;400:9-13. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2014.06.019. Epub 2014 
Jun 27.

Synthesis of the tetrasaccharide repeating unit of the O-glycan from the polar
flagellum flagellin of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Pal KB(1), Mukhopadhyay B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata, Mohanpur
741246, India. (2)Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER)
Kolkata, Mohanpur 741246, India. Electronic address: sugarnet73@hotmail.com.

Chemical synthesis of the tetrasaccharide repeating unit of the O-glycan from the
polar flagellum flagellin of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 in the form of its
p-methoxyphenyl glycoside is reported. The required glycosidic linkages have been
accomplished by activation of thioglycosides with N-iodosuccinimide in the
presence of H2SO4-silica. H2SO4-silica was found to be an effective alternative
to the classical acid promoters like TfOH or TMSOTf and it can lead to the
formation of both 1,2-cis and 1,2-trans glycosidic linkages depending on the
protecting group manipulation and control of the reaction condition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25299938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Physiol Rep. 2014 Oct 2;2(10). pii: e12117. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12117. Print 2014 
Oct 1.

Scavenger receptor class B, type I (Scarb1) deficiency promotes
osteoblastogenesis but stunts terminal osteocyte differentiation.

Martineau C(1), Kevorkova O(1), Brissette L(2), Moreau R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire du Métabolisme Osseux, BioMed, Département des Sciences
Biologiques, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, H3C 3P8, Quebec, Canada. 
(2)Laboratoire du Métabolisme des Lipoprotéines, Département des Sciences
Biologiques, BioMed, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, H3C 3P8, Quebec, 
Canada.

Scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI), the Scarb1 gene product, is a
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) receptor which was shown to influence bone
metabolism. Its absence in mice is associated with alterations of the
glucocorticoid/adrenocorticotropic hormone axis, and translated in high bone mass
and enhanced bone formation. Since the cellular alterations underlying the
enhanced bone formation remain unknown, we investigated Scarb1-deficient marrow
stromal cells (MSC) behavior in vitro. No difference in HDL3, cholesteryl ester
(CE) or estradiol (E) association/binding was measured between Scarb1-null and
wild-type (WT) cells. Scarb1 genic expression was down-regulated twofold
following osteogenic treatment. Neither WT nor null cell proliferation was
influenced by HDL3 exposure whereas this condition decreased genic expression of 
osteoblastic marker osterix (Sp7), and osteocyte markers sclerostin (Sost) and
dentin matrix protein 1 (Dmp1) independently of genotype. Sost and Dmp1 basal
expression in null cells was 40% and 50% that of WT cells; accordingly, osteocyte
density was 20% lower in vertebrae from Scarb1-null mice. Genic expression of
co-receptors for Wnt signaling, namely LDL-related protein (Lrp) 5 and Lrp8, was 
increased, respectively, by two- and threefold, and of transcription target-genes
axis inhibition protein 2 (Axin2) and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1 (Lef1)
over threefold. Gene expression of Wnt signaling agonist Wnt5a and of the
antagonist dickkopfs-related protein 1 (Dkk1) were found to be increased 10- to
20-fold in null MSC. These data suggest alterations of Wnt pathways in
Scarb1-deficient MSC potentially explaining their enhanced function, hence
contributing to the high bone mass observed in these mice.

© 2014 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4254088
PMID: 25281615  [PubMed]


65. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2015;36(4):379-86. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2014.955584.

Electro-optical study of the exposure of Azospirillum brasilense carbohydrate
epitopes.

Guliy OI(1), Matora LY, Dykman LA, Staroverov SA, Burygin GL, Bunin VD, Burov AM,
Ignatov OV.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms,
Russian Academy of Sciences (IBPPM RAS) , Saratov , Russian Federation.

The exposure of Azospirillum brasilense carbohydrate epitopes was investigated by
electro-optical analysis of bacterial cell suspensions. To study changes in the
electro-optical (EO) properties of the suspensions, we used antibodies generated 
to the complete lipopolysaccharide of A. brasilense type strain Sp7 and also
antibodies to the smooth and rough O polysaccharides of Sp7. After 18 hr of
culture growth, the EO signal of the suspension treated with antibodies to smooth
O polysaccharide was approximately 20% lower than that of the suspension treated 
with antibodies to complete lipopolysaccharide (control). After 72 hr of culture 
growth, the strongest EO signal was observed for the cells treated with
antibodies to rough O polysaccharide (approximately 46% greater than the
control), whereas for the cells treated with antibodies to smooth O
polysaccharide, it was much lower (approximately 23% of the control). These data 
were confirmed by electron microscopy. The results of the study may have
importance for the rapid evaluation of changes in lipopolysaccharide form in
microbial biotechnology, when the antigenic composition of the bacterial surface 
requires close control.

PMID: 25273383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Apr;230(4):922-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24823.

Novel hedgehog agonists promote osteoblast differentiation in mesenchymal stem
cells.

Nakamura T(1), Naruse M, Chiba Y, Komori T, Sasaki K, Iwamoto M, Fukumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Oral Health and Development
Sciences, Sendai, Japan; Liaison Center for Innovative Dentistry, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) family members are involved in multiple cellular processes
including proliferation, migration, differentiation, and cell fate determination.
Recently, the novel Hh agonists Hh-Ag 1.3 and 1.7 were identified in a
high-throughput screening of small molecule compounds that activate the
expression of Gli1, a target of Hh signaling. This study demonstrates that Hh-Ag 
1.3 and 1.7 strongly activate the expression of endogenous Gli1 and promote
osteoblast differentiation in the mesenchymal stem cell line C3H10T1/2. Both
compounds stimulated alkaline phosphatase activity in a dose-dependent manner,
and induced osteoblast marker gene expression in C3H10T1/2 cells, which indicated
that they had acquired an osteoblast identity. Of the markers, the expression of 
osterix/Sp7, a downstream target of runt-related transcription factor (Runx)2,
was induced by Hh-Ag 1.7, which also rescued the osteoblast differentiation
defect of RD-127, a mesenchymal cell line from Runx2-deficient mice. Hh-Ags also 
activated canonical Wnt signaling and synergized with low doses of BMP-2 to
enhance osteoblastic potential. Thus, Hh-Ag 1.7 could be useful for bone healing 
in individuals with abnormalities in osteogenesis, such as osteoporosis patients 
and the elderly, and can contribute to the development of novel therapeutics for 
the treatment of bone fractures and defects.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25215620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):531-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.100. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Sp7/Osterix induces the mouse pro-a2(I) collagen gene (Col1a2) expression via the
proximal promoter in osteoblastic cells.

Yano H(1), Hamanaka R(2), Nakamura-Ota M(2), Adachi S(3), Zhang JJ(3), Matsuo
N(3), Yoshioka H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radioisotope Research, Department of Research Support, Research
Promotion Project, Oita University, 1-1 Idaigaoka Hasama-machi, Yufu, Oita
879-5593, Japan. Electronic address: yanoh@oita-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Cell
Biology, Oita University, 1-1 Idaigaoka Hasama-machi, Yufu, Oita 879-5593, Japan.
(3)Department of Matrix Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, 1-1
Idaigaoka Hasama-machi, Yufu, Oita 879-5593, Japan.

Bone is essentially composed of two components, hydroxyapatite and extracellular 
matrix proteins. The extracellular matrix of bone is primary composed of
collagen, mostly type I collagen, with lesser amounts of other types of collagen 
such as type V collagen. Osteoblast differentiation is a multi-step process in
which many classes of factors function in a coordinated manner. Sp7/Osterix,
which binds to G/C-rich sequences, is a transcription factor that contributes to 
osteoblast differentiation. The present study aimed to clarify the involvement of
Sp7/Osterix with the proximal promoter region of the mouse Col1a2 gene containing
multiple G/C-rich sequences exist. Consequently, a functional analysis of the
proximal mouse Col1a2 promoter showed that a substitution mutation of the second 
G/C-rich sequence from the transcription site specifically decreased the activity
of osteoblastic cells. In addition, the experiments of overexpression of
Sp7/Osterix and treatment with its specific siRNA showed that this G/C-rich
sequence is responsible for the specific expression in osteoblastic cells.
Consistent with these data, Sp7/Osterix bound to the region and increased the
expression of the Col1a2 gene in association with osteoblast differentiation in
the culture system.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Connect Tissue Res. 2014 Aug;55 Suppl 1:88-91. doi: 10.3109/03008207.2014.923874.

Specificity protein 7 is not essential for tooth morphogenesis.

Clarke JC(1), Bae JM, Adhami M, Rashid H, Chen H, Napierala D, Gutierrez SE,
Sinha K, Crombrugghe Bd, Javed A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, University 
of Alabama , AL , USA .

Tooth formation is a multifaceted process involving numerous interactions between
oral epithelium and neural crest derived ecto-mesenchyme from morphogenesis to
cyto-differentiation. The precise molecular regulator that drives the
cyto-differentiation and dynamic cross-talk between the two cell types has yet to
be fully understood. Runx2 along with its downstream target Sp7 are essential
transcription factors for development of the mineralizing cell types. Global
knockout of the Runx2 gene results in an arrest of tooth morphogenesis at the
late bud stage. Like Runx2, Sp7-null mutants exhibit peri-natal lethality and are
completely devoid of alveolar bone. However, the role of Sp7 in tooth development
remains elusive. Here, we report the effects of Sp7 deletion on tooth formation. 
Surprisingly, tooth morphogenesis progresses normally until the mid bell stage in
Sp7-homozygous mutants. Incisors and multi-cusped first and second molars were
noted in both littermates. Thus, formation of alveolar bone is not a prerequisite
for tooth morphogenesis. Tooth organs of Sp7-null however, were significantly
smaller in size when compared to WT. Differentiation of both ameloblasts and
odontoblasts was disrupted in Sp7-null mice. Only premature and disorganized
ameloblasts and odontoblasts were noted in mutant mice. These data indicate that 
Sp7 is not required for tooth morphogenesis but is obligatory for the functional 
maturation of both ameloblasts and odontoblasts.

PMCID: PMC4269224
PMID: 25158188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Connect Tissue Res. 2014 Aug;55 Suppl 1:83-7. doi: 10.3109/03008207.2014.923872.

Sp7 and Runx2 molecular complex synergistically regulate expression of target
genes.

Rashid H(1), Ma C, Chen H, Wang H, Hassan MQ, Sinha K, de Crombrugghe B, Javed A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery and.

Runx2 and Sp7 transcription factors are essential for skeletogenesis. Targeted
deletion of either gene results in failure of osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation. Loss of bone-matrix gene expression is surprisingly similar in Sp7 and
Runx2 null mice. The molecular mechanisms responsible for similar transcriptional
regulation of target genes remain largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that
Runx2 and Sp7 interact physically and functionally. Both proteins are
co-expressed in osteoblastic cells. We first characterized a panel of Sp7
antibodies and demonstrate that majority of the published antibodies do not
recognize Sp7 protein. Co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed that endogenous
Runx2 protein physically interacts with Sp7 protein. We identified that runt
homology domain (RHD) of Runx2 protein is involved in physical association with
Sp7. Functional consequences of Runx2-Sp7 physical interaction was then assessed 
by promoter-reporter assays. We selected promoters of osteocalcin (OC), a marker 
of mature osteoblast and fibroblast growth factor 3 (FGF3), a signaling molecule 
that determine the fate of embryonic ecto-mesenchyme. Runx2 and Sp7 stimulate
OC-promoter activity by 3-folds in epithelial cells. However, when both proteins 
were co-expressed, a dose-dependent synergistic activation of 22-folds was noted.
Similar pattern of synergistic activation of OC-promoter was noted in mesenchymal
cell. FGF3 promoter was activated by 25<U+2009>- and 30-folds with Runx2 and Sp7
respectively. Again a dose-dependent synergistic activation of 130-folds was
evident when Runx2 and Sp7 were co-expressed in epithelial cells. Synergistic
activation of FGF3 promoter was also noted in mesenchymal cells. Together, our
data demonstrated that Runx2-Sp7 molecular complex functionally cooperate for
maximal induction of cell-phenotype-restricted genes.

PMCID: PMC4269247
PMID: 25158187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):27105-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.576793. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-regulated interactions between Osterix
and Runx2 are critical for the transcriptional osteogenic program.

Artigas N(1), Ureña C(1), Rodríguez-Carballo E(1), Rosa JL(1), Ventura F(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona,
L'Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), E-08907 L'Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Spain. (2)From the Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II,
Universitat de Barcelona, L'Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge
(IDIBELL), E-08907 L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain fventura@ub.edu.

The transcription factors Runx2 and Osx (Osterix) are required for osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. Runx2 expression occurs at early stages of
osteochondroprogenitor determination, followed by Osx induction during osteoblast
maturation. We demonstrate that coexpression of Osx and Runx2 leads to
cooperative induction of expression of the osteogenic genes Col1a1, Fmod, and
Ibsp. Functional interaction of Osx and Runx2 in the regulation of these
promoters is mediated by enhancer regions with adjacent Sp1 and Runx2 DNA-binding
sites. These enhancers allow formation of a cooperative transcriptional complex, 
mediated by the binding of Osx and Runx2 to their specific DNA promoter sequences
and by the protein-protein interactions between them. We also identified the
domains involved in the interaction between Osx and Runx2. These regions contain 
the amino acids in Osx and Runx2 known to be phosphorylated by p38 and ERK MAPKs.
Inhibition of p38 and ERK kinase activities or mutation of their known
phosphorylation sites in Osx or Runx2 strongly disrupts their physical
interaction and cooperative transcriptional effects. Altogether, our results
provide a molecular description of a mechanism for Osx and Runx2 transcriptional 
cooperation that is subject to further regulation by MAPK-activating signals
during osteogenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175347
PMID: 25122769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Br J Haematol. 2014 Oct;167(2):194-206. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13020. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

The bone marrow stromal compartment in multiple myeloma patients retains
capability for osteogenic differentiation in vitro: defining the stromal defect
in myeloma.

Kassen D(1), Moore S, Percy L, Herledan G, Bounds D, Rodriguez-Justo M, Croucher 
P, Yong K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London, London, UK.

Defects in bone repair contribute to multiple myeloma (MM) bone disease. It is
unknown whether this reflects failure of osteogenic differentiation from
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC), inherent stromal defects or mature cell
dysfunction. We quantified the number of fibroblast colony-forming units (CFU-f) 
and osteoblast colony-forming units (CFU-ob) in freshly isolated bone marrow (BM)
from healthy individuals (N = 10) and MM patients (N = 54). CFU-f and CFU-ob were
present in MM BM, at comparable frequency to normal subjects, irrespective of
disease stage, and the presence of bone disease. Adherent cultures from MM BM are
able to differentiate into osteoblasts, as indicated by the early upregulation of
RUNX2, SP7, AXIN2 and DLX5, and the production of alkaline phosphatase and
calcium. Coculture with MM cells failed to prevent osteogenic differentiation of 
adult human MSC. On the other hand, MM cells induced cell cycle progression in
resting MSC in a cell contact dependent manner. This effect was confirmed using
both primary CD138+ cells and MM cell lines, and was not seen with B or T cell
lines. Our data confirm the presence of osteoblast progenitors and the
preservation of osteogenic function in MM, however dysregulation of cell cycle
control may contribute to the loss of normal bone homeostasis that ultimately
results in osteolytic bone loss.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25079197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2014 Nov-Dec;90(6):536-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jped.2014.05.003.
Epub 2014 Jul 18.

What is new in genetics and osteogenesis imperfecta classification?

Valadares ER(1), Carneiro TB(2), Santos PM(3), Oliveira AC(3), Zabel B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. Electronic address:
eugenia@medicina.ufmg.br. (2)Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(3)Faculdade de Odontologia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil. (4)Pediatric Clinic, Freiburg University, Freiburg,
Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Literature review of new genes related to osteogenesis imperfecta (OI)
and update of its classification.
SOURCES: Literature review in the PubMed and OMIM databases, followed by
selection of relevant references.
SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS: In 1979, Sillence et al. developed a classification of
OI subtypes based on clinical features and disease severity: OI type I, mild,
common, with blue sclera; OI type II, perinatal lethal form; OI type III, severe 
and progressively deforming, with normal sclera; and OI type IV, moderate
severity with normal sclera. Approximately 90% of individuals with OI are
heterozygous for mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes, with dominant pattern 
of inheritance or sporadic mutations. After 2006, mutations were identified in
the CRTAP, FKBP10, LEPRE1, PLOD2, PPIB, SERPINF1, SERPINH1, SP7, WNT1, BMP1, and 
TMEM38B genes, associated with recessive OI and mutation in the IFITM5 gene
associated with dominant OI. Mutations in PLS3 were recently identified in
families with osteoporosis and fractures, with X-linked inheritance pattern. In
addition to the genetic complexity of the molecular basis of OI, extensive
phenotypic variability resulting from individual loci has also been documented.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering the discovery of new genes and limited
genotype-phenotype correlation, the use of next-generation sequencing tools has
become useful in molecular studies of OI cases. The recommendation of the
Nosology Group of the International Society of Skeletal Dysplasias is to maintain
the classification of Sillence as the prototypical form, universally accepted to 
classify the degree of severity in OI, while maintaining it free from direct
molecular reference.

Copyright © 2014 Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria. Published by Elsevier Editora
Ltda. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25046257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Implant Dent. 2014 Aug;23(4):407-15. doi: 10.1097/ID.0000000000000116.

Expression of SP7, RUNX1, DLX5, and CTNNB1 in human mesenchymal stem cells
cultured on xenogeneic bone substitute as compared with machined titanium.

Barone A(1), Toti P, Funel N, Campani D, Covani U.

Author information: 
(1)*Adjunct Professor, Department of Surgery, Medical, Molecular and Critical
Area Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Tuscan Stomatologic Institute,
Versilia General Hospital, Lido di Camaiore, Italy. Postdoctoral Fellow,
Department of Surgery, Medical, Molecular and Critical Area Pathology, University
of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Tuscan Stomatologic Institute, Versilia General Hospital,
Lido di Camaiore, Italy. Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of Surgery, Medical,
Molecular and Critical Area Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Tuscan
Stomatologic Institute, Versilia General Hospital, Lido di Camaiore, Italy.
§Associate Professor, Department of Surgery, Medical, Molecular and Critical Area
Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Tuscan Stomatologic Institute,
Versilia General Hospital, Lido di Camaiore, Italy. <U+2016>Professor, Department of
Surgery, Medical, Molecular and Critical Area Pathology, University of Pisa,
Pisa, Italy; Tuscan Stomatologic Institute, Versilia General Hospital, Lido di
Camaiore, Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of this research was to investigate the gene expression profile 
of 4 transcription factors in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) cultured with a
xenogeneic bone substitute and a support of machined titanium.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In vitro studies were performed on hMSC cells, which grew
in contact with cortical porcine bone and machined titanium disks for 10 days.
RNA quantification for genes DLX5, CTNNB1, RUNX1, and SP7 was assessed by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. For cells supported by
titanium, immunocytochemistry of osteocalcin (OC) was also performed.
RESULTS: In the osteoblast-induced cells (OIC), DLX5, CTNNB1, and RUNX1 were
significantly upregulated (+2.38-, +3.51-, and +7.08-fold, respectively), whereas
SP7 was downregulated (-26.32-fold). None of the genes seemed to be upregulated
or downregulated by the corticocancellous porcine bone. In cells grown on
titanium support, DLX5 and RUNX1 were respectively upregulated (+3.12-fold) and
downregulated (-2.14-fold). For titanium support, the presence of both catenin
beta-1 and OC was verified.
CONCLUSION: The 2 genes RUNX1 and SP7 resulted differently expressed in cells
cultured on metallic supports if compared with the expression recorded for OIC.
An induction of the osteogenic phenotype was observed when cells were cultured on
machined titanium, but not on xenogeneic material.

PMID: 25025858  [PubMed - in process]


74. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014 Aug;26(4):500-7. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000117.

Osteogenesis imperfecta due to mutations in non-collagenous genes: lessons in the
biology of bone formation.

Marini JC(1), Reich A, Smith SM.

Author information: 
(1)Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Osteogenesis imperfecta or 'brittle bone disease' has mainly
been considered a bone disorder caused by collagen mutations. Within the last
decade, however, a surge of genetic discoveries has created a new paradigm for
osteogenesis imperfecta as a collagen-related disorder, where most cases are due 
to autosomal dominant type I collagen defects, while rare, mostly recessive,
forms are due to defects in genes whose protein products interact with collagen
protein. This review is both timely and relevant in outlining the genesis,
development, and future of this paradigm shift in the understanding of
osteogenesis imperfecta.
RECENT FINDINGS: Bone-restricted interferon-induced transmembrane (IFITM)-like
protein (BRIL) and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) defects cause types V
and VI osteogenesis imperfecta via defective bone mineralization, while defects
in cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1), and
cyclophilin B (CYPB) cause types VII-IX osteogenesis imperfecta via defective
collagen post-translational modification. Heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) and
FK506-binding protein-65 (FKBP65) defects cause types X and XI osteogenesis
imperfecta via aberrant collagen crosslinking, folding, and chaperoning, while
defects in SP7 transcription factor, wingless-type MMTV integration site family
member 1 (WNT1), trimeric intracellular cation channel type b (TRIC-B), and old
astrocyte specifically induced substance (OASIS) disrupt osteoblast development. 
Finally, absence of the type I collagen C-propeptidase bone morphogenetic protein
1 (BMP1) causes type XII osteogenesis imperfecta due to altered collagen
maturation/processing.
SUMMARY: Identification of these multiple causative defects has provided crucial 
information for accurate genetic counseling, inspired a recently proposed
functional grouping of osteogenesis imperfecta types by shared mechanism to
simplify current nosology, and has prodded investigations into common pathways in
osteogenesis imperfecta. Such investigations could yield critical information on 
cellular and bone tissue mechanisms and translate to new mechanistic insight into
clinical therapies for patients.

PMCID: PMC4183132
PMID: 25007323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Sep;21(9):1365-76. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.82. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

DLX3 regulates bone mass by targeting genes supporting osteoblast differentiation
and mineral homeostasis in vivo.

Isaac J(1), Erthal J(1), Gordon J(2), Duverger O(1), Sun HW(3), Lichtler AC(4),
Stein GS(2), Lian JB(2), Morasso MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. (3)Biodata Mining and
Discovery Section, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Department of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Death Differ. 2014 Sep;21(9):1345-6.

Human mutations and in vitro studies indicate that DLX3 has a crucial function in
bone development, however, the in vivo role of DLX3 in endochondral ossification 
has not been established. Here, we identify DLX3 as a central attenuator of adult
bone mass in the appendicular skeleton. Dynamic bone formation, histologic and
micro-computed tomography analyses demonstrate that in vivo DLX3 conditional loss
of function in mesenchymal cells (Prx1-Cre) and osteoblasts (OCN-Cre) results in 
increased bone mass accrual observed as early as 2 weeks that remains elevated
throughout the lifespan owing to increased osteoblast activity and increased
expression of bone matrix genes. Dlx3OCN-conditional knockout mice have more
trabeculae that extend deeper in the medullary cavity and thicker cortical bone
with an increased mineral apposition rate, decreased bone mineral density and
increased cortical porosity. Trabecular TRAP staining and site-specific Q-PCR
demonstrated that osteoclastic resorption remained normal on trabecular bone,
whereas cortical bone exhibited altered osteoclast patterning on the periosteal
surface associated with high Opg/Rankl ratios. Using RNA sequencing and chromatin
immunoprecipitation-Seq analyses, we demonstrate that DLX3 regulates
transcription factors crucial for bone formation such as Dlx5, Dlx6, Runx2 and
Sp7 as well as genes important to mineral deposition (Ibsp, Enpp1, Mepe) and bone
turnover (Opg). Furthermore, with the removal of DLX3, we observe increased
occupancy of DLX5, as well as increased and earlier occupancy of RUNX2 on the
bone-specific osteocalcin promoter. Together, these findings provide novel
insight into mechanisms by which DLX3 attenuates bone mass accrual to support
bone homeostasis by osteogenic gene pathway regulation.

PMCID: PMC4131184
PMID: 24948010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Sci Rep. 2014 Jun 18;4:5346. doi: 10.1038/srep05346.

All-optical regulation of gene expression in targeted cells.

Wang Y(1), He H(2), Li S(3), Liu D(4), Lan B(5), Hu M(1), Cao Y(5), Wang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ultrafast Laser Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Information
Technology (Ministry of Education), College of Precision Instrument and
Optoelectronics Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, P.R. China.
(2)1] Ultrafast Laser Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Information
Technology (Ministry of Education), College of Precision Instrument and
Optoelectronics Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, P.R. China [2] 
Med-X Research Institute, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, 200030, P.R. China. (3)1] Key Laboratory of microbial
functional genomics of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, 300072, P.R. China [2]. (4)Department of Endodontics, School
of Stomatology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300072, P.R. China. (5)Key
Laboratory of microbial functional genomics of Ministry of Education, College of 
Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300072, P.R. China.

Controllable gene expression is always a challenge and of great significance to
biomedical research and clinical applications. Recently, various approaches based
on extra-engineered light-sensitive proteins have been developed to provide
optogenetic actuators for gene expression. Complicated biomedical techniques
including exogenous genes engineering, transfection, and material delivery are
needed. Here we present an all-optical method to regulate gene expression in
targeted cells. Intrinsic or exogenous genes can be activated by a
Ca(2+)-sensitive transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) 
driven by a short flash of femtosecond-laser irradiation. When applied to
mesenchymal stem cells, expression of a differentiation regulator Osterix can be 
activated by this method to potentially induce differentiation of them. A
laser-induced "Ca(2+)-comb" (LiCCo) by multi-time laser exposure is further
developed to enhance gene expression efficiency. This noninvasive method hence
provides an encouraging advance of gene expression regulation, with promising
potential of applying in cell biology and stem-cell science.

PMCID: PMC4061554
PMID: 24939233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Aug 1;326(1):46-56. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.06.003. Epub
2014 Jun 11.

Short-term moderate hypothermia stimulates alkaline phosphatase activity and
osteocalcin expression in osteoblasts by upregulating Runx2 and osterix in vitro.

Aisha MD(1), Nor-Ashikin MN(2), Sharaniza AB(3), Nawawi HM(4), Kapitonova MY(5), 
Froemming GR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Molecular Biotechnology & Faculty of Medicine, Universiti
Teknologi MARA, 47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address:
aisha.mohddin@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Medical Molecular Biotechnology &
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi MARA, 47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor,
Malaysia; DDH, Universiti of Teknologi MARA, Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia.
Electronic address: noras011@salam.uitm.edu.my. (3)DDH, Universiti of Teknologi
MARA, Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address:
sharaniza_abrahim@salam.uitm.edu.my. (4)Center for Pathology Diagnostic and
Research Laboratories, Clinical Training Center, Universiti Teknologi MARA, 47000
Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia; DDH, Universiti of Teknologi MARA, Shah Alam,
Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address: hapizah@salam.uitm.edu.my. (5)Institute
of Medical Molecular Biotechnology & Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi
MARA, 47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia; DDH, Universiti of Teknologi MARA, 
Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address: marina@salam.uitm.edu.my.
(6)Institute of Medical Molecular Biotechnology & Faculty of Medicine, Universiti
Teknologi MARA, 47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia; DDH, Universiti of
Teknologi MARA, Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address:
gabriele@salam.uitm.edu.my.

Exposure of Normal Human Osteoblast cells (NHOst) to a period of hypothermia may 
interrupt their cellular functions, lead to changes in bone matrix and disrupt
the balance between bone formation and resorption, resulting in bone loss or
delayed fracture healing. To investigate this possibility, we exposed NHOst cells
to moderate (35 °C) and severe (27 °C) hypothermia for 1, 12, 24 and 72 h. The
effects of hypothermia with respect to cell cytoskeleton organization, metabolic 
activity and the expression of cold shock chaperone proteins, osteoblast
transcription factors and functional markers, were examined. Our findings showed 
that prolonged moderate hypothermia retained the polymerization of the
cytoskeletal components. NHOst cell metabolism was affected differently according
to hypothermia severity. The osteoblast transcription factors Runx2 and osterix
were necessary for the transcription and translation of bone matrix proteins,
where alkaline phosphatase (Alp) activity and osteocalcin (OCN) bone protein were
over expressed under hypothermic conditions. Consequently, bone mineralization
was stimulated after exposure to moderate hypothermia for 1 week, indicating bone
function was not impaired. The cold shock chaperone protein Rbm3 was
significantly upregulated (p<0.001) during the cellular stress adaption under
hypothermic conditions. We suggest that Rbm3 has a dual function: one as a
chaperone protein that stabilizes mRNA transcripts and a second one in enhancing 
the transcription of Alp and Ocn genes. Our studies demonstrated that hypothermia
permitted the in vitro maturation of NHOst cells probably through an
osterix-dependent pathway. For that reason, we suggest that moderate hypothermia 
can be clinically applied to counteract heat production at the fracture site that
delays fracture healing.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24928274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 10;111(23):8673-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1324290111. Epub 2014 May 27.

Up-regulation of glycolytic metabolism is required for HIF1a-driven bone
formation.

Regan JN(1), Lim J(1), Shi Y(1), Joeng KS(2), Arbeit JM(3), Shohet RV(4), Long
F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery. (2)Medicine. (3)Surgery, and.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813.
(5)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery,Medicine,Developmental Biology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; and longf@wudosis.wustl.edu.

The bone marrow environment is among the most hypoxic in the body, but how
hypoxia affects bone formation is not known. Because low oxygen tension
stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIFa) proteins, we have investigated
the effect of expressing a stabilized form of HIF1a in osteoblast precursors.
Brief stabilization of HIF1a in SP7-positive cells in postnatal mice dramatically
stimulated cancellous bone formation via marked expansion of the osteoblast
population. Remarkably, concomitant deletion of vascular endothelial growth
factor A (VEGFA) in the mouse did not diminish bone accrual caused by HIF1a
stabilization. Thus, HIF1a-driven bone formation is independent of VEGFA
up-regulation and increased angiogenesis. On the other hand, HIF1a stabilization 
stimulated glycolysis in bone through up-regulation of key glycolytic enzymes
including pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1). Pharmacological inhibition of
PDK1 completely reversed HIF1a-driven bone formation in vivo. Thus, HIF1a
stimulates osteoblast formation through direct activation of glycolysis, and
alterations in cellular metabolism may be a broadly applicable mechanism for
regulating cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4060724
PMID: 24912186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Oct;115(10):1808-15. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24851.

Protein kinase A regulates the osteogenic activity of Osterix.

He S(1), Choi YH, Choi JK, Yeo CY, Chun C, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Osterix belongs to the SP gene family and is a core transcription factor
responsible for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Activation of
protein kinase A (PKA), a serine/threonine kinase, is essential for controlling
bone formation and BMP-induced osteoblast differentiation. However, the
relationship between Osterix and PKA is still unclear. In this report, we
investigated the precise role of the PKA pathway in regulating Osterix during
osteoblast differentiation. We found that PKA increased the protein level of
Osterix; PKA phosphorylated Osterix, increased protein stability, and enhanced
the transcriptional activity of Osterix. These results suggest that Osterix is a 
novel target of PKA, and PKA modulates osteoblast differentiation partially
through the regulation of Osterix.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24905700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2013 Dec 10;5(2):143-8. doi: 10.1021/ml400397k. eCollection
2014.

Design, synthesis, and osteogenic activity of daidzein analogs on human
mesenchymal stem cells.

Strong AL(1), Jiang Q(2), Zhang Q(2), Zheng S(2), Boue SM(3), Elliott S(4), Burow
ME(4), Bunnell BA(1), Wang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Tulane University
School of Medicine , New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, United States. (2)Department
of Chemistry and RCMI Cancer Research Program, Xavier University , New Orleans,
Louisiana 70125, United States. (3)Southern Regional Research Center , U.S.
Department of Agriculture, New Orleans, Louisiana 70130, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine , New Orleans,
Louisiana 70112, United States.

Osteoporosis is caused by an overstimulation of osteoclast activity and the
destruction of the bone extracellular matrix. Without the normal architecture,
osteoblast cells are unable to rebuild phenotypically normal bone. Hormone
replacement therapy with estrogen has been effective in increasing osteoblast
activity but also has resulted in the increased incidence of breast and uterine
cancer. In this study we designed and synthesized a series of daidzein analogs to
investigate their osteogenic induction potentials. Human bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from three different donors were treated with
daidzein analogs and demonstrated enhanced osteogenesis when compared to daidzein
treatment. The enhanced osteogenic potential of these daidzein analogs resulted
in increased osterix (Sp7), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteopontin (OPN), and
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), which are osteogenic transcription factors 
that regulate the maturation of osteogenic progenitor cells into mature
osteoblast cells.

PMCID: PMC4027770
PMID: 24900787  [PubMed]


81. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Nov;70(2):1199-204. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0042-1.

Potential of mesenchymal stem cells by adenovirus-mediated erythropoietin gene
therapy approaches for bone defect.

Li C(1), Ding J, Jiang L, Shi C, Ni S, Jin H, Li D, Sun H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, College and Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin
University, Changchun, 130021, Jilin, China.

Regeneration of large bone defects is a common clinical problem. Recent studies
have shown that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have emerged as a promising
alternative to traditional surgical techniques. However, it is still a key
question how to enhance the osteogenic potential of MSCs for possible clinical
trials. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of
adenovirus-mediated erythropoietin (Ad-EPO) transfer on BMSCs, we performed
extensive in vitro/in vivo assays in this study. Flow cytometry analysis and the 
result of MTT showed that EPO could promote BMSCs proliferation. QPCR data
demonstrated that EPO increased expressions of Runx2, Sp7, and Col1 in osteoblast
at various time points and also increased alkaline phosphatase activity and the
calcium deposition. These results indicate that EPO can increase the
differentiation of osteoblast. Importantly, in vivo assays clearly demonstrate
that EPO can efficiently induce new bone formation in the bone defect model. Our 
results strongly suggest that EPO can affect osteoblast differentiation and play 
important roles in bone regeneration leading to an increase in bone formation.

PMID: 24894982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 11;289(28):19539-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.578104. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Genomic determinants of gene regulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 during
osteoblast-lineage cell differentiation.

Meyer MB(1), Benkusky NA(1), Lee CH(1), Pike JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706. (2)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 pike@biochem.wisc.edu.

The biological effects of 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25 (OH)2D3) on osteoblast 
differentiation and function differ significantly depending upon the cellular
state of maturation. To explore this phenomenon mechanistically, we examined the 
impact of 1,25(OH)2D3 on the transcriptomes of both pre-osteoblastic (POBs) and
differentiated osteoblastic (OBs) MC3T3-E1 cells, and assessed localization of
the vitamin D receptor (VDR) at sites of action on a genome-scale using ChIP
sequence analysis. We observed that the 1,25(OH)2D3-induced transcriptomes of
POBs and OBs were quantitatively and qualitatively different, supporting not only
the altered biology observed but the potential for a change in VDR interaction at
the genome as well. This idea was confirmed through discovery that VDR cistromes 
in POBs and OBs were also strikingly different. Depletion of VDR-binding sites in
OBs, due in part to reduced VDR expression, was the likely cause of the loss of
VDR-target gene interaction. Continued novel regulation by 1,25(OH)2D3, however, 
suggested that factors in addition to the VDR might also be involved.
Accordingly, we show that transcriptomic modifications are also accompanied by
changes in genome binding of the master osteoblast regulator RUNX2 and the
chromatin remodeler CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß. Importantly, genome
occupancy was also highlighted by the presence of epigenetic enhancer signatures 
that were selectively changed in response to both differentiation and
1,25(OH)2D3. The impact of VDR, RUNX2, and C/EBPß on osteoblast differentiation
is exemplified by their actions at the Runx2 and Sp7 gene loci. We conclude that 
each of these mechanisms may contribute to the diverse actions of 1,25(OH)2D3 on 
differentiating osteoblasts.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094065
PMID: 24891508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Microb Ecol. 2014 Oct;68(3):495-503. doi: 10.1007/s00248-014-0429-y. Epub 2014
May 27.

Reduction of selenite by Azospirillum brasilense with the formation of selenium
nanoparticles.

Tugarova AV(1), Vetchinkina EP, Loshchinina EA, Burov AM, Nikitina VE, Kamnev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants
and Microorganisms, Russian Academy of Sciences, 410049, Saratov, Russia,
tugarova_anna@mail.ru.

The ability to reduce selenite (SeO(3)(2-)) ions with the formation of selenium
nanoparticles was demonstrated in Azospirillum brasilense for the first time. The
influence of selenite ions on the growth of A. brasilense Sp7 and Sp245, two
widely studied wild-type strains, was investigated. Growth of cultures on both
liquid and solid (2 % agar) media in the presence of SeO(3)(2-) was found to be
accompanied by the appearance of the typical red colouration. By means of
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) 
and X-ray fluorescence analysis (XFA), intracellular accumulation of elementary
selenium in the form of nanoparticles (50 to 400 nm in diameter) was demonstrated
for both strains. The proposed mechanism of selenite-to-selenium (0) reduction
could involve SeO(3)(2-) in the denitrification process, which has been well
studied in azospirilla, rather than a selenite detoxification strategy. The
results obtained point to the possibility of using Azospirillum strains as
endophytic or rhizospheric bacteria to assist phytoremediation of, and cereal
cultivation on, selenium-contaminated soils. The ability of A. brasilense to
synthesise selenium nanoparticles may be of interest to nanobiotechnology for
"green synthesis" of bioavailable amorphous red selenium nanostructures.

PMID: 24863127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Zhongguo Gu Shang. 2014 Feb;27(2):169-72.

[Hedgehog signaling pathway and osteoporosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo M, Huang HX, Huang H, Li ZT, Lai YY.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is a conserved and important signaling pathway
involved in proliferation and differentiation of many types of cells. Latest
studies have found that Hedgehog signaling pathway may induce MSCs osteoblast
differentiation by increasing the expression of the Runx2 and Osx and inhibit
MSCs differentiate to adipocyte. Hedgehog signaling pathway may also promote
osteoblast proliferation by regulating cyclin. This review summarizes the
mechanism that Hedgehog signaling pathway regulates osteoblast differentiation
and proliferation,and concludes that Hedgehog signaling pathway can regulate bone
metabolism. It might provide new ideas for the treatment of osteoporosis.

PMID: 24826487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Sep;357(3):695-705. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1891-z. Epub
2014 May 10.

Dexamethasone-related osteogenic differentiation of dental follicle cells depends
on ZBTB16 but not Runx2.

Felthaus O(1), Gosau M, Klein S, Prantl L, Reichert TE, Schmalz G, Morsczeck C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio- and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Center,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053, Regensburg, Germany.

Dental follicle cells (DFCs) can be artificially differentiated into mineralizing
cells. With a dexamethasone-based differentiation protocol, transcription factors
ZBTB16 and NR4A3 are highly upregulated but Runx2 and other osteogenic marker
genes are not. Previous studies have suggested the involvement of a
Runx2-independent differentiation pathway. The objective of this study is to
further elucidate this mechanism. Differentiation of DFCs was examined by
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining and ALP activity measurement, by Alizarin Red
S staining and by real-time reverse transcription plus the polymerase chain
reaction. ZBTB16 was overexpressed by using a transient transfection method.
Resulting genome-wide gene expression changes were assessed by microarray. ZBTB16
and Runx2 were inhibited by short interfering RNA transfection. Promoter binding 
of ZBTB16 was evaluated by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Downregulation of Runx2
had no effect on dexamethasone-induced differentiation but was effective on
BMP2-induced differentiation. Downregulation of ZBTB16, however, impaired
dexamethasone-induced differentiation. Genes that were upregulated by
dexamethasone induction were also upregulated by ZBTB16 overexpression. Genes
that were not upregulated during dexamethasone-induced differentiation were also 
not regulated by ZBTB16 overexpression. ZBTB16 bound directly to the promoter
regions of osterix and NR4A3 but not that of Runx2. Overexpression of ZBTB16 led 
to changes in the gene expression profile, whereby upregulated genes were
overrepresented in osteogenesis-associated biological processes. Our findings
suggest that, in DFCs, a Runx2-independent differentiation mechanism exists that 
is regulated by ZBTB16.

PMID: 24816988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2014 May;15(5):482-90. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1300203.

Adipose-derived stem cells transfected with pEGFP-OSX enhance bone formation
during distraction osteogenesis.

Lai QG(1), Sun SL, Zhou XH, Zhang CP, Yuan KF, Yang ZJ, Luo SL, Tang XP, Ci JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, the Second Hospital of Shandong 
University, Jinan 250033, China; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, the Ninth People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200011, China; Department of
Stomatology, Zhaoyuan People's Hospital, Zhaoyuan 265400, China; School of
Stomatology, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China; Department of
Ultrasonography, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan 
250013, China.

This study was designed to investigate the effects of local delivery of
adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) transfected with transcription factor osterix 
(OSX) on bone formation during distraction osteogenesis. New Zealand white
rabbits (n=54) were randomly divided into three groups (18 rabbits per group). A 
directed cloning technique was used for the construction of recombinant plasmid
pEGFP-OSX, where EGFP is the enhanced green fluorescence protein. After
osteodistraction of the right mandible of all experimental rabbits, rabbits in
group A were treated with ADSCs transfected with pEGFP-OSX, group B with ADSCs
transfected with pEGFP-N1, and group C with physiological saline. Radiographic
and histological examinations were processed after half of the animals within
each group were humanely killed by injection of sodium pentothal at Week 2 or 6
after surgery. The distraction bone density was measured as its projectional bone
mineral density (BMD). Three parameters were measured, namely, the thickness of
new trabeculae (TNT), and the volumes of the newly generated cortical bone (NBV1)
and the cancellous bone (NBV2) of the distracted regions. Good bone generation in
the distraction areas was found in group A, which had the highest BMD, TNT, and
NBV in the distraction zones among the groups. There was no significant
difference in bone generation in the distraction areas between groups B and C.
The results indicate that the transplantation of ADSCs transfected with pEGFP-OSX
can effectively promote bone generation during distraction in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4076605
PMID: 24793766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Endocrinology. 2014 Jul;155(7):2402-10. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1818. Epub 2014 Apr 
23.

Advanced glycation end product 3 (AGE3) suppresses the mineralization of mouse
stromal ST2 cells and human mesenchymal stem cells by increasing TGF-ß expression
and secretion.

Notsu M(1), Yamaguchi T, Okazaki K, Tanaka K, Ogawa N, Kanazawa I, Sugimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine 1, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Shimane 693-8501,
Japan.

In diabetic patients, advanced glycation end products (AGEs) cause bone fragility
because of deterioration of bone quality. We previously showed that AGEs
suppressed the mineralization of mouse stromal ST2 cells. TGF-ß is abundant in
bone, and enhancement of its signal causes bone quality deterioration. However,
whether TGF-ß signaling is involved in the AGE-induced suppression of
mineralization during the osteoblast lineage remains unknown. We therefore
examined the roles of TGF-ß in the AGE-induced suppression of mineralization of
ST2 cells and human mesenchymal stem cells. AGE3 significantly (P < .001)
inhibited mineralization in both cell types, whereas transfection with small
interfering RNA for the receptor for AGEs (RAGEs) significantly (P < .05)
recovered this process in ST2 cells. AGE3 increased (P < .001) the expression of 
TGF-ß mRNA and protein, which was partially antagonized by transfection with RAGE
small interfering RNA. Treatment with a TGF-ß type I receptor kinase inhibitor,
SD208, recovered AGE3-induced decreases in osterix (P < .001) and osteocalcin (P 
< .05) and antagonized the AGE3-induced increase in Runx2 mRNA expression in ST2 
cells (P < .001). Moreover, SD208 completely and dose dependently rescued
AGE3-induced suppression of mineralization in both cell types. In contrast, SD208
intensified AGE3-induced suppression of cell proliferation as well as
AGE3-induced apoptosis in proliferating ST2 cells. These findings indicate that, 
after cells become confluent, AGE3 partially inhibits the differentiation and
mineralization of osteoblastic cells by binding to RAGE and increasing TGF-ß
expression and secretion. They also suggest that TGF-ß adversely affects bone
quality not only in primary osteoporosis but also in diabetes-related bone
disorder.

PMID: 24758301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 May 16;447(4):580-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.04.044. Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Bortezomib enhances the osteogenic differentiation capacity of human mesenchymal 
stromal cells derived from bone marrow and placental tissues.

Sanvoranart T(1), Supokawej A(2), Kheolamai P(3), U-Pratya Y(4), Klincumhom N(5),
Manochantr S(3), Wattanapanitch M(5), Issaragrisil S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microscopy, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol
University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand. (2)Department of Clinical Microscopy,
Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
Electronic address: mtajr@mahidol.ac.th. (3)Division of Cell Biology, Department 
of Pre-clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University, Pathumthani,
Thailand. (4)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Siriraj Center of
Excellence for Stem Cell Research, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (5)Siriraj Center of Excellence for Stem Cell
Research, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. (6)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Siriraj Center of
Excellence for Stem Cell Research, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: surapolsi@gmail.com.

Bortezomib (BZB) is a chemotherapeutic agent approved for treating multiple
myeloma (MM) patients. In addition, there are several reports showing that
bortezomib can induce murine mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to undergo osteogenic 
differentiation and increase bone formation in vivo. MSCs are the multipotent
stem cells that have capacity to differentiate into several mesodermal
derivatives including osteoblasts. Nowadays, MSCs mostly bone marrow derived have
been considered as a valuable source of cell for tissue replacement therapy. In
this study, the effect of bortezomib on the osteogenic differentiation of human
MSCs derived from both bone marrow (BM-MSCs) and postnatal sources such as
placenta (PL-MSCs) were investigated. The degree of osteogenic differentiation of
BM-MSCs and PL-MSCs after bortezomib treatment was assessed by alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity, matrix mineralization by Alizarin Red S staining and 
the expression profiles of osteogenic differentiation marker genes, Osterix,
RUNX2 and BSP. The results showed that 1 nM and 2 nM BZB can induce osteogenic
differentiation of BM-MSCs and PL-MSCs as demonstrated by increased ALP activity,
increased matrix mineralization and up-regulation of osteogenic differentiation
marker genes, Osterix, RUNX2 and BSP as compared to controls. The enhancement of 
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs by bortezomib may lead to the potential
therapeutic applications in human diseases especially patients with osteopenia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24747566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Oral Sci. 2014 Mar;56(1):67-76.

Melatonin regulates human bone sialoprotein gene transcription.

Matsumura H(1), Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo.

Melatonin is produced by the pineal gland and regulates various physiological
processes including osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Bone
sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized connective tissue-specific protein expressed 
in the early stage of cementum and bone mineralization. To elucidate the effects 
of melatonin on human BSP gene expression, we utilized human Saos2
osteoblast-like cells. Melatonin (100 nM) increased the level of BSP mRNA at 3 h,
and the level became maximal at 12 and 24 h. We then investigated the
melatonin-induced transcriptional activity of luciferase constructs (between
-84LUC and -868LUC) including different lengths of the human BSP gene promoter
transfected into Saos2 cells. The effects of melatonin abrogated in constructs
included 2-bp mutations in the two cAMP response elements (CRE1 and CRE2). The
effects of melatonin were suppressed by protein kinase A, tyrosine kinase, ERK1/2
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors. Gel mobility shift assays showed
that melatonin increased the binding of nuclear proteins to CRE1 and CRE2, and
antibodies against CRE binding protein 1 (CREB1), phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun,
JunD and Fra2 disrupted CRE1 and CRE2 protein complex formation. These data
indicate that melatonin induces BSP transcription via the CRE1 and CRE2 elements 
in the human BSP gene promoter. (J Oral Sci 56, 67-76, 2014).

PMID: 24739710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Prolif. 2014 Jun;47(3):249-57. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12104. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

DDIT3 overexpression increases odontoblastic potential of human dental pulp
cells.

Wu Y(1), Sun H, Song F, Fu D, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School &
Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430079, China.

OBJECTIVES: Human dental pulp cells (HDPCs) with multi-potential
differentiational capacity can undergo odontoblastic differentiation when
stimulated with proinflammatory cytokines. However, factors linking
proinflammatory stimuli and their odontoblastic differentiation have, as yet, not
been completely understood. As an apoptotic transcription factor, DDIT3 plays a
crucial role in the inflammatory reaction and in osteogenic differentiation.
Thus, we hypothesized that DDIT3 may participate in odontoblastic differentiation
of HDPCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunofluorescent staining was used to detect expression
of DDIT3 in HDPCs and effects of TNFa, on its nuclear accumulation. HDPCs that
overexpressed DDIT3 were developed and their proliferation and odontoblastic
differentiation abilities were examined. qRT-PCR was employed to detect
mineralization-related genes, including ALP, runt-related transcription factor-2 
(Runx2), osterix (OSX), dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP), dentin matrix acidic
phosphoprotein 1 (DMP1) and osteocalcin (OCN). Western blot analysis was
performed to detect expression of DSPP protein.
RESULTS: DDIT3 was expressed in HDPCs. TNFa treatment enhanced mRNA expression as
well as nuclear accumulation of DDIT3 (slightly). DDIT3 overexpression reduced
HDPC proliferation, however, it increased their calcium nodule formation and
expression of OSX, DSPP, DMP1 and OCN.
CONCLUSIONS: DDIT3 may be a factor that links proinflammatory stimuli and
differentiation of HDPCs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24738922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2014 Apr 2. doi: 10.1002/term.1887. [Epub ahead of print]

Micro-aggregates do not influence bone marrow stromal cell chondrogenesis.

Potier E(1), Rivron NC, Van Blitterswijk CA, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Biomechanics, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

Although bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) appear promising for cartilage repair,
current clinical results are suboptimal and the success of BMSC-based therapies
relies on a number of methodological improvements, among which is better
understanding and control of their differentiation pathways. We investigated here
the role of the cellular environment (paracrine vs juxtacrine signalling) in the 
chondrogenic differentiation of BMSCs. Bovine BMSCs were encapsulated in alginate
beads, as dispersed cells or as small micro-aggregates, to create different
paracrine and juxtacrine signalling conditions. BMSCs were then cultured for 21
days with TGFß3 added for 0, 7 or 21 days. Chondrogenic differentiation was
assessed at the gene (type II and X collagens, aggrecan, TGFß, sp7) and matrix
(biochemical assays and histology) levels. The results showed that
micro-aggregates had no beneficial effects over dispersed cells: matrix
production was similar, whereas chondrogenic marker gene expression was lower for
the micro-aggregates, under all TGFß conditions tested. This weakened
chondrogenic differentiation might be explained by a different cytoskeleton
organization at day 0 in the micro-aggregates. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24700552  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


92. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Sep;29(9):1960-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2240.

Dlx5 and mef2 regulate a novel runx2 enhancer for osteoblast-specific expression.

Kawane T(1), Komori H, Liu W, Moriishi T, Miyazaki T, Mori M, Matsuo Y, Takada Y,
Izumi S, Jiang Q, Nishimura R, Kawai Y, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. The
expression of Runx2 is the first requisite step for the lineage determination
from mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts. Although the transcript from Runx2
distal promoter is majorly expressed in osteoblasts, the promoter failed to
direct green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression to osteoblasts. To find the
regulatory region, we generated GFP reporter mice driven by a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) of Runx2 locus, and succeeded in the reproduction of 
endogenous Runx2 expression. By serially deleting it, we identified a 343-bp
enhancer, which directed GFP expression specifically to osteoblasts, about 30<U+2009>kb 
upstream of the distal promoter. The sequence of the 343-bp enhancer was highly
conserved among mouse, human, dog, horse, opossum, and chicken. Dlx5, Mef2c,
Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and Sox6, which localized on the enhancer region in
primary osteoblasts, synergistically upregulated the enhancer activity, whereas
Msx2 downregulated the activity in mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Msx2 was
predominantly bound to the enhancer in mouse multipotent mesenchymal C3H10T1/2
cells, whereas Dlx5 was predominantly bound to the enhancer in MC3T3-E1 cells.
Dlx5 and Mef2 directly bound to the enhancer, and the binding sites were required
for the osteoblast-specific expression in mice, whereas the other factors bound
to the enhancer by protein-protein interaction. The enhancer was characterized by
the presence of the histone variant H2A.Z, the enrichment of histone H3 mono- and
dimethylated at Lys4 and acetylated at Lys18 and Lys27, but the depletion of
histone H3 trimethylated at Lys4 in primary osteoblasts. These findings indicated
that the enhancer, which had typical histone modifications for enhancers,
contains sufficient elements to direct Runx2 expression to osteoblasts, and that 
Dlx5 and Mef2, which formed an enhanceosome with Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and
Sox6, play an essential role in the osteoblast-specific activation of the
enhancer. © 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24692107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Amino Acids. 2014 Jul;46(7):1673-80. doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1729-8. Epub 2014
Mar 28.

Taurine promotes human mesenchymal stem cells to differentiate into osteoblast
through the ERK pathway.

Zhou C(1), Zhang X, Xu L, Wu T, Cui L, Xu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan, China.

Taurine has been reported to influence bone metabolism, but the role of taurine
on osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) remains
unclear. In the present study, we investigated the effect of taurine on
osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs. The results showed that taurine increased
the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and mineralized nodules in hMSCs induced 
by osteogenic induced medium. Meanwhile, RT-PCR analysis showed that taurine
up-regulated the mRNA expression of ALP, osteopontin, Runt-related transcription 
factor 2 (Runx2) and Osterix in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, taurine
induced activation of extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) and
pretreatment with the ERK inhibitor U0126 abolished the taurine-induced
osteogenesis of hMSCs. Taken together, our study reveals that taurine promotes
the osteogenesis of hMSCs by activating the ERK pathway.

PMID: 24677149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Oral Sci. 2014 Jun;122(3):190-7. doi: 10.1111/eos.12122. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Lentiviral-mediated expression of SATB2 promotes osteogenic differentiation of
bone marrow stromal cells in vitro and in vivo.

Gong Y(1), Qian Y, Yang F, Wang H, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2 ) acts as a potent
transcription factor to promote osteoblast differentiation and bone regeneration.
In this study, we first used lentiviral-mediated gene transfer of Satb2 into
mouse bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and investigated the capacity of SATB2
overexpression to promote osteogenic differentiation in vitro and in vivo. We
found that LV-Satb2 -transduced BMSCs produced SATB2 protein and underwent rapid 
and marked osteogenic differentiation, as demonstrated by increased expression of
osteoblastic genes, including runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2),
transcription factor Sp7 (Sp7), activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4), and
bone sialoprotein (Bsp), and increased alkaline phosphatase activity and Alizarin
Red S staining. To analyze the induction of bone formation in vivo,
LV-Satb2-transduced BMSCs were implanted into the hindlimbs of syngeneic mice,
with ß-tricalcium phosphate as the scaffolding material. Four weeks after
implantation, transduction with LV-Satb2 had greatly enhanced the formation of
new bone. These data demonstrated the capacity of lentiviral-mediated SATB2 to
promote the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs in vitro and to enhance bone
formation through a tissue-engineering technique that may be useful in
bone-regenerative medicine.

© 2014 Eur J Oral Sci.

PMID: 24666017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2014 Jan 29;10:293-9. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.10.26. eCollection 
2014.

Convergent synthesis of a tetrasaccharide repeating unit of the O-specific
polysaccharide from the cell wall lipopolysaccharide of Azospirillum brasilense
strain Sp7.

Mandal PK(1), Dhara D(2), Misra AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal and Process Chemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, BS-10/1, Sector 10, Jankipuram extension, Sitapur Road, Lucknow, 226
031, India. (2)Bose Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine, P-1/12, C.I.T.
Scheme VII-M, Kolkata-700054, India.

A straightforward convergent synthesis has been carried out for the
tetrasaccharide repeating unit of the O-specific cell wall lipopolysaccharide of 
the strain Sp7 of Azospirillum brasilense. The target tetrasaccharide has been
synthesized from suitably protected monosaccharide intermediates in 42% overall
yield in seven steps by using a [2 + 2] block glycosylation approach.

PMCID: PMC3943683
PMID: 24605150  [PubMed]


96. Mol Med Rep. 2014 May;9(5):1820-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2024. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

MicroRNA-125b suppresses the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of
human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Chen S(1), Yang L(1), Jie Q(1), Lin YS(2), Meng GL(1), Fan JZ(1), Zhang JK(1),
Fan J(1), Luo ZJ(1), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics,
First Affiliated Hospital, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan 610500, P.R.
China.

The regressive biological function of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (hBMSCs) is one of the key factors resulting in the decrease of bone mass
in senile osteoporosis. MicroRNAs (miRs) are non-coding small RNAs involved in
various gene regulation processes. Whether any miR(s) are involved in the
progression of osteoporosis by regulating the biological function of hBMSCs
remains to be elucidated. The present study aimed to compare the expression
levels of miR-125b in hBMSCs derived from senile osteoporotic patients with that 
of control (normal) subjects. A significantly upregulated expression of miR-125b 
in osteoporotic hBMSCs was detected. To elucidate the biological function of
miR-125b in senile osteoporosis, the effects of miR-125b expression on
proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs were assessed using gain- 
and loss-of-function studies. It was evident that the overexpression of a
miR-125b mimic was able to suppress the proliferative and osteogenic
differentiation of senile hBMSCs. In contrast, repression of the function of
miR-125b by transfection of an miR-125b inhibitor promoted the proliferation and 
osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs. Furthermore, the potential target gene of
miR-125b, osterix (Osx), was examined. The results of the present study strongly 
suggested that miR-125b may regulate osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs through
the modulation of Osx expression.

PMID: 24604278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 6;9(6):e90846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090846. eCollection 
2014.

5-azacytidine improves the osteogenic differentiation potential of aged human
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells by DNA demethylation.

Yan X(1), Ehnert S(1), Culmes M(2), Bachmann A(1), Seeliger C(3), Schyschka L(3),
Wang Z(3), Rahmanian-Schwarz A(4), Stöckle U(1), De Sousa PA(5), Pelisek J(2),
Nussler AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Siegfried Weller Institute for Trauma Research, BG Trauma Center, Eberhard
Karls University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (2)Clinic of Vascular and
Endovascular Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Trauma Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. (4)Clinic for Hand-, Plastic-,
Reconstructive- and Vascular Surgery, BG Trauma Center, Eberhard Karls University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (5)Center for Regenerative Medicine, the University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The therapeutic value of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (Ad-MSCs) for
bone regeneration is critically discussed. A possible reason for reduced
osteogenic potential may be an age-related deterioration of the Ad-MSCs. In long 
term in vitro culture, epigenomic changes in DNA methylation are known to cause
gene silencing, affecting stem cell growth as well as the differentiation
potential. In this study, we observed an age-related decline in proliferation of 
primary human Ad-MSCs. Decreased Nanog, Oct4 and Lin28A and increased Sox2
gene-expression was accompanied by an impaired osteogenic differentiation
potential of Ad-MSCs isolated from old donors (>60 a) as compared to Ad-MSCs
isolated from younger donors (<45 a). 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC) and
5-methylcytonsine (5 mC) distribution as well as TET gene expression were
evaluated to assess the evidence of active DNA demethylation. We observed a
decrease of 5 hmC in Ad-MSCs from older donors. Incubation of these cells with
5-Azacytidine induced proliferation and improved the osteogenic differentiation
potential in these cells. The increase in AP activity and matrix mineralization
was associated with an increased presence of 5 hmC as well as with an increased
TET2 and TET3 gene expression. Our data show, for the first time, a decrease of
DNA hydroxymethylation in Ad-MSCs which correlates with donor-age and that
treatment with 5-Azacytidine provides an approach which could be used to
rejuvenate Ad-MSCs from aged donors.

PMCID: PMC3946260
PMID: 24603866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biotech Histochem. 2014 Aug;89(6):440-5. doi: 10.3109/10520295.2014.889852. Epub 
2014 Mar 3.

Histological and immunohistochemical studies of the structure of lymph nodes in
Kilis goats.

Bozkurt YA(1), Kus S, Kozlu T, Basak F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Mustafa Kemal University , Hatay , Turkey.

Ten healthy adult Kilis goat mesenteric lymph nodes were used to examine the
general structure of lymph nodes, lymphocytes, plasma cells, reticular cells and 
reticular fibers using histological methods. We also detected T lymphocytes using
anti-CD3 [SP7], anti-CD4 [74-12-4], mouse anti-bovine CD4 [CC30] and mouse
anti-bovine CD8 [CC63] monoclonal antibodies (mAb); and B lymphocytes using
anti-CD79a [HM57] mAb, macrophages using anti-macrophage [MAC387] mAb and
follicular dendritic cells using anti-S100 polyclonal antibody (pAb). The
distribution of these cells also was studied. Although the primer antibodies we
used for CD3, CD8, CD79a, MAC387 and S100 worked well, the primer antibodies for 
CD4 were ineffective for paraffin embedded goat lymph nodes.

PMID: 24588598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Differentiation. 2014 Mar-Apr;87(3-4):111-8. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2014.01.002.
Epub 2014 Feb 26.

The P75 neurotrophin receptor regulates proliferation of the human MG63
osteoblast cell line.

Akiyama Y(1), Mikami Y(2), Watanabe E(3), Watanabe N(3), Toriumi T(4), Takahashi 
T(4), Komiyama K(2), Isokawa K(4), Shimizu N(5), Honda MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Nihon University Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Nihon University
School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan; 
Dental Research Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13,
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Diagnostic
Medicine, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1,
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (4)Dental Research Center, Nihon 
University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
101-8310, Japan; Department of Anatomy, Nihon University School of Dentistry,
1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. (5)Dental Research
Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan; Department of Orthodontics, Nihon University
School of Dentistry, 1-8-13 Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan.
(6)Dental Research Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13,
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan; Department of Anatomy, Nihon 
University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
101-8310, Japan. Electronic address: honda.masaki@nihon-u.ac.jp.

The 75 kDa transmembrane protein, p75(NTR), is a marker of mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs). Isolated MSCs are capable of differentiating into osteoblasts, but the
molecular function of p75(NTR) in MSCs and osteoblasts is poorly understood. The 
aim of this study was to examine the function of p75(NTR) in the human MG63
osteoblast cell line compared to the murine MC3T3E-1 pre-osteoblast cell line.
MG63 cells and MC3T3-E1 cells expressing exogenous p75(NTR) protein (denoted as
p75-MG63 and p75GFP-E1, respectively) were generated to compare osteogenic
differentiation and cell proliferation abilities. Overexpression of p75(NTR)
induced alkaline phosphatase activity and the mRNA expression of
osteoblast-related genes such as osterix and bone sialoprotein in both p75-MG63
and p75GFP-E1. Interestingly, exogenous p75(NTR) stimulated cell proliferation
and cell cycle progression in p75GFP-E1, but not in p75-MG63. To elucidate any
different effects of p75(NTR) expression on osteogenic differentiation and cell
proliferation, we examined the mRNA expression of tropomyosin receptor kinase
(trk) genes (trkA, trkB, trkC) and Nogo receptor (NgR), which are binding
partners of p75(NTR). Although trkA, trkB, and trkC were detected in both
p75-MG63 and p75GFP-E1, only NgR was detected in p75-MG63. We then used the K252a
inhibitor of the trks to identify the signaling pathway for osteogenic
differentiation and cell proliferation. Inhibition of trks by K252a suppressed
p75(NTR)-mediated osteogenic differentiation of p75GFP-E1, whereas deletion of
the GDI domain in P75(NTR) from the p75-MG63 produced enhanced cell proliferation
compared to p75-MG63. These results suggest that p75(NTR) signaling associated
with trk receptors promotes both cell proliferation and osteoblast
differentiation, but that p75(NTR)-mediated proliferation may be suppressed by
signaling from the p75(NTR)/NgR complex.

Copyright © 2014 International Society of Differentiation. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 May;98(10):4625-36. doi:
10.1007/s00253-014-5574-1. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

A SAM-dependent methyltransferase cotranscribed with arsenate reductase alters
resistance to peptidyl transferase center-binding antibiotics in Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7.

Singh S(1), Singh C, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Genetics, School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, India.

The genome of Azospirillum brasilense harbors a gene encoding
S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase, which is located downstream of 
an arsenate reductase gene. Both genes are cotranscribed and translationally
coupled. When they were cloned and expressed individually in an
arsenate-sensitive strain of Escherichia coli, arsenate reductase conferred
tolerance to arsenate; however, methyltransferase failed to do so. Sequence
analysis revealed that methyltransferase was more closely related to a PrmB-type 
N5-glutamine methyltransferase than to the arsenate detoxifying methyltransferase
ArsM. Insertional inactivation of prmB gene in A. brasilense resulted in an
increased sensitivity to chloramphenicol and resistance to tiamulin and
clindamycin, which are known to bind at the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) in 
the ribosome. These observations suggested that the inability of prmB:km mutant
to methylate L3 protein might alter hydrophobicity in the antibiotic-binding
pocket of the PTC, which might affect the binding of chloramphenicol,
clindamycin, and tiamulin differentially. This is the first report showing the
role of PrmB-type N5-glutamine methyltransferases in conferring resistance to
tiamulin and clindamycin in any bacterium.

PMID: 24573606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell Rep. 2014 Feb 13;6(3):482-98. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.010. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Sequential and opposing activities of Wnt and BMP coordinate zebrafish bone
regeneration.

Stewart S(1), Gomez AW(2), Armstrong BE(2), Henner A(2), Stankunas K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
Electronic address: sstewart@molbio.uoregon.edu. (2)Institute of Molecular
Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA. (3)Institute of Molecular
Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA; Department of Biology,
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA. Electronic address:
kryn@uoregon.edu.

Zebrafish fully regenerate lost bone, including after fin amputation, through a
process mediated by dedifferentiated, lineage-restricted osteoblasts. Mechanisms 
controlling the osteoblast regenerative program from its initiation through
reossification are poorly understood. We show that fin amputation induces a
Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent epithelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT) of
osteoblasts in order to generate proliferative Runx2(+) preosteoblasts. Localized
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling maintains this progenitor population toward the distal
tip of the regenerative blastema. As they become proximally displaced,
preosteoblasts upregulate sp7 and subsequently mature into re-epithelialized
Runx2(-)/sp7(+) osteoblasts that extend preexisting bone. Autocrine bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling promotes osteoblast differentiation by
activating sp7 expression and counters Wnt by inducing Dickkopf-related Wnt
antagonists. As such, opposing activities of Wnt and BMP coordinate the
simultaneous demand for growth and differentiation during bone regeneration. This
hierarchical signaling network model provides a conceptual framework for
understanding innate bone repair and regeneration mechanisms and rationally
designing regenerative therapeutics.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4009375
PMID: 24485659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085161. eCollection
2014.

Osx-Cre targets multiple cell types besides osteoblast lineage in postnatal mice.

Chen J(1), Shi Y(1), Regan J(1), Karuppaiah K(2), Ornitz DM(2), Long F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America. (2)Department of Developmental
Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United
States of America. (3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America ; Department of
Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America ; Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Osterix (Osx or Sp7) is a zinc-finger-family transcriptional factor essential for
osteoblast differentiation in mammals. The Osx-Cre mouse line (also known as
Osx1-GFP::Cre) expresses GFP::Cre fusion protein from a BAC transgene containing 
the Osx regulatory sequence. The mouse strain was initially characterized during 
embryogenesis, and found to target mainly osteoblast-lineage cells. Because the
strain has been increasingly used in postnatal studies, it is important to
evaluate its targeting specificity in mice after birth. By crossing the Osx-Cre
mouse with the R26-mT/mG reporter line and analyzing the progenies at two months 
of age, we find that Osx-Cre targets not only osteoblasts, osteocytes and
hypertrophic chondrocytes as expected, but also stromal cells, adipocytes and
perivascular cells in the bone marrow. The targeting of adipocytes and
perivascular cells appears to be specific to those residing within the bone
marrow, as the same cell types elsewhere are not targeted. Beyond the skeleton,
Osx-Cre also targets the olfactory glomerular cells, and a subset of the gastric 
and intestinal epithelium. Thus, potential contributions from the
non-osteoblast-lineage cells should be considered when Osx-Cre is used to study
gene functions in postnatal mice.

PMCID: PMC3893188
PMID: 24454809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4307-16. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1565-6. Epub 2014
Jan 19.

Impaired osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone
marrow of patients with lower-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.

Fei C(1), Zhao Y, Gu S, Guo J, Zhang X, Li X, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, No.600, Yi Shan Road, 200233, Shanghai, China.

The pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) has not been completely
understood, and insufficiency of the hematopoietic microenvironment can be an
important factor. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and osteoblasts are key
components of the hematopoietic microenvironment. Here, we measured the
expression of multiple osteogenic genes in 58 MSCs from MDS patients with
different disease stages and subtypes by real-time PCR and compared the
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs from 20 MDS patients with those of MSCs from
eight normal controls quantitatively and dynamically. The mRNA level of Osterix
and RUNX2, two key factors involved in the early differentiation process toward
osteoblasts, was significantly reduced in undifferentiated MSCs from lower-risk
MDS. After osteogenic induction, lower-risk MDS showed lower alkaline phosphatase
activity, less intense alizarin red S staining, and lower gene expression of
osteogenic differentiation markers; however, higher-risk MDS was normal. Finally,
in bone marrow biopsy, the number of osteoblasts was significantly decreased in
lower-risk MDS. These results indicate that MSCs from lower-risk MDS have
impaired osteogenic differentiation functions, suggesting their insufficient
stromal support in MDS.

PMID: 24443267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Matrix Biol. 2014 Feb;34:193-204. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.12.008. Epub 2014
Jan 7.

Osterix/Sp7 regulates biomineralization of otoliths and bone in medaka (Oryzias
latipes).

Renn J(1), Winkler C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117543, Singapore; Centre for BioImaging Sciences (CBIS), National University of 
Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Electronic address: jrenn@ulg.ac.be.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117543, Singapore; Centre for BioImaging Sciences (CBIS), National University of 
Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Electronic address: dbswcw@nus.edu.sg.

Osterix/Sp7 is a zinc finger transcription factor and critical regulator of
osteoblast differentiation, maturation and activity. Osterix expression has also 
been described in non-skeletal tissues but functional analyses are lacking. In
the present study, we show that in the teleost model medaka, osterix is present
as two alternatively spliced transcripts, osx_tv1 and osx_tv2. Knock-down of
osx_tv1 and/or osx_tv2 results in mineralization loss in early intramembranous
bones while cartilage formation is mostly unaffected. Formation of the
parasphenoid, the earliest mineralized bone in the medaka skeleton, is impaired
and fails to recover at later stages. Ossification of later bones, such as the
operculum and cleithrum, is delayed but recovers during further development. In
the axial skeleton, formation of the neural arches and centra is strongly
delayed. In vivo analyses using osterix:nlGFP and osteocalcin:GFP transgenic
medaka and whole mount in situ hybridization suggest that bone defects observed
after knock-down of osterix are caused by a delay of osteoblast maturation and
activity. Furthermore, we analyzed expression profile and function of osterix
during ear and otolith formation. We show that osterix is expressed in otic
placodes at the otic vesicle stage and that its knock-down results in a loss of
otoliths. Taken together, we show that osterix is required for bone formation in 
a teleost fish and that its important regulatory functions are conserved between 
teleosts and mammals. Furthermore, we provide the first functional evidence for a
role of Osterix in a non-skeletal tissue, i.e. the otoliths.

Copyright © 2014 International Society of Matrix Biology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24407212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Histopathology. 2014 Feb;64(3):336-47. doi: 10.1111/his.12071. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Does the calcification of adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma resemble the calcium
deposition of osteogenesis/odontogenesis?

Song-Tao Q(1), Xiao-Rong Y, Jun P, Yong-Jian D, Jin L, Guang-Long H, Yun-Tao L,
Jian R, Xiang-Zhao L, Jia-Ming X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guang Zhou, China.

AIMS: Calcification in adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP) is troublesome
for surgical intervention. The aim of this study was to examine the osteogenic
proteins that play important roles in the calcium deposition of the
odontogenic/osteogenic tissues in craniopharyngioma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Craniopharyngiomas (n = 89) were investigated for the
presence and expression pattern of the osteoinductive/odontoinductive factor bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (Bmp2) and two osteoblastic differentiation makers,
Runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2) and Osterix, using
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. Our results showed that Bmp2, Runx2
and Osterix levels increased in cases with high calcification and correlated
positively with the degree of calcification in ACP, whereas they showed little or
no expression in squamous papillary craniopharyngioma. In ACP, Bmp2 was expressed
primarily in the stellate reticulum and whorl-like array cells; Runx2 and Osterix
tended to be expressed in calcification-related epithelia, including whorl-like
array cells and epithelia in/around wet keratin and calcification lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicated, for the first time, that osteogenic factor Bmp2
may play an important role in the calcification of ACP via autocrine or paracrine
mechanisms. Given the presence of osteogenic markers (Runx2 and Osterix),
craniopharyngioma cells could differentiate into an osteoblast-like lineage, and 
the process of craniopharyngioma calcification resembles that which occurs in
osteogenesis/odontogenesis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24387671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 17;8(12):e83155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083155.
eCollection 2013.

Probiotic supplementation promotes calcification in Danio rerio larvae: a
molecular study.

Maradonna F(1), Gioacchini G(1), Falcinelli S(1), Bertotto D(2), Radaelli G(2),
Olivotto I(1), Carnevali O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e dell'Ambiente, Università Politecnica
delle Marche, Ancona, Italia. (2)Dipartimento di Biomedicina Comparata e
Alimentazione, Università degli Studi di Padova, Legnaro (Padova), Italia.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e dell'Ambiente, Università Politecnica
delle Marche, Ancona, Italia ; Istituto Nazionale Biostrutture e Biosistemi,
Roma, Italia.

A growing number of studies have been showing that dietary probiotics can exert
beneficial health effects in both humans and animals. We previously demonstrated 
that dietary supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus - a component of the
human gut microflora - enhances reproduction, larval development, and the
biomineralization process in Danio rerio (zebrafish). The aim of this study was
to identify the pathways affected by L. rhamnosus during zebrafish larval
development. Our morphological and histochemical findings show that L. rhamnosus 
accelerates bone deposition through stimulation of the expression of key genes
involved in ossification, e.g. runt-related transcription factor 2 (runx2), Sp7
transcription factor (sp7), matrix Gla protein (mgp), and bone
gamma-carboxyglutamate (gla) protein (bglap) as well as through inhibition of
sclerostin (sost), a bone formation inhibitor. Western blot analysis of
mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 and 3-(Mapk1 and Mapk3), which are involved in
osteoblast and osteocyte differentiation, documented an increase in Mapk1 16 days
post fertilization (dpf) and of Mapk3 23 dpf in individuals receiving L.
rhamnosus supplementation. Interestingly, a reduction of sost detected in the
same individuals suggests that the probiotic may help treat bone disorders.

PMCID: PMC3866187
PMID: 24358259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 10;8(12):e82388. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082388.
eCollection 2013.

Vitamin a is a negative regulator of osteoblast mineralization.

Lind T(1), Sundqvist A, Hu L, Pejler G, Andersson G, Jacobson A, Melhus H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Clinical Pharmacology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden.

An excessive intake of vitamin A has been associated with an increased risk of
fractures in humans. In animals, a high vitamin A intake leads to a reduction of 
long bone diameter and spontaneous fractures. Studies in rodents indicate that
the bone thinning is due to increased periosteal bone resorption and reduced
radial growth. Whether the latter is a consequence of direct effects on bone or
indirect effects on appetite and general growth is unknown. In this study we
therefore used pair-feeding and dynamic histomorphometry to investigate the
direct effect of a high intake of vitamin A on bone formation in rats. Although
there were no differences in body weight or femur length compared to controls,
there was an approximately halved bone formation and mineral apposition rate at
the femur diaphysis of rats fed vitamin A. To try to clarify the mechanism(s)
behind this reduction, we treated primary human osteoblasts and a murine
preosteoblastic cell line (MC3T3-E1) with the active metabolite of vitamin A;
retinoic acid (RA), a retinoic acid receptor (RAR) antagonist (AGN194310), and a 
Cyp26 inhibitor (R115866) which blocks endogenous RA catabolism. We found that
RA, via RARs, suppressed in vitro mineralization. This was independent of a
negative effect on osteoblast proliferation. Alkaline phosphatase and bone gamma 
carboxyglutamate protein (Bglap, Osteocalcin) were drastically reduced in RA
treated cells and RA also reduced the protein levels of Runx2 and Osterix, key
transcription factors for progression to a mature osteoblast. Normal osteoblast
differentiation involved up regulation of Cyp26b1, the major enzyme responsible
for RA degradation, suggesting that a drop in RA signaling is required for
osteogenesis analogous to what has been found for chondrogenesis. In addition, RA
decreased Phex, an osteoblast/osteocyte protein necessary for mineralization.
Taken together, our data indicate that vitamin A is a negative regulator of
osteoblast mineralization.

PMCID: PMC3858291
PMID: 24340023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Jun;29(6):1373-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2160.

Association analysis of BMD-associated SNPs with knee osteoarthritis.

Yerges-Armstrong LM(1), Yau MS, Liu Y, Krishnan S, Renner JB, Eaton CB, Kwoh CK, 
Nevitt MC, Duggan DJ, Mitchell BD, Jordan JM, Hochberg MC, Jackson RD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Personalized and Genomic Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,
Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Osteoarthritis (OA) risk is widely recognized to be heritable but few loci have
been identified. Observational studies have identified higher systemic bone
mineral density (BMD) to be associated with an increased risk of radiographic
knee osteoarthritis. With this in mind, we sought to evaluate whether
well-established genetic loci for variance in BMD are associated with risk for
radiographic OA in the Osteoarthritis Initiative (OAI) and the Johnston County
Osteoarthritis (JoCo) Project. Cases had at least one knee with definite
radiographic OA, defined as the presence of definite osteophytes with or without 
joint space narrowing (Kellgren-Lawrence [KL] grade = 2) and controls were absent
for definite radiographic OA in both knees (KL grade = 1 bilaterally). There were
2014 and 658 Caucasian cases, respectively, in the OAI and JoCo Studies, and 953 
and 823 controls. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified for
association analysis from the literature. Genotyping was carried out on Illumina 
2.5M and 1M arrays in Genetic Components of Knee OA (GeCKO) and JoCo,
respectively and imputation was done. Association analyses were carried out
separately in each cohort with adjustments for age, body mass index (BMI), and
sex, and then parameter estimates were combined across the two cohorts by
meta-analysis. We identified four SNPs significantly associated with prevalent
radiographic knee OA. The strongest signal (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0009; OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.22; 95% CI,
1.08-1.37) maps to 12q3, which contains a gene coding for SP7. Additional loci
map to 7p14.1 (TXNDC3), 11q13.2 (LRP5), and 11p14.1 (LIN7C). For all four loci
the allele associated with higher BMD was associated with higher odds of OA. A
BMD risk allele score was not significantly associated with OA risk. This
meta-analysis demonstrates that several genomewide association studies
(GWAS)-identified BMD SNPs are nominally associated with prevalent radiographic
knee OA and further supports the hypothesis that BMD, or its determinants, may be
a risk factor contributing to OA development. © 2014 American Society for Bone
and Mineral Research.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC4080308
PMID: 24339167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):260-74. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.10.007. Epub 2013
Nov 1.

Hyperbaric oxygen promotes osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow stromal
cells by regulating Wnt3a/ß-catenin signaling--an in vitro and in vivo study.

Lin SS(1), Ueng SW(2), Niu CC(2), Yuan LJ(2), Yang CY(2), Chen WJ(2), Lee MS(3), 
Chen JK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan;
Department of Orthopaedics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Physiology, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Electronic
address: jkc508@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

We hypothesized that the effect of hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) on bone formation is
increased via osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs),
which is regulated by Wnt3a/ß-catenin signaling. Our in vitro data showed that
HBO increased cell proliferation, Wnt3a production, LRP6 phosphorylation, and
cyclin D1 expression in osteogenically differentiated BMSCs. The mRNA and protein
levels of Wnt3a, ß-catenin, and Runx2 were upregulated while those of GSK-3ß were
downregulated after HBO treatment. The relative density ratio
(phospho-protein/protein) of Akt and GSK-3ß was both up-regulated while that of
ß-catenin was down-regulated after HBO treatment. We next investigated whether
HBO affects the accumulation of ß-catenin. Our Western blot analysis showed
increased levels of translocated ß-catenin that stimulated the expression of
target genes after HBO treatment. HBO increased TCF-dependent transcription,
Runx2 promoter/Luc gene activity, and the expression of osteogenic markers of
BMSCs, such as alkaline phosphatase activity, type I collagen, osteocalcin,
calcium, and the intensity of Alizarin Red staining. HBO dose dependently
increased the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP2) and osterix production. We
further demonstrated that HBO increased the expression of vacuolar-ATPases, which
stimulated Wnt3a secretion from BMSCs. Finally, we showed that the beneficial
effects of HBO on bone formation were related to Wnt3a/ß-catenin signaling in a
rabbit model by histology, mechanical testing, and immunohistochemical assays.
Accordingly, we concluded that HBO increased the osteogenic differentiation of
BMSCs by regulating Wnt3a secretion and signaling.

© 2013.

PMID: 24291646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Microb Ecol. 2014 Jan;67(1):155-60. doi: 10.1007/s00248-013-0329-6. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Gold(III) reduction by the rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense with the
formation of gold nanoparticles.

Tugarova AV(1), Burov AM, Burashnikova MM, Kamnev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 410049, Saratov, Russia, tugarova_anna@mail.ru.

For the soil nitrogen-fixing bacterium Azospirillum brasilense, the ability to
reduce [AuCl4](-) and to form gold nanoparticles (GNPs) has been demonstrated,
with the appearance of a mauve tint of the culture. To validate the shapes and
chemical nature of nanoparticles, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
X-ray fluorescence analysis were used. For the widely studied agriculturally
important wild-type strains A. brasilense Sp7 and Sp245, GNPs formed after
10 days of incubation of cell biomass with 0.25 mM [AuCl4](-) were shown (using
TEM) to be mainly of spherical form (5 to 20 nm in diameter), with rare
occasional triangles. In the course of cultivation with [AuCl4](-), after 5 days,
a mauve tint was already visible for cells of strain Sp245.5, after 6 days for
Sp245 and after 10 days for Sp7. Thus, for the mutant strain Sp245.5 (which has
significant differences in the structure and composition of cell-surface
polysaccharides as compared with Sp245), a more rapid formation of GNPs was
observed. Moreover, their TEM images (also obtained after 10 days) showed
different shapes: nano-sized spheres, triangles, hexagons and rods, as well as
larger round-shaped flower-like nanoparticles about 100 nm in size. Since by the 
time of GNP formation in our experiments the cells were found to be already not
viable, this confirms the dominating role of cell surface structure and chemical 
composition in shaping the GNPs formed in the course of [AuCl4](-) reduction to
Au(0). This finding may be useful for understanding the natural biogeochemical
mechanisms of gold reduction and formation of GNPs involving microorganisms. The 
data obtained may also help in developing protocols for environmentally friendly 
synthesis of nanoparticles and possible use of bacterial cells with modified
surface structure and composition for their fabrication.

PMID: 24276540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan 1;306(1):E48-57. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00421.2013. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

The atherogenic Scarb1 null mouse model shows a high bone mass phenotype.

Martineau C(1), Martin-Falstrault L, Brissette L, Moreau R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire du Métabolisme Osseux, BioMed, Université du Québec à Montréal,
Département des Sciences Biologiques, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, 
Quebec, Canada; and.

Scavenger receptor class B, type I (SR-BI), the Scarb1 gene product, is a
receptor associated with cholesteryl ester uptake from high-density lipoproteins 
(HDL), which drives cholesterol movement from peripheral tissues toward the liver
for excretion, and, consequently, Scarb1 null mice are prone to atherosclerosis. 
Because studies have linked atherosclerosis incidence with osteoporosis, we
characterized the bone metabolism in these mice. Bone morphometry was assessed
through microcomputed tomography and histology. Marrow stromal cells (MSCs) were 
used to characterize influence of endogenous SR-BI in cell functions. Total and
HDL-associated cholesterol in null mice were increased by 32-60%, correlating
with its role in lipoprotein metabolism. Distal metaphyses from 2- and 4-mo-old
null mice showed correspondingly 46 and 37% higher bone volume fraction
associated with a higher number of trabeculae. Histomorphometric analyses in
2-mo-old null male mice revealed 1.42-fold greater osteoblast surface, 1.37-fold 
higher percent mineralizing surface, and 1.69-fold enhanced bone formation rate. 
In vitro assays for MSCs from null mice revealed 37% higher proliferation rate,
48% more alkaline phosphatase activity, 70% greater mineralization potential and 
a 2-fold osterix (Sp7) expression, yet a 0.5-fold decrease in caveolin-1 (Cav1)
expression. Selective uptake levels of HDL-associated cholesteryl oleate and
estradiol were similar between MSC from wild-type and Scarb1 null mice,
suggesting that its contribution to this process is not its main role in these
cells. However, Scarb1 knockout stunted the HDL-dependent regulation of Cav1
genic expression. Scarb1 null mice are not prone to osteoporosis but show higher 
bone mass associated with enhanced bone formation.

PMCID: PMC3920004
PMID: 24253048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Dent. 2014 Jan;42(1):53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jdent.2013.10.020. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Effects of the enamel matrix derivative on the proliferation and odontogenic
differentiation of human dental pulp cells.

Wang Y(1), Zhao Y(2), Ge L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School and Hospital of Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(2)School and Hospital of Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
Electronic address: yumingzhao70@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: The enamel matrix derivative (EMD) has a positive effect on the
proliferation of human periodontal ligament cells and the healing of periodontal 
tissues. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of EMD on the
proliferation and differentiation of human dental pulp cells (hDPCs) in vitro.
METHODS: hDPCs were isolated from human impacted third molars and cultured in
vitro. After treatment with100µg/mL EMD, the proliferation of hDPCs was
determined by a cell counting kit 8 (CCK8) assay. After incubation in EMD
osteogenic induction medium for 14 days, the osteogenic differentiation of hDPCs 
was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, alizarin staining and the
expression of osteogenesis-related genes.
RESULTS: The EMD osteogenic induction medium enhanced the proliferation of hDPCs.
After osteogenic induction, EMD increased the osteogenic potential of hDPCs, as
measured by alkaline phosphatase activity and calcium accumulation; the
expression levels of osteogenesis-related genes, such as ALP, DSPP, BMP, and OPN 
were also upregulated. In addition, the expression levels of
odontogenesis-related transcription factors Osterix and Runx2 were upregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: EMD could enhance the mineralization of hDPSCs upregulated the
expression of markers for odontoblast/osteoblast-like cells. Further studies are 
required to determine if EMD can improve pulp tissue repair and regeneration.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24246686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(9):5379-83.

Stimulation of osteogenic differentiation in stromal cells of giant cell tumour
of bone by zoledronic acid.

Yang T(1), Zheng XF, Li M, Lin X, Yin QS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Guangzhou Liu Hua Qiao Hospital, Guangzhou, China 
E-mail : xiaofeizhengcn@163.com.

Therapeutic effects of zoledronic acid (ZOL) on giant cell tumour of bone (GCT)
have been proven. Apoptosis induction was considered to be one of the mechanisms 
of ZOL tumour inhibition. In this study, we presented the possibility of an
osteogenic differentiation stimulation mechanism of ZOL and further investigated 
dosage and time effects. We treated stromal cells of GCT (GCTSC) with ZOL for 48 
hours at different concentrations (0 µM, 0.01 µM, 0.1 µM, 1 µM, 5 µM, 30 µM) and 
assessed apoptotic and osteogenic differentiation markers with
immunohistochemical techniques and real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Our results
suggested that ZOL enhanced mRNA expression of Cbfa-1, osterix and osteocalcin
genes with a maximum effect at 1 µM in GCTSC. Time course experiments indicated a
time dependent osteogenic differentiation effect. In conclusion, ZOL may be
considered as an adjuvant in the treatment of GCT not only by inducing apoptosis 
but also by stimulating osteogenic differentiation of remaining tumor stromal
cells after surgery.

PMID: 24175830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Oral Sci. 2013 Dec;5(4):200-5. doi: 10.1038/ijos.2013.77. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

KDM6B epigenetically regulates odontogenic differentiation of dental mesenchymal 
stem cells.

Xu J(1), Yu B, Hong C, Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Stomatology, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing, China [2] Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been identified and isolated from dental
tissues, including stem cells from apical papilla, which demonstrated the ability
to differentiate into dentin-forming odontoblasts. The histone demethylase KDM6B 
(also known as JMJD3) was shown to play a key role in promoting osteogenic
commitment by removing epigenetic marks H3K27me3 from the promoters of osteogenic
genes. Whether KDM6B is involved in odontogenic differentiation of dental MSCs,
however, is not known. Here, we explored the role of KDM6B in dental MSC fate
determination into the odontogenic lineage. Using shRNA-expressing lentivirus, we
performed KDM6B knockdown in dental MSCs and observed that KDM6B depletion leads 
to a significant reduction in alkaline phosphate (ALP) activity and in formation 
of mineralized nodules assessed by Alizarin Red staining. Additionally, mRNA
expression of odontogenic marker gene SP7 (osterix, OSX), as well as
extracellular matrix genes BGLAP (osteoclacin, OCN) and SPP1 (osteopontin, OPN), 
was suppressed by KDM6B depletion. When KDM6B was overexpressed in
KDM6B-knockdown MSCs, odontogenic differentiation was restored, further
confirming the facilitating role of KDM6B in odontogenic commitment.
Mechanistically, KDM6B was recruited to bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2)
promoters and the subsequent removal of silencing H3K27me3 marks led to the
activation of this odontogenic master transcription gene. Taken together, our
results demonstrated the critical role of a histone demethylase in the epigenetic
regulation of odontogenic differentiation of dental MSCs. KDM6B may present as a 
potential therapeutic target in the regeneration of tooth structures and the
repair of craniofacial defects.

PMCID: PMC3967319
PMID: 24158144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Periodontal Res. 2014 Oct;49(5):554-62. doi: 10.1111/jre.12135. Epub 2013 Oct
18.

Osteogenic differentiation of human periodontal ligament cells after transfection
with recombinant lentiviral vector containing follicular dendritic cell secreted 
protein.

Xiang L(1), Ma L, He Y, Wei N, Gong P.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China; Dental Implant Center, West China Hospital of
Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Follicular dendritic cell secreted protein (FDC-SP),
has been identified in human periodontal ligament (PDL) in a recent study. It is 
suggested that the expression of FDC-SP might be associated with the osteogenic
differentiation and mineralization of human periodontal ligament cells (hPDLCs). 
However, the intrinsic mechanism regarding this is still unclear. The aim of this
study was to establish hPDLCs with safe and efficient overexpression of FDC-SP
and to elucidate the influence of FDC-SP transfection on hPDLC osteogenesis in
periodontal regeneration.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We first applied a recombinant lentiviral vector containing
FDC-SP to transfect hPDLCs via different multiplicity of infection (MOI) levels
(1, 10, 20, 50 and 100). Western blot was performed to confirm the expression of 
FDC-SP. MTT assay was employed to evaluate the proliferation status of
transfected cells. Then, the extent of osteogenic differentiation was
investigated by simultaneous monitoring of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity
assessment, immunofluorescent staining, the expression patterns of osteoblastic
markers and mineralization staining.
RESULTS: We found that hPDLCs transfected via MOI 20, 50 and 100 exhibited
expression of FDC-SP protein compared with MOI 1 and 10. There was no significant
effect of FDC-SP transfection (at different MOI levels of 1, 10 and 20) on the
proliferation of hPDLCs, whereas higher MOI levels (50 and 100) inhibited cell
proliferation ability. In addition, ALP activity decreased significantly in
FDC-SP-transfected hPDLCs at day 7. When stained with alizarin red, cells
overexpressing FDC-SP formed less mineralized nodules at 21 d post-induction of
differentiation, compared with the control cultures. Osteogenic inhibition was
also confirmed by ALP immunostaining. Moreover, mRNA expression levels of
osteoblastic markers decreased after FDC-SP transfection, which were in
accordance with western blot results.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that MOI 20 is optimal to transfect hPDLCs, which
achieves safe and efficient overexpression of FDC-SP in transfected cells.
Moreover, FDC-SP overexpression inhibits osteogenic differentiation of hPDLCs.
The present study contributes to a better understanding of the biological
functions governing FDC-SP-induced hPDLC differentiation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24138099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 5;721(1-3):225-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.09.031.
Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Silibinin promotes osteoblast differentiation of human bone marrow stromal cells 
via bone morphogenetic protein signaling.

Ying X(1), Sun L, Chen X, Xu H, Guo X, Chen H, Hong J, Cheng S, Peng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical College, 109 Xue Yuan xi Road, Wenzhou 325000, China. Electronic address:
yingxiaozhou@sina.com.

Silibinin is the major active constituent of the natural compound silymarin;
several studies suggest that silibinin possesses antihepatotoxic properties and
anticancer effects against carcinoma cells. However, no study has yet
investigated the effect of silibinin on osteogenic differentiation of human bone 
marrow stem cells (hBMSCs). The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of
silibinin on osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs. In this study, the hBMSCs were
cultured in an osteogenic medium with 0, 1, 10 or 20 µmol/l silibinin
respectively. hBMSCs viability was analyzed by cell number quantification assay
and cells osteogenic differentiation was evaluated by alkaline phosphatas (ALP)
activity assay, Von Kossa staining and real time-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). We found that silibinin promoted ALP activity in hBMSCs without
affecting their proliferation. The mineralization of hBMSCs was enhanced by
treatment with silibinin. Silibinin also increased the mRNA expressions of
Collagen type I (COL-I), ALP, Osteocalcin (OCN), Osterix, bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (BMP-2) and Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2). The BMP
antagonist noggin and its receptor kinase inhibitors dorsomorphin and LDN-193189 
attenuated silibinin-promoted ALP activity. Furthermore, BMP-responsive and
Runx2-responsive reporters were activated by silibinin treatment. These results
indicate that silibinin enhances osteoblast differentiation probably by inducing 
the expressions of BMPs and activating BMP and RUNX2 pathways. Thus, silibinin
may play an important therapeutic role in osteoporosis patients by improving
osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24076187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Differentiation. 2013 Jul-Sep;86(1-2):65-74. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2013.07.005.
Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Discovering small molecules that inhibit adipogenesis and promote
osteoblastogenesis: unique screening and Oncostatin M-like activity.

Nawa K(1), Ikeno H, Matsuhashi N, Ogasawara T, Otsuka E.

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., 1-2-58 Hiromachi,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 140-8710, Japan. Electronic address:
nawa.katsuhiko.cs@daiichisankyo.co.jp.

Oncostatin M (OSM), one of the IL-6 family cytokines, inhibits adipogenic
differentiation and stimulates osteoblastogenic differentiation from human bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs). This functional study of OSM enabled us
to develop a two-dimensional small-molecule screen that shifts hBMSC
differentiation from adipocyte to osteoblast. Several structurally related
compounds (isoxazoles) inhibited the accumulation of intracellular lipid
droplets, whereas they promoted alkaline phosphatase activity and extracellular
matrix calcification. Isoxazoles also reduced the expression of adipogenic
transcription factor PPAR<U+03B3> and increased the levels of osteogenic transcription
factors Runx2 and Osterix. They also induced the expression of the Wnt/ß-catenin 
downstream gene and TOPflash reporter; however, the dephosphorylated
ß-catenin-active form was not significantly increased. Interestingly, the slight 
modification of the active compound led to a complete reversion of the dual
differentiation activities. In summary, we have identified isoxazoles with
anti-adipogenic and pro-osteogenic activities that provide a potential new tool
for exploring the lineage commitment of mesenchymal stem cells and a possible
lead for therapeutic intervention in osteopenia and osteoporosis.

© 2013 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23995451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Int J Nanomedicine. 2013;8:2985-95. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S45184. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Using poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) microspheres to encapsulate plasmid of bone
morphogenetic protein 2/polyethylenimine nanoparticles to promote bone formation 
in vitro and in vivo.

Qiao C(1), Zhang K, Jin H, Miao L, Shi C, Liu X, Yuan A, Liu J, Li D, Zheng C,
Zhang G, Li X, Yang B, Sun H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun,
People's Republic of China.

Repair of large bone defects is a major challenge, requiring sustained
stimulation to continually promote bone formation locally. Bone morphogenetic
protein 2 (BMP-2) plays an important role in bone development. In an attempt to
overcome this difficulty of bone repair, we created a delivery system to slowly
release human BMP-2 cDNA plasmid locally, efficiently transfecting local target
cells and secreting functional human BMP-2 protein. For transfection, we used
polyethylenimine (PEI) to create pBMP-2/PEI nanoparticles, and to ensure slow
release we used poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) to create microsphere
encapsulated pBMP-2/PEI nanoparticles, PLGA@pBMP-2/PEI. We demonstrated that
pBMP-2/PEI nanoparticles could slowly release from the PLGA@pBMP-2/PEI
microspheres for a long period of time. The 3-15 µm diameter of the
PLGA@pBMP-2/PEI further supported this slow release ability of the
PLGA@pBMP-2/PEI. In vitro transfection assays demonstrated that pBMP-2/PEI
released from PLGA@pBMP-2/PEI could efficiently transfect MC3T3-E1 cells, causing
MC3T3-E1 cells to secrete human BMP-2 protein, increase calcium deposition and
gene expressions of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), runt-related transcription factor
2 (RUNX2), SP7 and I type collagen (COLL I), and finally induce MC3T3-E1 cell
differentiation. Importantly, in vivo data from micro-computed tomography
(micro-CT) and histological staining demonstrated that the human BMP-2 released
from PLGA@pBMP-2/PEI had a long-term effect locally and efficiently promoted bone
formation in the bone defect area compared to control animals. All our data
suggest that our PLGA-nanoparticle delivery system efficiently and functionally
delivers the human BMP-2 cDNA and has potential clinical application in the
future after further modification.

PMCID: PMC3748902
PMID: 23990717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Carbohydr Res. 2013 Oct 18;380:76-80. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2013.07.013. Epub
2013 Aug 2.

Structural studies of the O-specific polysaccharide(s) from the
lipopolysaccharide of Azospirillum brasilense type strain Sp7.

Sigida EN(1), Fedonenko YP, Shashkov AS, Zdorovenko EL, Konnova SA, Ignatov VV,
Knirel YA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Prospekt Entuziastov 13, 410049 Saratov, Russia.

Lipopolysaccharide was obtained by phenol-water extraction from dried bacterial
cells of Azospirillum brasilense type strain Sp7. Mild acid hydrolysis of the
lipopolysaccharide followed by GPC on Sephadex G-50 resulted in a polysaccharide 
mixture, which was studied by composition and methylation analyses, Smith
degradation and (1)H and (13)C NMR spectroscopy. The following polysaccharide
structures were established, where italics indicate a non-stoichiometric (~40%)
2-O-methylation of l-rhamnose.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23978662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Int J Med Sci. 2013 Jul 17;10(9):1181-92. doi: 10.7150/ijms.6657. Print 2013.

CXCL12/CXCR4 signal axis plays an important role in mediating bone morphogenetic 
protein 9-induced osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Liu C(1), Weng Y, Yuan T, Zhang H, Bai H, Li B, Yang D, Zhang R, He F, Yan S,
Zhan X, Shi Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, Ministry of Education,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China.

Mesenchymal progenitor stem cells (MPCs) are a group of bone marrow stromal
progenitor cells processing osteogenic, chondrogenic, adipogenic and myogenic
lineages differentiations. Previous studies have demonstrated that bone
morphogeneic protein 9(BMP9) is one of the most osteogenic BMPs both in vitro and
in vivo, however, the underlying molecular mechanism of osteogenesis induced by
BMP9 is needed to be deep explored. Here, we used the recombinant adenoviruses
assay to introduce BMP9 into C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal stem cells to elucidate the
role of CXCL12/CXCR4 signal axis during BMP9-incuced osteogenic differentiation. 
The results showed that CXCL12 and CXCR4 expressions were down-regulated at the
stage of BMP9-induced osteogenic differentiation, in a dose- and time-dependent. 
Pretreatment of C3H10T1/2 cells with CXCL12/CXCR4 could significantly affect the 
early and mid osteogenic markers alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteocalcin (OCN),
the transcription factors of Runx2, Osx, Plzf and Dlx5 expression, through
activating the Smad, MAPK signaling pathway. Addition of exogenous CXCL12 did not
affect the changes of the late osteogenic marker calcium deposition. Thus, our
findings suggest a co-requirement of the CXCL12/CXCR4 signal axis in BMP9-induced
the early- and mid-process of osteogenic differentiation of MSCs.

PMCID: PMC3739017
PMID: 23935395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Apr 9;93(14):1104-8.

[Expression of Osterix mRNA and protein induced by recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein-2 in human periodontal ligament cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YH(1), Li HF, Yang Q, Wang Y, Zheng Z, Wang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the changes of Osterix (Osx) mRNA and protein expression in 
human periodontal ligament cells (HPDLCs) induced by recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2), and examine the role of BMP-2 and Osx during
the osteogenic differentiation of HPDLCs.
METHODS: HPDLCs were isolated and cultured in vitro with explant method. Cells at
passage 3 were cultured in DMEM with rhBMP-2 at different concentrations (50,
100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 400, and 600 µg/L) for different times (2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 
14 and 21 days). Then the expressions of Osx mRNA and protein were measured by
real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR and Western blotting respectively. Cells
were treated with 10 µmol/L SB203580 (p38 inhibitor) to inhibit p38
phosphorylation induced by rhBMP-2. The mineralization nodules formation and the 
expressions of phosphorylated p38 and Osx mRNA were detected respectively.
RESULTS: During the culture of rhBMP-2, the expression of Osx mRNA significantly 
increased. Initially Osx protein had a low expression and then increased in a
time-dependent manner followed by the production of bone-like nodules in HPDLCs. 
Under the effect of SB203580, the up-regulation of phosphorylated p38 expression 
induced by rhBMP-2 was significantly inhibited as well as the expression of Osx
(Osx mRNA expression: 0.378 ± 0.034 vs 0.134 ± 0.027, Osx protein expression:
0.353 ± 0.024 vs 0.155 ± 0.031, both P < 0.01). Meanwhile the mineralization
nodules formed by HPDLCs induced by rhBMP-2 were fewer and delayed.
CONCLUSIONS: BMP-2 has a significant positive regulatory role on the expression
of Osx in HPDLCs. And p38 pathway is an important link of this regulatory
process. Thus, as an important signaling pathway in osteogenic differentiation of
HPDLCs, BMP-2/p38/Osx may be involved in periodontal tissue remodeling.

PMID: 23902847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Bone. 2013 Nov;57(1):325-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.07.032. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

On microRNA-214 suppressing osteogenic differentiation of C2C12 myoblast cells by
targeting Osterix.

Grünhagen J(1), Ott CE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité -
Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Bone. 2013 Nov;57(1):328-34.

Comment on
    Bone. 2013 Aug;55(2):487-94.

PMID: 23899634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Gene. 2013 Oct 10;528(2):216-20. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.008. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Impact of genetic variants of IL-6, IL6R, LRP5, ESR1 and SP7 genes on bone
mineral density in postmenopausal Mexican-Mestizo women with obesity.

Méndez JP(1), Rojano-Mejía D, Coral-Vázquez RM, Coronel A, Pedraza J, Casas MJ,
Soriano R, García-García E, Vilchis F, Canto P.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación en Obesidad, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Since obesity and osteoporosis present a high genetic predisposition 
and polymorphisms of IL-6, IL6R, LRP5, ESR1 and SP7 may influence the risk of
both diseases, the aim of this study was to analyze the possible association of
polymorphisms in these genes, as well as their haplotypes, with BMD variations in
postmenopausal Mexican-Mestizo women with grade 2 or grade 3 obesity.
METHODS: One hundred eighty unrelated postmenopausal women with grade 2 or grade 
3 obesity were included. BMD was measured in total hip and lumbar spine by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. DNA was obtained from blood leukocytes.
Rs1800795 of IL-6, rs2228145 of IL6R, rs3736228 of LRP5, rs9340799 (XbaI) and
rs2234693 (PvuII), of ESR1, rs10876432 and rs2016266, of SP7 (and their
haplotypes), were studied by real-time PCR allelic discrimination. Deviations
from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were tested. Pairwise linkage disequilibrium
between single nucleotide polymorphisms was calculated by direct correlation
r(2), and haplotype analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: Using WHO criteria, 54.5% had grade 2 obesity, and 45.5% had grade 3
obesity. Regarding DXA results, 11.1% women had osteoporosis, 41.7% had
osteopenia, and 47.2% had normal BMD. Genotype and haplotype analysis showed no
significant differences with BMD variations at the lumbar spine, total hip or
femoral neck.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find a significant association between the polymorphisms 
analyzed or their haplotypes and BMD variations in postmenopausal women with
obesity. The higher BMD observed in women with obesity could be the result of an 
adaptive response to the higher loading of the skeleton.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23891823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. FEBS Lett. 2013 Sep 17;587(18):3027-31. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.07.030. Epub 
2013 Jul 22.

miR-145 suppresses osteogenic differentiation by targeting Sp7.

Jia J(1), Tian Q, Ling S, Liu Y, Yang S, Shao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, China.

Osteogenesis depends on a coordinated network of transcription factors including 
Sp7. Emerging evidence indicates that microRNAs (miRNAs) act as pivotal
regulators in various biological processes including osteoblast proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we investigated the effect of miR-145 on osteogenic
differentiation. miR-145 was decreased during osteogenic differentiation, which
could suppress the osteogenic differentiation of C2C12 and MC3T3-E1 cells
confirmed by gain- and loss-of-function experiments. Moreover, bioinformatic
analysis combined with luciferase reporter assay, and Western blot validated that
miR-145 negatively regulated Sp7 expression. Inhibition of Sp7 showed similar
effect with miR-145 on osteogenic differentiation, whereas overexpression of Sp7 
attenuated this effect. Collectively, these data indicate that miR-145 is a novel
regulator of Sp7, and it suppresses the osteogenic differentiation of C2C12 and
MC3T3-E1 cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23886710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):321-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.021. Epub 2013 Jul
1.

MicroRNA expression profiling of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells during 
osteogenic differentiation reveals Osterix regulation by miR-31.

Baglìo SR(1), Devescovi V, Granchi D, Baldini N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Orthopedic Pathophysiology and Regenerative Medicine, Istituto 
Ortopedico Rizzoli, via di Barbiano 1/10, 40136, Bologna Italy.
rubinabaglio@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Gene. 2014 Feb 10;535(2):380.

Osteogenesis is the result of a complex sequence of events that involve the
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) into osteoblasts. MSCs are
multipotent adult stem cells that can give rise to different cell types of the
mesenchymal germ layer. The differentiation fate of MSCs depends on the
microenvironmental signals received by these cells and is tightly regulated by
multiple pathways that lead to the activation of specific transcription factors. 
Among the transcription factors involved in osteogenic differentiation Osterix
(Sp7) plays a key role and has been shown to be fundamental for bone homeostasis.
However, the molecular events governing the expression of this transcription
factor are not fully understood. In this study we set out to investigate the
changes in the microRNA (miRNA) expression that occur during the osteogenic
differentiation of bone marrow-derived MSCs. To this purpose, we analyzed the
miRNA expression profile of MSCs deriving from 3 donors during the
differentiation and mineralization processes by microarray. 29 miRNAs were
significantly and consistently modulated during the osteogenic differentiation
and 5 during the mineralization process. Interestingly, most of the
differentially expressed miRNAs have been reported to be implicated in stemness
maintenance, differentiation and/or oncogenesis. Subsequently, we focused our
attention on the regulation of Osterix by miRNAs and demonstrated that one of the
miRNAs differentially modulated during osteogenic differentiation, miR-31,
controls Osterix expression through association to the 3' untranslated region of 
this transcription factor. By analyzing miR-31 and Osterix expression levels we
found an inverse miRNA-target expression trend during osteogenic differentiation 
and in osteosarcoma cell lines. Moreover, the inhibition of the microRNA activity
led to an increase in the endogenous expression of Osterix. Our results define a 
miRNA signature characterizing the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs and provide
evidence for the involvement of miR-31 in the regulation of the bone-specific
transcription factor Osterix.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23827457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2012 Dec;9(Suppl 2):S164-8. doi: 10.4103/1735-3327.109736.

Titanium nanotubes activate genes related to bone formation in vitro.

Pozio A(1), Palmieri A, Girardi A, Cura F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA, IDROCOMB, C.R. Casaccia, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Titanium is used worldwide to make osseointegrable devices, thanks to
its favorable characteristics as mechanical proprieties and biocompatibility,
demonstrated by in vivo studies with animal models and clinical trials over a
forty-year period. However, the exact genetic effect of the titanium layer on
cells is still not well characterized.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate how titanium nanotubes stimulate
osteoblasts differentiation and proliferation, some osteoblast genes (SP7, RUNX2,
COL3A1, COL1A1, ALPL, SPP1 and FOSL1) were analyzed by quantitative Real Time RT-
PCR.
RESULTS: After 15 days, osteoblasts cultivated on titanium naotube showed the
up-regulation of bone related genes SP7, ENG, FOSL1 and SPP1 and the
down-regulation of RUNX2, COL3A1, COL1A1, and ALPL. After 30 days of treatment,
the bone related genes SP7, ENG, FOSL1 and RUNX2 were up-regulated while COL3A1, 
COL1A1, ALPL and SPP1 were down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results, demonstrates that titanium nanotubes can lead to
osteoblast differentiation and extracellular matrix deposition and mineralization
in dental pulp stem cells by the activation of osteoblast related genes SPP1,
FOSL1 and RUNX2.

PMCID: PMC3692167
PMID: 23814577  [PubMed]


127. Int J Oral Sci. 2013 Jun;5(2):75-84. doi: 10.1038/ijos.2013.41. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 gene controls tooth root development in coordination
with formation of the periodontium.

Rakian A(1), Yang WC, Gluhak-Heinrich J, Cui Y, Harris MA, Villarreal D, Feng JQ,
Macdougall M, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA.

Formation of the periodontium begins following onset of tooth-root formation in a
coordinated manner after birth. Dental follicle progenitor cells are thought to
form the cementum, alveolar bone and Sharpey's fibers of the periodontal ligament
(PDL). However, little is known about the regulatory morphogens that control
differentiation and function of these progenitor cells, as well as the progenitor
cells involved in crown and root formation. We investigated the role of bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (Bmp2) in these processes by the conditional removal of
the Bmp2 gene using the Sp7-Cre-EGFP mouse model. Sp7-Cre-EGFP first becomes
active at E18 in the first molar, with robust Cre activity at postnatal day 0
(P0), followed by Cre activity in the second molar, which occurs after P0. There 
is robust Cre activity in the periodontium and third molars by 2 weeks of age.
When the Bmp2 gene is removed from Sp7(+) (Osterix(+)) cells, major defects are
noted in root, cellular cementum and periodontium formation. First, there are
major cell autonomous defects in root-odontoblast terminal differentiation.
Second, there are major alterations in formation of the PDLs and cellular
cementum, correlated with decreased nuclear factor IC (Nfic), periostin and
a-SMA(+) cells. Third, there is a failure to produce vascular endothelial growth 
factor A (VEGF-A) in the periodontium and the pulp leading to decreased formation
of the microvascular and associated candidate stem cells in the
Bmp2-cKO(Sp7-Cre-EGFP). Fourth, ameloblast function and enamel formation are
indirectly altered in the Bmp2-cKO(Sp7-Cre-EGFP). These data demonstrate that the
Bmp2 gene has complex roles in postnatal tooth development and periodontium
formation.

PMCID: PMC3707077
PMID: 23807640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Arch Oral Biol. 2013 Oct;58(10):1357-68. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2013.03.011. 
Epub 2013 Jun 24.

The osteogenic differentiation of PDLSCs is mediated through MEK/ERK and p38 MAPK
signalling under hypoxia.

Wu Y(1), Yang Y, Yang P, Gu Y, Zhao Z, Tan L, Zhao L, Tang T, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Department of Orthodontics, West China 
Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, No. 14, 3rd Section, Renmin South
Road, Chengdu 610041, PR China.

PURPOSE: During orthodontic treatment and chronic periodontitis, the periodontal 
vasculature is severely impaired by overloaded mechanical force or chronic
inflammation. This leads to the hypoxic milieu of the periodontal stem cell niche
and ultimately affects periodontal tissue remodelling. However, the role of
hypoxia in the regulation of periodontal ligament stem cell (PDLSC) behaviours
still remains to be elucidated. The present study was aimed at investigating the 
effects of hypoxia on osteogenic differentiation, mineralisation and paracrine
release of PDLSCs and further demonstrating the involvement of mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) signalling in the process.
METHODS: First, PDLSCs were isolated and characterised. Second, the effects of
different periods of hypoxia on PDLSC osteogenic potential, mineralisation and
paracrine release were investigated. Third, extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and p38 kinase activities under hypoxia were measured.
Finally, specific MAPK inhibitors PD98059 and SB203580 were employed to
investigate the involvement of two kinases in PDLSC osteogenesis under hypoxia.
RESULTS: Immunocytochemical staining and multilineage differentiation assays
verified that the isolated cells were PDLSCs. Cell viability, alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity, messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels of
runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and Sp7, mineralisation and
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) release
were significantly increased by hypoxia. ERK1/2 and p38 were activated in
different ways under hypoxia. Furthermore, hypoxia-stimulated transcription and
expression of the above-mentioned osteogenic regulators were also reversed by
PD98059 and SB203580 to different degrees.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure of PDLSCs to hypoxia affected their osteogenic potential,
mineralisation and paracrine release, and the process involved mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK/ERK) and p38
MAPK signalling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23806288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Periodontol. 2014 Mar;85(3):498-508. doi: 10.1902/jop.2013.130048. Epub 2013
Jun 27.

Hypoxia regulates the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of human
periodontal ligament cells under cyclic tensile stress via mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathways.

Li L(1), Han MX, Li S, Xu Y, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that periodontal ligament exists in a
hypoxic microenvironment, especially under the condition of periodontitis or
physical stress. The present study is designed to investigate the effects and
mechanisms of hypoxia on regulating the proliferation and osteogenic
differentiation of human periodontal ligament cells (hPDLCs) under cyclic tensile
stress (CTS).
METHODS: hPDLCs were cultured in 2% O2 (hypoxia) or 20% O2 (normoxia) and then
subjected to a cyclic in-plane tensile deformation of 10% at 0.5 Hz. The
following parameters were measured: 1) cell proliferation by flow cytometry; 2)
cell ultrastructure by transmission electron microscopy; 3) expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and osteogenic relative factors (i.e.,
secreted phosphoprotein 1 [SPP1; also known as bone sialoprotein I/osteopontin], 
runt-related transcription factor 2 [RUNX2], and transcription factor Sp7 [SP7]) 
by real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot; and 4) involvement of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways by Western blot with
specific inhibitor.
RESULTS: Proliferation index in the hypoxia with CTS group was significantly
higher than in other groups. Significant increases in HIF-1a, SPP1, RUNX2, and
SP7 occurred in the presence of hypoxia for 24 hours. In addition, MAPK inhibitor
(PD 98,059) significantly attenuated hypoxia and CTS-induced phosphor-ERK1/2
(extracellular regulated kinase 1/2), phosphor-JNK (c-jun N-terminal kinase), and
phosphor-P38 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxia regulates CTS-responsive changes in proliferation and
osteogenic differentiation of hPDLCs via MAPK pathways. Hypoxia-treated hPDLCs
may serve as an in vitro model to explore the molecular mechanisms of
periodontitis.

PMID: 23805815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. DNA Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;32(9):488-97. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2070. Epub 2013 Jun
19.

Cyclic tensile stress during physiological occlusal force enhances osteogenic
differentiation of human periodontal ligament cells via ERK1/2-Elk1 MAPK pathway.

Li L(1), Han M, Li S, Wang L, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Physiological occlusal force constitutively exists in the oral environment and is
important for periodontal homeostasis and remodeling. Cyclic tensile stress (CTS)
triggers the biological response of periodontal ligament (PDL). However, a few
reports have studied the correlation between CTS during physiological occlusal
force and PDL cell activities such as osteogenic differentiation. In the present 
study, human PDL cells (hPDLCs) were subjected to 10% elongation CTS loading at
0.5<U+2009>Hz for 24<U+2009>h, which represents the physiological conditions of occlusal force.
Gene expression microarray was used to investigate the mechano-induced
differential gene profile and pathway analysis in vitro. The osteogenic relative 
factors, that is, SPP1, RUNX2, and SP7, were assessed by real-time PCR and
Western blot. The involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathways was investigated by Western blot with a specific inhibitor.
The expressions of SPP1, RUNX2, SP7, p-ERK1/2, and p-Elk1 were up-regulated after
10% CTS exposure. However, these up-regulated expressions were prevented by
ERK1/2 inhibitor U0126 in the physiological occlusal force-applied hPDLCs. These 
results showed that 10% CTS could enhance osteogenic differentiation of hPDLCs
via ERK1/2-Elk1 MAPK pathway, indicating that CTS during physiological occlusal
force is a potent agent for PDL remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3752521
PMID: 23781879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Aug;98(8):3095-103. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1505. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

New genes in bone development: what's new in osteogenesis imperfecta.

Marini JC(1), Blissett AR.

Author information: 
(1)Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. oidoc@helix.nih.gov

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable bone dysplasia characterized by bone 
fragility and deformity and growth deficiency. Most cases of OI (classical types)
have autosomal dominant inheritance and are caused by mutations in the type I
collagen genes. During the past several years, a number of noncollagenous genes
whose protein products interact with collagen have been identified as the
cause(s) of rare forms of OI. This has led to a paradigm shift for OI as a
collagen-related condition. The majority of the non-classical OI types have
autosomal recessive inheritance and null mutations in their respective genes. The
exception is a unique dominant defect in IFITM5, which encodes Bril and leads to 
hypertrophic callus and interosseous membrane ossification. Three recessive OI
types arise from defects in any of the components of the collagen prolyl
3-hydroxylation complex (CRTAP, P3H1, CyPB), which modifies the collagen
a1(I)Pro986 residue. Complex dysfunction leads to delayed folding of the
procollagen triple helix and increased helical modification. Next, defects in
collagen chaperones, HSP47 and FKBP65, lead to improper procollagen folding and
deficient collagen cross-linking in matrix, respectively. A form of OI with a
mineralization defect is caused by mutations in SERPINF1, whose protein product, 
PEDF, is a well-known antiangiogenesis factor. Defects in the C-propeptide
cleavage enzyme, BMP1, also cause recessive OI. Additional genes, including SP7
and TMEM38B, have been implicated in recessive OI but are as yet unclassified.
Elucidating the mechanistic pathways common to dominant and recessive OI may lead
to novel therapeutic approaches to improve clinical manifestations.

PMCID: PMC3733862
PMID: 23771926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Muscles Ligaments Tendons J. 2012 Oct 16;2(3):193-203. Print 2012 Jul.

Bioactive factors for tissue regeneration: state of the art.

Ohba S(1), Hojo H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biotechnology, Center for Disease Biology and Integrative
Medicine, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

THERE ARE THREE COMPONENTS FOR THE CREATION OF NEW TISSUES: cell sources,
scaffolds, and bioactive factors. Unlike conventional medical strategies,
regenerative medicine requires not only analytical approaches but also
integrative ones. Basic research has identified a number of bioactive factors
that are necessary, but not sufficient, for organogenesis. In skeletal
development, these factors include bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs),
transforming growth factor ß TGF-ß, Wnts, hedgehogs (Hh), fibroblast growth
factors (FGFs), insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), SRY box-containing gene (Sox)
9, Sp7, and runt-related transcription factors (Runx). Clinical and preclinical
studies have been extensively performed to apply the knowledge to bone and
cartilage regeneration. Given the large number of findings obtained so far, it
would be a good time for a multi-disciplinary, collaborative effort to optimize
these known factors and develop appropriate drug delivery systems for delivering 
them.

PMCID: PMC3666524
PMID: 23738297  [PubMed]


133. Acta Cir Bras. 2013 May;28(5):353-60.

In vitro evaluation of three different biomaterials as scaffolds for canine
mesenchymal stem cells.

Pereira-Junior OC(1), Rahal SC, Lima-Neto JF, Landim-Alvarenga Fda C, Monteiro
FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Surgery and Anesthesiology, School of Veterinary
Medicine and Animal Science, São Paulo State University, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

PURPOSE: To evaluate in vitro ability the of three different biomaterials -
purified hydroxyapatite, demineralized bone matrix and castor oil-based
polyurethane - as biocompatible 3D scaffolds for canine bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cell (MSC) intending bone tissue engineering.
METHODS: MSCs were isolated from canine bone marrow, characterized and cultivated
for seven days with the biomaterials. Cell proliferation and adhesion to the
biomaterial surface were evaluated by scanning electron microscopy while
differentiation into osteogenic lineage was evaluated by Alizarin Red staining
and Sp7/Osterix surface antibody marker.
RESULTS: The biomaterials allowed cellular growth, attachment and proliferation. 
Osteogenic differentiation occurred in the presence of hydroxyapatite, and matrix
deposition commenced in the presence of the castor oil-based polyurethane.
CONCLUSION: All the tested biomaterials may be used as mesenchymal stem cell
scaffolds in cell-based orthopedic reconstructive therapy.

PMID: 23702937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 18;51(1):99-108. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0251. Print 2013.

Regulation of the osterix (Osx, Sp7) promoter by osterix and its inhibition by
parathyroid hormone.

Barbuto R(1), Mitchell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Osterix (Osx, Sp7) is a zinc-finger transcription factor belonging to the
specificity protein (Sp) family expressed in cells of the osteoblast lineage in
the developing skeleton where it regulates expression of a number of osteoblastic
genes. We previously reported inhibition of osterix mRNA and protein by
parathyroid hormone (PTH) stimulation of cAMP in osteoblasts. We here show that
Osx expression in osteoblasts is regulated by Sp proteins as demonstrated by
mithramycin A inhibition of Osx mRNA and OSX protein levels. Mutation of putative
transcription factor binding sites within the Osx promoter demonstrated a tandem 
repeat sequence that selectively binds OSX but not other Sp factors expressed in 
osteoblasts (Sp1, Sp3, or Tieg (Klf10)). Mutation of either or both the repeat
sequences inhibited 90% of the promoter activity and also abrogated some of the
PTH-mediated inhibition of the promoter. Previous studies have shown growth
factor regulation of Osx expression by MAPK proteins, particularly p38
phosphorylation of OSX that increases its transcriptional activity. PTH
stimulation of osteoblasts inhibits MAPK components (ERK, JNK, and p38) but
inhibition of Osx mRNA and protein expression by PTH was selectively mimicked by 
p38 inhibition and expression of constitutively active MKK6, which stimulates
p38, blocked PTH inhibition of OSX. Together, our studies suggest that OSX
autoregulation is a major mechanism in osteoblasts and that PTH stimulation
inhibits osterix by inhibition of p38 MAPK regulation of OSX.

PMCID: PMC3685218
PMID: 23682129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 5;288(27):19973-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.454652. Epub 2013
May 7.

CCN3 protein participates in bone regeneration as an inhibitory factor.

Matsushita Y(1), Sakamoto K, Tamamura Y, Shibata Y, Minamizato T, Kihara T, Ito
M, Katsube K, Hiraoka S, Koseki H, Harada K, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, International Research Center for Molecular Science
in Tooth and Bone Diseases, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8549, 
Japan.

CCN3, a member of the CCN protein family, inhibits osteoblast differentiation in 
vitro. However, the role of CCN3 in bone regeneration has not been well
elucidated. In this study, we investigated the role of CCN3 in bone regeneration.
We identified the Ccn3 gene by microarray analysis as a highly expressed gene at 
the early phase of bone regeneration in a mouse bone regeneration model. We
confirmed the up-regulation of Ccn3 at the early phase of bone regeneration by
RT-PCR, Western blot, and immunofluorescence analyses. Ccn3 transgenic mice, in
which Ccn3 expression was driven by 2.3-kb Col1a1 promoter, showed osteopenia
compared with wild-type mice, but Ccn3 knock-out mice showed no skeletal changes 
compared with wild-type mice. We analyzed the bone regeneration process in Ccn3
transgenic mice and Ccn3 knock-out mice by microcomputed tomography and
histological analyses. Bone regeneration in Ccn3 knock-out mice was accelerated
compared with that in wild-type mice. The mRNA expression levels of
osteoblast-related genes (Runx2, Sp7, Col1a1, Alpl, and Bglap) in Ccn3 knock-out 
mice were up-regulated earlier than those in wild-type mice, as demonstrated by
RT-PCR. Bone regeneration in Ccn3 transgenic mice showed no significant changes
compared with that in wild-type mice. Phosphorylation of Smad1/5 was highly
up-regulated at bone regeneration sites in Ccn3 KO mice compared with wild-type
mice. These results indicate that CCN3 is up-regulated in the early phase of bone
regeneration and acts as a negative regulator for bone regeneration. This study
may contribute to the development of new strategies for bone regeneration
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3707697
PMID: 23653360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2013 Feb;38(1):68-72.

[Comparison of pain thresholds of acupoints on the leg in healthy volunteers].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang ZZ(1), Zhang J, Li DH.

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Union University, Tangshan 063000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the pain threshold of acupoints on the leg in healthy
volunteers so as to analyze the sensory specificity of different acupoints.
METHODS: A total of 66 healthy volunteers (34 male and 30 female) aged from 19 to
64 years were recruited in the present study. Pain thresholds of acupoints on the
lower leg were detected by using an Electronic Von Frey Anesthesiometer after
constructing an anthropometric diagram about the cutaneous division of the lower 
leg.
RESULTS: 1) Among acupoints Shugu (BL 65), Jinggu (BL 64), Kunlun (BL 60),
Chengshan (BL 57) of the Bladder Meridian from the heel to the popliteal fossa,
and non-acupoint (1cun lateral to BL 60), no significant differences were found
among these acupoint regions in the pain threshold (P > 0.05), while that of the 
non-acupoint was significantly higher in comparison with these acupoint regions
(P < 0.05). 2) At the Zusanli (ST 36) level, no significant differences were
found among the Yanglingquan (GB 34), Zusanli (ST 36) and Yinlingquan (SP 9)
regions in the pain threshold (P > 0.05) and the pain threshold was obviously
higher in the non-acupoint (1 cun lateral to ST36) than in the GB34, ST36 and SP 
9 regions (P < 0.05). 3) At the Xiajuxu (ST39) level, no significant differences 
were found among the Xiajuxu (ST39), Waiqiu (GB 36), Yangjiao (GB35), Feiyang
(BL58) and Lougu (SP7) regions in the pain threshold (P > 0.05), but the
non-acupoint (1 cun lateral to ST39) showed a higher threshold than those of the 
above-mentioned 5 acupoints (P < 0.05). 4) Among the 5 Xing-spring acupoints Dadu
(SP2), Xingjian (LR2), Neiting (ST44) and Xiaxi (GB 43) distributing in the
interdistal region, the pain threshold was lowest in the Neiting (ST 44) and
highest in the Xiaxi (GB 43) regions (P < 0.05). 5) Among the acupoints Shuiquan 
(KI 5), Taixi (KI 3), Zhubin (KI 9) and Lougu (SP7) on the lower leg, the pain
threshold was lowest in the Zhubin (KI 9) and highest in the Lougu (SP 7) regions
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In healthy subjects, the pain threshold is generally higher in the
non-acupoint region and also shows a sparse lower sensory threshold in some
acupoints as Neiting (ST 44), Zhubin (KI 9), etc. The specificity of acupoints
needs being studied further.

PMID: 23650804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Dent Res. 2013 Jul;92(7):622-8. doi: 10.1177/0022034513487906. Epub 2013 Apr
26.

Expression and function of enamel-related gene products in calvarial development.

Atsawasuwan P(1), Lu X, Ito Y, Chen Y, Gopinathan G, Evans CA, Kulkarni AB,
Gibson CW, Luan X, Diekwisch TG.

Author information: 
(1)Brodie Laboratory for Craniofacial Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Enamel-related gene products (ERPs) are detected in non-enamel tissues such as
bone. We hypothesized that, if functional, ERP expression corresponds with
distinct events during osteoblast differentiation and affects bone development
and mineralization. In mouse calvariae and MC3T3 cells, expression profiles of
enamel-related gene products (ERPs) correlated with key events in post-natal
calvarial development and MC3T3 cell mineralization. Developing skulls from both 
Amel- and Ambn-deficient animals were approximately 15% shorter when compared
with those of wild-type controls, and their sutures remained patent for a longer 
period of time. Analysis of Amel- and Ambn-deficient calvariae and calvarial
osteoblast cultures revealed a dramatic reduction in mineralized nodules, a
significant reduction in Runx2, Sp7, Ibsp, and Msx2 expression, and a reduction
in Alx4 in Amel-deficient calvariae vs. an increase in Alx4 in Ambn-deficient
calvariae. Analysis of these data indicates that ERP expression follows defined
developmental profiles and affects osteoblast differentiation, mineralization,
and calvarial bone development. We propose that, in parallel to their role in the
developing enamel matrix, ERPs have retained an evolutionary conserved function
related to the biomineralization of bones.

PMCID: PMC3684230
PMID: 23625374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2013 Jul 1;33(5):2757-65. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2013.02.044. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Combinatorial effect of Si4+, Ca2+, and Mg2+ released from bioactive glasses on
osteoblast osteocalcin expression and biomineralization.

Saffarian Tousi N(1), Velten MF, Bishop TJ, Leong KK, Barkhordar NS, Marshall GW,
Loomer PM, Aswath PB, Varanasi VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Baylor College of Dentistry, Texas A & M
Health Science Center, Dallas, TX 75246, USA.

Osteocalcin (OCN) expression is an essential osteogenic marker of successful bone
regeneration therapies. This study hypothesizes that Si(4+) and Ca(2+)
combinatorial released by bioactive glass enhance osteoblast biomineralization
through up-regulation of OCN expression; and Mg(2+) release delays such
enhancement. Osteoblasts (MC3T3-E1) were treated with ionic products of bioactive
glass dissolution (6P53-b experimental bioactive glass and 45S5 commercial
Bioglass). Results showed that gene expressions, including OCN and its up-stream
transcription factors (Runx2, ATF4, MSX1, SP7/OSX), growth factors and signaling 
proteins (BMP2, BMP6, SMAD3), were enhanced in both 45S5 and 6P53-b glass
conditioned mediums (GCMs). This up-regulation led to enhanced mineral formation 
by 45S5 glass conditioned mediums ([GCM], Si(4+)+Ca(2+)) after 20 days, and by
45S5 GCM and 6P53-b GCM (Si(4+)+Ca(2+)+Mg(2+)) after 30 days. In examining the
extracellular matrix generated by cells when exposed to each GCM, it was found
that 45S5 GCM had slightly elevated levels of mineral content within ECM as
compared to 6P53-b GCM after 30 days while control treatments exhibited no
mineral content. The formation of well-defined mineralized nodules (distinct
PO4(3-) [960 cm(-1)] and CO3(2-) [1072 cm(-1)] peaks from Raman Spectra) was
observed for each GCM as the soluble glass content increased. In examining the
individual and combined ion effects between Si(4+), Ca(2+), and Mg(2+), it was
found Mg(2+) down-regulates OCN expression. Thus, ions released from both 45S5
and 6P53-b bioactive glasses up-regulate OCN expression and biomineralization
while 6P53-b GCM Mg(2+) release down-regulated OCN expression and delayed
osteoblast biomineralization. These results indicate that Si(4+), Ca(2+), and
Mg(2+) combinatorially regulate osteoblast OCN expression and biomineralization.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 7;288(23):16430-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.446849. Epub 2013 
Apr 24.

Structural insights into histone demethylase NO66 in interaction with
osteoblast-specific transcription factor osterix and gene repression.

Tao Y(1), Wu M, Zhou X, Yin W, Hu B, de Crombrugghe B, Sinha KM, Zang J.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230026, China.

Osterix (Osx) is an osteoblast-specific transcriptional factor and is required
for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. A JmjC domain-containing
protein NO66 was previously found to participate in regulation of Osx
transcriptional activity and plays an important role in osteoblast
differentiation through interaction with Osx. Here, we report the crystal
structure of NO66 forming in a functional tetramer. A hinge domain links the
N-terminal JmjC domain and C-terminal winged helix-turn-helix domain of NO66, and
both domains are essential for tetrameric assembly. The oligomerization interface
of NO66 interacts with a conserved fragment of Osx. We show that the hinge
domain-dependent oligomerization of NO66 is essential for inhibition of
Osx-dependent gene activation. Our findings suggest that homo-oligomerization of 
JmjC domain containing proteins might play a physiological role through
interactions with other regulatory factors during gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3675579
PMID: 23620590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Periodontal Res. 2013 Dec;48(6):790-801. doi: 10.1111/jre.12072. Epub 2013 Apr 
15.

Engineering three-dimensional constructs of the periodontal ligament in
hyaluronan-gelatin hydrogel films and a mechanically active environment.

Saminathan A(1), Vinoth KJ, Low HH, Cao T, Meikle MC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore, 11 Lower Kent Ridge
Road, Singapore, 119083, Singapore.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Periodontal ligament (PDL) cells in stationary
two-dimensional culture systems are in a double default state. Our aim therefore 
was to engineer and characterize three-dimensional constructs, by seeding PDL
cells into hyaluronan-gelatin hydrogel films (80-100 µm) in a format capable of
being mechanically deformed.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Human PDL constructs were cultured with and without
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 in
(i) stationary cultures, and (ii) mechanically active cultures subjected to
cyclic strains of 12% at 0.2 Hz each min, 6 h/d, in a Flexercell FX-4000 Strain
Unit. The following parameters were measured: cell number and viability by laser 
scanning confocal microscopy; cell proliferation with the MTS assay; the
expression of a panel of 18 genes using real-time RT-PCR; matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) 1-3, TIMP-1, CTGF and FGF-2 protein levels in
supernatants from mechanically activated cultures with Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays. Constructs from stationary cultures were also examined by
scanning electron microscopy and immunostained for actin and vinculin.
RESULTS: Although initially randomly distributed, the cells became organized into
a bilayer by day 7; apoptotic cells remained constant at approximately 5% of the 
total. CTGF/FGF-2 stimulated cell proliferation in stationary cultures, but
relative quantity values suggested modest effects on gene expression. Two
transcription factors (RUNX2 and PPARG), two collagens (COL1A1, COL3A1), four
MMPs (MMP-1-3, TIMP-1), TGFB1, RANKL, OPG and P4HB were detected by gel
electrophoresis and Ct values < 35. In mechanically active cultures, with the
exception of P4HB, TGFB1 and RANKL, each was upregulated at some point in the
time scale, as was the synthesis of MMPs and TIMP-1. SOX9, MYOD, SP7, BMP2, BGLAP
or COL2A1 were not detected in either stationary or mechanically active cultures.
CONCLUSION: Three-dimensional tissue constructs provide additional complexity to 
monolayer culture systems, and suggest some of the assumptions regarding cell
growth, differentiation and matrix turnover based on two-dimensional cultures may
not apply to cells in three-dimensional matrices. Primarily developed as a
transitional in vitro model for studying cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions
in tooth support, the system is also suitable for investigating the pathogenesis 
of periodontal diseases, and importantly from the clinical point of view, in a
mechanically active environment.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23581542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Orthop Res. 2013 Sep;31(9):1382-9. doi: 10.1002/jor.22367. Epub 2013 Apr 11.

Electrospun fibers as a scaffolding platform for bone tissue repair.

Lyu S(1), Huang C, Yang H, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, New
York, USA.

The purpose of the study is to investigate the effects of electrospun fiber
diameter and orientation on differentiation and ECM organization of bone marrow
stromal cells (BMSCs), in attempt to provide rationale for fabrication of a
periosteum mimetic for bone defect repair. Cellular growth, differentiation, and 
ECM organization were analyzed on PLGA-based random and aligned fibers using
fluorescent microscopy, gene analyses, electron scanning microscopy (SEM), and
multiphoton laser scanning microscopy (MPLSM). BMSCs on aligned fibers had a
reduced number of ALP+ colony at Day 10 as compared to the random fibers of the
same size. However, the ALP+ area in the aligned fibers increased to a similar
level as the random fibers at Day 21 following stimulation with osteogenic media.
Compared with the random fibers, BMSCs on the aligned fibers showed a higher
expression of OSX and RUNX2. Analyses of ECM on decellularized spun fibers showed
highly organized ECM arranged according to the orientation of the spun fibers,
with a broad size distribution of collagen fibers in a range of 40-2.4 µm. Taken 
together, our data support the use of submicron-sized electrospun fibers for
engineering of oriented fibrous tissue mimetic, such as periosteum, for guided
bone repair and reconstruction.

Copyright © 2013 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMCID: PMC4083683
PMID: 23580466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jan 22;93(4):280-4.

[Histopathologic features of degenerative aortic valve and its mechanisms].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun J(1), Meng DM, Jiang N, Wang LQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Tianjin Chest Hospital, Tianjin 300051, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the related pathogenesis of degenerative aortic valvular
disease by observing the histopathological changes of aortic valves from patients
with aortic degenerative stenosis and compare the results with those controls
with normal aortic valves.
METHODS: Between May 2009 and May 2010, 22 cases of degenerative calcified aortic
valves from patients with aortic valve stenosis undergoing aortic valve
replacement (14 males, 8 females, mean age: (66 ± 6) years) and 6 cases of normal
aortic valves from those with dissection undergoing Bentall operation (4 males, 2
females, mean age: (43 ± 5) years) were collected. The results of hematoxylin and
eosin staining and immunohistochemical examinations were used to observe the
histological features of degenerative aortic valves and elucidate the related
pathogenesis of degenerative aortic valvular disease.
RESULTS: Degenerative aortic valve leaflets became thickened. Calcification
appeared in aortic side of valve leaflets. Inflammatory infiltrate, angiogenesis,
cholesterol crystals, foamy cell aggregation, diffuse and nodular calcification
could be seen in subendocardial space of degenerative aortic valve leaflets. No
expression of Osterix (OSX) or nuclear factor of activated T-cells 1 (NFATc1) was
observed in normal valves. In contrast, the expressions of OSX and NFATc1 showed 
nuclear immunostaining in degenerative aortic valves. Immunohistochemical
staining was graded from 0 to 3. And the expression of OSX was present in
1(4.5%), 1(4.5%), 8(36.4%) and 12 cases (54.5%) respectively in calcified areas, 
that of OSX in 4(18.2%), 6(27.3%), 7 (31.8%) and 5 cases (22.7%) respectively in 
non-calcified areas, that of NFATc1 in 1 (4.5%), 1 (4.5%), 8 (36.4%) and 12 cases
(54.5%) respectively in calcified areas, that of NFATc1 in 4 (18.2%), 6 (27.3%), 
8 (36.4%) and 4 cases (18.2%) respectively in non-calcified areas. The
expressions of OSX and NFATc1 in calcified areas were higher than those in
non-calcified areas (<U+03C7>(2) = 8.320, P = 0.040 and <U+03C7>(2) = 9.371, P = 0.025
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike in normal valves, inflammatory infiltrate, lipid deposition, 
angiogenesis and bone regulatory factors appear in degenerative aortic valves.
And inflammatory infiltrate, lipid deposition, angiogenesis and ossification may 
be involved in the degenerative calcified aortic stenosis.

PMID: 23578508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biophys J. 2013 Apr 2;104(7):1426-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.01.055.

Patch-clamp characterization of the MscS-like mechanosensitive channel from
Silicibacter pomeroyi.

Petrov E(1), Palanivelu D, Constantine M, Rohde PR, Cox CD, Nomura T, Minor DL
Jr, Martinac B.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, Australia.
petrov67@gmail.com

Comment in
    Biophys J. 2013 Apr 2;104(7):1391-3.

Based on sequence similarity, the sp7 gene product, MscSP, of the
sulfur-compound-decomposing Gram-negative marine bacterium Silicibacter pomeroyi 
belongs to the family of MscS-type mechanosensitive channels. To investigate
MscSP channel properties, we measured its response to membrane tension using the 
patch-clamp technique on either a heterologous expression system using giant
spheroplasts of MJF465 Escherichia coli strain (devoid of mechanosensitive
channels MscL, MscS, and MscK), or on purified MscSP protein reconstituted in
azolectin liposomes. These experiments showed typical pressure-dependent gating
properties of a stretch-activated channel with a current/voltage plot indicating 
a rectifying behavior and weak preference for anions similar to the MscS channel 
of E. coli. However, the MscSP channel exhibited functional differences with
respect to conductance and desensitization behavior, with the most striking
difference between the two channels being the lack of inactivation in MscSP
compared with MscS. This seems to result from the fact that although MscSP has a 
Gly in an equivalent position to MscS (G113), a position that is critical for
inactivation, MscSP has a Glu residue instead of an Asn in a position that was
recently shown to allosterically influence MscS inactivation, N117. To our
knowledge, this study describes the first electrophysiological characterization
of an MscS-like channel from a marine bacterium belonging to sulfur-degrading
a-proteobacteria.

Copyright © 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3617418
PMID: 23561519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Acta Biomater. 2013 Jul;9(7):7564-72. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.03.010. Epub
2013 Mar 19.

Titanium particle-challenged osteoblasts promote osteoclastogenesis and
osteolysis in a murine model of periprosthestic osteolysis.

Jiang Y(1), Jia T, Gong W, Wooley PH, Yang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Institute, Via Christi Wichita Hospitals - St. Francis,
929 N St Francis Street, Wichita, KS 67214, USA.

The current study investigates the interactive behavior of titanium alloy
particle-challenged osteoblastic bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and macrophage
lineage cells in a murine knee-prosthesis failure model. BMSCs were isolated from
male BALB/c mice femurs and induced in osteogenic medium. At 24h after isolation,
BMSCs in complete induction medium were challenged with 1, 3 or 5mgml(-1)
titanium particles for 7days. Culture media were collected at 2, 4 and 6days and 
cells were harvested at 7days for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay/stains. Cell
proliferation in the presence of Ti particles was periodically evaluated by MTT
assay. Mice implanted with titanium-pin tibial implants were given an
intra-articular injection of 50µl medium containing 5×10(5) Ti
particles-challenged bone-marrow-derived osteoblastic cells, followed by a repeat
injection at 2weeks post-operation. Control mice with titanium-pin implants
received a naïve osteoblastic cell transfusion. After sacrifice at 4weeks, the
implanted knee joint of each group was collected for biomechanical pin-pullout
testing, histological evaluation and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction analysis of mRNA extracted from the joint tissues. Ti particles
significantly stimulated the proliferation of BMSC-derived osteoblastic cells at 
both high and low particle concentrations (p<0.05), with no marked differences
between the particle doses. ALP expression was diminished following Ti particle
interactions, especially in the high-dose particle group (p<0.05). In addition,
the culture media collected from short-term challenged (48h) osteoblasts
significantly increased the numbers of TRAP+ cells when added to mouse peripheral
blood monocytes cultures, in comparison with the monocytes cells receiving naïve 
osteoblasts media (p<0.05). Intra-articular introduction of the osteoblastic
cells to the mouse pin-implant failure model resulted in reduced implant
interfacial shear strength and thicker peri-implant soft-tissue formation,
suggesting that titanium particles-challenged osteoblasts contributed to
periprosthetic osteolysis. Comparison of the gene expression profiles among the
peri-implant tissue samples following osteoblast injection did not find
significant difference in RunX2 or Osterix/Sp7 between the groups. However,
MMP-2, IL-1, TNF-a, RANKL, and TRAP gene expressions were elevated in the
challenged-osteoblast group (p<0.05). In conclusion, titanium alloy particles
were shown to interfere with the growth, maturation, and functions of the bone
marrow osteoblast progenitor cells. Particle-challenged osteoblasts appear to
express mediators that regulate osteoclastogenesis and peri-prosthetic
osteolysis.

Copyright © 2013 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3686639
PMID: 23518478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Aug;114(8):1863-70. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24528.

Control of Fiat (factor inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription) expression by Sp 
family transcription factors in osteoblasts.

Hekmatnejad B(1), Gauthier C, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospitals for Children-Canada, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3G 1A6.

FIAT (factor inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription) represses Osteocalcin gene
transcription and inhibits osteoblast activity by heterodimerizing with ATF4 to
prevent it from binding DNA. It thus appears important to identify and
characterize the molecular mechanisms that control Fiat gene expression in
osteoblasts. In silico sequence analysis identified a canonical GC-box within a
1,400 bp region of the proximal Fiat gene promoter. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) with MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells nuclear extracts indicated
that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3, but not Sp7/OSTERIX, bound this
proximal GC-box. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed interaction of the two
transcription factors with the Fiat promoter GC-element in living osteoblasts.
Transient transfection studies showed that Sp1 dose-dependently activated the
expression of a Fiat-luciferase reporter construct while both the long or short
isoforms of Sp3 dose-dependently inhibited transcription from the Fiat reporter
construct. Transfection of an Sp7/OSTERIX expression vector did not affect
expression of the Fiat-luciferase reporter. Co-transfection of increasing amounts
of the Sp3 expression vector in the context of maximal Sp1-dependent
Fiat-luciferase activation led to dose-dependent repression of the expression of 
the reporter. Using RNA knockdown, we measured a reduction in steady-state Fiat
expression when Sp1 was inhibited, and a reciprocal increase upon Sp3 knockdown. 
In parallel, treatment of osteoblasts with WP631, which prevents Sp1/DNA
interactions, strongly inhibited the expression of Fiat and reduced the occupancy
of the Fiat promoter proximal GC-box by Sp1. Taken together, our results suggest 
an interplay between Sp1 and Sp3 as a mechanism involved in the control of Fiat
gene expression in osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23463631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056451. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Characterization of Osterix protein stability and physiological role in
osteoblast differentiation.

Peng Y(1), Shi K, Wang L, Lu J, Li H, Pan S, Ma C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
People's Republic of China.

Osterix (Osx/SP7) is a C2H2 zinc finger-containing transcription factor of the SP
gene family. Osx knockout mice indicate that the gene plays an essential role in 
osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. However, the mechanisms involved
in the regulation of Osx are still poorly understood. Here, we report a novel
post-translational mechanism for the regulation of Osx in mammalian cells. We
found that the stability of endogenous and exogenous Osx reduced after
cycloheximide treatment. In cells treated with the proteasome inhibitors MG-132
or lactacystin, both endogenous and exogenous Osx protein expression increased in
a time-dependent manner. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assays showed that both
endogenous and exogenous Osx were ubiquitinated. Six lysine residues of Osx were 
identified as candidate ubiquitination sites by construction of point mutant
plasmids and luciferase reporter assays. Furthermore, we confirmed that K58 and
K230 are the ubiquitination sites of Osx by Co-IP assays and protein stability
assays. Moreover, the Osx K58R and K230R mutations promoted the expression of
osteoblast differentiation markers (alkaline phosphatase, collagen I and
osteocalcin) and enhanced osteogenic differentiation in C2C12 cells. Taken
together, our data indicate that Osx is an unstable protein, and that the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is involved in the regulation of Osx and thereby
regulates osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3574093
PMID: 23457570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 8;432(2):248-55. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.005. Epub 2013 Feb 10.

Calmodulin-dependent kinase II regulates osteoblast differentiation through
regulation of Osterix.

Choi YH(1), Choi JH, Oh JW, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Osterix (Osx), a zinc-finger transcription factor, is required for osteoblast
differentiation and new bone formation during embryonic development.
Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) acts as a key regulator of osteoblast
differentiation. However, the precise molecular signaling mechanisms between
Osterix and CaMKII are not known. In this study, we focused on the relationship
between Osterix and CaMKII during osteoblast differentiation. We examined the
role of the CaMKII pathway in the regulation of protein levels and its
transcriptional activity on Osterix. We showed that CaMKII interacts with Osterix
by increasing the protein levels and enhancing the transcriptional activity of
Osterix. Conversely, CaMKII inhibitor KN-93 decreases the protein levels and
increases the stability of Osterix. The siRNA-mediated knockdown of CaMKII
decreased the protein levels and transcriptional activity of Osterix. These
results suggest that Osterix is a novel target of CaMKII and the activity of
Osterix can be modulated by a novel mechanism involving CaMKII during osteoblast 
differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23402759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 5;110(6):2294-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1220811110.
Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Estrogen receptor-a in osteocytes is important for trabecular bone formation in
male mice.

Windahl SH(1), Börjesson AE, Farman HH, Engdahl C, Movérare-Skrtic S, Sjögren K, 
Lagerquist MK, Kindblom JM, Koskela A, Tuukkanen J, Divieti Pajevic P, Feng JQ,
Dahlman-Wright K, Antonson P, Gustafsson JÅ, Ohlsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Centre for Bone and
Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

The bone-sparing effect of estrogen in both males and females is primarily
mediated via estrogen receptor-a (ERa), encoded by the Esr1 gene. ERa in
osteoclasts is crucial for the trabecular bone-sparing effect of estrogen in
females, but it is dispensable for trabecular bone in male mice and for cortical 
bone in both genders. We hypothesized that ERa in osteocytes is important for
trabecular bone in male mice and for cortical bone in both males and females.
Dmp1-Cre mice were crossed with ERa(flox/flox) mice to generate mice lacking ERa 
protein expression specifically in osteocytes (Dmp1-ERa(-/-)). Male Dmp1-ERa(-/-)
mice displayed a substantial reduction in trabecular bone volume (-20%, P < 0.01)
compared with controls. Dynamic histomorphometry revealed reduced bone formation 
rate (-45%, P < 0.01) but the number of osteoclasts per bone surface was
unaffected in the male Dmp1-ERa(-/-) mice. The male Dmp1-ERa(-/-) mice had
reduced expression of several osteoblast/osteocyte markers in bone, including
Runx2, Sp7, and Dmp1 (P < 0.05). Gonadal intact Dmp1-ERa(-/-) female mice had no 
significant reduction in trabecular bone volume but ovariectomized Dmp1-ERa(-/-) 
female mice displayed an attenuated trabecular bone response to
supraphysiological E2 treatment. Dmp1-ERa(-/-) mice of both genders had
unaffected cortical bone. In conclusion, ERa in osteocytes regulates trabecular
bone formation and thereby trabecular bone volume in male mice but it is
dispensable for the trabecular bone in female mice and the cortical bone in both 
genders. We propose that the physiological trabecular bone-sparing effect of
estrogen is mediated via ERa in osteocytes in males, but via ERa in osteoclasts
in females.

PMCID: PMC3568324
PMID: 23345419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Tissue Eng Part A. 2013 Jun;19(11-12):1373-85. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2012.0323.
Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Characterization of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell combinations for
vascularized bone engineering.

Valenzuela CD(1), Allori AC, Reformat DD, Sailon AM, Allen RJ Jr, Davidson EH,
Alikhani M, Bromage TG, Ricci JL, Warren SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Plastic Surgery Laboratories, New York University 
Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Since bone repair and regeneration depend on vasculogenesis and osteogenesis,
both of these processes are essential for successful vascularized bone
engineering. Using adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs), we investigated temporal
gene expression profiles, as well as bone nodule and endothelial tubule formation
capacities, during osteogenic and vasculogenic ASC lineage commitment.
Osteoprogenitor-enriched cell populations were found to express RUNX2, MSX2, SP7 
(osterix), BGLAP (osteocalcin), SPARC (osteonectin), and SPP1 (osteopontin) in a 
temporally specific sequence. Irreversible commitment of ASCs to the osteogenic
lineage occurred between days 6 and 9 of differentiation.
Endothelioprogenitor-enriched cell populations expressed CD34, PECAM1 (CD31), ENG
(CD105), FLT1 (Vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGFR1]), and KDR (VEGFR2).
Capacity for microtubule formation was evident in as early as 3 days. Functional 
capacity was assessed in eight coculture combinations for both bone nodule and
endothelial tubule formation, and the greatest expression of these
end-differentiation phenotypes was observed in the combination of
well-differentiated endothelial cells with less-differentiated osteoblastic
cells. Taken together, our results demonstrate vascularized bone engineering
utilizing ASCs is a promising enterprise, and that coculture strategies should
focus on developing a more mature vascular network in combination with a less
mature osteoblastic stromal cell.

PMID: 23343199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Arch Oral Biol. 2013 Jun;58(6):690-8. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.10.018.
Epub 2013 Jan 12.

Bone morphogenetic protein 6 stimulates mineralization in human dental follicle
cells without dexamethasone.

Takahashi K(1), Ogura N, Aonuma H, Ito K, Ishigami D, Kamino Y, Kondoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Nihon University School of Dentistry at
Matsudo, Matsudo City, Matsudo Prefecture, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to investigate the osteogenic differentiation
human dental follicle cells (hDFCs) cultured with in osteogenic induction medium 
(OIM) without dexamethasone (DEX), and to analyze the gene expression profile
during osteogenic differentiation.
METHODS: hDFCs, which isolated from dental follicle tissue from impacted third
molar teeth, were cultured with OIM with or without DEX. Osteogenic
differentiation of hDFCs was examined using Alkaline phosphatase activity and
Arizarin red staining. Gene expression analysis was performed by Microarray and
real time-PCR.
RESULTS: We showed that hDFCs have the capacity to differentiate into osteogenic 
lineages in osteogenic induction medium lacking DEX. We also analyzed gene
expression profiling of hDFCs during osteogenic differentiation. BMP6 is
up-regulated in both the presence and absence of DEX. In addition, BMP6 enhances 
gene expression levels of DLX-5, Runx2, and Osterix, which are transcription
factors associated with osteogenic differentiation. BMP6 also stimulates
phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 which are transcription factors associated with BMP 
signalling at protein levels. Additionally BMP6 stimulates mineralization of
hDFCs monolayers examined by Arizarin red S staining.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that hDFCs can differentiate to osteogenic
lineage cells osteogenic induction medium without DEX, and BMP6 is a key gene in 
the osteogenic differentiation of hDFCs, and has therapeutic utility for bone
regeneration and bone research.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23317773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52948. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052948. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Synergistic inhibition of Wnt pathway by HIF-1a and osteoblast-specific
transcription factor osterix (Osx) in osteoblasts.

Chen D(1), Li Y, Zhou Z, Xing Y, Zhong Y, Zou X, Tian W, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bone Tissue Engineering, Beijing Research Institute of
Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Beijing JiShuiTan Hospital, Beijing, China.

Osterix (Osx) is an osteoblast-specific transcription factor required for
osteoblast differentiation. Inhibition of Wnt pathway by Osx highlights the
potential for feedback control mechanisms involved in bone formation.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) is a master regulator of hypoxia. HIF-1a has
been reported to couple angiogenesis to osteogenesis. Our recent study has
demonstrated that Osx and HIF-1a cooperatively regulate VEGF expression in
osteoblasts. Effects of hypoxia/HIF-1a on osteoblast proliferation and related
mechanisms are not well understood. In this study, osteoblast growth under
hypoxia was examined. We observed that osteoblast growth was inhibited under
hypoxia. To explore possible mechanisms for hypoxia/HIF-1a to inhibit osteoblast 
proliferation, we tested the effect of hypoxia/HIF-1a on Wnt pathway.
Quantitative RT-PCR results revealed that Wnt target genes such as cyclin D1 and 
c-Myc were downregulated under hypoxia while HIF-1a was upregulated. Treatment of
desferrioxamine, a HIF-1a activator, led to further downregulation of expressions
of cyclin D1 and c-Myc in osteoblasts. On the contrary, the inhibition of HIF-1a 
by siRNA in osteoblasts led to the expression increase of cyclin D1 and c-Myc.
These data suggest that HIF-1a inhibits Wnt pathway in osteoblasts. To examine
the effect of HIF-1a on Wnt pathway, HIF-1a was cotransfected with ß-catenin
along with Topflash reporter in transient transfection assay. Our results showed 
that HIF-1a inhibited ß-catenin-induced Topflash reporter activity.
Interestingly, a synergistic interplay was observed between Osx and HIF-1a in the
inhibition of ß-catenin-induced Topflash expression. Our findings indicate that
Osx and HIF-1a cooperatively inhibit Wnt pathway. This study revealed additional 
new information of the cooperation between HIF-1a and Osx in osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3531395
PMID: 23300831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Cell Sci. 2013 Feb 15;126(Pt 4):1032-45. doi: 10.1242/jcs.113910. Epub 2012 Dec
21.

Roles of chemokine receptor CX3CR1 in maintaining murine bone homeostasis through
the regulation of both osteoblasts and osteoclasts.

Hoshino A(1), Ueha S, Hanada S, Imai T, Ito M, Yamamoto K, Matsushima K,
Yamaguchi A, Iimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Chemokines have recently been reported to be involved in pathological bone
destruction. However, the physiological roles of chemokines in bone metabolism in
vivo have not been well documented. We analyzed the bone phenotypes in
Cx3cr1-deficient mice. The mice exhibited slight but significant increases in
trabecular and cortical thickness, reduced numbers of osteoclasts and increased
rates of osteoid formation. Although the morphometric parameters showed marginal 
differences, the Cx3cr1-deficient bones showed an elevated expression of
Osterix/SP7, which encodes an essential transcriptional factor for osteoblasts,
whereas the gene Osteocalcin/Bglap, which encodes a late marker, was
downregulated. The levels of transcripts for various osteoclastic markers, such
as receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK)/TNFRSF11A, receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B
ligand (RANKL)/TNFSF11, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRAP5B)/ACP5B,
Cathepsin K(CTSK), MMP3 and MMP13, were significantly decreased in the
Cx3cr1-deficient bones. Cultured Cx3cr1-deficient osteoblastic cells showed
inverse temporal patterns of osteoblastic marker expression and reduced calcium
deposition. Furthermore, in vitro studies and immunofluorescence staining against
CX3CR1 and CX3CL1 suggested a role for the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis in an early stage
of osteoblast differentiation, possibly through their trans and cis interactions.
Cultured Cx3cr1-deficient pre-osteoclasts showed impaired differentiation, mainly
due to a deficiency of the CD115(+)CD11b(lo) osteoclastogenic population of
myeloid-lineage precursors. The treatment of bone-marrow-derived osteoclastic
cultures with recombinant CX3CL1 at different time points suggested that the
CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis favors the maintenance of osteoclastic precursors, but not
differentiated osteoclasts. These observations uncovered novel roles of the
CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis in the differentiation of both osteoblasts and osteoclasts.

PMID: 23264747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Mar;24(3):278-90. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32835cbde7.

Preventing MEK1 activation influences the responses of human osteosarcoma cells
to bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 9.

Park H(1), Drevelle O, Daviau A, Senta H, Bergeron E, Faucheux N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnological Engineering,
Laboratory of Cell-Biomaterial Biohybrid Systems, University of Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec, J1K 2R1, Canada.

It was recently suggested that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 may be useful
for treating osteosarcoma cells. BMP-9, which has been patented to treat breast
and prostate cancers, has a higher osteoinductive potential than BMP-2. Peptides 
derived from the knuckle epitope of BMPs (pBMPs) also induced osteogenic
differentiation. However, the effect of BMP-9 and pBMPs on osteosarcoma cells is 
unclear. We analyzed the effects of BMP-2, BMP-9, pBMP-2, and pBMP-9 on the
behavior of human MG-63 and SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. An inhibitor of MEK1
activation (PD98059) that prevents downstream extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation and a specific inhibitor of p38 were also
used as mitogen activated protein kinase-targeting therapy is being investigated 
as a treatment modality for osteosarcoma. BMP-2 and BMP-9 (1.92 nmol/l) induced
the phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 in both osteosarcoma cells within 1 h but had
different effects on mitogen activated protein kinase pathways. Whereas BMP-2
mainly activated ERK1/2, BMP-9 phosphorylated p38 within 1 h. pBMP-2 did not
activate either the Smad or ERK/p38, whereas pBMP-9, like BMP-9, induced both
Smad1/5/8 and p38 phosphorylation. p38 activation by BMP-9 or pBMP-9 was also
enhanced by PD98059. However, BMP-2 or BMP-9 increased the amounts of distal-less
homeobox 5 and Osterix mRNAs in SaOS-2 cells within 6 h, whereas pBMP-9 had no
effect. PD98059 promoted the highest level of Osterix mRNA in SaOS-2 cells
incubated with BMP-2 or BMP-9, whereas p38 inhibitor had no effect. Furthermore, 
PD98059 induced the lowest proliferation of MG-63 cells incubated with BMP-2,
whereas p38 inhibitor did not affect the proliferation of either osteosarcoma
cell line. Therefore a combination of BMP-2 or BMP-9 and an inhibitor of MEK1 may
be a promising tool for regulating osteosarcoma cell behavior.

PMID: 23262982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Jan;139:252-61. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.12.006. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Effects of phytoestrogens and other plant-derived compounds on mesenchymal stem
cells, bone maintenance and regeneration.

Schilling T(1), Ebert R, Raaijmakers N, Schütze N, Jakob F.

Author information: 
(1)University of Würzburg, Orthopaedic Department, Orthopaedic Centre for
Musculoskeletal Research, Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address:
t-schilling.klh@uni-wuerzburg.de.

Phytoestrogens and other plant-derived compounds and extracts have been developed
for the treatment of menopause-related complaints and disorders, e.g. hot flushes
and osteoporosis. Since estrogens have been discussed to enhance the risk for
hormone-sensitive cancers, research activities try to find alternatives.
Phytoestrogens like genistein and resveratrol as well as other plant-derived
compounds are capable of substituting for estrogens to some extent. Their effects
on mesenchymal stem cells and the tissues derived therefrom have been
investigated in vitro and in preclinical settings. Besides their well-known
estrogenic, i.e. mainly antiresorptive effects on bone via estrogen receptor (ER)
signalling, they also directly or indirectly affect osteogenic and adipogenic
pathways. As a novel mechanism, phytoestrogens and plant-derived saponins and
flavonoids like kaempferol and xanthohumol have been described to reciprocally
affect the osteogenic versus the adipogenic differentiation pathway. Both,
ER-mediated and other pathways mediate a shift towards osteogenesis by inhibiting
PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa, the key adipogenic transcription factors (TFs), while
stimulating the key osteogenic TFs Runx2 and Sp7. Besides ER signalling, the
broad spectrum of molecular mechanisms supporting osteogenesis comprises the
modulation of PPAR<U+03B3>, Wnt/ß-catenin, and Sirt1 signalling, which inversely
influence the transcription or transactivation of osteogenic versus adipogenic
TFs. Preventing the age- and hormone deficiency-related shift towards
adipogenesis without provoking adverse estrogenic effects represents a very
promising strategy for treating bone loss and other metabolic diseases beyond
bone. Research on plant-derived compounds will have to be pursued in vitro as
well as in preclinical studies and controlled clinical trials in humans are
urgently needed. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled
'Phytoestrogens'.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23262262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Endod. 2013 Jan;39(1):76-82. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2012.10.013. Epub 2012 Nov 10.

Combined effects of simvastatin and enamel matrix derivative on odontoblastic
differentiation of human dental pulp cells.

Karanxha L(1), Park SJ, Son WJ, Nör JE, Min KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry, Wonkwang University School of Dentistry,
Iksan, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: We previously reported that simvastatin and enamel matrix
derivative (EMD) have a dentinogenic effect. However, there is little information
about the combined effects of these 2 agents on odontoblastic differentiation.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of combined treatment with
simvastatin and EMD on odontoblastic differentiation of human dental pulp cells
(hDPCs). This study further explored the role of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) as a target and mediator of the differentiation induced by
simvastatin in hDPCs.
METHODS: The odontoblastic differentiation was analyzed by alkaline phosphatase
activity, real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for
odontoblastic/osteoblastic markers (ie, dentin sialophosphoprotein, dentin matrix
protein 1, and osteonectin), and alizarin red S staining. We also explored the
role of ERK signaling as a mediator of simvastatin by Western blotting and
real-time PCR. The expression of osteoblast-specific transcription factors was
detected by reverse-transcription PCR.
RESULTS: The alkaline phosphatase activity and the expression of odontoblastic
markers (ie, dentin sialophosphoprotein and dentin matrix protein 1) increased in
simvastatin/EMD-treated cells. Mineralized nodule formation increased in EMD- and
simvastatin/EMD-treated cells. Notably, the combined use of both simvastatin and 
EMD resulted in more potent differentiation than that observed after a single
therapy. Simvastatin activated ERK phosphorylation and treatment with ERK
inhibitor blocked the messenger RNA expression of odontoblastic markers. However,
in simvastatin/EMD-treated cells, the expression of these genes did not decrease 
significantly. Compared with other groups, the EMD- and simvastatin/EMD-treated
group showed a greater expression of osterix.
CONCLUSIONS: Simvastatin promotes odontoblastic differentiation of hDPCs via the 
ERK signaling pathway. In addition, simvastatin-induced differentiation is
facilitated by co-treatment with EMD. Collectively, these results suggest a new
strategy to induce odontoblastic differentiation of hDPCs.

Copyright © 2013 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3812675
PMID: 23228261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Endod. 2013 Jan;39(1):68-75. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2012.10.006. Epub 2012 Nov 10.

Calcium ions released from mineral trioxide aggregate convert the differentiation
pathway of C2C12 cells into osteoblast lineage.

Matsumoto S(1), Hayashi M, Suzuki Y, Suzuki N, Maeno M, Ogiso B.

Author information: 
(1)Nihon University Graduate School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of mineral
trioxide aggregate (MTA) on pluripotent-mesenchymal cell differentiation.
METHODS: The pluripotent-mesenchymal cell line C2C12 was cultured in a 5% serum
medium to induce cell differentiation with or without MTA. The differentiation to
myoblasts was analyzed by the immunocytochemical staining of myosin heavy chains.
The cellular phenotype-specific markers characterizing the osteoblasts (Runx2 and
osterix), chondroblasts (Sox9), myoblasts (MyoD), and adipocytes (LPL) were
estimated with mRNA and protein levels by using real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blot analysis, respectively. To verify that the effect of
MTA was caused by the released calcium ions, the mRNA levels were analyzed in the
presence or absence of MTA with ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, calcium
chloride, or verapamil.
RESULTS: C2C12 cells cultured without MTA altered their phenotype to myoblasts,
exhibiting positive reactions to myosin heavy chains. However, the cells cultured
with MTA were strongly inhibited from developing into myoblasts. The mRNA and
protein expressions of Runx2, osterix, and Sox9 significantly increased with MTA;
the expressions of MyoD and LPL decreased significantly. Calcium chloride
addition without MTA presented a significant increase of mRNA levels of Runx2,
osterix, and Sox9; ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid addition with MTA presented a
significant increase of mRNA levels of MyoD and LPL. Verapamil blocked the
stimulating or suppressing effect of MTA on these transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that MTA converted the differentiation pathway of
C2C12 cells into osteoblast and/or chondroblast lineages as a result of elution
components such as calcium ions from MTA.

Copyright © 2013 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23228260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Braz Dent J. 2012;23(4):328-36.

In vitro evaluation of the odontogenic potential of mouse undifferentiated pulp
cells.

Semeghini MS(1), Fernandes RR, Chimello DT, de Oliveira FS, Bombonato-Prado KF.

Author information: 
(1)Ribeirão Preto Dental School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the odontogenic potential of
undifferentiated pulp cells (OD-21 cell line) through chemical stimuli in vitro. 
Cells were divided into uninduced cells (OD-21), induced cells (OD-21 cultured in
supplemented medium/OD-21+OM) and odontoblast-like cells (MDPC-23 cell line).
After 3, 7, 10 and 14 days of culture, it was evaluated: proliferation and cell
viability, alkaline phosphatase activity, total protein content, mineralization, 
immunolocalization of dentin matrix acidic phosphoprotein 1 (DMP1), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) and osteopontin (OPN) and quantification of genes ALP, OSTERIX 
(Osx), DMP1 and runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) through real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Data were analyzed by Kruskal-Wallis and
Mann-Whitney U tests (p<0.05). There was a decrease in cell proliferation in
OD-21 + OM, whereas cell viability was similar in all groups, except at 7 days.
The amount of total protein was higher in group OD-21 + OM in all periods; the
same occurred with ALP activity after 10 days when compared with OD-21, with no
significant differences from the MDPC-23 group. Mineralization was higher in
OD-21+OM when compared with the negative control. Immunolocalization demonstrated
that DMP1 and ALP were highly expressed in MDPC-23 cells and OD-21 + OM cells,
whereas OPN was high in all groups. Real-time PCR revealed that DMP1 and ALP
expression was higher in MDPC-23 cell cultures, whereas RUNX2 was lower for these
cells and higher for OD-21 negative control. Osx expression was lower for OD-21 +
OM. These results suggest that OD-21 undifferentiated pulp cells have odontogenic
potential and could be used in dental tissue engineering.

PMID: 23207845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int Endod J. 2013 Jun;46(6):565-72. doi: 10.1111/iej.12029. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Immortalization and characterization of human dental papilla cells with
odontoblastic differentiation.

Yang GB(1), Li XY, Yuan GH, Liu H, Fan MW.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

AIM: To establish a cell line of immortalized human dental papilla cells (hDPCs).
METHODOLOGY: Primary hDPCs were cultured and infected with lentivirus containing 
the hTERT gene. Integration and transcription of the hTERT gene were verified by 
PCR. The characteristics of the cells, such as morphology, proliferation and
mineralization, were analysed. Also, the expression of odontoblastic-related
markers including ALP, DMP1, DLX3, OSX, DSP and Nestin, was detected by
immunohistochemistry and real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: hTERT gene was integrated into genomic DNA of immortalized cells
(hDPC-TERT) and transcribed into mRNA. With long-time culture, hDPC-TERT bypassed
senescence and grew over 120 population doublings. hDPC-TERT cells have a higher 
proliferation rate, but retain the phenotypic characteristics of the primary
hDPCs, and so was ALP activity and mineralization activity. Furthermore, the
hDPC-TERT cells express no DSP and Nestin with maintenance medium, but highly
expressed DSP and Nestin after odontoblastic induction.
CONCLUSIONS: A line of immortalized human dental papilla cells, which remains in 
an undifferentiated state and has odontoblastic differentiation potential, was
established. This cell line can be used as a cell model for studying the
mechanism of the initiation of odontoblast differentiation.

© 2012 International Endodontic Journal.

PMID: 23186070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Genesis. 2013 Apr;51(4):246-58. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22360. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Generation and characterization of Osterix-Cherry reporter mice.

Strecker S(1), Fu Y, Liu Y, Maye P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Osterix is a zinc finger containing transcription factor, which functions as a
key regulator of osteoblast differentiation. To better understand the temporal
and spatial expression of Osterix during embryonic development and in the adult
skeleton, we generated Osterix-Cherry reporter mice. Bacterial recombination
techniques were employed to engineer a transgenic construct, which consisted of a
~39 kb DNA fragment encompassing the Osterix/Sp7 gene, but excluding adjacent
gene sequences. Osterix reporter expression was characterized at embryonic,
neonatal, and adult ages both by itself and in the context of a cross with Bone
Sialoprotein (BSP)-Topaz reporter mice. Relative to Osterix, BSP is a more mature
marker of osteoblast differentiation. In agreement with osteoblast lineage
maturation, Osterix reporter expression preceded BSP reporter expression during
embryonic development and spatially appeared in a much broader cell population.
Strong Osterix reporter expression was observed in mature osteoblasts and
osteocytes. However, weaker Osterix-Cherry positive cells were also observed in
the bone marrow, possibly identifying an early osteoprogenitor cell population.
Evaluation of Osterix reporter expression in male femur tissue sections from 10
days to 12 weeks of age revealed persistent expression in cells of the osteoblast
lineage and a surprising increase in maturing chondrocytes of the growth plate.
Also, Osterix reporter expression was transiently detected in the kidney after
birth.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3602345
PMID: 23180553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Sci Rep. 2012;2:872. doi: 10.1038/srep00872. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Bacteriophytochrome controls carotenoid-independent response to photodynamic
stress in a non-photosynthetic rhizobacterium, Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Kumar S(1), Kateriya S, Singh VS, Tanwar M, Agarwal S, Singh H, Khurana JP, Amla 
DV, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University ,
Varanasi-221005, India.

Ever since the discovery of the role of bacteriophytochrome (BphP) in inducing
carotenoid synthesis in Deinococcus radiodurans in response to light the role of 
BphPs in other non-photosynthetic bacteria is not clear yet. Azospirillum
brasilense, a non-photosynthetic rhizobacterium, harbours a pair of BphPs out of 
which AbBphP1 is a homolog of AtBphP1 of Agrobacterium tumefaciens. By
overexpression, purification, biochemical and spectral characterization we have
shown that AbBphP1 is a photochromic bacteriophytochrome. Phenotypic study of the
<U+0394>AbBphP1 mutant showed that it is required for the survival of A. brasilense on
minimal medium under red light. The mutant also showed reduced chemotaxis towards
dicarboxylates and increased sensitivity to the photooxidative stress. Unlike D. 
radiodurans, AbBphP1 was not involved in controlling carotenoid synthesis.
Proteome analysis of the <U+0394>AbBphP1 indicated that AbBphP1 is involved in inducing 
a cellular response that enables A. brasilense in regenerating proteins that
might be damaged due to photodynamic stress.

PMCID: PMC3503143
PMID: 23173079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Bone. 2013 Feb;52(2):548-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.11.007. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

Osterix induces Col1a1 gene expression through binding to Sp1 sites in the bone
enhancer and proximal promoter regions.

Ortuño MJ(1), Susperregui AR, Artigas N, Rosa JL, Ventura F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBELL,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

Bone-specific transcription factors promote differentiation of mesenchymal
precursors toward the osteoblastic cell phenotype. Among them, Runx2 and Osterix 
have been widely accepted as master osteogenic factors, since neither Runx2 nor
Osterix null mice form mature osteoblasts. Recruitment of Osterix to a number of 
promoters of bone-specific genes has been shown. However, little is known about
the functional interactions between Osterix and the Col1a1 promoter. In this
study we determined in several mesenchymal and osteoblastic cell types that
either BMP-2 or Osterix overexpression increased Col1a1 transcription. We
identified consensus Sp1 sequences, located in the proximal promoter and in the
bone-enhancer, as Osterix binding regions in the Col1a1 promoter in vitro and in 
vivo. Furthermore, we show that p38 or Erk MAPK signaling is required for maximal
transcriptional effects on Col1a1 expression. Runx2 has been shown to activate
Col1a1 expression through binding to sites which are located close to the Sp1
sites where Osterix binds. Our data show that overexpression of Runx2 and Osterix
leads to a cooperative effect on the expression of the Col1a1 endogenous gene and
its promoter reporter construct. These effects mainly affect the long isoform of 
Osterix which suggest that the two Osterix isoforms might display some
differential effects on the transactivation of bone-specific genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;47(9):552-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1002-0098.2012.09.011.

[Calcium hydroxide regulates bone sialoprotein gene transcription in human dental
pulp cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang S(1), Chen Z, Ning J, Gao P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Stomatological Hospital, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300070, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the effects of calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH)2] on transcription
of the bone sialoprotein (BSP) gene in human dental pulp cells.
METHODS: Human dental pulp tissues were collected from extracted teeth for
orthodontic reason. In cell culture media, different dose (0.012, 0.120, 0.400
and 1.200 mmol/L) of Ca(OH)2 was added. Total RNA of cells were extracted. The
best dose of Ca(OH)2 on human BSP was determined with the real-time polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). Further, the time (0, 3, 6, 12, 24 h) effects of the best
dose Ca(OH)2 on human BSP, runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx-2) and
osterix (OSX) mRNA levels were determined with PCR. Further method included
transient transfection assays, linking chimeric constructs of the human BSP gene 
promoter to a luciferase reporter gene, then ransfected using lipofectamine in
cells and measured the luciferase activities of BSP gene promoter.
RESULTS: With the real-time PCR, the optimal Ca(OH)2 concentration was determined
as 1.200 mmol/L. With this concentration at different time points (0, 3, 6, 12
and 24 h), the levels of BSP mRNA increased at 6 h (1.45 ± 0.36), reached maximal
at 12 h (2.66 ± 0.18); the levels of Runx-2mRNA increased at 6 h (2.38 ± 0.08),
at 12 h (2.73 ± 0.16), and decreased at 24 h. OSX mRNA could be recognized at 12 
h, reached maximal levels at 24 h (3.30 ± 0.062). Transient transfection assays
showed that treatment of human dental pulp cells with Ca(OH)2 (1.200 mmol/L)
increased the luciferase activities of the constructs between -84LUC and -868LUC 
at 12 h (2.00 ~ 2.60 fold).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrate that Ca(OH)2 could stimulate BSP
transcription between -84LUC and -868LUC in the human BSP gene promoter in human 
dental pulp cells.

PMID: 23141731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Oct 18;44(5):659-65.

Molecular mechanisms of osteoblast-specific transcription factor Osterix effect
on bone formation.

Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75219, USA.
Chi5.Zhang@utsouthwestern.edu

Bone formation is a complex developmental process involving the differentiation
of mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts. Osteoblast commitment and
differentiation are controlled through a multistep molecular pathway regulated by
different transcription factors and signaling proteins, including Indian
hedgehog, Runx2, Osterix (Osx), and Wnt pathway. Osx is an osteoblast-specific
transcription factor required for bone formation. Osx was first discovered as a
bone morphogenetic protein-2 inducible gene in mesenchymal stem cells. Osx
knock-out mice lack bone completely, and cartilage is normal. This opens a new
window to the whole field of how bone forms. The discovery that Osx inhibits Wnt 
pathway highlights the potential for novel feedback control mechanisms involved
in bone formation. Several downstream targets of Osx during bone formation have
been identified, including Satb2, vitamin D receptor and vascular endothelial
growth factor as well as Dkk1 and Sost. The delineation of the cascade of events 
leading to bone formation should provide a molecular basis for the development of
new and specific anabolic therapeutic agents for bone deficit conditions, such as
osteoporosis and osteonecrosis. This review summarizes the recent advances in
understanding the molecular mechanisms of Osx effect on bone formation. Studies
since the Osx discovery have provided convincing evidences to demonstrate that
Osx is the master gene that controls osteoblast lineage commitment and the
subsequent osteoblast differentiation and proliferation.

PMID: 23073571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Microbiology. 2013 Feb;159(Pt 2):205-18. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.061937-0. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

A constitutively expressed pair of rpoE2-chrR2 in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 is 
required for survival under antibiotic and oxidative stress.

Gupta N(1), Kumar S, Mishra MN, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, India.

Extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factors (s(E)) are known to bring about
changes in gene expression to enable bacteria to adapt to different stresses. The
Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 genome harbours nine genes encoding s(E), of which 
two are adjacent to the genes encoding ChrR-type zinc-binding anti-sigma (ZAS)
factors. We describe here the role and regulation of a new pair of rpoE-chrR,
which was found in the genome of A. brasilense Sp7 in addition to the previously 
described rpoE-chrR pair (designated rpoE1-chrR1). The rpoE2-chrR2 pair is also
cotranscribed, and their products show protein-protein interaction. The -10 and
-35 promoter elements of rpoE2-chrR2 and rpoE1-chrR1 were similar but not
identical. Unlike the promoter of rpoE1-chrR1, the rpoE2-chrR2 promoter was
neither autoregulated nor induced by oxidative stress. Inactivation of chrR2 or
overexpression of rpoE2 in A. brasilense Sp7 resulted in an overproduction of
carotenoids. It also conferred resistance to oxidative stresses and antibiotics. 
By controlling the synthesis of carotenoids, initiation and elongation of
translation, protein folding and purine biosynthesis, RpoE2 seems to play a
crucial role in preventing and repairing the cellular damage caused by oxidative 
stress. Lack of autoregulation and constitutive expression of rpoE2-chrR2 suggest
that RpoE2-ChrR2 may provide a rapid mechanism to cope with oxidative stress,
wherein singlet oxygen ((1)O(2))-mediated dissociation of the RpoE2-ChrR2 complex
might release RpoE2 to drive the expression of its target genes.

PMID: 23059974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Cell Physiol. 2013 May;228(5):1031-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24250.

Protein phosphatase 2A Ca regulates osteoblast differentiation and the
expressions of bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin via osterix transcription
factor.

Okamura H(1), Yoshida K, Yang D, Haneji T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Oral Histology, Institute of Health Biosciences,
The University of Tokushima Graduate School, Kuramoto, Tokushima, Japan.
okamura@dent.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) participates in regulating many
important physiological processes such as cell cycle, growth, apoptosis, and
signal transduction. Osterix is a zinc-finger-containing transcription factor
that is essential for osteoblast differentiation and regulation of many
bone-related genes. We have recently reported that decrease in a-isoform of PP2A 
catalytic subunit (PP2A Ca) accelerates osteoblast differentiation through the
expression of bone-related genes. In this study, we further examined the role of 
PP2A Ca in osteoblast differentiation by establishing the stable cell lines that 
overexpress PP2A Ca. Overexpression of PP2A Ca reduced alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity. Osteoblast differentiation and mineralization were also decreased in
PP2A Ca-overexpressing cells, with reduction of bone-related genes including
osterix, bone sialoprotein (Bsp), and osteocalcin (OCN). Luciferase assay showed 
that the transcriptional activity of the Osterix promoter region was decreased in
PP2A Ca-overexpressing cells. Introduction of ectopic Osterix rescued the
expression of Bsp and OCN in PP2A Ca-overexpressing cells. These results indicate
that PP2A Ca and its activity play a negative role in osteoblast differentiation 
and Osterix is a key factor responsible for regulating the expressions of Bsp and
OCN during PP2A Ca-mediated osteoblast differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23042641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Microbiology. 2012 Dec;158(Pt 12):2891-902. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.062380-0. Epub
2012 Sep 28.

RpoH2 sigma factor controls the photooxidative stress response in a
non-photosynthetic rhizobacterium, Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Kumar S(1), Rai AK, Mishra MN, Shukla M, Singh PK, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Genetics, School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

Bacteria belonging to the Alphaproteobacteria normally harbour multiple copies of
the heat shock sigma factor (known as s(32), s(H) or RpoH). Azospirillum
brasilense, a non-photosynthetic rhizobacterium, harbours five copies of rpoH
genes, one of which is an rpoH2 homologue. The genes around the rpoH2 locus in A.
brasilense show synteny with that found in rhizobia. The rpoH2 of A. brasilense
was able to complement the temperature-sensitive phenotype of the Escherichia
coli rpoH mutant. Inactivation of rpoH2 in A. brasilense results in increased
sensitivity to methylene blue and to triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC).
Exposure of A. brasilense to TTC and the singlet oxygen-generating agent
methylene blue induced several-fold higher expression of rpoH2. Comparison of the
proteome of A. brasilense with its rpoH2 deletion mutant and with an A.
brasilense strain overexpressing rpoH2 revealed chaperone GroEL, elongation
factors (Ef-Tu and EF-G), peptidyl prolyl isomerase, and peptide methionine
sulfoxide reductase as the major proteins whose expression was controlled by
RpoH2. Here, we show that the RpoH2 sigma factor-controlled photooxidative stress
response in A. brasilense is similar to that in the photosynthetic bacterium
Rhodobacter sphaeroides, but that RpoH2 is not involved in the detoxification of 
methylglyoxal in A. brasilense.

PMID: 23023973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Oct;44(10):856-65.

Lentiviral-mediated gene transfer into human adipose-derived stem cells: role of 
NELL1 versus BMP2 in osteogenesis and adipogenesis in vitro.

Liu Y(1), Chen C, He H, Wang D, E L, Liu Z, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

NEL-like molecule 1 (NELL1) is a potent osteogenic factor associated with
craniosynostosis. Adenoviruses, the most commonly used viral vectors for gene
therapy, have several disadvantages that may restrict osteogenesis. Previous
studies have shown that lentiviruses can serve as ideal vectors for gene therapy 
for bone regeneration. In this study, two lentiviral vectors (LvNELL1 and LvBMP2)
that encode human NELL1 and bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2), respectively,
were constructed. The effect of LvNELL1 infection on the proliferation,
osteogenesis, and adipogenesis of human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) in
vitro was assessed and compared with that of LvBMP2. The results showed that
hADSCs infected with LvNELL1 could efficiently and stably overexpress the target 
genes. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay results
demonstrated that LvBMP2, but not LvNELL1, enhanced the proliferation of hADSCs. 
Assessment of alkaline phosphatase activity and cellular mineralization indicated
that LvNELL1 infection promoted the osteogenic differentiation of hADSCs, and the
effect was comparable with that of LvBMP2. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) revealed that LvNELL1 infection upregulated OSX expression but not RUNX2
expression in hADSCs. In addition, adipogenic markers (lipid droplets, peroxisome
proliferator-activating receptor <U+03B3>, and lipoprotein lipase) analysis showed that 
LvNELL1 could dramatically inhibit the adipogenic differentiation of hADSCs, but 
LvBMP2 had no such effect. Taken together, these findings suggested that
lentiviral-mediated NELL1 gene transfer in hADSCs may be a novel and promising
approach to achieve effective and precise bone regeneration.

PMID: 23017834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Carbohydr Res. 2012 Nov 1;361:127-32. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2012.08.019. Epub
2012 Sep 5.

Identification of an O-linked repetitive glycan chain of the polar flagellum
flagellin of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Belyakov AY(1), Burygin GL, Arbatsky NP, Shashkov AS, Selivanov NY, Matora LY,
Knirel YA, Shchyogolev SY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 13 Prospekt Entuziastov, Saratov 410049, Russia.

This is the first report to have identified an O-linked repetitive glycan in
bacterial flagellin, a structural protein of the flagellum. Studies by sugar
analysis, Smith degradation, (1)H and (13)C NMR spectroscopy, and mass
spectrometry showed that the glycan chains of the polar flagellum flagellin of
the plant-growth-promoting rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 are
represented by a polysaccharide with a molecular mass of 7.7 kDa, which has a
branched tetrasaccharide repeating unit of the following structure:

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23017779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Growth Factors. 2012 Oct;30(5):333-43.

Osteogenic response of human adipose-derived stem cells to BMP-6, VEGF, and
combined VEGF plus BMP-6 in vitro.

Zhang Y(1), Madhu V, Dighe AS, Irvine JN Jr, Cui Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

Exogenous addition of three factors-mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)-has
proven to be more beneficial than delivery of any single factor for fracture
repair in animal models. We studied the osteogenic differentiation of human
adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) in the presence of VEGF, BMP-6, or VEGF plus 
BMP-6 to better understand their enhancement of osteoblastic differentiation of
MSCs. The VEGF plus BMP-6 group demonstrated an additive effect on the
enhancement of mineralization and expression of ALP and Msx2 genes. Unlike VEGF
or BMP-6 alone, the combination of VEGF and BMP-6 significantly enhanced the
expression of COL1A1, osterix, and Dlx5 genes. The data indicate that a
cross-talk between VEGF and BMP-6 signaling pathways enhances osteogenic
differentiation of hADSCs.

PMID: 23017019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Oct;97(10):E1958-77. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1890.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Clinical review: Genome-wide association studies of skeletal phenotypes: what we 
have learned and where we are headed.

Hsu YH(1), Kiel DP.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew SeniorLife Institute for Aging Research, 1200 Centre Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02131, USA.

CONTEXT: The primary goals of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are to
discover new molecular and biological pathways involved in the regulation of bone
metabolism that can be leveraged for drug development. In addition, the
identified genetic determinants may be used to enhance current risk factor
profiles.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: There have been more than 40 published GWAS on skeletal
phenotypes, predominantly focused on dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry-derived
bone mineral density (BMD) of the hip and spine.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Sixty-six BMD loci have been replicated across all the
published GWAS, confirming the highly polygenic nature of BMD variation. Only
seven of the 66 previously reported genes (LRP5, SOST, ESR1, TNFRSF11B,
TNFRSF11A, TNFSF11, PTH) from candidate gene association studies have been
confirmed by GWAS. Among 59 novel BMD GWAS loci that have not been reported by
previous candidate gene association studies, some have been shown to be involved 
in key biological pathways involving the skeleton, particularly Wnt signaling
(AXIN1, LRP5, CTNNB1, DKK1, FOXC2, HOXC6, LRP4, MEF2C, PTHLH, RSPO3, SFRP4,
TGFBR3, WLS, WNT3, WNT4, WNT5B, WNT16), bone development: ossification (CLCN7,
CSF1, MEF2C, MEPE, PKDCC, PTHLH, RUNX2, SOX6, SOX9, SPP1, SP7),
mesenchymal-stem-cell differentiation (FAM3C, MEF2C, RUNX2, SOX4, SOX9, SP7),
osteoclast differentiation (JAG1, RUNX2), and TGF-signaling (FOXL1, SPTBN1,
TGFBR3). There are still 30 BMD GWAS loci without prior molecular or biological
evidence of their involvement in skeletal phenotypes. Other skeletal phenotypes
that either have been or are being studied include hip geometry, bone ultrasound,
quantitative computed tomography, high-resolution peripheral quantitative
computed tomography, biochemical markers, and fractures such as vertebral,
nonvertebral, hip, and forearm.
CONCLUSIONS: Although several challenges lie ahead as GWAS moves into the next
generation, there are prospects of new discoveries in skeletal biology. This
review integrates findings from previous GWAS and provides a roadmap for future
directions building on current GWAS successes.

PMCID: PMC3674343
PMID: 22965941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2013 Feb;405(6):1921-7. doi: 10.1007/s00216-012-6370-3. Epub
2012 Sep 8.

Emission ((57)Co) Mössbauer spectroscopy as a tool for probing speciation and
metabolic transformations of cobalt(II) in bacterial cells.

Kamnev AA(1), Tugarova AV, Kovács K, Kuzmann E, Biró B, Tarantilis PA, Homonnay
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants
and Microorganisms, Russian Academy of Sciences, 410049 Saratov, Russia.
aakamnev@ibppm.sgu.ru

The emission ((57)Co) variant of Mössbauer spectroscopy, rarely used in
biology-related studies, was applied to study binding and possible
transformations of (57)Co(II) traces in live and dead (hydrothermally treated)
cells of the rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense (strain Sp7) at T=80 K in
frozen aqueous suspensions and as their dried residues. The Mössbauer parameters 
calculated from the spectra were compared with the similarly obtained data
reported earlier for another A. brasilense strain, Sp245 (which differs from
strain Sp7 by the ecological niche occupied in the rhizosphere and was found
earlier to exhibit different metabolic responses under similar environmental
conditions). Similarly to strain Sp245, live cells of strain Sp7, rapidly frozen 
2 min and 1 h after their contact with (57)Co(2+) (measured in frozen
suspensions), showed marked differences in their Mössbauer parameters, reflecting
metabolic transformations of (57)Co(2+) occurring within an hour. However, the
parameters for strains Sp7 (this work) and Sp245 (reported earlier), obtained
under similar conditions, were found to significantly differ, implying
dissimilarity in their metabolic response to Co(2+). This is in line with their
different metabolic responses to several heavy metals, including Co(2+), detected
earlier using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.

PMID: 22960797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Periodontal Res. 2013 Feb;48(1):52-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2012.01503.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Effects of vascular endothelial cells on osteogenic differentiation of noncontact
co-cultured periodontal ligament stem cells under hypoxia.

Wu Y(1), Cao H, Yang Y, Zhou Y, Gu Y, Zhao X, Zhang Y, Zhao Z, Zhang L, Yin J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Department of Orthodontics, West China 
College of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. wuyekeboy@qq.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: During periodontitis or orthodontic tooth movement, the
periodontal vasculature is severely impaired by chronic inflammation or excessive
mechanical force. This leads to a hypoxic microenvironment of the periodontal
cells and enhances the expression of various cytokines and growth factors that
may regulate angiogenesis and alveolar bone remodeling. However, the role of
hypoxia in regulating the communication between endothelial cells (ECs) and
osteoblast progenitors during the remodeling and repair of periodontal tissue is 
still poorly defined. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of
vascular ECs on osteogenic differentiation, mineralization and the paracrine
function of noncontact co-cultured periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) under
hypoxia, and further reveal the involvement of MEK/ERK and p38 MAPK pathways in
the process.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: First, PDLSCs were obtained and a noncontact co-culture
system of PDLSCs and human umbilical vein endothelial cells was established.
Second, the effects of different time-periods of hypoxia (2% O(2) ) on the
osteogenic potential, mineralization and paracrine function of co-cultured PDLSCs
were investigated. Third, ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK activities of PDLSCs under hypoxia 
were measured by western blotting. Finally, we employed specific MAPK inhibitors 
(PD98059 and SB20350) to investigate the involvement of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK in
PDLSC osteogenesis under hypoxia.
RESULTS: We observed further increased osteogenic differentiation of co-cultured 
PDLSCs, manifested by markedly enhanced alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) levels, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
release, runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and Sp7 transcriptional and 
protein levels and mineralized nodule formation, compared with PDLSCs cultured
alone. ERK1/2 was phosphorylated in a rapid but transient manner, whereas p38
MAPK was activated in a slow and sustained way under hypoxia. Furthermore,
hypoxia-stimulated transcription and expression of osteogenic regulators
(hypoxia-inducible factor-1a, ALP, Runx2, Sp7, PGE(2) and VEGF) were also
inhibited by PD98059 and SB203580 to different degrees.
CONCLUSION: Further increased osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of
co-cultured PDLSCs under hypoxia were regulated by MEK/ERK and p38 MAPK pathways.
And the ECs-mediated paracrine of PGE(2) and VEGF may facilitate the
unidirectional PDLSC-EC communication and promote PDLSCs osteogenesis.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22905750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biofizika. 2012 May-Jun;57(3):460-7.

[Obtaining the phage mini-antibodies and their use for detection of microbial
cells by using an electro-acoustic sensor].

[Article in Russian]

Gulii OI, Zaitsev BD, Kuznetsova IE, Shikhabudinov AM, Karavaeva OA, Dykman LA,
Staroverov SA, Ignatov OV.

The phage mini-antibodies to bacterial cells of strain Azospirillum brasilense
Sp245 were obtained and the possibility of using them for detection of microbial 
cells by means of a lateral field excited piezoelectric resonator was studied. It
has been found that the frequency dependencies of the real and imaginary parts of
the electrical impedance of the resonator loaded by the cell suspension A.
brasilense Sp245 with the mini-antibodies, significantly differ from those of the
resonator with the control cell suspension without mini-antibodies. The
concentration limit of possible determination of the microbial cells in their
interaction with the mini-antibodies is equal to 10(3) cells/ml. It has been
ascertained that detection of A. brasilense Sp245 cells using the mini-antibodies
is possible even in the presence of other cultures, for example, E. coli BL-Ril
and A. brasilense Sp7 cells. Therefore, it has been shown for the first time that
detection of microbial cells by an electro-acoustic sensor is feasible.

PMID: 22873070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 28;287(40):33179-90. Epub 2012 Aug 6.

Osterix regulates calcification and degradation of chondrogenic matrices through 
matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) expression in association with transcription 
factor Runx2 during endochondral ossification.

Nishimura R(1), Wakabayashi M, Hata K, Matsubara T, Honma S, Wakisaka S, Kiyonari
H, Shioi G, Yamaguchi A, Tsumaki N, Akiyama H, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate
School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, Japan. rikonisi@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Endochondral ossification is temporally and spatially regulated by several
critical transcription factors, including Sox9, Runx2, and Runx3. Although the
molecular mechanisms that control the late stages of endochondral ossification
(e.g. calcification) are physiologically and pathologically important, these
precise regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that Osterix
is an essential transcription factor for endochondral ossification that functions
downstream of Runx2. The global and conditional Osterix-deficient mice studied
here exhibited a defect of cartilage-matrix ossification and matrix vesicle
formation. Importantly, Osterix deficiencies caused the arrest of endochondral
ossification at the hypertrophic stage. Microarray analysis revealed that matrix 
metallopeptidase 13 (MMP13) is an important target of Osterix. We also showed
that there exists a physical interaction between Osterix and Runx2 and that these
proteins function cooperatively to induce MMP13 during chondrocyte
differentiation. Most interestingly, the introduction of MMP13 stimulated the
calcification of matrices in Osterix-deficient mouse limb bud cells. Our results 
demonstrated that Osterix was essential to endochondral ossification and revealed
that the physical and functional interaction between Osterix and Runx2 were
necessary for the induction of MMP13 during endochondral ossification.

PMCID: PMC3460424
PMID: 22869368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013 Oct;116(4):e221-9. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2011.12.024. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Enhancement of bone formation by genetically engineered human umbilical
cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells expressing osterix.

Wang B(1), Huang S, Pan L, Jia S.

Author information: 
(1)Attending Physician, Department of Orthodontics, Hefei Stomatologic Hospital, 
Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate if overexpression of osterix
(Osx) in human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (UC-MSCs) would
facilitate osteogenic differentiation in bone regeneration.
STUDY DESIGN: UC-MSCs were isolated from UCs. A pEGFP-Osx plasmid was constructed
and applied to transfect UC-MSCs. Cell proliferation, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 
activity, and expression of bone-related genes were examined to evaluate the
osteogenic potential of UC-MSCs. Bone regeneration in vivo was evaluated in nude 
mice using PLGA as a carrier.
RESULTS: Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction showed that pEGFP-Osx
transfection enhanced expression of bone matrix proteins. Overexpression of Osx
in UC-MSCs enhanced ALP activity, while not inhibited their proliferation rate.
The Osx-transduced group formed significantly more bone at 4 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Concerning their simple isolation and proliferation, it is believed 
that genetically engineered UC-MSCs could play important roles in the study and
application of bone tissue engineering.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22819334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2012 Jan;152(3):333-5.

Effects of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 lectin and Phaseolus vulgarus
phytohemagglutinin on cytokine activity of lymphocytes in vitro.

Ponomareva EG(1), Emelyanova NV, Nikitina VE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Saratov, Russia. ponomareva@ibppm.sgu.ru

We studied the effect of fucose-specific lectin from Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 
bacteria and Phaseolus vulgarus phytohemagglutinin (PHA) on activity of IFN-<U+03B3>,
IFN-a, IL-1a, IL-4, IL-8, and TNF-a in human blood in vitro. During the
experiment, IFN-<U+03B3> production increased from 25 pg/ml in controls to 103 and 56
pg/ml under the influence of lectin and PHA, respectively. Agglutinins had
similar effects on IFN-a production. Bacterial lectin increased IL-1a level from 
2.65±0.08 to 8.45±0.41 pg/ml. PHA also increased IL-1a levels, but this effect
was by 1.5-2 times less pronounced. Bacterial lectin and PHA increased production
IL-4 by almost 2 times and production of IL-8 by 6 and 5 times, respectively,
compared to the control. No differences were found in the effects of bacterial
lectin and PHA on TNF-a synthesis. Experiments showed that immunostimulatory and 
immunomodulatory effects of bacterial lectin are more pronounced than those of
PHA.

PMID: 22803079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mod Pathol. 2012 Nov;25(11):1452-61. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.110. Epub 2012
Jul 6.

Regulators of skeletal development: a cluster analysis of 206 bone tumors reveals
diagnostically useful markers.

Horvai AE(1), Roy R, Borys D, O'Donnell RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94115-1656, USA. andrew.horvai@ucsf.edu

The molecules Indian hedgehog (IHH), SP7 (also known as osterix), sex-determining
region Y-box 9 (SOX9), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and TWIST1
regulate the normal differentiation of osteo- and chondrogenic cells from
precursors during skeletal development and remodeling. The aberrant function of
the same molecules has been implicated in the pathogenesis of bone tumors.
Preliminary studies suggest that antibodies against these molecules have
practical, diagnostic or prognostic utility in tumors. However, a comprehensive
analysis of the expression of these molecules in a large, diverse set of bone
tumors has yet to be reported. The goals of this study were to compare the
immunohistochemical profiles of IHH, SP7, SOX9, RUNX2 and TWIST1 among bone
tumors and to determine the optimum panel for diagnostic utility. Tissue
microarrays prepared from 206 undecalcified tumors (71 osteosarcomas, 26
osteoblastomas/osteoid osteomas, 50 giant cell tumors, 5 chondromyxoid fibromas
and 54 chondroblastomas) were stained with antibodies to IHH, SP7, SOX9, RUNX2
and TWIST1. The stains were scored for intensity (0-3+) and distribution. The
results were analyzed by cluster analysis. Optimum antibody panels for diagnostic
sensitivity and specificity were calculated. Analysis revealed six main clusters 
that corresponded well to tumor types and suggested a close relationship between 
the stromal cells of giant cell tumor and the osteoblasts of osteosarcoma. The
expression profile of chondromyxoid fibroma and chondroblastoma also suggested
related differentiation. The distribution of osteoblastomas and osteoid osteomas 
was more heterogeneous. RUNX2, SOX9 and TWIST1 represented the most sensitive and
specific immunohistochemical panel to distinguish among these diagnoses with the 
limitation that no result could discriminate between chondroblastoma and
chondromyxoid fibroma. IHH and SP7 did not yield additional utility.

PMID: 22766796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Arch Oral Biol. 2013 Jan;58(1):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.05.010.
Epub 2012 Jun 18.

The effect of surface microgrooves and anodic oxidation on the surface
characteristics of titanium and the osteogenic activity of human periodontal
ligament cells.

Lee MH(1), Kang JH, Lee SW.

Author information: 
(1)Green Ceramics Division, Korea Institute of Ceramic Engineering and
Technology, 77 10-gil, Digital-ro, Geumcheon-gu, Seoul 153-801, Republic of
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of titanium
(Ti) surface microgrooves and anodic oxidation on the surface characteristics of 
titanium and the osteogenic activity of human periodontal ligament cells (PLCs)
cultured on theses surfaces.
DESIGN: Mechanically ground Ti was used as the control substratum (NE0).
Truncated V-shaped microgrooves, 60µm-wide and 10µm-deep in cross-sections, were 
created on the Ti substrata by photolithography (NE60/10). Anodically oxidized Ti
(NE0AO) and anodically oxidized microgrooved Ti (NE60/10AO) were also prepared.
Scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) were performed for surface characterization. Cell
proliferation assay, osteoblast differentiation assay, and quantitative real-time
PCR analysis were performed to compare the osteogenic activity of PLCs on NE0,
NE60/10, NEAO, and NE60/10AO.
RESULTS: A decrease in the microgroove-width of NE60/10AO compared to NE60/10 due
to Ti oxide layer generation by anodic oxidation was detected with XRD and XPS.
Cell proliferation, osteoblast differentiation, and osteo-related gene expression
were enhanced on the NE60/10AO substrata compared with NE0, NE60/10, and NE0AO.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of Ti surface microgrooves and subsequent anodic
oxidation treatment synergistically upregulated osteo-related gene expression,
despite showing limited ability to increase cell proliferation and osteoblast
differentiation levels in PLCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22717323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2012 Jun 14;66:359-71.

[Mutations of noncollagen genes in osteogenesis imperfecta--implications of the
gene products in collagen biosynthesis and pathogenesis of disease].

[Article in Polish]

Galicka A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Chemii Medycznej, Uniwersytet Medyczny w Bialymstok. angajko@umb.edu.pl

 Recent investigations revealed that the "brittle bone" phenotype in osteogenesis
imperfecta (OI) is caused not only by dominant mutations in collagen type I
genes, but also by recessively inherited mutations in genes responsible for the
post-translational processing of type I procollagen as well as for bone
formation. The phenotype of patients with mutations in noncollagen genes overlaps
with very severe type III and lethal type II OI caused by mutations in collagen
genes. Mutations in genes that encode proteins involved in collagen prolyl
3-hydroxylation (P3H1/CRTAP/CyPB) eliminated Pro986 hydroxylation and caused an
increase in modification of collagen helix by prolyl 4-hydroxylase and lysyl
hydroxylase. However, the importance of these disturbances in the disease
pathomechanism is not known. Loss of complex proteins' function as collagen
chaperones may dominate the disease mechanism. The latest findings added to the
spectrum of OI-causing and collagen-influencing factors other chaperones (HSP47
and FKBP65) and protein BMP-1, which emphasizes the complexity of collagen
folding and secretion as well as their importance in bone formation. Furthermore,
mutations in genes encoding transcription factor SP7/Osterix and pigment
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) constitute a novel mechanism for OI, which is
independent of changes in biosynthesis and processing of collagen.

PMID: 22706122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Odontology. 2013 Jul;101(2):133-9. doi: 10.1007/s10266-012-0067-0. Epub 2012 Jun 
8.

Effect of titanium surface topographies on human bone marrow stem cells
differentiation in vitro.

Perrotti V(1), Palmieri A, Pellati A, Degidi M, Ricci L, Piattelli A, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Dental School, University of Chieti-Pescara, Via F. Sciucchi 63, 66100,
Chieti, Italy.

Coating characteristics of dental implants such as composition and topography
regulate cell response during implant healing. The aim of this study was to
assess how surface topography can affect osteogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) by analyzing the expression levels of bone-related 
genes and MSCs marker. Thirty disk-shaped, commercially pure Grade 2 titanium
samples (10 × 2 mm) with 3 different surface topographies (DENTSPLY-Friadent
GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) were used in the present study: 10 Ti machined disks
(control), 10 Ti sandblasted and acid-etched disks (DPS(®)) and 10 sandblasted
and acid-etched disks at high temperature (Plus(®)). Samples were processed for
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. By
comparing machined and Plus(®) disks, quantitative real-time RT-PCR showed a
significant reduction of the bone-related genes osteocalcin (BGLAP) and
osteoblast transcriptional factor (RUNX2). The comparison between DPS(®) and
Plus(®) disks showed a slight induction of all the genes examined (RUNX2, ALPL,
COL1A1, COL3A1, ENG, FOSL1, SPP1, and SP7); only the expression of BGLAP remained
stable. The present study, demonstrated that implant surface topography affects
osteoblast gene expression. Indeed, Plus(®) surface produces an effect on MSCs in
the late differentiation stages.

PMID: 22678711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Arch Oral Biol. 2012 Oct;57(10):1395-407. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.04.010.
Epub 2012 May 15.

Effects of mechanical vibration on proliferation and osteogenic differentiation
of human periodontal ligament stem cells.

Zhang C(1), Li J, Zhang L, Zhou Y, Hou W, Quan H, Li X, Chen Y, Yu H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Paradental tissues (alveolar bone, periodontal ligament (PDL), and
gingiva) have the capacity to adapt to their functional environment. The
principal cellular elements of the PDL play an important role in normal function,
regeneration of periodontal tissue and in orthodontic treatment. Recently,
several studies have shown that low-magnitude, high-frequency (LMHF) mechanical
vibration can positively influence bone homeostasis; however, the mechanism and
optimal conditions for LMHF mechanical vibration have not been elucidated. It has
been speculated that LMHF mechanical vibration stimulations have a favourable
influence on osteocytes, osteoblasts and their precursors, thereby enhancing the 
expression of osteoblastic genes involved in bone formation and remodelling. The 
objective of this study was to test the effect of LMHF mechanical vibration on
proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of human PDL stem cells (PDLSCs).
METHODS: Human PDLSCs were isolated from premolar teeth and randomized into
vibration (magnitude: 0.3g; frequency: 10-180 Hz; 30 min/24h) and static
cultures. The effect of vibration on PDLSC proliferation, differentiation and
osteogenic potential was assessed at the genetic and protein level.
RESULTS: After LMHF mechanical vibration, PDLSC proliferation was decreased;
however, this was accompanied by increased markers of osteogenesis in a
frequency-dependent manner. Specifically, alkaline phosphatase activity gradually
increased with the frequency of vibration, to a peak at 50 Hz, and the level of
osteocalcin was significantly higher than control following vibration at 40 Hz,
50 Hz, 60 Hz, 90 Hz and 120 Hz. Levels of Col-I, Runx2 and Osterix were
significantly increased by LMHF mechanical vibration at frequencies of 40 Hz and 
50 Hz.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrates that LMHF mechanical vibration promotes PDLSC 
osteogenic differentiation and implies the existence of a frequency-dependent
effect of vibration on determining PDLSC commitment to the osteoblast lineage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22595622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Craniofac Surg. 2012 May;23(3):638-44. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e31824db8d4.

Bony engineering using time-release porous scaffolds to provide sustained growth 
factor delivery.

Szpalski C(1), Nguyen PD, Cretiu Vasiliu CE, Chesnoiu-Matei I, Ricci JL, Clark E,
Smay JE, Warren SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, New York University Langone Medical Center, New
York, NY, USA.

Microporous scaffolds designed to improve bony repair have had limited success;
therefore, we sought to evaluate whether time-released porous scaffolds with or
without recombinant bone morphogenetic protein 2 (rhBMP-2) could enhance stem
cell osteoinduction. Custom-made 15/85 hydroxyapatite/ß-tricalcium phosphate
scaffolds were left empty (E) or filled with rhBMP-2 (E+), calcium sulfate (CS), 
or CS and rhBMP-2 (CS+). All scaffolds were placed in media and weighed daily.
Conditioned supernatant was analyzed for rhBMP-2 and then used to feed human
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ASCs). Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem
cell ALP activity, OSTERIX expression, and bone nodule formation were determined.
E scaffolds retained 97% (SD, 2%) of the initial weight, whereas CS scaffolds had
a near-linear 30% (SD, 3%) decrease over 60 days. E+ scaffolds released 155 (SD, 
5) ng of rhBMP-2 (77%) by day 2. In contrast, CS+ scaffolds released only 30 (SD,
2) ng (10%) by day 2, and the remaining rhBMP-2 was released over 20 days.
Conditioned media from E+ scaffolds stimulated the highest ALP activity and
OSTERIX expression in ACSs on day 2. However, after day 6, media from CS+
scaffolds stimulated the highest ALP activity and OSTERIX expression in ASCs.
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells exposed to day 8 CS+-conditioned media
produced significantly more bone nodules (10.1 [SD, 1.7] nodules per high-power
field) than all other scaffolds. Interestingly, day 8 conditioned media from CS
scaffolds simulated significantly more bone nodules than either E or E+ scaffold 
(P < 0.05 for both). Time-released hydroxyapatite/ß-tricalcium phosphate porosity
provides sustained growth factor release, enhances ASC osteoinduction, and may
result in better in vivo bone formation.

PMID: 22565873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035579. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Differentiation-dependent secretion of proangiogenic factors by mesenchymal stem 
cells.

Hoch AI(1), Binder BY, Genetos DC, Leach JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are a promising cell population for cell-based bone
repair due to their proliferative potential, ability to differentiate into
bone-forming osteoblasts, and their secretion of potent trophic factors that
stimulate angiogenesis and neovascularization. To promote bone healing,
autogenous or allogeneic MSCs are transplanted into bone defects after
differentiation to varying degrees down the osteogenic lineage. However, the
contribution of the stage of osteogenic differentiation upon angiogenic factor
secretion is unclear. We hypothesized that the proangiogenic potential of MSCs
was dependent upon their stage of osteogenic differentiation. After 7 days of
culture, we observed the greatest osteogenic differentiation of MSCs when cells
were cultured with dexamethasone (OM+). Conversely, VEGF protein secretion and
upregulation of angiogenic genes were greatest in MSCs cultured in growth media
(GM). Using conditioned media from MSCs in each culture condition, GM-conditioned
media maximized proliferation and enhanced chemotactic migration and tubule
formation of endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs). The addition of a
neutralizing VEGF(165/121) antibody to conditioned media attenuated ECFC
proliferation and chemotactic migration. ECFCs seeded on microcarrier beads and
co-cultured with MSCs previously cultured in GM in a fibrin gel exhibited
superior sprouting compared to MSCs previously cultured in OM+. These results
confirm that MSCs induced farther down the osteogenic lineage possess reduced
proangiogenic potential, thereby providing important findings for consideration
when using MSCs for bone repair.

PMCID: PMC3334972
PMID: 22536411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1465-76. doi: 10.1002/stem.1107.

Impaired osteoblastogenesis in a murine model of dominant osteogenesis
imperfecta: a new target for osteogenesis imperfecta pharmacological therapy.

Gioia R(1), Panaroni C, Besio R, Palladini G, Merlini G, Giansanti V, Scovassi
IA, Villani S, Villa I, Villa A, Vezzoni P, Tenni R, Rossi A, Marini JC, Forlino 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Section of Biochemistry, University of
Pavia, Via Taramelli 3/B, Pavia, Italy.

The molecular basis underlying the clinical phenotype in bone diseases is
customarily associated with abnormal extracellular matrix structure and/or
properties. More recently, cellular malfunction has been identified as a
concomitant causative factor and increased attention has focused on stem cells
differentiation. Classic osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a prototype for
heritable bone dysplasias: it has dominant genetic transmission and is caused by 
mutations in the genes coding for collagen I, the most abundant protein in bone. 
Using the Brtl mouse, a well-characterized knockin model for moderately severe
dominant OI, we demonstrated an impairment in the differentiation of bone marrow 
progenitor cells toward osteoblasts. In mutant mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), the
expression of early (Runx2 and Sp7) and late (Col1a1 and Ibsp) osteoblastic
markers was significantly reduced with respect to wild type (WT). Conversely,
mutant MSCs generated more colony-forming unit-adipocytes compared to WT, with
more adipocytes per colony, and increased number and size of triglyceride drops
per cell. Autophagy upregulation was also demonstrated in mutant adult MSCs
differentiating toward osteogenic lineage as consequence of endoplasmic reticulum
stress due to mutant collagen retention. Treatment of the Brtl mice with the
proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib ameliorated both osteoblast differentiation in
vitro and bone properties in vivo as demonstrated by colony-forming
unit-osteoblasts assay and peripheral quantitative computed tomography analysis
on long bones, respectively. This is the first report of impaired MSC
differentiation to osteoblasts in OI, and it identifies a new potential target
for the pharmacological treatment of the disorder.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3459187
PMID: 22511244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Bone Miner Res. 2012 Jul;27(7):1598-606. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1621.

miR-93/Sp7 function loop mediates osteoblast mineralization.

Yang L(1), Cheng P, Chen C, He HB, Xie GQ, Zhou HD, Xie H, Wu XP, Luo XH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Second Xiangya Hospital of
Central South University, 139# Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, Hunan 410011, PR
China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play pivotal roles in osteoblast differentiation. However, the
mechanisms of miRNAs regulating osteoblast mineralization still need further
investigation. Here, we performed miRNA profiling and identified that miR-93 was 
the most significantly downregulated miRNA during osteoblast mineralization.
Overexpression of miR-93 in cultured primary mouse osteoblasts attenuated
osteoblast mineralization. Expression of the Sp7 transcription factor 7 (Sp7,
Osterix), a zinc finger transcription factor and critical regulator of osteoblast
mineralization, was found to be inversely correlated with miR-93. Then Sp7 was
confirmed to be a target of miR-93. Overexpression of miR-93 in cultured
osteoblasts reduced Sp7 protein expression without affecting its mRNA level.
Luciferase reporter assay showed that miR-93 directly targeted Sp7 by
specifically binding to the target coding sequence region (CDS) of Sp7.
Experiments such as electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and promoter luciferase reporter assay confirmed that
Sp7 bound to the promoter of miR-93. Furthermore, overexpression of Sp7 reduced
miR-93 transcription, whereas blocking the expression of Sp7 promoted miR-93
transcription. Our study showed that miR-93 was an important regulator in
osteoblast mineralization and miR-93 carried out its function through a novel
miR-93/Sp7 regulatory feedback loop. Our findings provide new insights into the
roles of miRNAs in osteoblast mineralization.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 22467200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032364. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

SP7 inhibits osteoblast differentiation at a late stage in mice.

Yoshida CA(1), Komori H, Maruyama Z, Miyazaki T, Kawasaki K, Furuichi T, Fukuyama
R, Mori M, Yamana K, Nakamura K, Liu W, Toyosawa S, Moriishi T, Kawaguchi H,
Takada K, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

RUNX2 and SP7 are essential transcription factors for osteoblast differentiation 
at an early stage. Although RUNX2 inhibits osteoblast differentiation at a late
stage, the function of SP7 at the late stage of osteoblast differentiation is not
fully elucidated. Thus, we pursued the function of SP7 in osteoblast
differentiation. RUNX2 induced Sp7 expression in Runx2(-/-) calvarial cells.
Adenoviral transfer of sh-Sp7 into primary osteoblasts reduced the expression of 
Alpl, Col1a1, and Bglap2 and mineralization, whereas that of Sp7 reduced Bglap2
expression and mineralization at a late stage of osteoblast differentiation. Sp7 
transgenic mice under the control of 2.3 kb Col1a1 promoter showed osteopenia and
woven-bone like structure in the cortical bone, which was thin and less
mineralized, in a dose-dependent manner. Further, the number of processes in the 
osteoblasts and osteocytes was reduced. Although the osteoblast density was
increased, the bone formation was reduced. The frequency of BrdU incorporation
was increased in the osteoblastic cells, while the expression of Col1a1, Spp1,
Ibsp, and Bglap2 was reduced. Further, the osteopenia in Sp7 or Runx2 transgenic 
mice was worsened in Sp7/Runx2 double transgenic mice and the expression of
Col1a1 and Bglap2 was reduced. The expression of Sp7 and Runx2 was not increased 
in Runx2 and Sp7 transgenic mice, respectively. The expression of endogenous Sp7 
was increased in Sp7 transgenic mice and Sp7-transduced cells; the introduction
of Sp7 activated and sh-Sp7 inhibited Sp7 promoter; and ChIP assay showed the
binding of endogenous SP7 in the proximal region of Sp7 promoter. These findings 
suggest that SP7 and RUNX2 inhibit osteoblast differentiation at a late stage in 
a manner independent of RUNX2 and SP7, respectively, and SP7 positively regulates
its own promoter.

PMCID: PMC3292551
PMID: 22396760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Implant Dent. 2012 Apr;21(2):118-23. doi: 10.1097/ID.0b013e31824bc948.

Anatase-based implants nanocoating on stem cells derived from adipose tissue.

Zollino I(1), Girardi A, Palmieri A, Cura F, Sollazzo V, Brunelli G, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of a new anatase
coating with antibacterial properties (Bactercline anatase coating [BAC]) on
dental implants in the commitment of stem cells derived from adipose tissue to
osteoblasts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, the quantitative expression of specific genes, such as transcriptional 
factors (runx2 and sp7), bone-related genes (spp1, col1a1, col3a1, alpl, and
fosl1), and mesenchymal stem cells marker (eng), was examined.
RESULTS: BAC caused induction of bone-related genes such as sp7, fosl1, alpl, and
spp1. In contrast, the expression of runx2, col3a1, and col1a1 was decreased in
stem cells treated with BAC with respect to untreated cells.
CONCLUSION: The obtained results are relevant to better understand the molecular 
mechanism of bone regeneration and as a model for comparing other materials with 
similar clinical effects.

PMID: 22382753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Aug;64(8):2632-43. doi: 10.1002/art.34434.

Transcriptional profile of native CD271+ multipotential stromal cells: evidence
for multiple fates, with prominent osteogenic and Wnt pathway signaling activity.

Churchman SM(1), Ponchel F, Boxall SA, Cuthbert R, Kouroupis D, Roshdy T,
Giannoudis PV, Emery P, McGonagle D, Jones EA.

Author information: 
(1)NIHR Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit and University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Controversy surrounds the identity and functionality of rare bone
marrow-derived multipotential stromal cells (BM-MSCs), including their
differentiation capabilities, their relationship to pericytes and
hematopoiesis-supporting stromal cells, and the relevance of their
culture-expanded progeny in studies of skeletal biology and development of
cell-based therapies. The aim of this study was to clarify the nature of
candidate BM-MSCs by profiling transcripts that reflect different aspects of
their putative functions in vivo.
METHODS: Rare, sorted BM-derived CD45(-/low) CD271(bright) (CD271) cells were
analyzed using 96-gene expression arrays focused on transcripts relevant to
mesenchymal-lineage differentiation (toward bone, cartilage, fat, or muscle),
hematopoietic and stromal support, and molecules critical to skeletal
homeostasis. These cells were compared to matched CD45+ CD271-
hematopoietic-lineage cells, culture-expanded MSCs, and skin fibroblasts. When
feasible, transcription was validated using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: CD271 cells had a transcriptional profile consistent with the multiple
fates of in vivo MSCs, evident from the observed simultaneous expression of
osteogenic, adipogenic, pericytic, and hematopoiesis-supporting genes (e.g., SP7 
[osterix], FABP4 [fatty acid binding protein 4], ANGPT1 [angiopoietin 1], and
CXCL12 [stromal cell-derived factor 1], respectively). Compared to
culture-expanded MSCs and fibroblasts, CD271 cells exhibited greater
transcriptional activity, particularly with respect to Wnt-related genes
(>1,000-fold increased expression of FRZB [secreted frizzled-related protein 3]
and WIF1 [Wnt inhibitory factor 1]). A number of transcripts were identified as
novel markers of MSCs.
CONCLUSION: The native, BM-derived in vivo MSC population is endowed with a gene 
signature that is compatible with multiple functions, reflecting the topographic 
bone niche of these cells, and their signature is significantly different from
that of culture-expanded MSCs. This indicates that studies of the biologic
functions of MSCs in musculoskeletal diseases, including osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis, should focus on in vivo MSCs, rather than their culture-adapted
progeny.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 22378497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Cell Sci. 2012 Apr 15;125(Pt 8):1945-57. doi: 10.1242/jcs.095893. Epub 2012 Feb
22.

Disruption of Kif3a in osteoblasts results in defective bone formation and
osteopenia.

Qiu N(1), Xiao Z, Cao L, Buechel MM, David V, Roan E, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38165, USA.

We investigated whether Kif3a in osteoblasts has a direct role in regulating
postnatal bone formation. We conditionally deleted Kif3a in osteoblasts by
crossing osteocalcin (Oc; also known as Bglap)-Cre with Kif3a(flox/null) mice.
Conditional Kif3a-null mice (Kif3a(Oc-cKO)) had a 75% reduction in Kif3a
transcripts in bone and osteoblasts. Conditional deletion of Kif3a resulted in
the reduction of primary cilia number by 51% and length by 27% in osteoblasts.
Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice developed osteopenia by 6 weeks of age unlike Kif3a(flox/+)
control mice, as evidenced by reductions in femoral bone mineral density (22%),
trabecular bone volume (42%) and cortical thickness (17%). By contrast,
Oc-Cre;Kif3a(flox/+) and Kif3a(flox/null) heterozygous mice exhibited no skeletal
abnormalities. Loss of bone mass in Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice was associated with
impaired osteoblast function in vivo, as reflected by a 54% reduction in mineral 
apposition rate and decreased expression of Runx2, osterix (also known as Sp7
transcription factor 7; Sp7), osteocalcin and Dmp1 compared with controls.
Immortalized osteoblasts from Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice exhibited increased cell
proliferation, impaired osteoblastic differentiation, and enhanced adipogenesis
in vitro. Osteoblasts derived from Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice also had lower basal
cytosolic calcium levels and impaired intracellular calcium responses to fluid
flow shear stress. Sonic hedgehog-mediated Gli2 expression and Wnt3a-mediated
ß-catenin and Axin2 expression were also attenuated in Kif3a(Oc-cKO) bone and
osteoblast cultures. These data indicate that selective deletion of Kif3a in
osteoblasts disrupts primary cilia formation and/or function and impairs
osteoblast-mediated bone formation through multiple pathways including
intracellular calcium, hedgehog and Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3360919
PMID: 22357948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Endod. 2012 Mar;38(3):405-10. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2011.12.025. Epub 2012 Jan
28.

Effects of simvastain and enamel matrix derivative on Portland cement with
bismuth oxide-induced growth and odontoblastic differentiation in human dental
pulp cells.

Lee SY(1), Min KS, Choi GW, Park JH, Park SH, Lee SI, Kim EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Tissue Regeneration, School of Dentistry and
Institute of Oral Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: We previously reported that bismuth oxide containing Portland
cement (BPC) showed similar biocompatibility to Portland cement (PC) in
periodontal ligament cells. However, the bioactivity of simvastatin and Emdogain 
(Biora AB, Malmö, Sweden) on BPC was not reported. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the effects of simvastatin and Emdogain on BPC compared with mineral
trioxide aggregate (MTA) in human dental pulp cells (HDPCs).
METHODS: Cell growth was determined by
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium-bromide (MTT) assay.
Differentiation was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, alizarin
red staining, and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The cell growth of HDPCs exposed to Emdogain and simvastatin plus BPC
was superior to those administered BPC alone and similar to those that received
MTA for 14 days. The simvastatin and Emdogain groups increased the odontogenic
potential of the BPC group with respect to ALP activity, mineralization nodules, 
messenger RNA expression of ALP, osteopontin, osteocalcin, Runx2, and osterix.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that simvastatin and Emdogain improved cell
growth and the differentiation of the BPC group in HDPCs and may be useful
ingredients in BPC as pulp-capping material.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22341085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Feb 24;418(4):669-75. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.01.074. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

IL-3 promotes osteoblast differentiation and bone formation in human mesenchymal 
stem cells.

Barhanpurkar AP(1), Gupta N, Srivastava RK, Tomar GB, Naik SP, Joshi SR, Pote ST,
Mishra GC, Wani MR.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, University of Pune Campus, Pune 411 007,
India.

IL-3 is an important cytokine that regulates hematopoiesis. We have previously
demonstrated that IL-3 is a potent inhibitor of osteoclastogenesis and bone
resorption. In the present study, we have investigated the role of IL-3 on human 
osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. We found that IL-3 in a
dose-dependent manner increases osteoblast differentiation and matrix
mineralization in human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). IL-3 significantly
enhances the expression of osteoblast specific genes such as alkaline
phosphatase, collagen type-I, osteocalcin and osteopontin; and Runx-2 and osterix
transcription factors. Moreover, IL-3 induces the expression of bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), and activates smad1/5/8. IL-3 enhances
osteoblast differentiation and BMP-2 secretion through JAK/STAT pathway.
Interestingly, IL-3 promotes in vivo bone regeneration ability of MSCs. Thus, we 
reveal for the first time that IL-3 enhances human osteoblast differentiation and
bone formation in both in vitro and in vivo conditions, and suggest its
therapeutic potential for bone formation in important bone diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22293197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Br J Nutr. 2012 Nov 28;108(10):1736-45. doi: 10.1017/S0007114511007355. Epub 2012
Jan 31.

Zinc modifies the effect of phyto-oestrogens on osteoblast and osteoclast
differentiation in vitro.

Karieb S(1), Fox SW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Biological Sciences, Room 404 Davy Building, Drake
Circus, Plymouth University, Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK.

Osteoblast and osteoclast activity is disrupted in post-menopausal osteoporosis. 
Thus, to fully address this imbalance, therapies should reduce bone resorption
and promote bone formation. Dietary factors such as phyto-oestrogens and Zn have 
beneficial effects on osteoblast and osteoclast activity. However, the effect of 
combinations of these factors has not been widely studied. We therefore examined 
the effect of coumestrol, daidzein and genistein in the presence or absence of
zinc sulphate (Zn) on osteoclast and osteoblast activity. Osteoclast
differentiation and bone resorption were significantly reduced by coumestrol (10-
7 m), daidzein (10- 5 m) and genistein (10- 7 m); and this direct
anti-osteoclastic action was unaffected by Zn (10- 5 m). In addition, Zn
augmented the inhibitory effect of phyto-oestrogens on the osteoblast-derived
stimulus for osteoclast formation, significantly reducing the ratio of receptor
activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-to-osteoprotegerin mRNA expression in human
osteoblast. We then examined the effect of these compounds on osteoblast
activity. Mineralisation was enhanced by coumestrol (10- 5 to 10- 7 m), daidzein 
(10- 5 to 10- 6 m) and genistein (10- 5 m); and Zn significantly augmented this
response. Zn and phyto-oestrogens also significantly enhanced alkaline
phosphatase activity and Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) mRNA
expression. On the other hand, Zn blunted phyto-oestrogen-induced type I collagen
and osteocalcin expression and suppressed coumestrol and daidzein-stimulated
osterix expression. Zn may therefore modify the anabolic action of
phyto-oestrogens, promoting characteristics associated with early rather than
late stages of osteoblast differentiation. Our data suggest that while Zn
enhances the anti-osteoclastic effect of phyto-oestrogens, it may limit aspects
of their anabolic action on bone matrix formation.

PMID: 22289672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Stem Cell Res. 2012 May;8(3):346-56. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2011.12.005. Epub 2011
Dec 21.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 can promote the osteogenic differentiation and
osteogenesis of stem cells from apical papilla.

Wang S(1), Mu J, Fan Z, Yu Y, Yan M, Lei G, Tang C, Wang Z, Zheng Y, Yu J, Zhang 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
China.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) plays an important role in the regulation of
tooth root development, and stem cells from apical papilla (SCAPs) are
responsible for the formation of root pulp and dentin. To date, it remains
unclear whether IGF-1 can regulate the function of SCAPs. In this study, SCAPs
were isolated and purified from human immature root apex, and stimulated by 100
ng/mL exogenous IGF-1. The effects of IGF-1 on the proliferation and
differentiation of SCAPs were subsequently investigated. IGF-1 treated SCAPs
presented the morphological and ultrastructural changes. Cell proliferation,
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and mineralization capacity of SCAPs were
increased by IGF-1. Western blot and quantitative RT-PCR analyses further
demonstrated that the expression of osteogenic-related proteins and genes (e.g., 
alkaline phosphatase, runt-related transcription factor 2, osterix, and
osteocalcin) was significantly up-regulated in IGF-1 treated SCAPs, whereas the
expression of odontoblast-specific markers (e.g., dentin sialoprotein and dentin 
sialophosphoprotein) was down-regulated by IGF-1. In vivo results revealed that
IGF-1 treated SCAPs mostly gave birth to bone-like tissues while untreated SCAPs 
mainly generated dentin-pulp complex-like structures after transplantation. The
present study revealed that IGF-1 can promote the osteogenic differentiation and 
osteogenesis capacity of SCAPs, but weaken their odontogenic differentiation and 
dentinogenesis capability, indicating that IGF-1 treated SCAPs can be used as a
potential candidate for bone tissue engineering.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22286010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2011 Oct-Dec;25(4):603-14.

Effect of low-level laser irradiation on osteoblast proliferation and bone
formation.

Grassi FR(1), Ciccolella F, D'Apolito G, Papa F, Iuso A, Salzo AE, Trentadue R,
Nardi GM, Scivetti M, De Matteo M, Silvestris F, Ballini A, Inchingolo F, Dipalma
G, Scacco S, Tetè S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Methodology and Medical Surgery Technology, University 
of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2012 Jan-Mar;26(1):3 p following 163. Dipalma, M
[corrected to Dipalma, G].

Applications of laser therapy in biostimulation and healing injured tissues are
widely described in medical literature. The present study focuses on the effects 
of laser irradiation on the growth rate and differentiation of human
osteoblast-like cells seeded on titanium or zirconia surfaces. Cells were laser
irradiated with low therapeutical doses at different intervals and the effects of
irradiation were evaluated at each time-point. After 3 hours lasered cells showed
an enhanced mitogen activity compared to non-lasered control cells and a higher
alkaline phosphatase activity, marker of bone formation. At the same time, the
mRNA of RUNX2 and OSTERIX, two genes involved in osteoblast differentiation,
showed a clear decrease in lasered cells. This reached the lowest value 6 to 12
hours after irradiation, after which the transcripts started to increase,
indicating that the laser treatment did promote the osteogenic potential of
growth-induced cells. These results indicate that Low Level Laser Treatment
(LLLT) stimulates osteogenic cell proliferation.

PMID: 22217992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Feb 15;676(1-3):26-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.12.001.
Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Ugonin K-stimulated osteogenesis involves estrogen receptor-dependent activation 
of non-classical Src signaling pathway and classical pathway.

Lee CH(1), Huang YL, Liao JF, Chiou WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

We have reported previously that ugonin K, a flavonoid isolated from
Helminthostachys zeylanica (L.) Hook, potently induces cell differentiation and
mineralization of MC3T3-E1 mouse osteoblast-like cells. Here we aimed to
elucidate whether ugonin K evoked osteogenesis required interaction with estrogen
receptor. Results showed that ugonin K induced increases in alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP) activity, expressions of bone sialoprotein (BSP) and osteocalcin (OCN), and
subsequent bone nodule formation were concentration-dependently inhibited by
estrogen receptor antagonist ICI 182,780, suggesting that an estrogen
receptor-dependent pathway was involved. In the presence of ICI 182,780, ugonin K
induced up-regulation of the expressions of runt-related transcription factor 2
(Runx2) and osterix was also significantly repressed. Numerous studies have
demonstrated that estrogens induced rapid and transient activation of the c-Src
phosphorylation cascade. We found that ugonin K indeed raised the phosphorylated 
level of c-Src and such phosphorylation was significantly attenuated by ICI
182,780 treatment. Application of c-Src specific inhibitor PP2
concentration-dependently repressed ugonin K-induced osteogenesis. In the nuclear
translocation assay, results showed that ugonin K increased the nuclear level of 
estrogen receptor-a protein, suggesting that an enhanced transcriptional activity
might be observed. Excepting MC3T3-E1 cells, results obtained from ALP activity
assay revealed that ugonin K also stimulated osteoblastic differentiation of
human MG-63 osteosarcoma cells and rat primary osteoblasts isolated from femora. 
Our results demonstrate that ugonin K stimulated osteogenesis might act through
an estrogen receptor-dependent activation of a non-classical signaling pathway
mediated by phosphorylation of c-Src. Moreover, a transactivation potential
toward estrogen receptor-a through a classical pathway might not be precluded.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22192930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Clin Calcium. 2011 Dec;21(12):103-12. doi: CliCa111218531862.

[Bone and calcium update; bone research update. Regulatory mechanisms in
osteoblast differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishimura R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate
School of Dentistry, Japan.

Differentiation process of osteoblasts, which play a central role in bone
formation, is harmoniously controlled by several cytokines and hormones.
Particularly, Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) , Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) , and Wnt 
family proteins are important cytokines for osteoblast differentiation.
Understandings of molecular mechanisms by which these cytokines stimulate
osteoblast differentiation have been extensively investigated. BMP/Smad
signaling, canonical Wnt pathway, non-canonical Wnt pathway and Ihh/Gli signaling
play critical role in osteoblast differentiation. Furthermore, biochemical and
genetic studies have demonstrated important roles of Runt related transcription
factor 2 (Runx2) , Osterix, Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) , Msh
homeobox 2 (Msx2) and Oasis for osteoblast differentiation. Thus, these milestone
studies have dramatically progressed in our understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of osteoblast differentiation for 20 years.

PMID: 22133830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nefrologia. 2011;31(6):644-7. doi: 10.3265/Nefrologia.pre2011.Oct.11175.

Arterial calcification: cardiovascular function and clinical outcome.

London GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U970, Paris and Hopital F.H. Manhès, Fleury-Mérogis, France.
glondon@club-internet.fr

Arterial calcification (AC) is a common complication of CKD and ESRD, and the
extents of AC are predictive of subsequent cardiovascular mortality beyond
established conventional risk factors. AC develop in two distinct sites: the
intima and media layers of the large and medium-sized arterial wall. These two
forms are frequently associated. AC is tightly associated with aging and arterial
remodeling, including intima-media thickening, but also changes of the geometry
and function of aortic valves. Evidence has accumulated pointing to the active
and regulated nature of the calcification process. Elevated phosphate and calcium
may stimulate sodium&ndash;dependent phosphate cotransport involving
osteoblast&ndash;like changes in cellular gene expression. AC is responsible for 
stiffening of the arteries with increased left ventricular afterload and abnormal
coronary perfusion as the principal clinical consequences.

PMID: 22130278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Orthop Res. 2012 Jun;30(6):864-71. doi: 10.1002/jor.22019. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Effects of lactic acid and glycolic acid on human osteoblasts: a way to
understand PLGA involvement in PLGA/calcium phosphate composite failure.

Meyer F(1), Wardale J, Best S, Cameron R, Rushton N, Brooks R.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
fmeyer@unistra.fr

The use of degradable composite materials in orthopedics remains a field of
intense research due to their ability to support new bone formation and degrade
in a controlled manner, broadening their use for orthopedic applications. Poly
(lactide-co-glycolide) acid (PLGA), a degradable biopolymer, is now a popular
material for different orthopedic applications and is proposed for use in tissue 
engineering scaffolds either alone or combined with bioactive ceramics.
Interference screws composed of calcium phosphates and PLGA are readily available
in the market. However, some reports highlight problems of screw migration or
aseptic cyst formation following screw degradation. In order to understand these 
phenomena and to help to improve implant formulation, we have evaluated the
effects of PLGA degradation products: lactic acid and glycolic acid on human
osteoblasts in vitro. Cell proliferation, differentiation, and matrix
mineralization, important for bone healing were studied. It was found that the
toxicity of polymer degradation products under buffering conditions was limited
to high concentrations. However, non-toxic concentrations led to a decrease in
cell proliferation, rapid cell differentiation, and mineralization failure.
Calcium, whilst stimulating cell proliferation was not able to overcome the
negative effects of high concentrations of lactic and glycolic acids on
osteoblasts. These effects help to explain recently reported clinical failures of
calcium phosphate/PLGA composites, but further in vitro analyses are needed to
mimic the dynamic situation which occurs in the body by, for example, culture of 
osteoblasts with materials that have been pre-degraded to different extents and
thus be able to relate these findings to the degradation studies that have been
performed previously.

Copyright © 2011 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 22105618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Oct;323(2):105-12. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02366.x. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

The chemotaxis-like Che1 pathway has an indirect role in adhesive cell properties
of Azospirillum brasilense.

Siuti P(1), Green C, Edwards AN, Doktycz MJ, Alexandre G.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.

The Azospirillum brasilense chemotaxis-like Che1 signal transduction pathway was 
recently shown to modulate changes in adhesive cell surface properties that, in
turn, affect cell-to-cell aggregation and flocculation behaviors rather than
flagellar-mediated chemotaxis. Attachment to surfaces and root colonization may
be functions related to flocculation. Here, the conditions under which A.
brasilense wild-type Sp7 and che1 mutant strains attach to abiotic and biotic
surfaces were examined using in vitro attachment and biofilm assays combined with
atomic force microscopy and confocal microscopy. The nitrogen source available
for growth is found to be a major modulator of surface attachment by A.
brasilense and could be promoted in vitro by lectins, suggesting that it depends 
on interaction with surface-exposed residues within the extracellular matrix of
cells. However, Che1-dependent signaling is shown to contribute indirectly to
surface attachment, indicating that distinct mechanisms are likely underlying
flocculation and attachment to surfaces in A. brasilense.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22092709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 25;415(3):472-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.097. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Osterix is regulated by Erk1/2 during osteoblast differentiation.

Choi YH(1), Gu YM, Oh JW, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Osterix (Osx) is a novel zinc finger-containing transcription factor that is
essential for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation in bone homeostasis. 
The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases are a group of evolutionarily
conserved proline-directed protein serine/threonine kinases that are activated in
response to a variety of extracellular stimuli and mediate signal transduction
from the cell surface to the nucleus. Erk1/2 plays essential roles in osteoblast 
differentiation and in supporting osteoclastogenesis, but the precise molecular
signaling mechanisms between Osterix and Erk1/2 are not known. We therefore
focused on the relationship between Osterix and Erk1/2 during osteoblast
differentiation because BMP signaling induces Erk activation in osteoblasts. We
investigated the role of the MAPK pathway in regulating protein levels and
transcriptional functions of Osterix. We found that Erk activation by
overexpression of constitutively active MEK increased the mRNA and protein levels
of Osterix and enhanced the transcriptional activity of Osterix, whereas U0126,
an inhibitor of MEK, suppressed the protein levels of Osterix and the
transcriptional activity. Also, overexpression of constitutively active MEK
stabilized Osterix protein. These results suggest that Erk1/2 regulates a major
transcription factor, Osterix, during osteoblast differentiation by increasing
its protein stability and transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22056560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2011 Sep;40(5):467-74.

[Effects of mycophenolic acid on human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao WJ(1), Liu LZ, Lai XY, Wang C, Yu XH, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. caoweijie2003@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of mycophenolic acid (MPA) on the
proliferation and differentiation of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs).
METHODS: MSCs were treated with MPA at the concentration of 1 µ mol/L, 10 µ
mol/L, 50 µ mol/L, and 100 µ mol/L, respectively. Cell proliferation was analyzed
using CCK-8 method. Apoptosis was detected by PI/Annexin V assay kit. The mRNA
expression of inosine-5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) in MSCs was analyzed
by RT-PCR. Osteogenic differentiation was analyzed by Von Kossa staining, Ca(2+) 
quantification and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In the range of 1 µ mol/L to 100 µ mol/L, MPA caused a significant
subdued proliferation rate of MSCs in a concentration-and time-dependent manner
by guanosine depletion, and PI/Annexin staining showed no apoptosis induced by
MPA. RT-PCR results showed that MSCs expressed both IMPDH I and IMPDH II. von
Kossa staining and Ca(2+) quantification indicated that MPA inhibited osteogenic 
differentiation of MSCs, and real-time PCR detected a dose-dependent decrease in 
expression of Osteopontin and BMP-2. Further investigation showed that MPA
down-regulated the expression of Runx2 and Osterix.
CONCLUSION: MPA can inhibit the proliferation of MSCs by guanosine depletion in a
concentration-and time-dependent manner and inhibit the osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs by down-regulation of the expression of Runx2 and
Osterix.

PMID: 21984147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024638. Epub 2011 Sep 13.

NELL-1, an osteoinductive factor, is a direct transcriptional target of Osterix.

Chen F(1), Zhang X, Sun S, Zara JN, Zou X, Chiu R, Culiat CT, Ting K, Soo C.

Author information: 
(1)Dental and Craniofacial Research Institute, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, United States of America.

NELL-1 is a novel secreted protein associated with premature fusion of cranial
sutures in craniosynostosis that has been found to promote osteoblast cell
differentiation and mineralization. Our previous study showed that Runx2, the key
transcription factor in osteoblast differentiation, transactivates the NELL-1
promoter. In this study, we evaluated the regulatory involvement and mechanisms
of Osterix, an essential transcription factor of osteoblasts, in NELL-1 gene
expression and function. Promoter analysis showed a cluster of potential Sp1
sites (Sp1/Osterix binding sites) within approximately 70 bp (from -71 to -142)
of the 5' flanking region of the human NELL-1 transcriptional start site.
Luciferase activity in our NELL-1 promoter reporter systems was significantly
decreased in Saos-2 cells when Osterix was overexpressed. Mutagenesis study
demonstrated that this suppression is mediated by the Sp1 sites. The binding
specificity of Osterix to these Sp1 sites was confirmed in Saos-2 cells and
primary human osteoblasts by EMSA in vitro and ChIP assay in vivo. ChIP assay
also showed that Osterix downregulated NELL-1 by affecting binding of RNA
polymerase II to the NELL-1 promoter, but not by competing with Runx2 binding to 
the OSE2 sites. Moreover, NELL-1 mRNA levels were significantly decreased when
Osterix was overexpressed in Saos-2, U2OS, Hela and Glioma cells.
Correspondingly, knockdown of Osterix increased NELL-1 transcription and
osteoblastic differentiation in both Saos-2 cells and primary human osteoblasts. 
These results suggest that Osterix is a direct transcriptional regulator with
repressive effect on NELL-1 gene expression, contributing to a delicate balance
of regulatory effects on NELL-1 transcription with Runx2, and may play a crucial 
role in osteoblast differentiation and mineralization. These findings also extend
our understanding of the molecular mechanism of Runx2, Osterix, and NELL-1 and
demonstrate their crosstalk during osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3172249
PMID: 21931789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Dec;219(2):440-7. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.08.033. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

HGF/c-Met signalling promotes Notch3 activation and human vascular smooth muscle 
cell osteogenic differentiation in vitro.

Liu Y(1), Wang T, Yan J, Jiagbogu N, Heideman DA, Canfield AE, Alexander MY.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Group, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Vascular calcification is a major clinical problem and elucidating
the underlying mechanism is important to improve the prognosis of patients with
cardiovascular disease. We aimed to elucidate the role and mechanism of action of
Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF)/c-Met signalling in vascular calcification and
establish whether blocking this pathway could prevent mineralisation of vascular 
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in vitro.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrate increased HGF secretion and c-Met
up-regulation and phosphorylation during VSMC osteogenic differentiation.
Adenoviral-mediated over-expression of HGF (AdHGF) in VSMCs accelerated
mineralisation, shown by alizarin red staining, and significantly increased
(45)Calcium incorporation (1.96 ± 0.54-fold [P < 0.05]) and alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP) activity (3.01 ± 0.8-fold [P < 0.05]) compared to controls. AdHGF also
significantly elevated mRNA expression of bone-related proteins, Runx2,
osteocalcin, BMP2 and osterix in VSMCs. AdHGF-accelerated mineralisation
correlated with increased Akt phosphorylation, nuclear translocation of Notch3
intracellular domain (N3IC) and up-regulation of the Notch3 target protein, HES1.
In contrast, adenoviral-mediated over-expression of the HGF antagonist, NK4,
markedly attenuated VSMC mineralisation, and reduced c-Met phosphorylation, Akt
activation and HES1 protein expression compared to AdHGF-treated cells.
Furthermore, the Notch inhibitor, DAPT, attenuated N3IC nuclear translocation and
AdHGF-induced mineralisation.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate HGF induces VSMC osteogenic differentiation via
c-Met/Akt/Notch3 signalling, highlighting these pathways as potential targets for
intervention of vascular calcification.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3925803
PMID: 21920521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jun;227(6):2677-85. doi: 10.1002/jcp.23010.

The transcription factor osterix (SP7) regulates BMP6-induced human osteoblast
differentiation.

Zhu F(1), Friedman MS, Luo W, Woolf P, Hankenson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The transcription factor osterix (Sp7) is essential for osteoblastogenesis and
bone formation in mice. Genome wide association studies have demonstrated that
osterix is associated with bone mineral density in humans; however, the molecular
significance of osterix in human osteoblast differentiation is poorly described. 
In this study we have characterized the role of osterix in human mesenchymal
progenitor cell (hMSC) differentiation. We first analyzed temporal microarray
data of primary hMSC treated with bone morphogenetic protein-6 (BMP6) using
clustering to identify genes that are associated with osterix expression. Osterix
clusters with a set of osteoblast-associated extracellular matrix (ECM) genes,
including bone sialoprotein (BSP) and a novel set of proteoglycans, osteomodulin 
(OMD), osteoglycin, and asporin. Maximum expression of these genes is dependent
upon both the concentration and duration of BMP6 exposure. Next we overexpressed 
and repressed osterix in primary hMSC using retrovirus. The enforced expression
of osterix had relatively minor effects on osteoblastic gene expression
independent of exogenous BMP6. However, in the presence of BMP6, osterix
overexpression enhanced expression of the aforementioned ECM genes. Additionally,
osterix overexpression enhanced BMP6 induced osteoblast mineralization, while
inhibiting hMSC proliferation. Conversely, osterix knockdown maintained hMSC in
an immature state by decreasing expression of these ECM genes and decreasing
mineralization and hMSC proliferation. Overexpression of the osterix regulated
gene OMD with retrovirus promoted mineralization of hMSC. These results suggest
that osterix is necessary, but not sufficient for hMSC osteoblast
differentiation. Osterix regulates the expression of a set of ECM proteins which 
are involved in terminal osteoblast differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3241898
PMID: 21898406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Nov;22(21):3955-61. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-04-0356. Epub 2011
Aug 31.

MiR-637 maintains the balance between adipocytes and osteoblasts by directly
targeting Osterix.

Zhang JF(1), Fu WM, He ML, Wang H, Wang WM, Yu SC, Bian XW, Zhou J, Lin MC, Lu G,
Poon WS, Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Ho Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400038, PR China.

Bone development is dynamically regulated by homeostasis, in which a balance
between adipocytes and osteoblasts is maintained. Disruption of this
differentiation balance leads to various bone-related metabolic diseases,
including osteoporosis. In the present study, a primate-specific microRNA
(miR-637) was found to be involved in the differentiation of human mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs). Our preliminary data indicated that miR-637 suppressed the
growth of hMSCs and induced S-phase arrest. Expression of miR-637 was increased
during adipocyte differentiation (AD), whereas it was decreased during osteoblast
differentiation (OS), which suggests miR-637 could act as a mediator of
adipoosteogenic differentiation. Osterix (Osx), a significant transcription
factor of osteoblasts, was shown to be a direct target of miR-637, which
significantly enhanced AD and suppressed OS in hMSCs through direct suppression
of Osx expression. Furthermore, miR-637 also significantly enhanced de novo
adipogenesis in nude mice. In conclusion, our data indicated that the expression 
of miR-637 was indispensable for maintaining the balance of adipocytes and
osteoblasts. Disruption of miR-637 expression patterns leads to irreversible
damage to the balance of differentiation in bone marrow.

PMCID: PMC3204058
PMID: 21880893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Nov;17(21-22):2833-43. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2011.0062.
Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Human amniotic fluid stem cells seeded in fibroin scaffold produce in vivo
mineralized matrix.

Maraldi T(1), Riccio M, Resca E, Pisciotta A, La Sala GB, Ferrari A, Bruzzesi G, 
Motta A, Migliaresi C, Marzona L, De Pol A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratories, Pathological Anatomy and Forensic Medicine,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. tullia.maraldi@unimore.it

This study investigated the potential of amniotic fluid stem cells (AFSCs) to
synthesize mineralized extracellular matrix (ECM) within different porous
scaffolds of collagen, poly-D,L-lactic acid (PDLLA), and silk fibroin. The AFSCs 
were initially differentiated by using an osteogenic medium in two-dimensional
culture, and expression of specific bone proteins and the physiologic mineral
production by the AFSCs were analyzed. In particular, during differentiation
process, AFSCs expressed proteins like Runt-related transcription factor 2
(Runx2), Osterix, Osteopontin, and Osteocalcin with a sequential expression,
analogous to those occurring during osteoblast differentiation, and produced
extracellular calcium stores. AFSCs were then cultured on three-dimensional (3D) 
scaffolds and evaluated for their ability to differentiate into osteoblastic
cells in vivo. Stem cells were cultured in vitro for 1 week in collagen, fibroin,
and PDLLA scaffolds. The effect of predifferentiation of the stem cells in
scaffolds on the subsequent bone formation in vivo was determined in a rat
subcutaneous model. With the addition of a third dimension, osteogenic
differentiation and mineralized ECM production by AFSCs were significantly
higher. This study demonstrated the strong potential of AFSCs to produce 3D
mineralized bioengineered constructs in vivo and suggests that fibroin may be an 
effective scaffold material for functional repair of critical size bone defects.

PMID: 21864161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan;20(1):11-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.141. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

EMQN best practice guidelines for the laboratory diagnosis of osteogenesis
imperfecta.

van Dijk FS(1), Byers PH, Dalgleish R, Malfait F, Maugeri A, Rohrbach M, Symoens 
S, Sistermans EA, Pals G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. fs.vandijk2@vumc.nl

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) comprises a group of inherited disorders
characterized by bone fragility and increased susceptibility to fractures.
Historically, the laboratory confirmation of the diagnosis OI rested on cultured 
dermal fibroblasts to identify decreased or abnormal production of abnormal type 
I (pro)collagen molecules, measured by gel electrophoresis. With the discovery of
COL1A1 and COL1A2 gene variants as a cause of OI, sequence analysis of these
genes was added to the diagnostic process. Nowadays, OI is known to be
genetically heterogeneous. About 90% of individuals with OI are heterozygous for 
causative variants in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes. The majority of remaining
affected individuals have recessively inherited forms of OI with the causative
variants in the more recently discovered genes CRTAP, FKBP10, LEPRE1,PLOD2, PPIB,
SERPINF1, SERPINH1 and SP7, or in other yet undiscovered genes. These advances in
the molecular genetic diagnosis of OI prompted us to develop new guidelines for
molecular testing and reporting of results in which we take into account that
testing is also used to 'exclude' OI when there is suspicion of non-accidental
injury. Diagnostic flow, methods and reporting scenarios were discussed during an
international workshop with 17 clinicians and scientists from 11 countries and
converged in these best practice guidelines for the laboratory diagnosis of OI.

PMCID: PMC3234509
PMID: 21829228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Acta Biomater. 2011 Dec;7(12):4210-21. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2011.07.019. Epub
2011 Jul 29.

In search of representative models of human bone-forming cells for
cytocompatibility studies.

Saldaña L(1), Bensiamar F, Boré A, Vilaboa N.

Author information: 
(1)CIBER de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN), Madrid,
Spain.

Osteosarcoma-derived cells have been routinely used for studying osteoblastic
functions, but it remains unclear to what extent they mimic the behavior of
primary osteoblasts in the study of cells and materials interactions. This study 
reports comparatively on the responses of three human osteosarcoma cell lines,
MG-63, Saos-2 and U-2 OS, and human primary osteoblasts cultured on Ti6Al4V
surfaces or exposed to Ti particles. Phenotypic characterization of the cell
lines revealed that Saos-2 cells and primary osteoblasts displayed similar
expression patterns of Cbfa1, SP7 and osteocalcin. Unlike primary cells, the cell
lines expressed markers of undifferentiated cells, had high proliferative rates
and poor fibronectin matrix assembly. None of the three cell lines faithfully
reproduced the adhesive behavior of primary osteoblasts when cultured on Ti6Al4V 
surfaces or exposed to Ti particles. Differences in cell growth between the cell 
lines and primary osteoblasts cultured on Ti6Al4V surfaces were also observed. Ti
particles inhibited the growth of Saos-2 cells and primary osteoblasts to a
similar extent, while no such effect was observed in U-2 OS and MG-63 cells.
Saos-2 cells reproduced the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity profile of
primary osteoblasts cultured on metallic surfaces or exposed to particles.
Altogether, these results show that none of the osteoblast-like cells studied
perfectly mimic the behavior of human osteoblast cells (hOB) on Ti6Al4V surfaces 
or exposed to Ti particles. Saos-2 cells reproduce some of the hOB responses such
as the profile of enzymatic ALP activity when cultured on the surfaces or treated
with particles as well as cell growth inhibition when exposed to Ti particles.
Although in vitro cytocompatibility studies involve the evaluation of multiple
parameters, Saos-2 cells may be used as representative of human osteoblasts when 
these standard tests are evaluated.

Copyright © 2011 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 21827875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Bone. 2011 Oct;49(4):683-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2011.07.027. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

The transcriptional activity of osterix requires the recruitment of Sp1 to the
osteocalcin proximal promoter.

Niger C(1), Lima F, Yoo DJ, Gupta RR, Buo AM, Hebert C, Stains JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Maryland, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. cniger@umoa.umm.edu

The transcription factor osterix (Osx/Sp7) is required for osteogenic
differentiation and bone formation in vivo. While Osx can act at canonical Sp1
DNA-binding sites and/or interact with NFATc1 to cooperatively regulate
transcription in some osteoblast promoters, little is known about the molecular
details by which Osx regulates osteocalcin (OCN) transcription. We previously
identified in the OCN proximal promoter a minimal C/T-rich motif, termed OCN-CxRE
(connexin-response element) that binds Sp1 and Sp3 in a gap junction-dependent
manner. In the present study, we hypothesized that Osx could act via this
non-canonical Sp1/Sp3-binding element to regulate OCN transcription. OCN promoter
luciferase reporter assays show that Osx alone is an insufficient activator that 
requires Sp1, but not Sp3, to synergistically stimulate OCN promoter activity.
Moreover, promoter deletion analyses demonstrate that both the Sp1/Sp3-binding
OCN-CxRE (-70 to -57) and the -92 to -87 region of the OCN proximal promoter are 
critical for Osx/Sp1 synergistic activities. Our data show that Sp1 influences
Osx activity by enhancing Osx occupancy on the OCN promoter, perhaps via physical
interactions between the two transcription factors. Finally, alteration of the
expression of the gap junction protein connexin43 modulates the recruitment of
both Sp1 and Osx to the OCN promoter. In total, our data are strongly in support 
of Sp1 as an essential transcription factor required for Osx recruitment and
transactivation of the OCN promoter. Further, these data lend insight into a
mechanism by which alteration of connexin43 impacts osteogenesis in vitro and in 
vivo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3170016
PMID: 21820092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Pathol. 2011 Oct;179(4):1594-600. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.06.016. Epub
2011 Jul 30.

miR-125b regulates calcification of vascular smooth muscle cells.

Goettsch C(1), Rauner M, Pacyna N, Hempel U, Bornstein SR, Hofbauer LC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Bone Diseases, Technical University, 
Dresden, Germany.

Vascular calcification is a prominent feature of atherosclerosis and is closely
linked to osteoporosis. Cellular differentiation is regulated by various
microRNAs (miRs), including miR-125b, which is known to be involved in osteoblast
differentiation. However, no specific miR has been defined that modulates
vascular calcification. Herein, we assessed the impact of miR-125b in osteogenic 
transformation of vascular smooth muscle cells. Osteogenic transdifferentiation
of human coronary artery smooth muscle cells was induced by osteogenic medium and
enhanced the formation of mineralized matrix, resulting in a significantly higher
mineral deposition after 21 days. Increased expression of miR-125b was
time-dependent in human coronary artery smooth muscle cells and diminished during
osteogenic transdifferentiation. At day 21, miR-125b was significantly reduced
(-42%) compared with that in the untreated control. The expression of
miR-processing enzymes, RNase III endonucleases DICER1 and DROSHA, was also
decreased. Furthermore, inhibition of endogenous miR-125b promoted osteogenic
transdifferentiation, as measured by increased alkaline phosphatase activity and 
matrix mineralization. Expression analysis revealed the osteoblast transcription 
factor SP7 (osterix) as a target of miR-125b. In vivo, miR-125b was decreased in 
calcified aortas of apolipoprotein E knockout mice. In conclusion, our results
suggest that miR-125b is involved in vascular calcification in vitro and in vivo,
at least partially by targeting SP7. Evaluating the role of miRs in arterial
calcification in vivo may have important therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3181383
PMID: 21806957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr-Jun;24(2 Suppl):59-64.

Polylactide-polyglycolide resorbable plates stimulates adipose tissue-derived
stem cells towards osteoblasts differentiation.

Sollazzo V(1), Lucchese A, Palmieri A, Zollino I, Iaccarino C, Carnevali G,
Pezzetti F, Brunelli G, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Polylactide, polyglycolide materials or devices have been utilized routinely
during maxillofacial, craniofacial, and orthopaedic reconstructive surgical
procedures.(1) These materials combine the benefits of rigid fixation with the
advantages of biodegradation, avoiding the need for implant removal and
minimizing the risk of other complications.(2) To study how polylactide,
polyglycolide acids plates (PLPG plates) can induce osteoblast differentiation
and proliferation in mesenchymal stem cells, the expression levels of bone
related genes (RUNX2, SP7, ALPL, SPP1, COL1A1, COL3A1 and FOSL1) and mesenchymal 
stem cells marker (ENG) were measured in adipose derived stem cells (ADSCs) and
normal osteoblast (NO) cultivated on PLPG plates after 15 and 30 days of
treatment using real time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction.
Significantly differentially expressed genes among ADSCs and NO were SP7, ENG,
FOSL1, RUNX, ALPL and SPP1 in the first 15 days of treatment and SP7, ENG FOSL1, 
COL3A1 COL1A1, SPP1 and ALPL after 30 days. The present study demonstrated that
PLPG plates strongly influences the behavior of ADSCs in vitro by enhancing
proliferation, differentiation and deposition of matrix.

PMID: 21781447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 5;411(3):637-41. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.009. Epub 2011 Jul 12.

Akt phosphorylates and regulates the osteogenic activity of Osterix.

Choi YH(1), Jeong HM, Jin YH, Li H, Yeo CY, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Osterix (Osx), a zinc-finger transcription factor is required for osteoblast
differentiation and new bone formation during embryonic development. Akt is a
member of the serine/threonine-specific protein kinase and plays important roles 
in osteoblast differentiation. The function of Osterix can be also modulated by
post-translational modification. But, the precise molecular signaling mechanisms 
between Osterix and Akt are not known. In this study, we investigated the
potential regulation of Osterix function by Akt in osteoblast differentiation. We
found that Akt phosphorylates Osterix and that Akt activation increases protein
stability, osteogenic activity and transcriptional activity of Osterix. We also
found that BMP-2 increases the protein level of Osterix in an Akt
activity-dependent manner. These results suggest that Akt activity enhances the
osteogenic function of Osterix, at least in part, through protein stabilization
and that BMP-2 regulates the osteogenic function of Osterix, at least in part,
through Akt.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Curr Biol. 2011 Jul 26;21(14):1204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.06.044. Epub 2011
Jul 14.

A secreted fungal effector of Glomus intraradices promotes symbiotic biotrophy.

Kloppholz S(1), Kuhn H, Requena N.

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbial Interactions, Botanical Institute, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Hertzstrasse 16, D-76187 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2011 Sep;9(9):629.
    Curr Biol. 2011 Jul 26;21(14):R550-2.

Biotrophic fungi interacting with plants establish long-term relationships with
their hosts to fulfill their life cycles. In contrast to necrotrophs, they need
to contend with the defense mechanisms of the plant to develop within the host
and feed on living cells. It is generally accepted that microbial pathogens
produce and deliver a myriad of effector proteins to hijack the cellular program 
of their hosts. Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi are the most widespread
biotrophs of plant roots. We investigated whether AM fungi use effector proteins 
to short-circuit the plant defense program. Here we show that Glomus intraradices
secretes a protein, SP7, that interacts with the pathogenesis-related
transcription factor ERF19 in the plant nucleus. ERF19 is highly induced in roots
by the fungal pathogen Colletotrichum trifolii as well as by several fungal
extracts, but only transiently during mycorrhiza colonization. When
constitutively expressed in roots, SP7 leads to higher mycorrhization while
reducing the levels of C. trifolii-mediated defense responses. Furthermore,
expression of SP7 in the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae attenuates root
decay symptoms. Taken together, these results suggest that SP7 is an effector
that contributes to develop the biotrophic status of AM fungi in roots by
counteracting the plant immune program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21757354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;12(4):2543-55. doi: 10.3390/ijms12042543. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

An oligodeoxynucleotide with promising modulation activity for the proliferation 
and activation of osteoblast.

Feng Z(1), Shen Y, Wang L, Cheng L, Wang J, Li Q, Shi W, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, School of Stomatology, Jilin University, 1500
Qinghua Road, Changchun 130021, China; E-Mails: fzy00@sina.com (Z.F.);
33817805@qq.com (J.W.).

The paper explored the regulatory role of oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) with
specific sequences in the proliferation and activation of osteoblast, using human
osteoblast-like cell line MG 63 as the model. Through the administration of ODNs 
to MG 63 cells at a concentration of 1.0 µg/mL, ODN MT01 with positive effects on
proliferation and activation of osteoblast was selected from 11 different ODNs by
methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity 
measurement. To get a deeper insight into the molecular mechanism, effects of ODN
MT01 treatment on the expression level of Sp7, runx-2, collagen-I,
osteoprotegerin (OPG) and RANK ligand (RANKL) were determined using quantitative 
real time PCR and Western blotting. Remarkably, the mRNA and protein expression
levels of Sp7, runx-2, collagen-I and OPG were improved after ODN MT01 treatment.
Meanwhile, the protein expression level of RANKL was dramatically decreased.
These results suggested that ODN MT01 had a significant impact in facilitating
osteogenic proliferation and activation, and provided a direct evidence for the
notion that single strand ODN could regulate the balance of bone formation and
resorption, and thus was of great potential in the rebuilding of alveolar bone.

PMCID: PMC3127133
PMID: 21731457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Bone Miner Metab. 2012 Jan;30(1):69-77. doi: 10.1007/s00774-011-0284-6. Epub
2011 Jun 14.

The identification of novel mutations in COL1A1, COL1A2, and LEPRE1 genes in
Chinese patients with osteogenesis imperfecta.

Zhang ZL(1), Zhang H, Ke YH, Yue H, Xiao WJ, Yu JB, Gu JM, Hu WW, Wang C, He JW, 
Fu WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Bone Disease and Genetics Research Unit, Department of Osteoporosis 
and Bone Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's
Hospital, Shanghai, 600 Yi-Shan Rd, Shanghai 200233, People's Republic of China. 
ZZL2002@medmail.com.cn

Dominant inheritance of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by mutations in
COL1A1 or COL1A2, the genes that encode type I collagen, and CRTAP, LEPRE1, PPIB,
FKBP10, SERPINH1, and SP7 mutations were recently detected in a minority of
patients with autosomal recessive OI. However, these findings have been mostly
restricted to Western populations. The proportion of mutations and the
correlations between genotype and phenotype in Chinese patients with OI are
completely unknown. In this study, mutation analyses were performed for COL1A1,
COL1A2, CRTAP, and LEPRE1 in a cohort of 58 unrelated Chinese patients with OI;
the relationship between collagen type I mutations and clinical features was
examined. A total of 56 heterozygous mutations were identified in COL1A1 and
COL1A2, including 43 mutations in COL1A1 and 13 mutations in COL1A2. Among the 56
causative COL1A1 and COL1A2 mutations, 24 novel mutations were found, and 25
(44.6%) resulted in the substitution of a glycine within the Gly-X-Y triplet
domain of the triple helix. Compared with COL1A1 haploinsufficiency (n = 23),
patients with mutations affecting glycine residues had a severe skeletal
phenotype. In patients 18 years of age or older, on average patients with COL1A1 
haploinsufficiency were taller and had higher femoral neck bone mineral density
than with patients with helical mutations. Interestingly, we found two novel
compound heterozygous mutations in the LEPRE1 gene in two unrelated families with
autosomal recessive OI. Although the genotype-phenotype correlation is still
unclear, our findings are useful to understand the genetic basis of Chinese
patients with OI.

PMID: 21667357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2011 Nov;108(11):2727-35. doi: 10.1002/bit.23227. Epub 2011
Jun 21.

Osteogenic response to BMP-2 of hMSCs grown on apatite-coated scaffolds.

Davis HE(1), Case EM, Miller SL, Genetos DC, Leach JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, UC Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

Osteoconductive materials play a critical role in promoting integration with
surrounding bone tissue and resultant bone repair in vivo. However, the impact of
3D osteoconductive substrates coupled with soluble signals on progenitor cell
differentiation is not clear. In this study, we investigated the influence of
bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) concentration on the osteogenic
differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) when seeded in carbonated
apatite-coated polymer scaffolds. Mineralized scaffolds were more hydrophilic and
adsorbed more BMP-2 compared to non-mineralized scaffolds. Changes in alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity within stimulated hMSCs were dependent on the dose of 
BMP-2 and the scaffold composition. We detected more cell-secreted calcium on
mineralized scaffolds at all time points, and higher BMP-2 concentrations
resulted in increased ALP and calcium levels. RUNX2 and IBSP gene expression
within hMSCs was affected by both substrate and soluble signals, SP7 by soluble
factors, and SPARC by substrate-mediated cues. The present data indicate that a
combination of apatite and BMP-2 do not simply enhance the osteogenic response of
hMSCs, but act through multiple pathways that may be both substrate- and growth
factor-mediated. Thus, multiple signaling strategies will likely be necessary to 
achieve optimal bone regeneration.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3178749
PMID: 21656707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):30071-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.253518. Epub
2011 Jun 7.

Myocyte enhancer factor 2c, an osteoblast transcription factor identified by
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-enhanced mineralization.

Stephens AS(1), Stephens SR, Hobbs C, Hutmacher DW, Bacic-Welsh D, Woodruff MA,
Morrison NA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Queensland,
Australia.

Rapid mineralization of cultured osteoblasts could be a useful characteristic in 
stem cell-mediated therapies for fracture and other orthopedic problems. Dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) is a small amphipathic solvent molecule capable of stimulating
cell differentiation. We report that, in primary human osteoblasts, DMSO
dose-dependently enhanced the expression of osteoblast differentiation markers
alkaline phosphatase activity and extracellular matrix mineralization.
Furthermore, similar DMSO-mediated mineralization enhancement was observed in
primary osteoblast-like cells differentiated from mouse mesenchymal cells derived
from fat, a promising source of starter cells for cell-based therapy. Using a
convenient mouse pre-osteoblast model cell line MC3T3-E1, we further investigated
this phenomenon showing that numerous osteoblast-expressed genes were elevated in
response to DMSO treatment and correlated with enhanced mineralization. Myocyte
enhancer factor 2c (Mef2c) was identified as the transcription factor most
induced by DMSO, among the numerous DMSO-induced genes, suggesting a role for
Mef2c in osteoblast gene regulation. Immunohistochemistry confirmed expression of
Mef2c in osteoblast-like cells in mouse mandible, cortical, and trabecular bone. 
shRNAi-mediated Mef2c gene silencing resulted in defective osteoblast
differentiation, decreased alkaline phosphatase activity, and matrix
mineralization and knockdown of osteoblast specific gene expression, including
osteocalcin and bone sialoprotein. A flow on knockdown of bone-specific
transcription factors, Runx2 and osterix by shRNAi knockdown of Mef2c, suggests
that Mef2c lies upstream of these two important factors in the cascade of gene
expression in osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3191047
PMID: 21652706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2011 Sep;77(3):590-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01139.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Soil factors exhibit greater influence than bacterial inoculation on alfalfa
growth and nitrogen fixation.

Neumann U(1), Kosier B, Jahnke J, Priefer UB, Al-Halbouni D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil Ecology, Institute of Biology I, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany.

In order to study the effects of soil factors and bacterial inoculation on
alfalfa (Medicago sativa), plants were inoculated with Ensifer meliloti L33 and
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 in pot experiments using two different soils
separately as well as in a mixture. One soil was contaminated with chemical waste
products; the other was an arable soil. Soil factors, including the availability 
of macro- and micronutrients as well as carbon and nitrogen contents, were found 
to exhibit a much greater influence on the growth of alfalfa than any of the
inoculations. In contaminated soil, the shoot and root growth of alfalfa was
decreased and nodules were diminished and ineffective. Bacterial inoculations did
not significantly improve this hostile growth environment. However, in a mixture 
(44% arable, 22% contaminated soil, 34% vermiculite), growth conditions for
alfalfa were improved so that shoot dry weight and nodule numbers increased up to
100- and 20-fold, respectively, compared with the contaminated soil. For the
strain L33, its persistence in the rhizosphere was correlated to the presence of 
its host plant, but its dynamics were influenced by competition with indigenous
rhizobia. The strain Sp7, once provided with a suitable soil, was not dependent
on the plant's rhizosphere, but it enhanced the performance of L33 and native
rhizobia.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21627671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Sep;70(9):1684-91. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.144774. Epub 2011
May 27.

Monosodium urate monohydrate crystals inhibit osteoblast viability and function: 
implications for development of bone erosion in gout.

Chhana A(1), Callon KE, Pool B, Naot D, Watson M, Gamble GD, McQueen FM, Cornish 
J, Dalbeth N.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Research Group, Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland,
New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Bone erosion is a common manifestation of chronic tophaceous gout.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects of monosodium urate monohydrate (MSU)
crystals on osteoblast viability and function.
METHODS: The MTT assay and flow cytometry were used to assess osteoblast cell
viability in the MC3T3-E1 and ST2 osteoblast-like cell lines, and primary rat and
primary human osteoblasts cultured with MSU crystals. Quantitative real-time PCR 
and von Kossa stained mineralised bone formation assays were used to assess the
effects of MSU crystals on osteoblast differentiation using MC3T3-E1 cells. The
numbers of osteoblasts and bone lining cells were quantified in bone samples from
patients with gout.
RESULTS: MSU crystals rapidly reduced viability in all cell types in a
dose-dependent manner. The inhibitory effect on cell viability was independent of
crystal phagocytosis and was not influenced by differing crystal length or
addition of serum. Long-term culture of MC3T3-E1 cells with MSU crystals showed a
reduction in mineralisation and decreased mRNA expression of genes related to
osteoblast differentiation such as Runx2, Sp7 (osterix), Ibsp (bone
sialoprotein), and Bglap (osteocalcin). Fewer osteoblast and lining cells were
present on bone directly adjacent to gouty tophus than bone unaffected by tophus 
in patients with gout.
CONCLUSIONS: MSU crystals have profound inhibitory effects on osteoblast
viability and differentiation. These data suggest that bone erosion in gout
occurs at the tophus-bone interface through alteration of physiological bone
turnover, with both excessive osteoclast formation, and reduced osteoblast
differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells.

PMID: 21622970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jun;155A(6):1414-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33998. Epub 2011
May 12.

Type 1 collagenopathy presenting with a Russell-Silver phenotype.

Parker MJ(1), Deshpande C, Rankin J, Wilson LC, Balasubramanian M, Hall CM,
Wagner BE, Pollitt R, Dalton A, Bishop NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Services, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, UK. michael.parker@sch.nhs.uk

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous group of inherited disorders of
bone formation, resulting in low bone mass and an increased propensity to
fracture. It exhibits a broad spectrum of clinical severity, ranging from
multiple fractures in utero and perinatal death, to normal adult stature and low 
fracture incidence. Extra-skeletal features of OI include blue sclera, hearing
loss, skin hyperlaxity, joint hyperextensibility, and dentinogenesis imperfecta. 
The proa1(I) and proa2(I) chains of collagen 1 are encoded by the COL1A1 and
COL1A2 genes, respectively; quantitative or qualitative defects in type I
collagen synthesis usually manifest as types of OI or some sub-types of EDS. The 
majority of patients (about 90%) with a clinical diagnosis of OI have a mutation 
in the COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes, which shows an autosomal dominant pattern of
inheritance. Six other genes, CRTAP, LEPRE1, FKBP10, PP1B, SP7/Osterix (OSX), and
SERPINH1, are associated with autosomal recessive forms of OI. However, other,
rare phenotypes have also been described. There are many differential diagnoses
of the short, syndromic child, including chromosomal, single gene, and
multifactorial causes. However, one condition of particular relevance in the
context of this report is the Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS). As originally
described, the RSS is a very specific condition. However, it has subsequently
become an umbrella term for a heterogeneous group of conditions presenting with
short stature and triangular shape to the face. A significant proportion of these
are now believed to be due to imprinting defects at 11p15. However, the cause in 
many cases remains unknown. We describe two cases with a phenotypic overlap
between OI and RSS who both have COL1A1 mutations. Thus, a type 1 collagenopathy 
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of syndromic short stature.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21567925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Craniofac Surg. 2011 May;22(3):860-3. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e31820f7d34.

Biological effect of resorbable plates on normal osteoblasts and osteoblasts
derived from Pfeiffer syndrome.

Palmieri A(1), Zollino I, Clauser L, Lucchese A, Girardi A, Farinella F, Carinci 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Biodegradable fixation devices made of the polymers polylactide, polyglycolide
and their copolymers are used routinely during maxillofacial, craniofacial, and
orthopedic reconstructive surgical procedures, thanks to their property of
biodegradation that avoid the need for implant removal. In particular, they are
used in the treatment of craniosynostosis in pediatric patients affected by
Pfeiffer syndrome, where the resorption time of 1 year or less does not interfere
with the normal growth of the skull. To study the mechanism how
polylactide-polyglycolide (PLPG) acid plates can induce osteoblast
differentiation and proliferation in normal osteoblasts and in osteoblasts
derived from a patient with Pfeiffer syndrome, the expression levels of
bone-related genes were analyzed using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction. Osteoblasts grown on the PLPG acid plates resulted in significant
upregulation of mRNA expression of many genes related to osteodifferentiation
during the treatment, indicating that polylactide, polyglycolide biopolymers
enhance proliferation, differentiation, and deposition of matrix in osteoblasts. 
This study also revealed some differences in gene expression between normal
osteoblasts and osteoblasts derived from patients with Pfeiffer syndrome,
cultivated on PLPG acid plates.

PMID: 21558934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Leukemia. 2011 Jul;25(7):1174-81. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.43. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

A novel role for CCL3 (MIP-1a) in myeloma-induced bone disease via osteocalcin
downregulation and inhibition of osteoblast function.

Vallet S(1), Pozzi S, Patel K, Vaghela N, Fulciniti MT, Veiby P, Hideshima T,
Santo L, Cirstea D, Scadden DT, Anderson KC, Raje N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Upregulation of cytokines and chemokines is a frequent finding in multiple
myeloma (MM). CCL3 (also known as MIP-1a) is a pro-inflammatory chemokine, levels
of which in the MM microenvironment correlate with osteolytic lesions and tumor
burden. CCL3 and its receptors, CCR1 and CCR5, contribute to the development of
bone disease in MM by supporting tumor growth and regulating osteoclast (OC)
differentiation. In this study, we identify inhibition of osteoblast (OB)
function as an additional pathogenic mechanism in CCL3-induced bone disease.
MM-derived and exogenous CCL3 represses mineralization and osteocalcin production
by primary human bone marrow stromal cells and HS27A cells. Our results suggest
that CCL3 effects on OBs are mediated by ERK activation and subsequent
downregulation of the osteogenic transcription factor osterix. CCR1 inhibition
reduced ERK phosphorylation and restored both osterix and osteocalcin expression 
in the presence of CCL3. Finally, treating SCID-hu mice with a small molecule
CCR1 inhibitor suggests an upregulation of osteocalcin expression along with OC
downregulation. Our results show that CCL3, in addition to its known catabolic
activity, reduces bone formation by inhibiting OB function, and therefore
contributes to OB/OC uncoupling in MM.

PMCID: PMC4142423
PMID: 21403648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Toxicon. 2011 May;57(6):851-60. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2011.02.024. Epub 2011 Mar
2.

Umbelliferone induces changes in the structure and pharmacological activities of 
Bn IV, a phospholipase A(2) isoform isolated from Bothrops neuwiedi.

Toyama Dde O(1), Diz Filho EB, Cavada BS, da Rocha BA, de Oliveira SC, Cotrim CA,
Soares VC, Delatorre P, Marangoni S, Toyama MH.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde, Universidade Presbiteriana
Mackenzie, São Paulo, Brazil. mhtjpn@yahoo.com

In this paper was demonstrated that umbelliferone induces changes in structure
and pharmacological activities of Bn IV, a lysine 49 secretory phospholipase A(2)
(sPLA2) from Bothrops neuwiedi. Incubation of Bn IV with umbelliferone virtually 
abolished platelet aggregation, edema, and myotoxicity induced by native Bn IV.
The amino acid sequence of Bn IV showed high sequence similarities with other
Lys49 sPLA2s from B. jararacussu (BthTx-I), B. pirajai (PrTx-I), and B. neuwiedi 
pauloensis (Bn SP6 and Bn SP7). This sPLA2 also has a highly conserved C-terminal
amino acid sequence, which has been shown as important for the pharmacological
activities of Lys49 sPLA2. Sequencing of Bn IV previously treated with
umbelliferone revealed modification of S(1) and S(20). Fluorescent spectral
analysis and circular dichroism (CD) studies showed that umbelliferone modified
the secondary structure of this protein. Moreover, the pharmacological activity
of Bn IV is driven by synergism of the C-terminal region with the a-helix motifs,
which are involved in substrate binding of the Asp49 and Lys49 residues of sPLA2 
and have a direct effect on the Ca(2+)-independent membrane damage of some
secretory snake venom PLA2. For Bn IV, these interactions are potentially
important for triggering the pharmacological activity of this sPLA2.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21376071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2010 Nov;39(6):682-4.

[Study of the expression level of zinc finger factor osterix associated with
fluoride bone injury].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma J(1), Song Y, Liu K.

Author information: 
(1)Dpartment of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the expression of zinc finger transcription factor Osterix 
(Osx) in different groups of floride (F) exposure in order to investigate its
role in the cause of fluoride bone injuries and ossification around bone.
METHODS: Western blot and fluorescence real-time quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were used to detect the
expressions of Osx mRNA and its protein in fibroblast, and the concentrations of 
F was 0.01, 0.1, 10 mg/L in experimental groups, and the control was 0 mg/L.
RESULTS: The levels of Osx protein in F exposure groups increased at first and
then decreased with the levels of F exposure, in which a significant increases
were found after fibroblasts were exposed to F for about 24-48 h in all
experimental groups (P < 0.05). In comparition with the 0 h F exposure group, the
trend of Osx was the same, the results of RT-PCR indicated that the levels of Osx
mRNA significantly increased in the group of 24-48 h F exposure groups (P <
0.05), overall, the trends of Osx mRNA level were similar to the trend of Osx
protein, which went up at first and then went down in each group.
CONCLUSION: The expressions of Osx factor in fibroblast could be promoted by
fluoride, which could play an important role in the process of the transformation
from fibroblasts to osteoblast induced by fluoride, and in the development of
fluoride bone injuries and ossification around bone.

PMID: 21351630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Mar;112(3):750-5. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22994.

Signaling networks in RUNX2-dependent bone development.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.
komorit@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

RUNX2 is an essential transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation and
chondrocyte maturation. SP7, another transcription factor, is required for
osteoblast differentiation. Major signaling pathways, including FGF, Wnt, and
IHH, also play important roles in skeletal development. RUNX2 regulates Sp7
expression at an early stage of osteoblast differentiation. FGF2 upregulates
Runx2 expression and activates RUNX2, and gain-of-function mutations of FGFRs
cause craniosynostosis and limb defect with upregulation of Runx2 expression. Wnt
signaling upregulates Runx2 expression and activates RUNX2, and RUNX2 induces
Tcf7 expression. IHH is required for Runx2 expression in osteoprogenitor cells
during endochondral bone development, and RUNX2 directly regulates Ihh expression
in chondrocytes. Thus, RUNX2 regulates osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte
maturation through the network with SP7 and with FGF, Wnt, and IHH signaling
pathways during skeletal development.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21328448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Microbiol Res. 2011 Dec 20;166(8):595-605. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2010.11.007.
Epub 2011 Jan 15.

cDNA-AFLP analysis of differential gene expression related to cell chemotactic
and encystment of Azospirillum brasilense.

Li H(1), Cui Y, Wu L, Tu R, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, PR China.

Our previous study indicated org35 was involved in chemotaxis and interacted with
nitrogen fixation transcriptional activator NifA via PAS domain. In order to
reveal the role of org35 in nitrogen regulation, the downstream target genes of
org35 were identified. We here report differentially expressed genes in org35
mutants comparing with wild type Sp7 by means of cDNA-AFLP. Four up-regulated
transcript-derived fragments (TDFs) homologues of chemotaxis transduction
proteins were found, including CheW, methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein and
response regulator CheY-like receiver. Three distinct TDFs (AB46, AB58 and AB63) 
were similar to PHB de-polymerase C-terminus, cell shape-determining protein and 
flagellin domain protein. And 11 TDFs showed similarities with signal
transduction proteins, including homologous protein of the nitrogen regulation
protein NtrY and nitrate/nitrite response regulator protein NarL. These data
suggested that the Azospirillum brasilense org35 was a multi-effecter and
involved in chemotaxis, cyst development and regulation of nitrogen fixation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21242066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Microbiology. 2011 Apr;157(Pt 4):988-99. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.046672-0. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor cotranscribed with its cognate
anti-sigma factor confers tolerance to NaCl, ethanol and methylene blue in
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Mishra MN(1), Kumar S, Gupta N, Kaur S, Gupta A, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, India.

Azospirillum brasilense, a plant-growth-promoting rhizobacterium, is exposed to
changes in its abiotic environment, including fluctuations in temperature,
salinity, osmolarity, oxygen concentration and nutrient concentration, in the
rhizosphere and in the soil. Since extra-cytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factors
play an important role in stress adaptation, we analysed the role of ECF sigma
factor (also known as RpoE or s(E)) in abiotic stress tolerance in A. brasilense.
An in-frame rpoE deletion mutant of A. brasilense Sp7 was carotenoidless and
slow-growing, and was sensitive to salt, ethanol and methylene blue stress.
Expression of rpoE in the rpoE deletion mutant complemented the defects in
growth, carotenoid biosynthesis and sensitivity to different stresses. Based on
data from reverse transcriptase-PCR, a two-hybrid assay and a pull-down assay, we
present evidence that rpoE is cotranscribed with chrR and the proteins
synthesized from these two overlapping genes interact with each other.
Identification of the transcription start site by 5' rapid amplification of cDNA 
ends showed that the rpoE-chrR operon was transcribed by two promoters. The
proximal promoter was less active than the distal promoter, whose consensus
sequence was characteristic of RpoE-dependent promoters found in
alphaproteobacteria. Whereas the proximal promoter was RpoE-independent and
constitutively expressed, the distal promoter was RpoE-dependent and strongly
induced in response to stationary phase and elevated levels of ethanol, salt,
heat and methylene blue. This study shows the involvement of RpoE in controlling 
carotenoid synthesis as well as in tolerance to some abiotic stresses in A.
brasilense, which might be critical in the adaptation, survival and proliferation
of this rhizobacterium in the soil and rhizosphere under stressful conditions.

PMID: 21233159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Microbiol Res. 2011 Dec 20;166(8):606-17. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2010.12.001. Epub
2011 Jan 13.

A CheR/CheB fusion protein is involved in cyst cell development and chemotaxis in
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Wu L(1), Cui Y, Hong Y, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, PR China.

We here report the sequence and functional analysis of cstB of Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7. The predicted cstB contains C-terminal two PAS domains and
N-terminal part which has similarity with CheB-CheR fusion protein. cstB mutants 
had reduced swarming ability compared to that of A. brasilense wild-type strain, 
implying that cstB was involved in chemotaxis in A. brasilense. A microscopic
analysis revealed that cstB mutants developed mature cyst cells more quickly than
wild type, indicating that cstB is involved in cyst formation. cstB mutants were 
affected in colony morphology and the production of exopolysaccharides (EPS)
which are essential for A. brasilense cells to differentiate into cyst-like
forms. These observations suggested that cstB was a multi-effector involved in
cyst development and chemotaxis in A. brasilense.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21232929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Jun;19(6):1311-4. doi: 10.1038/oby.2010.324. Epub
2011 Jan 6.

BMD-associated variation at the Osterix locus is correlated with childhood
obesity in females.

Zhao J(1), Bradfield JP, Li M, Zhang H, Mentch FD, Wang K, Sleiman PM, Kim CE,
Glessner JT, Frackelton EC, Chiavacci RM, Berkowitz RI, Zemel BS, Hakonarson H,
Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed a number of genetic
variants robustly associated with bone mineral density (BMD) and/or osteoporosis.
Evidence from epidemiological and clinical studies has shown an association
between BMD and BMI, presumably as a consequence of bone loading. We investigated
the 23 previously published BMD GWAS-derived loci in the context of childhood
obesity by leveraging our existing genome-wide genotyped European American cohort
of 1106 obese children (BMI = 95th percentile) and 5997 controls (BMI < 95th
percentile). Evidence of association was only observed at one locus, namely
Osterix (SP7), with the G allele of rs2016266 being significantly
over-represented among childhood obesity cases (P = 2.85 × 10(-3)). When
restricting these analyses to each gender, we observed strong association between
rs2016266 and childhood obesity in females (477 cases and 2867 controls; P = 3.56
× 10(-4)), which survived adjustment for all tests applied. However, no evidence 
of association was observed among males. Interestingly, Osterix is the only GWAS 
locus uncovered to date that has also been previously implicated in the
determination of BMD in childhood. In conclusion, these findings indicate that a 
well established variant at the Osterix locus associated with increased BMD is
also associated with childhood obesity primarily in females.

PMID: 21212767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Sep;20(9):1539-47. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0279. Epub 2011 Feb
24.

Impact of zinc fingers and homeoboxes 3 on the regulation of mesenchymal stem
cell osteogenic differentiation.

Suehiro F(1), Nishimura M, Kawamoto T, Kanawa M, Yoshizawa Y, Murata H, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

We propose zinc fingers and homeoboxes 3 (ZHX3) as new osteogenic markers for
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). ZHX3 mRNA expression was upregulated within 1-6<U+2009>h
after incubation of MSCs in the osteogenic induction medium, and reached maximum 
levels after 24<U+2009>h of incubation. Two to 4 days later, ZHX3 mRNA levels had
decreased sharply. Maximal mRNA levels were 3- to 5-fold higher than those in the
undifferentiated state. In contrast, Runt-related transcription factor2 (RUNX2)
mRNA expression was downregulated at 2-4<U+2009>h after incubation, and levels were only
enhanced 1.4-fold after 12 and 24<U+2009>h of incubation. Further, Osterix mRNA levels
increased only 1.6-fold after 4 and 24<U+2009>h of incubation. Thus, ZHX3 expression may
be a better marker of MSC osteogenic differentiation than RUNX2 or Osterix
expression at the initial stage of differentiation. Knockdown of ZHX3 using 2
distinct small interfering RNA (siRNA) oligonucleotides had little effect on cell
morphology or on MSC proliferation, regardless of the differentiation state of
the cells. However, ZHX3 siRNAs suppressed Osterix, but not RUNX2 mRNA
expression, within 1<U+2009>h of osteogenic differentiation, and this suppression was
sustained for at least 24<U+2009>h. The 2 ZHX3 siRNAs also suppressed alkaline
phosphatase induction and matrix mineralization (assessed using alizarin red
staining), and, further, suppressed the calcium content of the cultures at a
later stage of differentiation (days 6-21). The effects of ZHX3 siRNAs on the
osteogenic differentiation were comparable to those of RUNX2 and Osterix siRNAs. 
These findings suggest that ZHX3 is involved in the switch from the
undifferentiated state of MSC to an osteogenic program, and that ZHX3 may be
useful as an early osteogenic differentiation marker.

PMID: 21174497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Hum Pathol. 2010 Dec;41(12):1788-93. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.06.008.

Expression of master regulatory genes controlling skeletal development in benign 
cartilage and bone forming tumors.

Dancer JY(1), Henry SP, Bondaruk J, Lee S, Ayala AG, de Crombrugghe B, Czerniak
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recent progress in skeletal molecular biology has led to the clarification of the
transcriptional mechanisms of chondroblastic and osteoblastic lineage
differentiation. Three master transcription factors-Sox9, Runx2, and Osterix-were
shown to play an essential role in determining the skeletal progenitor cells'
fate. The present study evaluates the expression of these factors in 4 types of
benign bone tumors-chondromyxoid fibroma, chondroblastoma, osteoid osteoma, and
osteoblastoma-using immunohistochemistry and tissue microarrays. Osteoid osteoma 
and osteoblastoma showed strong nuclear expression of Osterix and Runx2. In
contrast, only a few chondroblastomas showed positive nuclear expression of
Osterix. Strong nuclear expression of Sox9 was detected in all chondroblastomas, 
whereas nearly half of the osteoblastomas showed focal weak cytoplasmic
expression of Sox9.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4012830
PMID: 21078438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Dec 10;403(2):242-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.023. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

The effects of Sp7/Osterix gene silencing in the chondroprogenitor cell line,
ATDC5.

Omoteyama K(1), Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Division of Functional Morphology, Dental Research
Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13, Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. omoteyama@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

Chondrocytes are known to express Sp7/Osterix (Osx) to varying degrees, but the
role of Osx in chondrocytes is still unknown. In the current study, we
investigated the role of the Osx gene using the clonal mouse embryonic cell line 
ATDC5, which retains the properties of the chondroprogenitor. ATDC5 cells express
Osx; therefore, the effects of Osx gene silencing with shRNA lentiviral particles
on chondrocyte marker gene expression and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity
were investigated. At confluency, gene silencing down-regulated expression of the
Sox trio (Sox5, 6, 9), Dlx5 and Alp mRNA, as well as ALP enzyme activity. Bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) is known to induce Osx gene expression in
chondrocytes, and stimulation with BMP2 rescued Osx expression accompanied by
up-regulation of Alp expression and ALP enzyme activity in a dose-dependent
manner. To clarify the role of Osx in chondrocyte differentiation, cells induced 
to differentiate by 10µg/ml insulin for 21days were examined. Gene silencing
inhibited the expression of the hypertrophic chondrocyte marker gene, type X
collagen (Col X), and attenuated up-regulation of Dlx5 and Alp mRNA, as well as
ALP enzyme activity. Taken together, these results suggest that Osx is involved
in chondrogenic gene activation and is a positive regulator of the chondrocyte
differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21075078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 26;402(4):755-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.103. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Molecular mechanisms of the inhibitory effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on
osteoblast differentiation.

Bandow K(1), Maeda A, Kakimoto K, Kusuyama J, Shamoto M, Ohnishi T, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Field of Developmental Medicine, Kagoshima
University, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Sakuragaoka,
Kagoshima, Japan.

Osteoblasts express Toll like receptor (TLR) 4 and produce osteoclast-activating 
cytokines in response to the stimulation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). It has
recently been reported that LPS exerts an inhibitory effect on osteoblast
differentiation into osteocytes. However, the molecular mechanisms of this
inhibitory effect remain ambiguous. The downstream signals of TLR4 are mediated
by adaptor molecules including myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), leading
to the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), such as
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), whose activation by LPS requires
the upstream serine/threonine kinase, Cot/Tpl2. To determine the signal molecules
responsible for the inhibitory effects of LPS on osteoblast differentiation, we
examined the in vitro differentiation of the primary osteoblasts from myd88(-/-) 
and cot/tpl2(-/-) mice. The matrix mineralization by the wild-type and
cot/tpl2(-/-) osteoblasts was significantly inhibited by LPS, whereas that of
myd88(-/-) was not affected. During differentiation, LPS suppressed the mRNA
expression of runt related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), osterix (Sp7), and
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in the wild-type, but not in the
myd88(-/-) osteoblasts. The inhibitory effect of LPS on the mRNA expression of
these transcription factors was absent in the early phase but partially impaired 
in the late phase of differentiation in the cot/tpl2(-/-) osteoblasts. Thus, the 
inhibitory effect of LPS on osteoblast differentiation is Myd88-dependent,
whereas the degree of its requirement for Cot/Tpl2 varies depending on the
differentiation phase.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21036155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Biomaterials. 2011 Jan;32(3):760-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.09.042. Epub
2010 Oct 13.

Electroporation-mediated transfer of Runx2 and Osterix genes to enhance
osteogenesis of adipose stem cells.

Lee JS(1), Lee JM, Im GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang,
Republic of Korea.

In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that electroporation-mediated
transfer of Runx2, Osterix, or both genes enhances the in vitro and in vivo
osteogenesis from adipose stem cells (ASCs). ASCs were transfected with Runx2,
Osterix, or both genes using electroporation, and further cultured in monolayer
or in PLGA scaffold under osteogenic medium for 14 days, then analyzed for in
vitro osteogenic differentiation. Transfected ASC-PLGA scaffold hybrids were also
implanted on nude mice to test for in vivo ectopic bone formation. Runx2 and
Osterix genes were strongly expressed in ASCs transfected with each gene on day
7, decreasing rapidly on day 14. Runx2 protein was strongly expressed in ASCs
transfected with the Runx2 gene, while Osterix protein was strongly expressed in 
ASCs transfected with either or both Runx2 and Osterix genes. Overexpression of
Runx2 and Osterix significantly increased the gene expression of osteogenic
differentiation markers (alkaline phosphatase [ALP], osteocalcin [OCN], type I
collagen [COL1A1], and bone sialoprotein [BSP]) in ASCs. Transfection of Runx2
and Osterix genes enhanced the protein expression of OCN, type I collagen, and
BSP, as demonstrated by Western blot analysis, and ALP activity as well as
enhancing mineralization in the monolayer culture and ASC-PLGA scaffold hybrids. 
Runx2- or Osterix-transfected ASC-PLGA scaffold hybrids promoted bone formation
in nude mice after 6 weeks of in vivo implantation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20947160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Matrix Biol. 2010 Oct;29(8):701-6. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2010.09.002. Epub 2010
Oct 1.

Sp7/Osterix is involved in the up-regulation of the mouse pro-a1(V) collagen gene
(Col5a1) in osteoblastic cells.

Wu YF(1), Matsuo N, Sumiyoshi H, Yoshioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Matrix Medicine, Oita University, 1-1 Idaigaoka Hasama-machi,
Yufu, Oita 879-5593, Japan.

Sp7/Osterix, a transcription factor whose expression is restricted in
osteoblasts, belongs to the Sp family of transcription factor that bind to
G/C-rich sequences. Previous studies have identified a Sp1binding site in the
proximal promoter region of the mouse Col5a1 gene, but it did not activate or
repress this gene in a mouse fibroblast cell line and a human rhabdomyosarcoma
cell line. The purpose of the present study was to clarify the involvement of
Sp7/Osterix in the mouse Col5a1 gene. A functional analysis revealed that
mutation of the Sp1 binding site specifically decreased the promoter activity in 
osteoblastic cells. An overexpression of Sp7/Osterix significantly increased the 
promoter activity and the endogenous mRNA levels of the Col5a1 gene in
osteoblastic cells. Conversely, siRNA-mediated knockdown of Sp7/Osterix decreased
the promoter activity and the endogenous mRNA levels of the Col5a1 gene. These
effects on promoter activity were canceled when the mutant construct of Sp1
binding site was introduced. Consistent with these data, the experiments using an
osteoblast differentiation model showed increased promoter activity and
endogenous mRNA levels, along with increased Sp7/Osterix during differentiation. 
Therefore, type V collagen appears to be involved in bone formation.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Matrix Biology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20888414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Saudi Dent J. 2010 Oct;22(4):161-6. doi: 10.1016/j.sdentj.2010.07.007. Epub 2010 
Jul 17.

Engipore acts on human bone marrow stem cells.

Sollazzo V(1), Palmieri A, Girardi A, Farinella F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Corso Giovecca 203, 44100 Ferrara,
Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Porous HA scaffolds are promising materials for tissue engineering
because they offer a tridimensional support and serve as template for cell
proliferation and at last tissue formation. Engipore provide a natural 3D
scaffold with organic fibrous material in bone. However, how this material alters
osteoblast activity to promote bone formation is poorly understood.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To study how Engipore can induce osteoblast
differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells, the expression levels of bone related 
genes and mesenchymal stem cells marker were analyzed.
RESULTS: Engipore causes a significant induction of osteoblast transcriptional
factors like SP7 and RUNX2 and of the bone-related gene osteocalcin (BGLAP). The 
expression of CD105 was not significantly changed in stem cells treated with
Engipore with respect to untreated cells, while SSP1 (osteopontin) was
significantly down expressed thus reducing osteoclast activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The obtained results can be relevant to better understand the
molecular mechanism of bone regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3723274
PMID: 23960492  [PubMed]


237. Microbiol Res. 2011 Sep 20;166(6):458-67. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2010.08.006. Epub
2010 Sep 23.

A hybrid two-component system protein from Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 was
involved in chemotaxis.

Cui Y(1), Tu R, Wu L, Hong Y, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, PR China.

We here report the sequence and functional analysis of org35 of Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7, which was originally identified to be able to interact with NifA 
in yeast-two-hybrid system. The org35 encodes a hybrid two-component system
protein, including N-terminal PAS domains, a histidine kinase (HPK) domain and a 
response regulator (RR) domain in C-terminal. To determine the function of the
Org35, a deletion-insertion mutant in PAS domain [named Sp7353] and a
complemental strain Sp7353C were constructed. The mutant had reduced chemotaxis
ability compared to that of wild-type, and the complemental strain was similar to
the wild-type strain. These data suggested that the A. brasilense org35 played a 
key role in chemotaxis. Variants containing different domains of the org35 were
expressed, and the functions of these domains were studied in vitro.
Phosphorylation assays in vitro demonstrated that the HPK domain of Org35
possessed the autokinase activity and that the phosphorylated HPK was able to
transfer phosphate groups to the RR domain. The result indicated Org35 was a
phosphorylation-communicating protein.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20869221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2011 Apr;111(4):412-9. doi:
10.1016/j.tripleo.2010.05.012. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Transcription factor osterix modified bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells enhance 
callus formation during distraction osteogenesis.

Lai QG(1), Yuan KF, Xu X, Li DR, Li GJ, Wei FL, Yang ZJ, Luo SL, Tang XP, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Second Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, China.

This study was designed to investigate the effects of local delivery of bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs) with or without osterix (OSX) gene
transfected on bone regeneration in the distracted zone using a rabbit model of
mandibular lengthening. Fifty-four New Zealand white rabbits underwent
osteodistraction of the left mandible and were then randomly divided into group
A, group B, and group C (n = 18 for each group). At the end of distraction BMMSCs
transfected with OSX, autologous BMMSCs and physiological saline were injected
into the distraction gaps in groups A, B, and C, respectively. Nine animals from 
each group were humanely killed at 2 and 6 weeks after completion of distraction.
The distracted mandibles were harvested and processed for radiographic,
histological, and immunohistochemical examination. Excellent bone formation in
the distracted callus was observed in group A and group B; the former showed
better bone formation and highest bone mineral density (BMD), thickness of new
trabeculae (TNT, mm) and volumes of the newly formed bone area (NBV) in the
distraction zones. Group C animals showed poor bone formation in the distracted
callus when compared with groups A and B. Positive immunostaining of bone
sialoprotein (BSP) was observed in the distracted callus in all groups; however, 
BSP expression was much stronger in group A than in groups B and C. The results
of this study suggest transplantation of BMMSCs can promote bone formation in DO;
OSX-mediated ex vivo gene therapy was more effective during bone deposition and
callus formation in distraction osteogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20813560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Genetika. 2010 Jul;46(7):904-10.

[Localization of denitrification genes in plasmid DNA of bacteria Azospirillum
brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Petrova LP, Varshalomidze OÉ, Shelud'ko AV, Katsy EI.

In 85-Mda plasmid (p85) of plant-associated bacteria Azospirillum brasilense
Sp245 model strain, the genes encoding copper-containing nitrite reductase
(nirK); heterodimeric NO-reductase (norCB); NorQ and NorD proteins affecting
synthesis and (or) activation of NirK and (or) NO-reductase (norQD); catalytic
subunit I ofcytochrom c oxidase (CccoN); presumable NO sensor carrying two
hemeerythrine domains (orf181); and an enzyme required for synthesis of
presumable NO antagonist, homocystein (metC) were identified. In the same region 
of p85, orf293 encoding transcriptional regulator of LysR type, orf208 whose
protein product carries a formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase subunit E domain, and 
an orf164-encoding conservative secretory protein with unknown function were also
found. Localization of a set of denitrification genes in the plasmid DNA A.
brasilense Sp245 adjacent to IS elements ISAzba1 and ISAzba2 indicates potential 
mobility of these genes and high probability of their horizontal transfer among
populations of rhizospheric bacteria. A site homologous to p85 nirK-orf208-orf181
genes was detected in the 115 kb plasmid of A. brasilense Sp7 type strain.

PMID: 20795494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Jan;26(1):209-19. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.203.

Identification of the homeobox protein Prx1 (MHox, Prrx-1) as a regulator of
osterix expression and mediator of tumor necrosis factor a action in osteoblast
differentiation.

Lu X(1), Beck GR Jr, Gilbert LC, Camalier CE, Bateman NW, Hood BL, Conrads TP,
Kern MJ, You S, Chen H, Nanes MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, VA Medical Center, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a) promotes bone loss and inhibits bone formation.
Osterix (Osx, SP7) is a transcription factor required for osteoblast (OB)
differentiation because deletion results in a cartilaginous skeleton. We
previously described a TNF suppressor element in the Osx promoter that was used
to isolate nuclear proteins mediating TNF inhibition of OB differentiation.
Nuclear extracts from TNF-treated pre-OBs were incubated with the TNF suppressor 
element for protein pull-down, and tryptic fragments were analyzed by mass
spectrometry. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay confirmed eight bound
transcription factors. One protein, the paired related homeobox protein (Prx1),
had been shown previously to have a critical role in limb bud formation and
skeletal patterning. PCR revealed Prx1 expression in primary stromal cells
(MSCs), C3H10T1/2 cells, and MC3T3 preosteoblasts. TNF stimulated a 14-fold
increase in mRNA for Prx1, rapid cell accumulation in MC3T3 cells, and expression
in periosteal and trabecular lining cells in vivo. Transient expression of Prx
inhibited transcription of Osx and RUNX2. Expression of the Prx1b isoform or Prx2
decreased Osx and RUNX2 mRNA and OB differentiation in preosteoblasts. Silencing 
of Prx1 with siRNA abrogated TNF suppression of Osx mRNA and increased basal Osx 
expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift revealed Prx1b as the preferred
isoform binding the Osx promoter. These results identify the homeobox protein
Prx1 as an obligate mediator of TNF inhibition of Osx and differentiation of OB
progenitors. Activation of Prx1 by TNF may contribute to reduced bone formation
in inflammatory arthritis, menopause, and aging.

© 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3179318
PMID: 20683885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Microbiol. 2010 Jul 4;10:184. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-184.

Gene encoding gamma-carbonic anhydrase is cotranscribed with argC and induced in 
response to stationary phase and high CO2 in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Kaur S(1), Mishra MN, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, India. tripathianil@rediffmail.com

BACKGROUND: Carbonic anhydrase (CA) is a ubiquitous enzyme catalyzing the
reversible hydration of CO2 to bicarbonate, a reaction underlying diverse
biochemical and physiological processes. Gamma class carbonic anhydrases
(gamma-CAs) are widespread in prokaryotes but their physiological roles remain
elusive. At present, only gamma-CA of Methanosarcina thermophila (Cam) has been
shown to have CA activity. Genome analysis of a rhizobacterium Azospirillum
brasilense, revealed occurrence of ORFs encoding one beta-CA and two gamma-CAs.
RESULTS: One of the putative gamma-CA encoding genes of A. brasilense was cloned 
and overexpressed in E. coli. Electrometric assays for CA activity of the whole
cell extracts overexpressing recombinant GCA1 did not show CO2 hydration
activity. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis indicated that gca1 in A. brasilense
is co-transcribed with its upstream gene annotated as argC, which encodes a
putative N-acetyl-gamma-glutamate-phosphate reductase. 5'-RACE also demonstrated 
that there was no transcription start site between argC and gca1, and the
transcription start site located upstream of argC transcribed both the genes
(argC-gca1). Using transcriptional fusions of argC-gca1 upstream region with
promoterless lacZ, we further demonstrated that gca1 upstream region did not have
any promoter and its transcription occurred from a promoter located in the argC
upstream region. The transcription of argC-gca1 operon was upregulated in
stationary phase and at elevated CO2 atmosphere.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows lack of CO2 hydration activity in a recombinant
protein expressed from a gene predicted to encode a gamma-carbonic anhydrase in
A. brasilense although it cross reacts with anti-Cam antibody raised against a
well characterized gamma-CA. The organization and regulation of this gene along
with the putative argC gene suggests its involvement in arginine biosynthetic
pathway instead of the predicted CO2 hydration.

PMCID: PMC2914000
PMID: 20598158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jul 9;87(1):110-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.016. Epub
2010 Jun 24.

Identification of a frameshift mutation in Osterix in a patient with recessive
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Lapunzina P(1), Aglan M, Temtamy S, Caparrós-Martín JA, Valencia M, Letón R,
Martínez-Glez V, Elhossini R, Amr K, Vilaboa N, Ruiz-Perez VL.

Author information: 
(1)CIBER de enfermedades Raras, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Osteogenesis imperfecta, or "brittle bone disease," is a type I collagen-related 
condition associated with osteoporosis and increased risk of bone fractures.
Using a combination of homozygosity mapping and candidate gene approach, we have 
identified a homozygous single base pair deletion (c.1052delA) in SP7/Osterix
(OSX) in an Egyptian child with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta. The clinical
findings from this patient include recurrent fractures, mild bone deformities,
delayed tooth eruption, normal hearing, and white sclera. OSX encodes a
transcription factor containing three Cys2-His2 zinc-finger DNA-binding domains
at its C terminus, which, in mice, has been shown to be essential for bone
formation. The frameshift caused by the c.1052delA deletion removes the last 81
amino acids of the protein, including the third zinc-finger motif. This finding
adds another locus to the spectrum of genes associated with osteogenesis
imperfecta and reveals that SP7/OSX also plays a key role in human bone
development.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2896769
PMID: 20579626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Orthop Surg Res. 2010 Jun 15;5:37. doi: 10.1186/1749-799X-5-37.

Transcriptional regulation of bone formation by the osteoblast-specific
transcription factor Osx.

Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bone Research Laboratory, Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children,
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, Texas, USA. Chi5.Zhang@utsouthwestern.edu.

Bone formation is a complex developmental process involving the differentiation
of mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts. Osteoblast differentiation occurs
through a multi-step molecular pathway regulated by different transcription
factors and signaling proteins. Osx (also known as Sp7) is the only
osteoblast-specific transcriptional factor identified so far which is required
for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Osx knock-out mice lack bone
completely and cartilage is normal. This opens a new window to the whole research
field of bone formation. Osx inhibits Wnt pathway signaling, a possible mechanism
for Osx to inhibit osteoblast proliferation. These reports demonstrate that Osx
is the master gene that controls osteoblast lineage commitment and the subsequent
osteoblast proliferation and differentiation. This review is to highlight recent 
progress in understanding the molecular mechanisms of transcriptional regulation 
of bone formation by Osx.

PMCID: PMC2898801
PMID: 20550694  [PubMed]


244. Cell Biochem Funct. 2010 Jun;28(4):334-41. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1668.

Insulin stimulates osteoblast proliferation and differentiation through ERK and
PI3K in MG-63 cells.

Yang J(1), Zhang X, Wang W, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.

Insulin has been proposed to be an anabolic agent in bone, but the mechanisms
underlying insulin effects on osteoblast differentiation are still not clear. To 
explore the mechanisms of action of insulin on osteoblast growth and
differentiation, human osteoblastic cell line-MG-63 was used and stimulated by
insulin in the presence or absence of ERK inhibitor PD98059, PI3-K inhibitor
LY294002, or inhibitor PD98059 + LY294002. The results showed that insulin
positively regulated the expression of its receptor. Insulin stimulated the
proliferation of MG-63 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner and blockade of
both MAPK and PI3K pathways could inhibit the cell proliferation. In addition,
ALP activity, the secretion of type I collagen, OC gene expression, and
mineralized nodule formation were increased in the insulin treated group, whereas
these indicators were decreased after treatment with blocking agents. However,
treatment with PI3-K inhibitor LY294002 significantly reversed the
down-regulation of Runx2 expression and treatment with ERK inhibitor PD98059
remarkably decreased up-regulation of Osx and IGF-1 expression after insulin
treatment. Therefore, the data obtained from this study suggested that insulin
promoted osteoblast proliferation and differentiation through MAPK and PI3K
pathway in MG-63 cells.

2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20517899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Genesis. 2010 Aug;48(8):505-11. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20639.

Zebrafish sp7:EGFP: a transgenic for studying otic vesicle formation,
skeletogenesis, and bone regeneration.

DeLaurier A(1), Eames BF, Blanco-Sánchez B, Peng G, He X, Swartz ME, Ullmann B,
Westerfield M, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
april@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

We report the expression pattern and construction of a transgenic zebrafish line 
for a transcription factor involved in otic vesicle formation and skeletogenesis.
The zinc finger transcription factor sp7 (formerly called osterix) is reported as
a marker of osteoblasts. Using bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-mediated
transgenesis, we generated a zebrafish transgenic line for studying skeletal
development, Tg(sp7:EGFP)b1212. Using a zebrafish BAC, EGFP was introduced
downstream of the regulatory regions of sp7 and injected into one cell-stage
embryos. In this transgenic line, GFP expression reproduces endogenous sp7 gene
expression in the otic placode and vesicle, and in forming skeletal structures.
GFP-positive cells were also detected in adult fish, and were found associated
with regenerating fin rays post-amputation. This line provides an essential tool 
for the further study of zebrafish otic vesicle formation and the development and
regeneration of the skeleton.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2926247
PMID: 20506187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Izv Akad Nauk Ser Biol. 2010 Jan-Feb;(1):105-8.

[Effect of lectins from Azospirillum brasilense to peroxidase and oxalate oxidase
activity regulation in wheat roots].

[Article in Russian]

Alen'kina SA, Nikitina VE.

Lectins were extracted from the surface of nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and from its mutant A. brasilense Sp7.2.3 defective
in lectin activity. The ability oflectins to stimulate the rapid formation of
hydrogen peroxide related to increase of oxalate oxidase and peroxidase activity 
in the roots of wheat seedlings has been demonstrated. The most rapid induced
pathway of hydrogen peroxide formation in the roots of wheat seedlings was the
oxalic acid oxidation by oxalate oxidase which is the effect oflectin in under 10
min in a concentration of 10 microg/ml. The obtained results show that lectins
from Azospirillum are capable of inducing the adaptation processes in the roots
of wheat seedlings.

PMID: 20235434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 9;394(3):503-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.171. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Sp7/Osterix up-regulates the mouse pro-alpha3(V) collagen gene (Col5a3) during
the osteoblast differentiation.

Yun-Feng W(1), Matsuo N, Sumiyoshi H, Yoshioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Matrix Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, 1-1
Idaigaoka Hasama-machi, Yufu, Oita 879-5593, Japan.

Type V collagen is a quantitatively minor collagen, but acts as critical
regulator of fibril formation in the extracellular matrix. The purpose of this
study is to clarify the mechanism responsible for the transcriptional regulation 
of the mouse Col5a3 gene in osteoblastic cells. Sp7/Osterix is a transcription
factor specifically expressed by osteoblasts and is important for osteoblast
differentiation. The overexpression of Sp7/Osterix significantly increased the
promoter activity and the endogenous mRNA level of the Col5a3 gene in
osteoblastic cells. Conversely, a reduction of Sp7/Osterix by siRNA treatment
decreased the promoter activity and the endogenous mRNA level of the Col5a3 gene.
A CHIP assay confirmed that Sp7/Osterix interacted with the Col5a3 core promoter 
in vivo at the Sp1 binding site. The data from the experiments using the
osteoblast differentiation model and the co-overexpression of Sp7/Osterix with
Sp1 suggest that Sp7/Osterix promotes the expression of the collagen gene,
Col5a3, and thereby playing a role in bone formation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Aug;25(8):1821-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.62.

Replication of previous genome-wide association studies of bone mineral density
in premenopausal American women.

Ichikawa S(1), Koller DL, Padgett LR, Lai D, Hui SL, Peacock M, Foroud T, Econs
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN, USA. ichikawa@iupui.edu

Bone mineral density (BMD) achieved during young adulthood (peak BMD) is one of
the major determinants of osteoporotic fracture in later life. Genetic variants
associated with BMD have been identified by three recent genome-wide association 
studies. The most significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from these
studies were genotyped to test whether they were associated with peak BMD in
premenopausal American women. Femoral neck and lumbar spine BMD were determined
by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry in two groups of premenopausal women: 1524
white women and 512 black women. In premenopausal white women, two SNPs in the
C6orf97/ESR1 region were significantly associated with BMD (p < 4.8 x 10(-4)),
with suggestive evidence for CTNNBL1 and LRP5 (p < .01). Evidence of association 
with one of the two SNPs in the C6orf97/ESR1 region also was observed in
premenopausal black women. Furthermore, SNPs in SP7 and a chromosome 4 intergenic
region showed suggestive association with BMD in black women. Detailed analyses
of additional SNPs in the C6orf97/ESR1 region revealed multiple genomic blocks
independently associated with femoral neck and lumbar spine BMD. Findings in the 
three published genome-wide association studies were replicated in independent
samples of premenopausal American women, suggesting that genetic variants in
these genes or regions contribute to peak BMD in healthy women in various
populations.

PMCID: PMC3153352
PMID: 20200978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2010 Jul;94(1):169-79. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.32701.

The combination of micron and nanotopography by H(2)SO(4)/H(2)O(2) treatment and 
its effects on osteoblast-specific gene expression of hMSCs.

Mendonça G(1), Mendonça DB, Aragão FJ, Cooper LF.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Católica de Brasília, Pós-Graduação em Ciências Genômicas e
Biotecnologia, SGAN Quadra 916, Módulo B, Av. W5 Norte 70.790-160-Asa Norte,
Brasília/DF, Brazil. mendonca@ucb.br

H(2)SO(4)/H(2)O(2) treatment of titanium implants imparts nanofeatures to the
surface and alters the osteoblast response. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the effect of H(2)SO(4)/H(2)O(2) treatment of commercially pure Titanium (cpTi)
surfaces on gene expression of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs)
differentiated into osteoblasts. Commercially pure grade IV titanium disks (20.0 
mm x 1.0 mm) were polished or polished and subsequently treated by grit blasting 
or grit-blasting/acid etching with an H(2)SO(4)/H(2)O(2) solution. The surfaces
were divided into three groups: smooth (S), grit-blasted (Gb), and
nanostructured: grit-blasted/acid etched (Nano). Surfaces were examined by
scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. HMSCs were grown on the
disks. The data points analyzed were at 3, 7, 14, and 28 days. Real-time PCR was 
used to measure the mRNA levels of ALP, BSP, Runx2, OCN, OPN, and OSX. The
housekeeping gene GAPDH was used as a control. Descriptive statistics were
calculated using Microsoft Excel. T-test was performed for comparison of mRNA
levels when compared with S surfaces (p < 0.05). All osteoblast-specific genes
were regulated in surface-dependent patterns and most of them were upregulated on
the Nano surfaces. Runx2 and OSX mRNAs were more than threefold upregulated at
days 14 and 28 on Nano. Higher levels for ALP (38-fold), BSP (76-fold), and OCN
(3-fold) were also observed on the Nano surfaces. A grit-blasted surface imparted
with nanofeatures by H(2)SO(4)/H(2)O(2) treatment affected adherent cell
bone-specific gene expression. (c) 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater
Res, 2010.

PMID: 20128007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;127(3):249-85. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0773-z. Epub 2009 Dec 
12.

Genetics of osteoporosis: accelerating pace in gene identification and
validation.

Li WF(1), Hou SX, Yu B, Li MM, Férec C, Chen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, General Hospital of
the People's Liberation Army, 100037 Beijing, China.

Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mineral density and structural
deterioration of bone tissue, leading to an increased risk of fractures. It is
the most common metabolic bone disorder worldwide, affecting one in three women
and one in eight men over the age of 50. In the past 15 years, a large number of 
genes have been reported as being associated with osteoporosis. However, only in 
the past 4 years we have witnessed an accelerated pace in identifying and
validating osteoporosis susceptibility loci. This increase in pace is mostly due 
to large-scale association studies, meta-analyses, and genome-wide association
studies of both single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variations. A
comprehensive review of these developments revealed that, to date, at least 15
genes (VDR, ESR1, ESR2, LRP5, LRP4, SOST, GRP177, OPG, RANK, RANKL, COLIA1, SPP1,
ITGA1, SP7, and SOX6) can be reasonably assigned as confirmed osteoporosis
susceptibility genes, whereas, another >30 genes are promising candidate genes.
Notably, confirmed and promising genes are clustered in three biological
pathways, the estrogen endocrine pathway, the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway,
and the RANKL/RANK/OPG pathway. New biological pathways will certainly emerge
when more osteoporosis genes are identified and validated. These genetic findings
may provide new routes toward improved therapeutic and preventive interventions
of this complex disease.

PMID: 20101412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biofactors. 2010 Jan-Feb;36(1):25-32. doi: 10.1002/biof.72.

Regulation of gene expression in osteoblasts.

Jensen ED(1), Gopalakrishnan R, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55905, USA.

In recent years, much progress has been made in understanding the factors that
regulate the gene expression program that underlies the induction, proliferation,
differentiation, and maturation of osteoblasts. A large and growing number of
transcription factors make important contributions to the precise control of
osteoblast formation and function. It has become increasingly clear that these
diverse transcription factors and the signals that regulate their activity cannot
be viewed as discrete, separate signaling pathways. Rather, they form a highly
interconnected, cooperative network that permits gene expression to be closely
regulated. There has also been a substantial increase in our understanding of the
mechanistic control of gene expression by cofactors such as acetyltransferases
and histone deacetylases. The purpose of this review is to highlight recent
progress in understanding the major transcription factors and epigenetic
coregulators, including histone deacetylases and microRNAs, involved in
osteoblastogenesis and the mechanisms that determine their functions as
regulators of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2820584
PMID: 20087883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Leuk Res. 2010 Jun;34(6):700-1. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.12.023. Epub 2010 Jan
13.

Bortezomib upregulates [corrected] the osterix expression by osteoblasts in the
myeloma microenvironment: Implications into osteoblast function in myeloma bone
disease.

Terpos E.

Erratum in
    Leuk Res. 2011 Jul;35(7):983.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2010 Feb;34(2):243-9.

PMID: 20074800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Opt Express. 2009 Dec 21;17(26):24208-23. doi: 10.1364/OE.17.024208.

Image reconstruction in diffuse optical tomography based on simplified spherical 
harmonics approximation.

Chu M(1), Dehghani H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics, University of Exeter, EX4 1EZ, UK.

The use of higher order approximations to the Radiative transport equation,
through simplified spherical harmonics expansion (SP(N)) in optical tomography
are presented. It is shown that, although the anisotropy factor can be modeled in
the forward problem, its sensitivity to the measured boundary data is limited to 
superficial regions and more importantly, due to uniqueness of the inverse
problem it cannot be determined using frequency domain data. Image reconstruction
through the use of higher ordered models is presented. It is demonstrated that at
higher orders (for example SP7) the image reconstruction becomes highly
under-determined due to the large increase in the number of unknowns which cannot
be adequately recovered. However, reconstruction of diffuse parameters, namely
optical absorption and reduced scatter have shown to be more accurate where only 
the sensitivity matrix used in the inverse problem is based on SP(N) method and
image reconstruction is limited to these two diffuse parameters.

PMID: 20052132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Oral Maxillofac Res. 2010 Apr 1;1(1):e4. doi: 10.5037/jomr.2010.1104.
eCollection 2010.

Early effects of p-15 on human bone marrow stem cells.

Sollazzo V(1), Palmieri A(2), Girardi A(2), Farinella F(3), Carinci F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Ferrara Italy. (2)Department of
Histology, Embryology and Applied Biology, University of Bologna, Bologna Italy. 
(3)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Ferrara, Ferrara Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Peptide-15 (P-15) is an analogue of the cell binding domain of
collagen. P-15 has been shown to facilitate physiological to process in a way
similar to collagen, to serve as anchorage for cells, and to promote the binding,
migration and differentiation of cells. However, how P-15 alters osteoblast
activity to promote bone formation is poorly understood. To study the
osteoinductive properties of peptide P-15, we analyzed the expression levels of
bone related genes in human mesenchymal stem cells treated with this biomaterial.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using real time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain
Reaction the quantitative expression of specific genes, like transcriptional
factors (RUNX2 and SP7), bone related genes (SPP1, COL1A1, COL3A1, BGLAP, ALPL,
and FOSL1) and mesenchymal stem cells marker (ENG) were examined.
RESULTS: P-15 causes a considerable induction of osteoblast transcriptional
factor like osterix (SP7) and of the bone related genes osteopontin (SPP1) and
osteocalcin (BGLAP). In contrast the expression of endoglin (ENG) was markedly
decreased in stem cells treated with P-15 respect to untreated cells, indicating 
the differentiation effect of this biomaterial on stem cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows the effect of P-15 on mesenchymal stem cells
in the early differentiation stages: P-15 is an inducer of osteogenesis on human 
stem cells as indicated by the activation of bone related markers SP7, SPP1 and
BGLAP.The results may allow a better understanding of the molecular mechanism of 
bone regeneration and as a model for comparing other materials with similar
clinical effects.

PMCID: PMC3886042
PMID: 24421960  [PubMed]


255. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2010 Winter;7(1):28-34.

PerioGlas® Acts on Human Stem Cells Isolated from Peripheral Blood.

Sollazzo V(1), Palmieri A, Scapoli L, Martinelli M, Girardi A, Pezzetti F,
Morselli P, Farinella F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor, Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: PerioGlas® (PG) is an alloplastic material used for grafting
periodontal osseous defects since 1995. In animal models, it has been proven that
PG achieves histologically good repair of sur-gically created defects. In
clinical trials, PG was effective as an adjunct to conventional surgery in the
treatment of intrabony defects. Because the molecular events due to PG that are
able to alter osteob-last activity to promote bone formation are poorly
understood, we investigated the expression of os-teoblastic related genes in
mesenchymal stem cells exposed to PG.
METHODS: The expression levels of bone related genes like RUNX2, SP7, SPP1,
COL1A1, COL3A1, BGLAP, ALPL, and FOSL1 and mesenchymal stem cells marker (CD105) 
were analyzed, using real time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Pearson's chi-square (<U+03C7>(2)) test was used to detect markers with significant
differences in gene expression.
RESULTS: PG caused induction of osteoblast transcriptional factor (like RUNX2),
bone related genes osteopontin (SPP1), osteocalcin (BGLAP) and alkaline
phosphatase (ALPL). All had statistical sig-nificant P values (< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: PG has a differentiation effect on mesenchymal stem cells derived
from peripheral blood. The obtained results can be relevant to better
understanding of the molecular mechanism of bone regeneration and as a model for 
comparing other materials with similar clinical effects.

PMCID: PMC3065339
PMID: 21448444  [PubMed]


256. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Feb 1;109(2):406-16. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22412.

The role of BMP-7 in chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation of human bone
marrow multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells in vitro.

Shen B(1), Wei A, Whittaker S, Williams LA, Tao H, Ma DD, Diwan AD.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Institute, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. George 
Hospital, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

This study addresses the role of bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7) in
chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow multipotent
mesenchymal stromal cells (BM MSCs) in vitro. BM MSCs were expanded and
differentiated in the presence or absence of BMP-7 in monolayer and
three-dimensional cultures. After 3 days of stimulation, BMP-7 significantly
inhibited MSC growth in expansion cultures. When supplemented in commonly used
induction media for 7-21 days, BMP-7 facilitated both chondrogenic and osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs. This was evident by specific gene and protein expression
analyses using real-time PCR, Western blot, histological, and immunohistochemical
staining. BMP-7 supplementation appeared to enhance upregulation of
lineage-specific markers, such as type II and type IX collagens (COL2A1, COL9A1) 
in chondrogenic and secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1), osteocalcin (BGLAP), and
osterix (SP7) in osteogenic differentiation. BMP-7 in the presence of TGF-beta3
induced superior chondrocytic proteoglycan accumulation, type II collagen, and
SOX9 protein expression in alginate and pellet cultures compared to either factor
alone. BMP-7 increased alkaline phosphatase activity and dose-dependently
accelerated calcium mineralization of osteogenic differentiated MSCs. The
potential of BMP-7 to promote adipogenesis of MSCs was restricted under
osteogenic conditions, despite upregulation of adipocyte gene expression. These
data suggest that BMP-7 is not a singular lineage determinant, rather it promotes
both chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation of MSCs by co-ordinating with
initial lineage-specific signals to accelerate cell fate determination. BMP-7 may
be a useful enhancer of in vitro differentiation of BM MSCs for cell-based tissue
repair.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19950204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;658:43-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1050-9_5.

Regulation of osteoblast differentiation by Runx2.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of BasicMedical Sciences, Department of Cell Biology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.
komorit@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Runx2 protein is first detected in preosteoblasts, and the expression is
upregulated in immature osteoblasts, but downregulated in mature osteoblasts.
Runx2 is the first transcription factor required for determination of the
osteoblast lineage, while Sp7 and canonical Wnt-signaling further direct the fate
of mesenchymal cells to osteoblasts, blocking their differentiation into
chondrocytes. Runx2 induces the differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal cells 
into immature osteoblasts, directing the formation of immature bone, but Runx2
inhibits osteoblast maturation and mature bone formation. Normally, the protein
level of Runx2 in osteoblasts reduces during bone development, and osteoblasts
acquire mature phenotypes, which are required for mature bone formation.
Furthermore, Runx2 triggers the expression of major bone matrix genes during the 
early stages of osteoblast differentiation, but Runx2 is not essential for the
maintenance of these gene expressions in mature osteoblasts.

PMID: 19950014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Trop Life Sci Res. 2009 Dec;20(2):71-7.

Microbial Inoculation Improves Growth of Oil Palm Plants (Elaeis guineensis
Jacq.).

Om AC(1), Ghazali AH(1), Keng CL(1), Ishak Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 USM, Pulau
Pinang, Malaysia. (2)Biology Research Division, Malaysian Palm Oil Board (MPOB), 
43000 Kajang, Selangor, Malaysia.

Introduction of diazotrophic rhizobacteria to oil palm tissues during the in
vitro micropropagation process establishes an early associative interaction
between the plant cells and bacteria. In the association, the diazotrophs provide
the host plants with phytohormones and fixed nitrogen. This study was conducted
to observe growth of bacterised tissue cultured oil palm plants under ex vitro
conditions after 280 days of growth. Root dry weight, shoot dry weight, root
volume, bacterial colonisation, leaf protein and chlorophyll content of the host 
plants were observed. The results revealed that the inocula successfully
colonised roots of the host plants. Plants inoculated with Acetobacter
diazotrophicus (R12) had more root dry weight and volume than plants inoculated
with Azospirillum brasilense (Sp7). Leaf protein and chlorophyll content were
higher in the bacterised plants compared to Control 2 plants (inoculated with
killed Sp7). These results suggest that the diazotrophs successfully improved the
growth of the host plant (oil palm) and minimised the amount of N fertiliser
necessary for growth.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC3819059
PMID: 24575180  [PubMed]


259. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 6;29(1):68-79. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.332. Epub 2009 Nov 19.

Regulation of the osteoblast-specific transcription factor Osterix by NO66, a
Jumonji family histone demethylase.

Sinha KM(1), Yasuda H, Coombes MM, Dent SY, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. ksinha@mdanderson.org

Osterix (Osx) is an osteoblast-specific transcription factor required for
osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Osx null mice develop a normal
cartilage skeleton but fail to form bone and to express osteoblast-specific
marker genes. To better understand the control of transcriptional regulation by
Osx, we identified Osx-interacting proteins using proteomics approaches. Here, we
report that a Jumonji C (JmjC)-domain containing protein, called NO66, directly
interacts with Osx and inhibits Osx-mediated promoter activation. The knockdown
of NO66 in preosteoblast cells triggered accelerated osteoblast differentiation
and mineralization, and markedly stimulated the expression of Osx target genes. A
JmjC-dependent histone demethylase activity was exhibited by NO66, which was
specific for both H3K4me and H3K36me in vitro and in vivo, and this activity was 
needed for the regulation of osteoblast-specific promoters. During BMP-2-induced 
differentiation of preosteoblasts, decreased NO66 occupancy correlates with
increased Osx occupancy at Osx-target promoters. Our results indicate that
interactions between NO66 and Osx regulate Osx-target genes in osteoblasts by
modulating histone methylation states.

PMCID: PMC2780536
PMID: 19927124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2009 Jul-Aug;24(4):627-35.

Effects of titanium surface roughness on mesenchymal stem cell commitment and
differentiation signaling.

Balloni S(1), Calvi EM, Damiani F, Bistoni G, Calvitti M, Locci P, Becchetti E,
Marinucci L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Science, University of
Perugia, Italy.

PURPOSE: Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are primary cells capable of
differentiating to osteocytic lineage when stimulated under appropriate
conditions. This study examined changes in hMSC morphology, proliferation, and
gene expression after growth on machined or dual acid-etched (AE) titanium
surfaces.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: hMSCs, isolated from adult human bone marrow, were
cultured on titanium surfaces. The two specimens of titanium surfaces in this
study included machined and AE titanium disks. Cell morphology was evaluated by
scanning electron microscopy, and cell proliferation and collagen synthesis were 
estimated by measuring the amount of 3H-thymidine incorporation into DNA and
3H-proline incorporation into collagen fibers. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity was determined by measuring the release of p-nitrophenol from disodium
p-nitrophenyl phosphate. Changes in gene expression for bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (BMP-2), Runx2 type II, Osterix (Osx), osteopontin, type I collagen,
ALP, osteocalcin, and bone sialoprotein were determined by reverse-transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction after 22 days of in vitro culture in osteogenic medium.
RESULTS: The two substrates had no significant effects on cell adhesion and
proliferation. Morphologic characteristics were observed by scanning electron
microscopy. hMSCs on the machined surface spread more and were flatter than cells
cultured on the AE surface. Osteopontin mRNA expression was similar on all
surfaces, and the other mRNA transcripts were increased in hMSC cultured on AE
surface. In particular, BMP-2, Runx2, and Osx, three osteogenic factors that
induce the progressive differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal cells into
osteoblasts, were expressed more on AE titanium than on machined titanium.
Collagen and ALP assays confirmed the highest level of mRNA transcripts
correlated with increases in these proteins.
CONCLUSION: These results showed that an AE titanium surface stimulated the
expression of markers of osteoblastic phenotype more than a machined titanium
surface.

PMID: 19885402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Nov;60(11):3356-65. doi: 10.1002/art.24884.

Circulating mesenchymal stem cells with abnormal osteogenic differentiation in
patients with osteoporosis.

Dalle Carbonare L(1), Valenti MT, Zanatta M, Donatelli L, Lo Cascio V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Verona, Verona, Italy. luca.dallecarbonare@univr.it

OBJECTIVE: While the role of osteoclasts in bone loss has been well investigated,
the involvement of osteoblast-lineage cells has not been completely elucidated.
Several genes contribute to normal osteoblastic differentiation from mesenchymal 
stem cells (MSCs), but an understanding of their role in the pathogenesis of
osteoporosis is still lacking. The present study was undertaken to evaluate a
possible alteration of osteogenic gene expression as a mechanism contributing to 
bone loss.
METHODS: We studied the osteogenic differentiation process in MSCs obtained from 
the peripheral blood of 31 patients with osteoporosis and 20 normal donors. The
cells were evaluated by colony-forming unit-fibroblastic assay and cultured in
osteogenic medium to analyze the transcription factors runt-related transcription
factor 2 (RUNX-2) and Sp7 and the bone-related genes COL1A1, SPARC, and SPP1
after 3, 8, and 15 days of differentiation. In addition, to determine possible
differences between the 2 groups in terms of osteoclastic and osteoblastic
activation, we quantified the osteoprotegerin (OPG) and RANKL levels in the
supernatants of osteoblastic culture.
RESULTS: Circulating MSCs were increased in osteoporosis patients compared with
normal donors. In contrast, gene expression analysis revealed down-regulation of 
RUNX2, Sp7, COL1A1, SPARC, and SPP1 in patients with osteoporosis, associated
with a lower OPG:RANKL ratio.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that an alteration of osteoblastic
differentiation may contribute to the pathogenesis of osteoporosis. The
noninvasive approach used in the present study could be proposed as a useful tool
for studying mesenchymal involvement in bone diseases.

PMID: 19877060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):775-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.048. Epub 2009 Oct 17.

Traf2 interacts with Smad4 and regulates BMP signaling pathway in MC3T3-E1
osteoblasts.

Shimada K(1), Ikeda K, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo,
Japan. shimada-ki@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play important roles in osteoblast
differentiation and maturation. In mammals, the BMP-induced receptor-regulated
Smads form complexes with Smad4. These complexes translocate and accumulate in
the nucleus, where they regulate the transcription of various target genes.
However, the function of Smad4 remains unclear. We performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen using Smad4 as bait and a cDNA library derived from bone marrow, to
indentify the proteins interacting with Smad4. cDNA clones for Tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 2 (Traf2) were identified, and the
interaction between the endogenous proteins was confirmed in the mouse osteoblast
cell line MC3T3-E1. To investigate the function of Traf2, we silenced it with
siRNA. The level of BMP-2 protein in the medium, the expression levels of the
Bmp2 gene and BMP-induced transcription factor genes, including Runx2, Dlx5,
Msx2, and Sp7, and the phosphorylated-Smad1 protein level were increased in cells
transfected with Traf2 siRNA. The nuclear accumulation of Smad1 increased with
TNF-alpha stimulation for 30 min at Traf2 silencing. These results suggest that
the TNF-alpha-stimulated nuclear accumulation of Smad1 may be dependent on Traf2.
Thus, the interaction between Traf2 and Smad4 may play a role in the cross-talk
between TNF-alpha and BMP signaling pathways.

PMID: 19836350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Orthopade. 2009 Nov;38(11):1009-19. doi: 10.1007/s00132-009-1488-5.

[Osteoblasts : cellular and molecular regulatory mechanisms in fracture healing].

[Article in German]

Hofmann A(1), Mattyasovszky SG, Brüning C, Ritz U, Mehling I, Meurer A, Rommens
PM.

Author information: 
(1)BiomaTiCS Group, Zentrum für Unfallchirurgie und Orthopädie,
Universitätsmedizin, Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität, Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55101, 
Mainz, Deutschland. Hofmann.trauma-surgery@gmx.net

Bone tissue possesses a unique regeneration ability, translating mechanical and
metabolic stimuli into a biological response. The perpetual regeneration
processes allow continuous self-renewal and adaptation to prevailing mechanical
forces. The complex regulation of osteoblastic differentiation during fracture
repair has not been completely defined. Two different transcription factors -
RUNX2 and SP7 - are considered to be master genes of osteoblastic
differentiation. Furthermore, the canonical WNT pathway plays an essential role
in the activation of osteoblastic differentiation during both bone growth and
fracture healing. Studies of fracture healing have revealed that downregulation
of the WNT pathway causes a significant reduction in new bone formation.
Moreover, correct WNT signalling is also required for BMP2-induced bone
formation. There is increasing evidence that patients who develop recalcitrant
fracture nonunions exhibit not only reduced numbers and differentiation capacity 
of osteogenic progenitors but also a significant downregulation of numerous
factors in the WNT pathway. Therefore, better understanding of the WNT regulatory
mechanisms could reveal new strategies for the treatment of delayed fracture
healing and for the tissue engineering of bone.

PMID: 19826779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Seikagaku. 2009 Aug;81(8):703-7.

[JNK signaling in osteoblast differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsuguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.

PMID: 19803394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Genet. 2009 Nov;41(11):1199-206. doi: 10.1038/ng.446. Epub 2009 Oct 4.

Twenty bone-mineral-density loci identified by large-scale meta-analysis of
genome-wide association studies.

Rivadeneira F(1), Styrkársdottir U, Estrada K, Halldórsson BV, Hsu YH, Richards
JB, Zillikens MC, Kavvoura FK, Amin N, Aulchenko YS, Cupples LA, Deloukas P,
Demissie S, Grundberg E, Hofman A, Kong A, Karasik D, van Meurs JB, Oostra B,
Pastinen T, Pols HA, Sigurdsson G, Soranzo N, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U,
Williams FM, Wilson SG, Zhou Y, Ralston SH, van Duijn CM, Spector T, Kiel DP,
Stefansson K, Ioannidis JP, Uitterlinden AG; Genetic Factors for Osteoporosis
(GEFOS) Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is a heritable complex trait used in the clinical
diagnosis of osteoporosis and the assessment of fracture risk. We performed
meta-analysis of five genome-wide association studies of femoral neck and lumbar 
spine BMD in 19,195 subjects of Northern European descent. We identified 20 BMD
loci that reached genome-wide significance (GWS; P < 5 x 10(-8)), of which 13 map
to regions not previously associated with this trait: 1p31.3 (GPR177), 2p21
(SPTBN1), 3p22 (CTNNB1), 4q21.1 (MEPE), 5q14 (MEF2C), 7p14 (STARD3NL), 7q21.3
(FLJ42280), 11p11.2 (LRP4, ARHGAP1, F2), 11p14.1 (DCDC5), 11p15 (SOX6), 16q24
(FOXL1), 17q21 (HDAC5) and 17q12 (CRHR1). The meta-analysis also confirmed at GWS
level seven known BMD loci on 1p36 (ZBTB40), 6q25 (ESR1), 8q24 (TNFRSF11B),
11q13.4 (LRP5), 12q13 (SP7), 13q14 (TNFSF11) and 18q21 (TNFRSF11A). The many SNPs
associated with BMD map to genes in signaling pathways with relevance to bone
metabolism and highlight the complex genetic architecture that underlies
osteoporosis and variation in BMD.

PMCID: PMC2783489
PMID: 19801982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2009 Nov;300(1):75-82. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2009.01773.x. Epub 2009 Aug 28.

Glycogen phosphorylase is involved in stress endurance and biofilm formation in
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Lerner A(1), Castro-Sowinski S, Lerner H, Okon Y, Burdman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Robert H. Smith Faculty of
Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot,
Israel.

Here we report the identification of a glycogen phosphorylase (glgP) gene in the 
plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense, Sp7, and the
characterization of a glgP marker exchange mutant of this strain. The glgP mutant
showed a twofold reduction of glycogen phosphorylase activity and an increased
glycogen accumulation as compared with wild-type Sp7, indicating that the
identified gene indeed encodes a protein with glycogen phosphorylase activity.
Interestingly, the glgP mutant had higher survival rates than the wild type after
exposure to starvation, desiccation and osmotic pressure. The mutant was shown to
be compromised in its biofilm formation ability. Analysis of the
exopolysaccharide sugar composition of the glgP mutant revealed a decrease in the
amount of glucose, accompanied by increases in rhamnose, fucose and ribose, as
compared with the Sp7 exopolysaccharide. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first study that demonstrates GlgP activity in A. brasilense, and shows that 
glycogen accumulation may play an important role in the stress endurance of this 
bacterium.

PMID: 19765087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Microbiology. 2009 Dec;155(Pt 12):4058-68. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.031807-0. Epub 2009
Sep 17.

The Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 noeJ and noeL genes are involved in extracellular
polysaccharide biosynthesis.

Lerner A(1), Castro-Sowinski S, Valverde A, Lerner H, Dror R, Okon Y, Burdman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology and The Otto Warburg Minerva
Center for Agricultural Biotechnology, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of
Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, PO Box 12,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Azospirillum brasilense is a plant root-colonizing bacterium that exerts
beneficial effects on the growth of many agricultural crops. Extracellular
polysaccharides of the bacterium play an important role in its interactions with 
plant roots. The pRhico plasmid of A. brasilense Sp7, also named p90, carries
several genes involved in synthesis and export of cell surface polysaccharides.
We generated two Sp7 mutants impaired in two pRhico-located genes, noeJ and noeL,
encoding mannose-6-phosphate isomerase and GDP-mannose 4,6-dehydratase,
respectively. Our results demonstrate that in A. brasilense Sp7, noeJ and noeL
are involved in lipopolysaccharide and exopolysaccharide synthesis. noeJ and noeL
mutant strains were significantly altered in their outer membrane and
cytoplasmic/periplasmic protein profiles relative to the wild-type strain.
Moreover, both noeJ and noeL mutations significantly affected the bacterial
responses to several stresses and antimicrobial compounds. Disruption of noeL,
but not noeJ, affected the ability of the A. brasilense Sp7 to form biofilms. The
pleiotropic alterations observed in the mutants could be due, at least partially,
to their altered lipopolysaccharides and exopolysaccharides relative to the
wild-type.

PMID: 19762447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 15;334(2):481-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.08.015. Epub 2009 
Aug 21.

Tgfbr2 is required for development of the skull vault.

Seo HS(1), Serra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) is known to play important roles in
multiple developmental processes. One of the main functions is in skeletal
development. Our previous studies demonstrated that loss of Tgfbr2 in
Prx1Cre-expressing limb mesenchyme results in defects in the long bones and
joints of mice. Here we show that loss of Tgfbr2 also results in defects in the
development of the skull vault indicating Tgfbr2 has a critical role in
intramembranous bone formation as well as endochondral bone formation. Mutant
mice did not survive after birth and demonstrated an open skull. The first signs 
of skull defects were observed at E14.5 day. Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos
showed significantly reduced cell proliferation in the developing mesenchyme of
the skull by E14.5 day without any detectable alteration in apoptosis suggesting 
that reduced cell proliferation in Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos was at least
partially responsible for the defects observed. Immunofluorescent staining showed
a significant reduction in the expression of Runx2/Cbfa1 and Osterix/Sp7 in
Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos suggesting that osteoblast differentiation was
also altered in Prx1Cre(+)/Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos. To distinguish between the
effects of losing Tgfbr2 on mesenchymal proliferation versus osteoblast
differentiation, osteoprogenitor cells from the skulls of Tgfbr2(f/f) embryos
were cultured under conditions of high cell density and Tgfbr2 was deleted from
the cells using Adeno-Cre virus. RT-PCR analysis showed that the mRNA level of
Runx2 and Osterix as well as Dlx5 and Msx2 were down-regulated in Tgfbr2-deleted 
cultures compared to control cultures indicating that Tgfbr2 regulates osteoblast
differentiation independent of regulating proliferation. Together, these results 
suggest that Tgfbr2 is required for normal development of the skull.

PMCID: PMC2753698
PMID: 19699732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2009 Oct;299(2):149-58. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2009.01736.x. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Regulation of expression and biochemical characterization of a beta-class
carbonic anhydrase from the plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium, Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7.

Kaur S(1), Mishra MN, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India.

Carbonic anhydrase (CA; [EC 4.2.1.1]) is a ubiquitous enzyme catalysing the
reversible hydration of CO(2) to bicarbonate, a reaction that supports various
biochemical and physiological functions. Genome analysis of Azospirillum
brasilense, a nonphotosynthetic, nitrogen-fixing, rhizobacterium, revealed an ORF
with homology to beta-class carbonic anhydrases (CAs). Biochemical
characteristics of the beta-class CA of A. brasilense, analysed after cloning the
gene (designated as bca), overexpressing in Escherichia coli and purifying the
protein by affinity purification, revealed that the native recombinant enzyme is 
a homotetramer, inhibited by the known CA inhibitors. CA activity in A.
brasilense cell extracts, reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR and Western blot
analyses showed that bca was constitutively expressed under aerobic conditions.
Lower beta-galactosidase activity in A. brasilense cells harbouring bca promoter:
lacZ fusion during the stationary phase or during growth on 3% CO(2) enriched air
or at acidic pH indicated that the transcription of bca was downregulated by the 
stationary phase, elevated CO(2) levels and acidic pH conditions. These
observations were also supported by RT-PCR analysis. Thus, beta-CA in A.
brasilense seems to be required for scavenging CO(2) from the ambient air and the
requirement of CO(2) hydration seems to be higher for the cultures growing
exponentially at neutral to alkaline pH.

PMID: 19694814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Leuk Res. 2010 Feb;34(2):243-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.07.017. Epub 2009 Aug
4.

Constitutive down-regulation of Osterix in osteoblasts from myeloma patients: in 
vitro effect of Bortezomib and Lenalidomide.

De Matteo M(1), Brunetti AE, Maiorano E, Cafforio P, Dammacco F, Silvestris F.

Author information: 
(1)DIMO, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, University of
Bari Medical School, Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, 70124, Bari, Italy.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2010 Jun;34(6):700-1.

Bortezomib and Lenalidomide have been shown to be effective in the control of
multiple myeloma (MM) progression. We have investigated their role in the in
vitro expression of Osterix by primary osteoblast cultures from MM patients and
found that Osterix RNA was constitutively down-regulated in these cells.
Treatment of osteoblasts with Bortezomib resulted in an increase of Osterix RNA
and in enhanced activity of both BMP-2 and Runx2. Instead, Lenalidomide was
unable to modify Osterix transcription. These findings provide additional
evidence suggesting that, at least in vitro, Bortezomib promotes the osteoblast
maturation whereas Lenalidomide is ineffective.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19656567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Connect Tissue Res. 2009;50(4):270-7. doi: 10.1080/03008200902846262.

Age and skeletal sites affect BMP-2 responsiveness of human bone marrow stromal
cells.

Osyczka AM(1), Damek-Poprawa M, Wojtowicz A, Akintoye SO.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology and Earth Sciences, Department of Cytology & Histology,
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.

Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) contain osteoprogenitors responsive to
stimulation by osteogenic growth factors like bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs).
When used as grafts, BMSCs can be harvested from different skeletal sites such as
axial, appendicular, and orofacial bones, but the lower therapeutic efficacy of
BMPs on BMSCs-responsiveness in humans compared to animal models may be due
partly to effects of skeletal site and age of donor. We previously reported
superior differentiation capacity and osteogenic properties of orofacial BMSCs
relative to iliac crest BMSCs in same individuals. This study tested the
hypothesis that recombinant human BMP-2 (rhBMP-2) stimulates human BMSCs
differently based on age and skeletal site of harvest. Adult maxilla, mandible,
and iliac crest BMSCs from same individuals and pediatric iliac crest BMSCs were 
comparatively assessed for BMP-2 responsiveness under serum-containing and
serum-free insulin-supplemented culture conditions. Adult orofacial BMSCs were
more BMP-2-responsive than iliac crest BMSCs based on higher gene transcripts of 
alkaline phosphatase, osteopontin, and osteogenic transcription factors MSX-2 and
Osterix in serum-free insulin-containing medium. Pediatric iliac crest BMSCs were
more responsive to rhBMP-2 than adult iliac crest BMSCs based on higher
expression of alkaline phosphatase and osteopontin in serum-containing medium.
Unlike orofacial BMSCs, MSX-2 and Osterix transcripts were similarly expressed by
adult and pediatric iliac crest BMSCs in response to rhBMP-2. These data
demonstrate that age and skeletal site-specific differences exist in BMSC
osteogenic responsiveness to BMP-2 stimulation and suggest that MSX-2 and Osterix
may be potential regulatory transcription factors in BMP-mediated osteogenesis of
adult orofacial cells.

PMCID: PMC2905683
PMID: 19637063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;43(5):197-207. doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0012. Epub 2009 Jun
8.

Regulation of osterix (Osx, Sp7) and the Osx promoter by parathyroid hormone in
osteoblasts.

Hong SH(1), Lu X, Nanes MS, Mitchell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, 1 King's
College Circle, Room 4342, Ontario, Canada.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) binds to its receptor on osteoblasts to regulate gene
transcription primarily through the elevation of the second messenger cAMP. A
number of genes regulated by PTH in osteoblasts contain GC-rich and Sp-binding
sites. Osterix (Osx, Sp7) is a transcription factor required for the
differentiation of osteoblasts that can bind to Sp-binding sites on gene
promoters and regulate their expression. Here, we report the effect of PTH (1-34)
on Osx expression in osteoblastic UMR-106-01 cells and murine calvaria. PTH
(1-34) and PTH (1-31) inhibited Osx mRNA and protein expression, and this effect 
could be mimicked by forskolin, 8-bromo-cAMP, or expression of constitutively
active Gsalpha (caGsalpha). Treatment of the cells with PTH (3-34) or the
EPAC-selective agonist 8CPT-2Me-cAMP had no effect on Osx mRNA, whereas PTH
(7-34) or expression of caGqalpha-stimulated Osx mRNA levels. PTH (1-34)
treatment did not require new protein synthesis and did not involve changes in
Osx mRNA stability. Osx promoter fragments coupled to a luciferase reporter were 
inhibited by PTH (1-34) treatment in a similar manner to the inhibition of Osx
mRNA and protein. Deletion analysis localized PTH inhibition to two regions
flanking the Osx1 start site; -304/-119 and -71/+91. These results demonstrate
that prolonged exposure to PTH inhibits Osx expression in osteoblasts through
sites on its proximal promoter and this suppression occurs through PTH
stimulation of cellular cAMP.

PMID: 19505977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Aug 1;18(15):2729-38. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp205. Epub 2009 May 
9.

Promoter and intron 1 polymorphisms of COL1A1 interact to regulate transcription 
and susceptibility to osteoporosis.

Jin H(1), van't Hof RJ, Albagha OM, Ralston SH.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatic Diseases Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

Three polymorphisms (-1997G/T; -1663IndelT and +1245G/T) have been identified in 
the 5' flank of COL1A1 gene that are associated with osteoporosis but the
underlying mechanism is unclear. Here we investigated the functional effects of
these variants on COL1A1 transcription. Transcription was 2-fold higher with the 
osteoporosis-associated G-del-T haplotype compared with the common G-Ins-G
haplotype. Gel shift assays showed that the region surrounding the -1663IndelT
polymorphism recognized a complex of proteins essential for osteoblast
differentiation and function including Nmp4 and Osterix, and the
osteoporosis-associated -1663delT allele had increased binding affinity for this 
complex. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that the region flanking 
-1663insdelT bound a complex of proteins including Osterix and Nmp4 and also
showed evidence of recruitment of Nmp4 to the Sp1 binding site in intron 1.
Further studies showed that haplotype G-del-T had higher binding affinity for RNA
polymerase II, consistent with increased transcription of the G-del-T allele and 
there was a significant inverse association between carriage of G-del-T and bone 
mineral density (BMD) in a cohort of 3270 Caucasian women. We conclude that
common polymorphic variants in the 5' flank of COLIA1 regulate transcription by
affecting DNA-protein interactions and that increased levels of transcription
correlate with reduced BMD values in vivo. This is consistent with a model
whereby increased COL1A1 transcription predisposes to osteoporosis, probably by
increasing production of the alpha 1 chain and disrupting the normal ratio of
collagen type 1 alpha 1 and alpha 2 chains.

PMID: 19429913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Arch Microbiol. 2009 Jun;191(6):501-7. doi: 10.1007/s00203-009-0475-x. Epub 2009 
Apr 24.

Characterization of chsA, a new gene controlling the chemotactic response in
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Carreño-López R(1), Sánchez A, Camargo N, Elmerich C, Baca BE.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Microbiológicas, Benemérita Universidad 
Autónoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico.

We report, here, the characterization of a mutant strain of Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 impaired in surface motility and chemotactic response. Presence of
flagella in the mutant strain was confirmed by western blot analysis, using
antisera raised against the polar and lateral flagellins, and by electron
microscopy. Genetic complementation and nucleotide sequencing led to the
identification of a new gene, named chsA. The deduced translation product, ChsA
protein, contained a PAS sensory domain and an EAL domain. As ChsA displayed
characteristic signaling protein architecture, it is thought that this protein is
a component of the signaling pathway controlling chemotaxis in Azospirillum.

PMID: 19390839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Res Microbiol. 2009 Apr;160(3):205-12. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.03.005. Epub
2009 Apr 12.

Identification of the glutamine synthetase adenylyltransferase of Azospirillum
brasilense.

Van Dommelen A(1), Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, K.U. Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium.
Anne.Vandommelen@biw.kuleuven.be

Glutamine synthetase, a key enzyme in nitrogen metabolism of both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, is strictly regulated. One means of regulation is the modulation of
activity through adenylylation catalyzed by adenylyltransferases. Using PCR
primers based on conserved sequences in glutamine synthetase
adenylyltransferases, we amplified part of the glnE gene of Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7. The complete glnE sequence of A. brasilense Sp245 was retrieved
from the draft genome sequence of this organism
(http://genomics.ornl.gov/research/azo/). Adenylyltransferase is a bifunctional
enzyme consisting of an N-terminal domain responsible for deadenylylation
activity and a C-terminal domain responsible for adenylylation activity. Both
domains are partially homologous to each other. Residues important for catalytic 
activity were present in the deduced amino acid sequence of the A. brasilense
Sp245 glnE sequence. A glnE mutant was constructed in A. brasilense Sp7 by
inserting a kanamycin resistance cassette between the two active domains of the
enzyme. The resulting mutant was unable to adenylylate the glutamine synthetase
enzyme and was impaired in growth when shifted from nitrogen-poor to
nitrogen-rich medium.

PMID: 19366628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mikrobiologiia. 2009 Jan-Feb;78(1):42-51.

[Diverse morphological types of dormant cells and conditions for their formation 
in Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Muliukin AL, Suzina NE, Pogorelova AIu, Antoniuk LP, Duda VI, El'-Registan GI.

Differences in generation of dormant forms (DF) were revealed between two strains
of non-sporeforming gram-negative bacteria Azospirillum brasilense, Sp7
(non-endophytic) and Sp245 (endophytic strain). In post-stationary ageing
bacterial cultures grown in a synthetic medium with a fivefold decreased initial 
nitrogen content, strain Sp7 formed two types of cyst-like resting cells (CRC).
Strain Sp245 did not form such types of DF under the same conditions. CRC of the 
first type were formed in strain Sp245 only under phosphorus deficiency (C > P). 
The endophytic strain was also shown to form structurally differentiated cells
under complete starvation, i.e. at a transfer of early stationary cultures, grown
in the media with C > N unbalance, to saline solution (pH 7.2). These DF had a
complex structure similar to that of azotobacter cysts. The CRC, which are
generated by both azospirilla strains and belong to distinct morphological types,
possessed the following major features: absence of division; specific
ultrastructural organization; long-term maintenance of viability (for 4 months
and more); higher heat resistance (50-60 degrees C, 10 min) as compared with
vegetative cells, i.e. the important criteria for dormant prokaryotic forms.
However, CRC of non-endophytic strain Sp7 had higher heat resistance (50, 55, 60 
degrees C). The viability maintenance and the portion of heat-resistant cells
depended on the conditions of maturation and storage of CRC populations.
Long-term storage (for 4 months and more) of azospirilla DF populations at -20
degrees C was optimal for maintenance of their colony-forming ability (57% of the
CFU number in stationary cultures), whereas the largest percentage of
heat-resistant cells was in CRC suspensions incubated in a spent culture medium
(but not in saline solution) at room temperature. The data on the intraspecies
diversity of azospirilla DF demonstrate the relation between certain type DF
formation to the type of interaction (non-endophytic or endophytic) with the
plant partner and provide more insight into the adaptation mechanisms that ensure
the survival of gram-negative non-spore-forming bacteria in nature.

PMID: 19334596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Arch Virol. 2009;154(4):661-3. doi: 10.1007/s00705-009-0341-9. Epub 2009 Mar 7.

HSV-2 ICP34.5 protein modulates herpes simplex virus glycoprotein processing.

Chatterjee S(1), Wang JW, Cismowski MJ, Bower JR, Rosenthal KS.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeastern Ohio Universities Colleges of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Rootstown, 44272, USA.

The ICP34.5 gene from HSV-2 strain 333 was cloned and, when expressed in Vero
cells, enhanced the efficiency and extent of glycoprotein processing of
glycoprotein C (gC1), a representative viral glycoprotein, during infection with 
HSV-1 SP7. The ICP34.5 from HSV-1 SP7 limits the extent and efficiency of viral
glycoprotein processing. The ability of the HSV-2 ICP34.5 protein to enhance the 
efficiency and extent of HSV-1 SP7 glycoprotein processing indicates that
modulation of viral glycoprotein processing is also a property of the HSV-2
ICP34.5 protein.

PMID: 19267180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Oral Investig. 2009 Dec;13(4):383-91. doi: 10.1007/s00784-009-0260-x. Epub
2009 Feb 28.

Gene expression profiles of dental follicle cells before and after osteogenic
differentiation in vitro.

Morsczeck C(1), Schmalz G, Reichert TE, Völlner F, Saugspier M, Viale-Bouroncle
S, Driemel O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, University of
Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
christian.morsczeck@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

Recently, osteogenic precursor cells were isolated from human dental follicles,
which differentiate into cementoblast- or osteoblast-like cells under in vitro
conditions after the induction with dexamethasone or insulin. However, mechanisms
for osteogenic differentiation are not understood in detail. In a previous study,
real-time RT-PCR results demonstrated molecular mechanisms in dental follicle
cells (DFCs) during osteogenic differentiation that are different from those in
bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. We analysed gene expression profiles 
in DFCs before and after osteogenic differentiation with the Affymetrix
GeneChip(R) Human Gene 1.0 ST Array. Transcripts of 98 genes were up-regulated
after differentiation. These genes could be clustered into subcategories such as 
cell differentiation, cell morphogenesis, and skeletal development.
Osteoblast-specific transcription factors like osterix and runx2 were
constitutively expressed in differentiated DFCs. In contrast, the transcription
factor ZBTB16, which promotes the osteoblastic differentiation of mesenchymal
stem cells as an up-stream regulator of runx2, was differentially expressed after
differentiation. Transcription factors NR4A3, KLF9 and TSC22D3, involved in the
regulation of cellular development, were up-regulated as well. In conclusion, we 
present the first transcriptome of human DFCs before and after osteogenic
differentiation. This study sheds new light on the complex mechanism of
osteogenic differentiation in DFCs.

PMID: 19252934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Microbiology. 2009 Mar;155(Pt 3):791-804. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.021824-0.

The wzm gene located on the pRhico plasmid of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 is
involved in lipopolysaccharide synthesis.

Lerner A(1), Okon Y, Burdman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology and The Otto Warburg Center for
Agricultural Biotechnology, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and 
Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Several genes involved in the interaction between Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and
plants are located on the pRhico plasmid. Here we report the characterization of 
an Sp7 mutant strain with impairment of the pRhico-located gene wzm. This gene
encodes an inner-membrane component of an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter 
with similarity to transporters involved in surface polysaccharide export.
Indeed, SDS-PAGE revealed that LPS synthesis is affected in the wzm mutant. No
significant differences were observed between wild-type and mutant strains in
exopolysaccharide (EPS) amount; however, several differences were observed
between them in EPS monosaccharide composition, and only wild-type colonies
stained positively with Congo red. Microscopy revealed that wzm mutant cells are 
longer and thinner, and exhibit several differences in their cell surface
relative to the wild-type. The wzm mutant was more resistant to oxidative stress,
starvation, desiccation, heat and osmotic shock than the wild-type. In contrast, 
the mutant was more susceptible than the wild-type to UV radiation and saline
stress. The strains also differed in their susceptibility to different
antibiotics. Differences between the strains were also observed in their
outer-membrane protein composition. No differences were observed between strains 
in their ability to attach to sweet corn roots and seeds, and to promote growth
under the tested conditions. As LPS plays an important role in cell envelope
structural integrity, we propose that the pleiotropic phenotypic changes observed
in the wzm mutant are due to its altered LPS relative to the wild-type.

PMID: 19246750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(8):1510-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp052. Epub 2009 Jan
30.

Common variants in the region around Osterix are associated with bone mineral
density and growth in childhood.

Timpson NJ(1), Tobias JH, Richards JB, Soranzo N, Duncan EL, Sims AM, Whittaker
P, Kumanduri V, Zhai G, Glaser B, Eisman J, Jones G, Nicholson G, Prince R,
Seeman E, Spector TD, Brown MA, Peltonen L, Smith GD, Deloukas P, Evans DM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Causal Analyses in Translational Epidemiology, Department of
Social Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Peak bone mass achieved in adolescence is a determinant of bone mass in later
life. In order to identify genetic variants affecting bone mineral density (BMD),
we performed a genome-wide association study of BMD and related traits in 1518
children from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). We
compared results with a scan of 134 adults with high or low hip BMD. We
identified associations with BMD in an area of chromosome 12 containing the
Osterix (SP7) locus, a transcription factor responsible for regulating osteoblast
differentiation (ALSPAC: P = 5.8 x 10(-4); Australia: P = 3.7 x 10(-4)). This
region has previously shown evidence of association with adult hip and lumbar
spine BMD in an Icelandic population, as well as nominal association in a UK
population. A meta-analysis of these existing studies revealed strong association
between SNPs in the Osterix region and adult lumbar spine BMD (P = 9.9 x
10(-11)). In light of these findings, we genotyped a further 3692 individuals
from ALSPAC who had whole body BMD and confirmed the association in children as
well (P = 5.4 x 10(-5)). Moreover, all SNPs were related to height in ALSPAC
children, but not weight or body mass index, and when height was included as a
covariate in the regression equation, the association with total body BMD was
attenuated. We conclude that genetic variants in the region of Osterix are
associated with BMD in children and adults probably through primary effects on
growth.

PMCID: PMC2664147
PMID: 19181680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mikrobiologiia. 2008 Nov-Dec;77(6):782-7.

[Dynamics of the changes of electrophysical properties of Azospirillum brasilense
Sp7 cells at their binding with wheat germ agglutinin].

[Article in Russian]

Gulii ON, Antoniuk LP, Ignatov VV, Ignatov OV.

The electrooptical properties of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 cell suspensions
have been studied at a specific interaction with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA),
using the dependences between the changes of optical densities of cell
suspensions at the electric orientation of cells and the orienting field
frequencies of 740, 1000, 1450, 2000, and 2800 kHz. It was shown that the
electrooptical (EO) properties of cell suspensions changed at the interaction
ofA. brasilense Sp7 cells with WGA and that the EO signal value changed
irrespective of the cultivation conditions. At the same time, the dynamics of the
changes of the EO properties of microbial suspensions was different for microbial
cells grown under different conditions. It may be evidence of the differences in 
the cell surface properties of microbial cells, and of the dependence between
bacterial response to lectin and growth conditions. The possibility of using the 
EO analysis of bacterial suspensions for the study of the high-specific binding
of polypeptide molecular signals with the bacterial target cells and for
assessment of the dynamics of this process has been demonstrated.

PMID: 19137717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Mar 1;106(4):599-607. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22036.

Cloning and analysis of rat osteoclast inhibitory lectin gene promoter.

Quan JX(1), Zheng F, Li XX, Hu LL, Sun ZY, Jiao YL, Wang BL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Ministry of Health for Hormone and Development, Institute of
Endocrinology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, PR China.

Osteoclast inhibitory lectin (OCIL) is a novel regulator of bone remodeling,
however, little is known concerning how OCIL is regulated to date. In this study,
approximately 4.4 kb of the 5'-flanking sequence of rat OCIL gene was cloned into
the promoter-less reporter vector pGL3-basic and transiently transfected into
three different cell lines. The differences in the levels of luciferase activity 
paralleled well with the levels of OCIL mRNA expression in these cells,
suggesting that the regulation of rat OCIL gene expression occurs mainly at the
transcriptional level. Additional luciferase assays using a series of constructs 
containing unidirectionally deleted fragments showed that the construct-1819/pGL3
(-1819 to +118) exhibited the highest luciferase activity, suggesting the
presence of functional promoter in this region. The region from -4370 to -2805
might contain negative regulatory elements, while the region from -1819 to -1336 
might have important positive regulatory elements that enhance OCIL
transcription. Sequence analysis of the promoter revealed the absence of both
TATA and CAAT boxes. However, in the proximal promoter region (-81 to +118),
several potential transcription factor binding sites that may be responsible for 
the basal transcriptional activity of rat OCIL promoter were observed. The
promoter contains several potential Sp1 binding sites, and cotransfection of a
shRNA expression plasmid that knockdowns Sp1 significantly reduced OCIL promoter 
activity and endogenous gene expression and moreover, overexpressing Sp7, a Sp1
family member that also binds to Sp1 binding sequence, increased OCIL promoter
activity and gene expression, suggesting a role of Sp1 family proteins in
regulation of OCIL transcription.

PMID: 19127542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):15-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.284. Epub 2008 Dec 14.

New sequence variants associated with bone mineral density.

Styrkarsdottir U(1), Halldorsson BV, Gretarsdottir S, Gudbjartsson DF, Walters
GB, Ingvarsson T, Jonsdottir T, Saemundsdottir J, Snorradóttir S, Center JR,
Nguyen TV, Alexandersen P, Gulcher JR, Eisman JA, Christiansen C, Sigurdsson G,
Kong A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. unnur.styrkarsdottir@decode.is

In an extended genome-wide association study of bone mineral density among 6,865 
Icelanders and a follow-up in 8,510 subjects of European descent, we identified
four new genome-wide significant loci. These are near the SOST gene at 17q21, the
MARK3 gene at 14q32, the SP7 gene at 12q13 and the TNFRSF11A (RANK) gene at
18q21. Furthermore, nonsynonymous SNPs in the C17orf53, LRP4, ADAM19 and IBSP
genes were suggestively associated with bone density.

PMID: 19079262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. PLoS Biol. 2008 Dec 9;6(12):2764-73. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060305.

A signaling protease required for melanization in Drosophila affects resistance
and tolerance of infections.

Ayres JS(1), Schneider DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.

Organisms evolve two routes to surviving infections-they can resist pathogen
growth (resistance) and they can endure the pathogenesis of infection
(tolerance). The sum of these two properties together defines the defensive
capabilities of the host. Typically, studies of animal defenses focus on either
understanding resistance or, to a lesser extent, tolerance mechanisms, thus
providing little understanding of the relationship between these two mechanisms. 
We suggest there are nine possible pairwise permutations of these traits,
assuming they can increase, decrease, or remain unchanged in an independent
manner. Here we show that by making a single mutation in the gene encoding a
protease, CG3066, active in the melanization cascade in Drosophila melanogaster, 
we observe the full spectrum of changes; these mutant flies show increases and
decreases in their resistance and tolerance properties when challenged with a
variety of pathogens. This result implicates melanization in fighting microbial
infections and shows that an immune response can affect both resistance and
tolerance to infections in microbe-dependent ways. The fly is often described as 
having an unsophisticated and stereotypical immune response where single
mutations cause simple binary changes in immunity. We report a level of
complexity in the fly's immune response that has strong ecological implications. 
We suggest that immune responses are highly tuned by evolution, since selection
for defenses that alter resistance against one pathogen may change both
resistance and tolerance to other pathogens.

PMCID: PMC2596860
PMID: 19071960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Int J Cardiol. 2010 Mar 4;139(2):142-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.10.014. Epub
2008 Nov 18.

Bone regulatory factors NFATc1 and Osterix in human calcific aortic valves.

Alexopoulos A(1), Bravou V, Peroukides S, Kaklamanis L, Varakis J, Alexopoulos D,
Papadaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Patras, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence suggests that calcific aortic valve stenosis
constitutes an active process sharing common features with atherosclerosis and
bone formation. To further support this hypothesis, we investigated the
expression of bone regulatory factors in calcified aortic valves.
METHODS-RESULTS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples of human aortic
tricuspid valves (n=54) were used from patients undergoing valve replacement for 
calcific, non-rheumatic aortic stenosis. As controls, fourteen aortic tricuspid
valves (n=14) were obtained at autopsy from patients without clinical and
morphological aortic valve lesions. Sections from both stenotic and normal aortic
valve leaflets were studied immunohistochemically. Interstitial cells in stenotic
valves showed intense expression of Sox9, Runx2 and Osterix (Osx) whereas NFATc1 
was expressed in interstitial and inflammatory cells. In addition, NFATc1
expression correlated significantly with Osx (r=0.458, p<0.001) and Runx2
(r=0.387, p<0.001). Finally, there was accumulation of activated interstitial
cells, T lymphocytes and macrophages as well as intense neoangiogenesis in
pathological leaflets.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of NFATc1 and Osx in our material lends further support
to the hypothesis that during the process of aortic valve calcification there is 
expression of osteoblastic phenotypes by valvular cells.

Copyright 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19019468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):3125-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807466200. Epub 2008
Nov 18.

Co-stimulation of the bone-related Runx2 P1 promoter in mesenchymal cells by SP1 
and ETS transcription factors at polymorphic purine-rich DNA sequences
(Y-repeats).

Zhang Y(1), Hassan MQ, Xie RL, Hawse JR, Spelsberg TC, Montecino M, Stein JL,
Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Transcriptional control of Runx2 gene expression through two alternative
promoters (P1 and P2) is critical for the execution of its function as an
osteogenic cell fate determining factor. In all vertebrates examined to date, the
bone related P1 promoter contains a purine-rich region (-303 to -128 bp in the
rat) that separates two regulatory domains. The length of this region differs
dramatically between species even within the same order. Using deletion analysis,
we show that part of this purine-rich region (-200 to -128) containing a
duplicated element (Y-repeat) positively regulates Runx2 P1 transcription.
Electrophoretic mobility assays and chromatin immunoprecipitations reveal that
Y-repeat binds at least two different classes of transcription factors related to
GC box binding proteins (e.g. SP1 and SP7/Osterix) and ETS-like factors (e.g.
ETS1 and ELK1). Forced expression of SP1 increases Runx2 P1 promoter activity
through the Y-repeats, and small interfering RNA depletion of SP1 decreases Runx2
expression. Similarly, exogenous expression of wild type ELK1, but not a
defective mutant that cannot be phosphorylated, enhances Runx2 gene expression.
SP1 is most abundant in proliferating cells, and ELK1 is most abundant in
postconfluent cells; during MC3T3-E1 osteoblast differentiation, both proteins
are transiently co-expressed when Runx2 expression is enhanced. Taken together,
our data suggest that basal Runx2 gene transcription is regulated by dynamic
interactions between SP1 and ETS-like factors during progression of osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2631976
PMID: 19017640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Phytopathology. 2005 Nov;95(11):1287-93. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-95-1287.

Consistent Quantitative Trait Loci in Pea for Partial Resistance to Aphanomyces
euteiches Isolates from the United States and France.

Pilet-Nayel ML, Muehlbauer FJ, McGee RJ, Kraft JM, Baranger A, Coyne CJ.

ABSTRACT Development of pea cultivars resistant to Aphanomyces root rot, the most
destructive root disease of pea worldwide, is a major disease management
objective. In a previous study of a mapping population of 127 recombinant inbred 
lines (RILs) derived from the cross 'Puget' (susceptible) x '90-2079' (partially 
resistant), we identified seven genomic regions, including a major quantitative
trait locus (QTL), Aph1, associated with partial resistance to Aphanomyces root
rot in U.S. fields (21). The objective of the present study was to evaluate, in
the same mapping population, the specificity versus consistency of Aphanomyces
resistance QTL under two screening conditions (greenhouse and field, by
comparison with the previous study) and with two isolates of Aphanomyces
euteiches originating from the United States and France. The 127 RILs were
evaluated in the greenhouse for resistance to pure culture isolates SP7 (United
States) and Ae106 (France). Using the genetic map previously described, a total
of 10 QTL were identified for resistance in greenhouse conditions to the two
isolates. Among these were Aph1, Aph2, and Aph3, previously detected for partial 
field resistance in the United States. Aph1 and Aph3 were detected with both
isolates and Aph2 with only the French isolate. Seven additional QTL were
specifically detected with one of the two isolates and were not identified for
partial field resistance in the United States. The consistency of the detected
resistance QTL over two screening environments and isolates is discussed with
regard to pathogen variability, and disease assessment and QTL detection methods.
This study suggests the usefulness of three consistent QTL, Aph1, Aph2, and Aph3,
for marker-assisted selection.

PMID: 18943359  [PubMed]


288. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Feb;218(2):323-33. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21605.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into osteogenic or hematopoietic
lineages: a dose-dependent effect of osterix over-expression.

Kärner E(1), Unger C, Cerny R, Ahrlund-Richter L, Ganss B, Dilber MS, Wendel M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Biology, Institute of Odontology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Enhanced differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (HESCs), induced by
genetic modification could potentially generate a vast number of diverse cell
types. Such genetic modifications have frequently been achieved by
over-expression of individual regulatory proteins. However, careful evaluation of
the expression levels is critical, since this might have important implications
for the differentiation potential of HESCs. To date, attempts to promote
osteogenesis by means of gene transfer into HESCs using the early bone "master"
transcription factor osterix (Osx) have not been reported. In this study, we
attained HESC subpopulations expressing two significantly different levels of
Osx, following lentiviral gene transfer. Both subpopulations exhibited
spontaneous differentiation and reduced expression of markers characteristic of
the pluripotent phenotype, such as SSEA3, Tra1-60, and Nanog, In order to promote
bone differentiation, the cells were treated with ascorbic acid,
beta-glycerophosphate and dexamethasone. The high level of Osx, compared to
endogenous levels found in primary human osteoblasts, did not enhance osteogenic 
differentiation, and did not up-regulate collagen I expression. We show that the 
high Osx levels instead induced the commitment towards the
hematopoietic-endothelial lineage-by up-regulating the expression of CD34 and
Gata1. However, low levels of Osx up-regulated collagen I, bone sialoprotein and 
osteocalcin. Conversely, forced high level expression of the homeobox
transcription factor HoxB4, a known regulator for early hematopoiesis, promoted
osteogenesis in HESCs, while low levels of HoxB4 lead to hematopoietic gene
expression.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18932205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Braz J Biol. 2008 Aug;68(3):519-28.

Patterns of prey selection of Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) lactitarse Saussure
(Hymenoptera: Crabronidae) in southern Brazil.

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

This study was carried out in the Parque Municipal das Araucárias, in the
municipality of Guarapuava, southern Brazil. A total of 449 T. lactitarse nests
were collected using trap-nests of different diameters. Fifty three species of
spiders belonging to 7 families were captured by T. lactitarse. Araneidae was the
most captured family and has been strongly represented by the genus Eustala.
Through Bray-Curtis's coefficient and the unweighted pair group method average
(UPGMA), the spiders species can be divided into 3 groups: the smaller group
includes the most abundant species (Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Acacesia
villalobosi, Alpaida sp1 and Araneus corporosus), the second group includes
species with intermediate abundance (Wagneriana iguape, Araneus omnicolor,
Eustala sp4, Alpaida grayi, Eustala sp3, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1 and
Wagneriana iguape), and the third and largest group includes the least abundant
species (Aysha gr. brevimana 1, Eustala sp5, Wagneriana eupalaestra, Alpaida
scriba, Alpaida veniliae, Araneus aff. omnicolor, Araneus sicki, Eustala sp8,
Mangora sp2, Mangora sp3, Wagneriana juquia, Alpaida sp2, Araneus blumenau,
Eustala sp6, Eustala sp7 and Ocrepeira galianoae). Of 2,029 identified spiders,
1,171 were captured in the Araucaria forest, 612 in grassland areas and 246 in
the swamp. Grassland and swamp areas evidenced greater similarity between them
than to the Araucaria Forest, regarding presence-absence of spider species in T. 
lactitarse's diet, as well as regarding species abundance in these habitats. The 
juvenile number (56%) was significantly higher than the female (38%) and male
(6%) percentages.

PMID: 18833472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;14(19):6081-91. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0219.

Negative regulation of the osteoblast function in multiple myeloma through the
repressor gene E4BP4 activated by malignant plasma cells.

Silvestris F(1), Cafforio P, De Matteo M, Calvani N, Frassanito MA, Dammacco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, University of Bari
Medical School, Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, Bari, Italy. f.silvestris@dimo.uniba.it

PURPOSE: To explore the pathogenetic mechanisms that suppress the osteoblast
function in multiple myeloma because osteogenesis results in defective new bone
formation and repair.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microarray gene analysis revealed the overexpression of
E4BP4, a transcriptional repressor gene, in normal osteoblasts cocultured with
myeloma cells that were releasing the parathyroid hormone-related protein
(PTHrP). Thus, the effect of E4BP4 was assessed in PTHrP-stimulated osteoblasts
by measuring the RNA levels of both Runx2 and Osterix as major osteoblast
transcriptional activators. Because E4BP4 is a negative regulator of the
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) pathway that drives the expression of both Runx2 and
Osterix, these factors were investigated after prostaglandin E(2) treatment to
overcome the COX-2 defect as well as in E4BP4-silenced osteoblasts. Finally,
E4BP4, PTHrP, Osterix, and osteocalcin levels were measured in vivo in patients
with bone disease together with the E4BP4 protein in bone biopsies.
RESULTS: E4BP4 was specifically induced by PTHrP and inhibited both Runx2 and
Osterix, whereas E4BP4-silenced osteoblasts expressed functional levels of both
factors. The prostaglandin E(2) treatment of E4BP4-up-regulated osteoblasts
promptly restored Runx2 and Osterix activities, suggesting that integrity of
COX-2 pathway is essential for their transcription. Down-regulation of Osterix by
E4BP4 was confirmed in vivo by its inverse levels in osteoblasts from myeloma
patients with increased serum PTHrP, whose bone biopsies expressed the E4BP4
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the role of E4BP4 as osteoblast transcriptional
repressor in inhibiting both Runx2 and Osterix in myeloma bone disease and
correlate its effect with the increased PTHrP activity.

PMID: 18829486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Pak J Biol Sci. 2008 Jun 15;11(12):1541-50.

Colonization and nitrogenase activity of Triticum aestivum (cv. Baccross and
Mahdavi) to the dual inoculation with Azospirillum brasilense and Rhizobium
meliloti plus 2,4-D.

Mehry A(1), Akbar M, Giti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Arak, Arak, Iran.

The potential enhancement of root colonization and nitrogenase activity of wheat 
cultivars (Baccross and Mahdavi) was studied with application of two Azospirillum
brasilense strains (native and Sp7) co-inoculated with two Rhizobium meliloti
strains (native and DSMZ 30135). The results indicated that the colonization was 
different due to the strains and cultivars of wheat were used. Native A.
brasilense colonized wheat root better than Sp7 strain. However, Baccross cv.
reacted better with native Azospirillum compared to Mahdavi cv. which reacted
better with Sp7. When plants inoculated with dual inoculants (SP7 with standard
Rhizobium), the colonization of Azospirillum were increased significantly (from
1.67 x 10(5) to 22 x 10(5) cfu g(-1) FW for Baccras cv. and 3.67 x 10(5) to 26 x 
10(5) cfu g(-1) FW for Mahdavi cultivar). When the standard Rhizobium as
co-inoculants changed to the native Rhizobium, the colonization of Azospirillum
was higher when compared to the single inoculants but was almost the same when
compared to the standard Rhizobium. When the standard or native strains of
Rhizobium used as single inoculation of wheat roots, the number of Rhizobium in
the wheat roots were not changed significantly. However, when plants
co-inoculated with Rhizobium and Azospirillum, the colonization of Rhizobium was 
increased. Co-inoculation of standard strain of R. melilot with A. brasilense Sp7
showed that the colonization of Rhizobium were increased from 0.67 x 10(5) to 21 
x 10(5) cfu g(-1) FW for Baccross cv. and 0.33 x 10(5) to 18 x 10(5) cfu g(-1) FW
for Mahdavi cv. This behavior was the same when inoculation of Rhizobium was
happened with the native one. In dual inoculation, the highest nitrogenase
activity was measured in combination of the local strains (native A. brasilense
with the native R. meliloti) and the lower one belongs to the combination of
standard strains (Sp7 with standard R. meliloti). The difference in nirtogenase
activity for different cultivars of wheat with Sp7 and standard Rhizobium is not 
significant but the difference for Sp7 strain plus native Rhizobium is
significant (p > 0.05). However, the differences were not significant (p < 0.05) 
for nitrogenase activity in bacterial tubes, the difference for nitrogenase
activity of co-inoculated plants with combination of Sp7 and Rhizobium either
standard or native were significantly different.

PMID: 18819640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Nov;318(1-2):81-7. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9859-5. Epub
2008 Sep 6.

Gene expression in normotopic and heterotopic human bone: increased level of SP7 
mRNA in pathological tissue.

Chauveau C(1), Broux O, Delecourt C, Hardouin P, Jeanfils J, Devedjian JC.

Author information: 
(1)LR2B-Laboratoire de Recherche sur les Biomatériaux et les Biotechnologies,
Université du Littoral Côte d'Opale, Quai Masset, Bassin Napoléon, BP 120, 62327 
Boulogne-sur-Mer, France.

Head injury-induced heterotopic ossification (HO) develops at vicinity of joints 
and in severe cases requires surgical intervention. Our previous study
demonstrated high mRNA levels of osteocalcin (OC), type 1 collagen (COL1),
osteonectin and RUNX2/CBFA1 in osteocytes and lining osteoblasts from
non-evolutive HO compared to equivalent healthy cells from the proximal femoral
shaft of patients receiving prosthesis. This allowed a first molecular
characterisation of this pathological bone. The aims of this study is to extend
the analysis to 10 more genes and determine those involved in the high OC mRNA
level observed in pathological bone samples. RNAs were prepared from normotopic
and heterotopic human bone samples digested by collagenase. After cDNA synthesis,
mRNA levels were determined by real-time PCR and normalised using beta actin and 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. OSTERIX/SP7 expression was observed for
the first time in human adult bone biopsies. In HO samples higher levels of SP7
(four- to sevenfold increase) and 1alpha,25-dihydroxy vitamin D(3) receptor (VDR)
(two- to threefold increase) were observed compared to control samples. Moreover,
SP7 level was correlated to OC and RUNX2 levels. In control samples, OC and SP7
levels were correlated. Our study further confirms that the involvement of SP7 in
bone physiology is not only limited to the developmental step. Moreover, our
results support the hypothesis that in HO the high level of OC expression could
be due not only to an increase in RUNX2, but also in SP7 or VDR or to an
imbalance in their respective activities.

PMID: 18777089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Bone. 2008 Dec;43(6):1084-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.07.252. Epub 2008 Aug 13.

Gene expression analysis in osteoblastic differentiation from peripheral blood
mesenchymal stem cells.

Valenti MT(1), Dalle Carbonare L, Donatelli L, Bertoldo F, Zanatta M, Lo Cascio
V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, Medicina Interna D, University
of Verona, Piazzale Scuro 37134 Verona, Italy. mariateresa.valenti@univr.it

MSCs are known to have an extensive proliferative potential and ability to
differentiate in various cell types. Osteoblastic differentiation from
mesenchymal progenitor cells is an important step of bone formation, though the
pattern of gene expression during differentiation is not yet well understood.
Here, to investigate the possibility to obtain a model for in vitro bone
differentiation using mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) from human subjects
non-invasively, we developed a method to obtain hMSCs-like cells from peripheral 
blood by a two step method that included an enrichment of mononuclear cells
followed by depletion of unwanted cells. Using these cells, we analyzed the
expression of transcription factor genes (runt-related transcription factor 2
(RUNX2) and osterix (SP7)) and bone related genes (osteopontin (SPP1),
osteonectin (SPARC) and collagen, type I, alpha 1 (COLIA1)) during osteoblastic
differentiation. Our results demonstrated that hMSCs can be obtained from
peripheral blood and that they are able to generate CFU-F and to differentiate in
osteoblast and adipocyte; in this study, we also identified a possible gene
expression timing during osteoblastic differentiation that provided a powerful
tool to study bone physiology.

PMID: 18761114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2008 Oct;287(2):221-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2008.01325.x. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Mutation in a gene encoding anti-sigma factor in A. brasilense confers tolerance 
to elevated temperature, antibacterial peptide and PEG-200 via carotenoid
synthesis.

Mishra MN(1), Thirunavukkarasu N, Sharma IM, Jagnnadham MV, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India.

Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 has been shown to overproduce carotenoids if the
anti-sigma factor (anti-sigma(E))-encoding gene is inactivated. The anti-sigma
mutant (Car-1) of A. brasilense Sp7 was more tolerant to the stresses generated
by elevated temperature (40 degrees C), PEG-200 (30 mg mL(-1)) and the
antibacterial agent Polymyxin-B (PMB, 25 microg mL(-1)) but not to elevated
salinity (15 mg mL(-1)). Inhibition of carotenoid synthesis by diphenylamine
inhibited the ability of the mutant to tolerate all the three stresses. Out of
the four stress agents, only elevated temperature and salinity induced the rpoE
promoter and increased the carotenoid content in Sp7 as well as in the Car-1
mutant. Comparison of the membrane permeability of the parent and the mutant by a
PMB-N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine coupled assay showed that the presence of
carotenoids in the mutant reduced the permeability of their membranes. Our study 
indicates that the carotenoid synthesis, which is under the control of
extracytoplasmic function sigma factor (sigma(E)) in A. brasilense Sp7, plays a
positive role in tolerating elevated temperature, the antibacterial peptide and
PEG-200.

PMID: 18754787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 24;283(43):29119-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801774200. Epub 2008
Aug 14.

BMP2 regulates Osterix through Msx2 and Runx2 during osteoblast differentiation.

Matsubara T(1), Kida K, Yamaguchi A, Hata K, Ichida F, Meguro H, Aburatani H,
Nishimura R, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate
School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Osterix/Sp7, a member of the Sp1 transcription factor family, plays an essential 
role in bone formation and osteoblastogenesis. Although Osterix has been shown to
be induced by BMP2 in a mesenchymal cell line, the molecular basis of the
regulation, expression and function of Osterix during osteoblast differentiation,
is not fully understood. Thus we examined the role of BMP2 signaling in the
regulation of Osterix using the mesenchymal cell lines C3H10T1/2 and C2C12.
Osterix overexpression induced alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin
expression in C2C12 cells and stimulated calcification of murine primary
osteoblasts. Considering that Runx2 overexpression induces Osterix, these results
suggest that Osterix functions as downstream of Runx2. Surprisingly, BMP2
treatment induced Osterix expression and alkaline phosphatase activity in
mesenchymal cells derived from Runx2-deficient mice. Furthermore, overexpression 
of Smad1 and Smad4 up-regulated Osterix expression, and an inhibitory Smad,
Smad6, markedly suppressed BMP2-induced Osterix expression in the Runx2-deficient
cells. Moreover, overexpression of a homeobox gene, Msx2, which is up-regulated
by BMP2 and promotes osteoblastic differentiation, induced Osterix expression in 
the Runx2-deficient cells. Knockdown of Msx2 clearly inhibited induction of
Osterix by BMP2 in the Runx2-deficient mesenchymal cells. Interestingly,
microarray analyses using the Runx2-deficient cells revealed that the role of
Osterix was distinct from that of Runx2. These findings suggest that Osterix is
regulated via both Runx2-dependent and -independent mechanisms, and that Osterix 
controls osteoblast differentiation, at least in part, by regulating the
expression of genes not controlled by Runx2.

PMCID: PMC2662012
PMID: 18703512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mikrobiologiia. 2008 May-Jun;77(3):350-7.

[Chemical and serological studies of liposaccharides of bacteria of the genus
Azospirillum].

[Article in Russian]

Konnova ON, Boiko AS, Burygin GL, Fedorenko IuP, Matora LIu, Konnova SA, Ignatov 
VV.

The analysis of the lipopolysaccharides (LPS) of nine strains of azospirilla
revealed the presence of the characteristic components of these glycopolymers:
carbohydrates, hydroxylated fatty acids, and 2-keto-3-deoxyoctonic acid (KDO).
SDS electrophoresis revealed the heterogeneous nature and the strains differences
in the ratio of the molecular S and R forms present in the LPS. Polyclonal rabbit
antibodies (Ab) were obtained against the isolated LPS(Cd), LPS(Sp59b), LPS(Sp7),
LPS(S17), and LPS(KBC1) preparations. Based on the results of the serological
studies of the LPS, the bacterial strains investigated in the work were divided
into two main serogroups. Based on the immunoblotting data, Ab(Sp59b) and Ab(Cd) 
were found to be formed in response to both the S and R forms of the LPS
molecules, whereas all the rest formed in response to the S forms only. It was
shown that the heterogeneity of the antigenic determinants is typical of the
second LPS group. It was suggested that rhamnose plays one of the key roles in
the specific interactions between the azospirillum membrane LPS and Ab.

PMID: 18683652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Mater Sci Mater Med. 2009 Jan;20(1):45-50. doi: 10.1007/s10856-008-3544-9. Epub
2008 Jul 31.

In vitro evaluation of freeze-dried bone allografts combined with platelet rich
plasma and human bone marrow stromal cells for tissue engineering.

Cenni E(1), Perut F, Ciapetti G, Savarino L, Dallari D, Cenacchi A, Stagni C,
Giunti A, Fornasari PM, Baldini N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pathophysiology of Orthopaedic Implants, Istituto Ortopedico
Rizzoli, via di Barbiano 1/10, 40136, Bologna, Italy. elisabetta.cenni@ior.it

Freeze-dried bone allograft (FDBA) might be more effective in combination with
platelet rich plasma (PRP) and bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC) in accelerating
bone healing. The isolation of BMSC through density gradient (pBMSC) is not
extensively applicable in clinical practice, because it increases the risk of
infection. Alternatively, BMSC can be concentrated by simple centrifugation
(wBMSC) directly in the operating room. However, we do not know if wBMSC act in
the same way as pBMSC. BMSC from 10 donors were tested whether, in the presence
of a combination of FDBA and autologous PRP, the osteogenic differentiation of
the cells concentrated by simple centrifugation (wBMSC + FDBA + PRP) was similar 
to that of pBMSC. Cell-associated alkaline phosphatase, osterix and fibroblast
growth factor-2 were higher in wBMSC + FDBA + PRP. In conclusion, the combination
of FDBA and PRP had a favouring effect on the differentiation towards osteoblasts
and allowed BMSC concentrated by simple centrifugation to differentiate as fast
as BMSC purified by density gradient.

PMID: 18668210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Microbiology. 2008 Jul;154(Pt 7):2096-105. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/016428-0.

An extra-cytoplasmic function sigma factor and anti-sigma factor control
carotenoid biosynthesis in Azospirillum brasilense.

Thirunavukkarasu N(1), Mishra MN, Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J, Gross CA, Tripathi
AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, India.

Strains Sp7 and Cd of Azospirillum brasilense, a plant growth-promoting
rhizobacterium, differ in synthesis of carotenoids. While colonies of strain Sp7 
have a white-cream colour on plates, colonies of strain Cd are orange-pink
coloured because of the synthesis of carotenoids. Screening of a mini-Tn5 mutant 
library of A. brasilense Sp7 revealed two orange-pink-coloured mutants that
produced carotenoids. Cloning and sequencing of the Tn5 flanking region in both
the carotenoid-producing mutants of Sp7 revealed insertion of Tn5 in an ORF
encoding anti-sigma factor, a ChrR-like protein. The upstream region of the
Tn5-mutated ORF contained another ORF that encoded an extra-cytoplasmic function 
(ECF)-class sigma factor (sigma(E), RpoE). When the nucleotide sequences of the
corresponding ORFs from the carotenoid-producing strain Cd were analysed, the
sequence of the Cd sigma(E) was identical to that of the carotenoid non-producing
strain Sp7, but the Cd anti-sigma(E) ORF had a deletion that caused frame
shifting and creation of a stop codon. This resulted in the premature termination
of the protein, which was about 7 kDa smaller than the Sp7 anti-sigma(E). Cloning
of Sp7 anti-sigma(E) in a broad-host-range expression vector and expression in A.
brasilense Cd and in the anti-sigma(E) knockout mutant of A. brasilense Sp7
resulted in the inhibition of carotenoid synthesis. Similarly, cloning and
overexpression of A. brasilense Sp7 sigma(E) in A. brasilense Sp7 resulted in the
production of carotenoids. These observations clearly indicate that carotenoid
synthesis in A. brasilense is controlled by sigma(E) with its cognate
anti-sigma(E).

PMID: 18599837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mikrobiologiia. 2008 Mar-Apr;77(2):196-200.

[Study of immunochemical heterogeneity of Azospirillum brasilense
lipopolysaccharides].

[Article in Russian]

Matora LIu, Burygin GL, Shchegolev SIu.

A comparative immunochemical analysis of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) in
Azospirillum brasilense model strains Sp7 and Sp245 and in mutants with
transformed somatic antigens has been performed. According to the results of a
complex of various immunochemical methods, including studies with polyclonal
antibodies against the LPS these bacteria, their LPS consist of an assembly of
macromolecules with different antigenic characteristics. Two types of O-specific 
polysaccharides (O-PS) are present in the LPS of every strain of A. brasilense
under study. The major difference between the two O-PS is the antigenic
heterogeneity of one of them. This heterogeneous O-PS has been shown to possess
at least two O-factors (antigenic determinants) different in their structure.
Meanwhile, according to all the tests performed, the other O-PS in every strain
is immunochemically homogeneous and identical to one of the determinants revealed
in the more diversified O-PS. The LPS heterogeneity among the given strains may
be due to the pattern of O-specific polysaccharide synthesis, one of the O-PS
being an intermediate in the synthesis of the other.

PMID: 18522320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 18;372(1):230-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.022. Epub 2008 May 13.

Upregulation of Runx2 and Osterix during in vitro chondrogenesis of human
adipose-derived stromal cells.

Rich JT(1), Rosová I, Nolta JA, Myckatyn TM, Sandell LJ, McAlinden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The aim of this study was to create a gene expression profile to better define
the phenotype of human adipose-derived stromal cells (HADSCs) during in vitro
chondrogenesis, osteogenesis and adipogenesis. A novel aspect of this work was
the analysis of the same subset of genes during HADSC differentiation into all
three lineages. Chondrogenic induction resulted in increased mRNA expression of
Sox transcription factors, COL2A1,COL10A1, Runx2, and Osterix. This is the first 
report demonstrating significant upregulation in expression of
osteogenesis-related transcription factors Runx2 and Osterix by TGF-beta3
induction of HADSCs during in vitro chondrogenesis. These findings suggest that
the commonly-used chondrogenic induction reagents promote differentiation
suggestive of hypertrophic chondrocytes and osteoblasts. We conclude that
alternative strategies are required to induce efficient articular chondrocyte
differentiation in order for HADSCs to be of clinical use in cartilage tissue
engineering.

PMCID: PMC2548292
PMID: 18482578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Oral Sci. 2008 Jun;116(3):199-206. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0722.2008.00533.x.

Expression of Osterix in mechanical stress-induced osteogenic differentiation of 
periodontal ligament cells in vitro.

Zhao Y(1), Wang C, Li S, Song H, Wei F, Pan K, Zhu K, Yang P, Tu Q, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Stomatology, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Osterix (Osx) is an osteoblast-specific transcription factor required for the
differentiation of pre-osteoblasts into functional osteoblasts. This study sought
to examine the changes of Osx expression in periodontal ligament cells (PDLC)
subjected to mechanical force, and to investigate whether Osx is involved in the 
mechanical stress-induced differentiation of PDLC. Human PDLC were exposed to
centrifugal force for 1-12 h. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), western 
blot, and immunofluorescence assays were used to examine the mRNA and protein
expression of Osx and its subcellular localization. Furthermore, PDLC were
transfected with the expression vector pcDNA3.1 flag-Osx and subjected to
mechanical force for 6 h. The changes in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and 
in the expression of core-binding factor alpha1 (Cbfa1), ALP, osteopontin, bone
sialoprotein, osteocalcin, and collagen I were measured. After the application of
mechanical force, Osx was upregulated in a time-dependent manner at both mRNA and
protein levels, and Osx protein was translocated from the cytosol into the cell
nuclei. Overexpression of Osx did not affect the expression of Cbfa1, but it
significantly enhanced the ALP activity and the mRNA expression of all the
aforementioned osteogenic marker genes, all of which increased further under
mechanical stress. These results suggest that Osx might play an important role in
the mechanical stress-induced osteogenic differentiation of PDLC and therefore be
involved in alveolar bone remodeling during orthodontic therapy.

PMID: 18471237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell Biomech. 2007 Dec;4(4):177-88.

Focal adhesion kinase signaling controls cyclic tensile strain enhanced collagen 
I-induced osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells.

Ward DF Jr(1), Williams WA, Schapiro NE, Weber GL, Christy SR, Salt M, Klees RF, 
Boskey A, Plopper GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180-3596, 
USA.

Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a key integrator of integrin-mediated signals from
the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton and downstream signaling molecules. 
FAK is activated by phosphorylation at specific tyrosine residues, which then
stimulate downstream signaling including the ERK1/2 pathway, leading to a variety
of cellular responses. In this study, we examined the effects of FAK point
mutations at tyrosine residues (Y397, Y925, Y861, and Y576/7) on osteogenic
differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells exposed to collagen I and cyclic 
tensile strain. Our results demonstrate that FAK signaling emanating from Y397,
Y925, and to a lesser extent Y576/7, but not from Y861, controls osteogenic
differentiation through an ERK1/2 pathway, as measured by expression levels of
key osteogenesis marker genes and subsequent matrix mineralization. These data
indicate that FAK is a critical decision maker in extracellular
matrix/strain-enhanced osteogenic differentiation.

PMID: 18437915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Bone. 2008 May;42(5):886-93. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.01.009. Epub 2008 Feb 7.

Ubc9 promotes the stability of Smad4 and the nuclear accumulation of Smad1 in
osteoblast-like Saos-2 cells.

Shimada K(1), Suzuki N, Ono Y, Tanaka K, Maeno M, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8310, Japan. shimada-ki@dent.nihon-u.ac.jp

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play important roles in osteoblast
differentiation and maturation. In mammals, the BMP-induced receptor-regulated
Smads form complexes with Smad4. These complexes translocate and accumulate
within the nucleus, where they regulate the transcription of various target
genes. However, the function of Smad4 remains unclear. We performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen using Smad4 as bait and a cDNA library derived from human bone 
marrow to identify the proteins interacting with Smad4. Two full-length cDNA
clones for Ubc9 were identified, and the potential functions of Ubc9 were
investigated. To determine the role of Ubc9 in the BMP signaling pathway, the
endogenous transcription of Ubc9 in the human osteoblast cell line Saos-2 was
silenced using siRNA. The expression of BMP-induced transcription factors,
including Runx2, Dlx5, Msx2, and Osterix, was examined using real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and the protein expression of 
Smad4, Smad1, phosphorylated Smad1, and BMP type I receptors was determined by
Western blotting. The subcellular localization of Smad1 and Smad4 was observed
using immunofluorescence staining after Ubc9 silencing. To determine whether
Smad4 is sumoylated in vitro, recombinant Smad4 was purified and sumoylated Smad4
was visualized using Western blotting. The mRNA expression of various
transcription factors was markedly inhibited after Ubc9 silencing. The protein
levels of Smad4 and phosphorylated Smad1 decreased in a dose-dependent manner
according to the amount of siRNA applied. Gene silencing also decreased the
nuclear accumulation of Smad1 and Smad4. The sumoylation assay showed that
sumoylated Smad4 is present and dependent on Ubc9 in vitro, which was confirmed
by pretreatment with Senp2, a SUMO-protease. These results suggest that Ubc9
promotes the stability of sumoylated Smad4. Furthermore, the expression of key
transcription factors, phosphorylated Smad1 protein, and the nuclear accumulation
of Smad1 and Smad4 are inhibited by Ubc9 silencing. Thus, Ubc9 plays an important
role in the up-regulation of the BMP signaling pathway.

PMID: 18321803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nat Med. 2008 Mar;14(3):299-305. doi: 10.1038/nm1712. Epub 2008 Feb 24.

Dimorphic effects of Notch signaling in bone homeostasis.

Engin F(1), Yao Z, Yang T, Zhou G, Bertin T, Jiang MM, Chen Y, Wang L, Zheng H,
Sutton RE, Boyce BF, Lee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 7703, USA.

Notch signaling is a key mechanism in the control of embryogenesis. However, its 
in vivo function during mesenchymal cell differentiation, and, specifically, in
bone homeostasis, remains largely unknown. Here, we show that osteoblast-specific
gain of Notch function causes severe osteosclerosis owing to increased
proliferation of immature osteoblasts. Under these pathological conditions, Notch
stimulates early osteoblastic proliferation by upregulating the genes encoding
cyclin D, cyclin E and Sp7 (osterix). The intracellular domain of Notch1 also
regulates terminal osteoblastic differentiation by directly binding Runx2 and
repressing its transactivation function. In contrast, loss of all Notch signaling
in osteoblasts, generated by deletion of the genes encoding presenilin-1 and
presenilin-2 in bone, is associated with late-onset, age-related osteoporosis,
which in turn results from increased osteoblast-dependent osteoclastic activity
due to decreased osteoprotegerin mRNA expression in these cells. Together, these 
findings highlight the potential dimorphic effects of Notch signaling in bone
homeostasis and may provide direction for novel therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC2671578
PMID: 18297084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Environ Microbiol. 2008 May;10(5):1365-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2007.01529.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 29.

Organization of the ipdC region regulates IAA levels in different Azospirillum
brasilense strains: molecular and functional analysis of ipdC in strain SM.

Malhotra M(1), Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Delhi South Campus, Benito Juarez Road, 
New Delhi-110021, India.

Presence of the indole-3-pyruvic acid pathway (IPyA) of indole-3-acetic acid
(IAA) biosynthesis was demonstrated by identifying the ipdC gene encoding
indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase (IPDC) in Azospirillum brasilense strain SM.
Comparison with other A. brasilense strains, Sp7 and Sp245, revealed homology in 
the gene and its 5' regulatory region. The 3' region of strain SM carries a
truncated iaaC gene implicated in controlling IAA biosynthesis in strain Sp245.
While the ipdC transcript could be visualized by reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), truncated iaaC was non-functional. Strain SM derivatives
carrying higher copy number of ipdC and P(ipdC) showed improved IAA biosynthesis.
P(ipdC) showed sequence elements that are part of composite auxin-responsive
promoters. Expression of ipdC was upregulated by IAA, other auxins, temperature
and nutrient stress, and an increase in pH. Heterologous overexpression of a
functional iaaC gene from strain Sp245 in strain SM confirmed its role in
controlling IAA biosynthesis and lowering ipdC expression which may be effected
by dissociating IAA-transcriptional regulator interactions in the 5' region.
However, the effect of the introduced iaaC was overcome when both ipdC and iaaC
were expressed from similar plasmid background. This analysis confirmed that
strain-based differences in IAA biosynthesis could be explained by differential
regulation of ipdC expression.

PMID: 18248455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Feb 15;314(4):763-73. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.12.007. Epub
2008 Jan 22.

Dissection of the osteogenic effects of laminin-332 utilizing specific LG
domains: LG3 induces osteogenic differentiation, but not mineralization.

Klees RF(1), Salasznyk RM, Ward DF, Crone DE, Williams WA, Harris MP, Boskey A,
Quaranta V, Plopper GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street, Troy,
NY 12180-3596, USA.

The overall mechanisms governing the role of laminins during osteogenic
differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) are poorly understood. We 
previously reported that laminin-332 induces an osteogenic phenotype in hMSC and 
does so through a focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and extracellular signal-related
kinase (ERK) dependent pathway. We hypothesized that this is a result of
integrin-ECM binding, and that it occurs via the known alpha3 LG3 integrin
binding domain of laminin-332. To test this hypothesis we cultured hMSC on
several different globular domains of laminin-332. hMSC adhered best to the LG3
domain, and this adhesion maximally activated FAK and ERK within 120 min.
Prolonged culturing (8 or 16 days) of hMSC on LG3 led to activation of the
osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 and expression of key osteogenic markers
(osterix, bone sialoprotein 2, osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, extracellular
calcium) in hMSC. LG3 domain binding did not increase matrix mineralization,
demonstrating that the LG3 domain alone is not sufficient to induce complete
osteogenic differentiation in vitro. We conclude that the LG3 domain mediates
attachment of hMSC to laminin-332 and that this adhesion recapitulates most, but 
not all, of the osteogenic differentiation associated with laminin-5 binding to
hMSC.

PMCID: PMC2268764
PMID: 18206871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Prikl Biokhim Mikrobiol. 2007 Nov-Dec;43(6):653-6.

[Stabilizing effect of Azospirillum lectins on beta-glucosidase activity].

[Article in Russian]

Alen'kina SA, Zharkova VR, Nikitina VE.

Lectins from the surface of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and Azospirillumn
brasilense Sp7.2.3 (a mutant with impaired lectin activity) were shown to induce 
a stabilizing effect on the activity of almond beta-glucosidase under conditions 
of thermoinactivation and proteolytic enzyme treatment. Differences were revealed
in the influence of lectins with various antigenic properties. Our results
indicate that the effects of lectins on the catalytic activity of the enzyme are 
mainly associated with conformational changes in lectin molecules during
mutagenesis, but not with carbohydrate specificity (general property). These data
should be taken into account in evaluating the role of lectins in the formation
of nitrogen-fixing associations.

PMID: 18173106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Arch Microbiol. 2008 May;189(5):519-24. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 produces an outer-membrane lectin that specifically
binds to surface-exposed extracellular polysaccharide produced by the bacterium.

Mora P(1), Rosconi F, Franco Fraguas L, Castro-Sowinski S.

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Bioquímica, Departamento de Biociencias, Facultad de Química, CC
1157, Montevideo, Uruguay.

Azospirillum sp promotes the growth of many important crop plants. We
demonstrated lectin binding activity in outer-membrane protein extracts of A.
brasilense Sp7 by hemagglutination assays. The lectin specifically recognised the
exopolysaccharide (EPS) produced by aggregated cells. Affinity chromatography
using EPS-Sepharose was used to identify a 67 kDa outer-membrane lectin (OML)
that recognised a binding region in the extracellular polysaccharide. Results
show the specific recognition and binding between EPS and OML. The potential
relationship between cell-to-cell aggregation and the OML-EPS interaction is
discussed.

PMID: 18094958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Feb;74(3):861-74. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Bacteriophage prevalence in the genus Azospirillum and analysis of the first
genome sequence of an Azospirillum brasilense integrative phage.

Boyer M(1), Haurat J, Samain S, Segurens B, Gavory F, González V, Mavingui P,
Rohr R, Bally R, Wisniewski-Dyé F.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, F-69003, France.

The prevalence of bacteriophages was investigated in 24 strains of four species
of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria belonging to the genus Azospirillum. Upon
induction by mitomycin C, the release of phage particles was observed in 11
strains from three species. Transmission electron microscopy revealed two
distinct sizes of particles, depending on the identity of the Azospirillum
species, typical of the Siphoviridae family. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and
hybridization experiments carried out on phage-encapsidated DNAs revealed that
all phages isolated from A. lipoferum and A. doebereinerae strains had a size of 
about 10 kb whereas all phages isolated from A. brasilense strains displayed
genome sizes ranging from 62 to 65 kb. Strong DNA hybridizing signals were shown 
for most phages hosted by the same species whereas no homology was found between 
phages harbored by different species. Moreover, the complete sequence of the A.
brasilense Cd bacteriophage (phiAb-Cd) genome was determined as a double-stranded
DNA circular molecule of 62,337 pb that encodes 95 predicted proteins. Only 14 of
the predicted proteins could be assigned functions, some of which were involved
in DNA processing, phage morphogenesis, and bacterial lysis. In addition, the
phiAb-Cd complete genome was mapped as a prophage on a 570-kb replicon of strain 
A. brasilense Cd, and a region of 27.3 kb of phiAb-Cd was found to be duplicated 
on the 130-kb pRhico plasmid previously sequenced from A. brasilense Sp7, the
parental strain of A. brasilense Cd.

PMCID: PMC2227737
PMID: 18065619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Arch Oral Biol. 2008 Mar;53(3):214-9. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Compressive force stimulates the expression of osteogenesis-related transcription
factors in ROS 17/2.8 cells.

Yanagisawa M(1), Suzuki N, Mitsui N, Koyama Y, Otsuka K, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Nihon University School of Dentistry, 1-8-13
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine how compressive force affects the expression of
osteogenesis-related transcription factors in osteoblasts.
DESIGN: Cells of ROS 17/2.8, a typical osteoblastic cell line, were cultured with
or without continuous compressive force (0.5-2.0 g/cm(2)). Expression of mRNA
encoding the osteogenesis-related transcription factors Runx2, Osterix, Msx2,
Dlx5 and AJ18 was measured using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Protein
expression of these transcription factors was determined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: A compressive force of 1.0 g/cm(2) significantly increased mRNA and
protein expression of Runx2, Osterix, Msx2 and Dlx5, which are critical for
osteoblast differentiation. In contrast, mRNA and protein expression of AJ18,
which downregulates osteoblast differentiation, were decreased with 1.0 g/cm(2)
of compressive force.
CONCLUSIONS: A compressive force of 1.0 g/cm(2), which was considered optimal for
bone formation under the present experimental conditions, stimulates osteoblastic
differentiation via the modulation of osteogenesis-related transcription factors.

PMID: 18054892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 2007 Sep-Oct;(5):80-2.

[Changes in electrophysical characteristics of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 cells 
during their interaction with polyclonal antibodies].

[Article in Russian]

Gulii OI, Bunin VD, O'Neil D, Ivnitskii D, Matora LIu, Ignatov VV, Ignatov OV.

Electrooptical characteristics of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 cells during their 
specific interaction with polyclonal rabbit antibodies were studied. Dependence
of optical density of cell suspension during electroorientation of cells from
frequency of orienting field in interval 10, 100, 250, and 500 kHz was evaluated.
Itwas shown that electrooptical (EO) characteristics of bacterial suspensions
change during interaction of A. brasilense cells with antibodies, and maximal
changes occur when frequency of oriented field amounts 100-250 kHz. During
interaction of A. brasilense Sp7 with strain-specific polyclonal antibodies in
the presence of Escherichia coli K-12 and Pseudomonas putida C-11 decrease of
amplitude of analytic signal was observed but detection of A. brasilense Sp7
cells was possible. Possibility of detection of microorganisms by EO analysis
during their interaction with antibodies was shown.

PMID: 18038554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2007 May-Jun;141(2-3):187-201.

Optimization of keratinase production and enzyme activity using response surface 
methodology with Streptomyces sp7.

Tatineni R(1), Doddapaneni KK, Potumarthi RC, Mangamoori LN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Institute of Science and Technology, JNT University,
Hyderabad, 500085, India.

A two-step response surface methodology (RSM) study was conducted for the
optimization of keratinase production and enzyme activity from poultry feather by
Streptomyces sp7. Initially different combinations of salts were screened for
maximal production of keratinase at a constant pH of 6.5 and feather meal
concentration of 5 g/L. A combination of K2HPO4, KH2PO4, and NaCl gave a maximum 
yield of keratinase (70.9 U/mL) production. In the first step of the RSM study,
the selected five variables (feather meal, K2HPO4, KH2PO4, NaCl, and pH) were
optimized by a 25 full-factorial rotatable central composite design (CCD) that
resulted in 95 U/mL of keratinase production. The results of analysis of variance
and regression of a second-order model showed that the linear effects of feather 
meal concentration (p<0.005) and NaCl (p<0.029) and the interactive effects of
all variables were more significant and that values of the quadratic effects of
feather meal (p<1.72e-5), K2HPO4 (p<4.731e-6), KH2PO4 (p<1.01e-10), and pH (p
7.63e-7) were more significant than the linear and interactive effects of the
process variables. In the second step, a 23 rotatable full-factorial CCD and
response surface analysis were used for the selection of optimal process
parameters (pH, temperature, and rpm) for keratinase enzyme activity. These
optima were pH 11.0, 45 degrees C, and 300 rpm.

PMID: 18025551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Front Biosci. 2008 Jan 1;13:898-903.

Regulation of bone development and maintenance by Runx2.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.
komorit@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Runx2 and Sp7/Osterix determine the osteoblast lineage from mesenchymal stem
cells with canonical Wnt signaling. In the process of osteoblast differentiation,
these factors and canonical Wnt signaling molecules inhibit mesenchymal cells
from differentiating into chondrocytes and adipocytes. After the commitment to
osteoblast lineage, Runx2 maintains the osteoblasts in an immature stage, during 
which immature bone forms with randomly and loosely packed collagen fibrils and
low mineralization. Runx2 must be suppressed for immature osteoblasts to become
fully mature osteoblasts, which form mature bone with regularly and densely
packed collagen fibrils and high mineralization. During the early stage of
osteoblast differentiation, Runx2 regulates the expression of major bone matrix
protein genes. However, Runx2 is not essential for the maintenance of the
expression of the major bone matrix protein genes in mature osteoblasts. Estrogen
and parathyroid hormone (PTH) enhance Runx2 expression and activity through
anabolic effects, however, estrogen negatively regulates Runx2 in
osteoclastogenesis. Runx2 is also involved in the catabolic effect of PTH through
the induction of Tnfsf11. Thus, Runx2 regulates bone development, bone
maturation, and bone maintenance through the regulation of osteoblast
differentiation and function.

PMID: 17981598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Arch Physiol Biochem. 2007 Jun;113(3):154-61.

Advanced glycation endproducts influence the mRNA expression of RAGE, RANKL and
various osteoblastic genes in human osteoblasts.

Franke S(1), Siggelkow H, Wolf G, Hein G.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Internal Medicine III, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Germany. 
sybille.franke@med.uni-jena.de

Glycation reactions resulting in the generation and accumulation of advanced
glycation endproducts (AGEs) are potential mechanisms by which bone protein may
be altered in vivo. AGEs accumulate in the bone increasingly with age come into
close contact with osteoblasts or osteoclasts. The direct effect of AGEs on bone 
cells has not been thoroughly investigated. This study aimed to examine whether
glycated bovine serum albumin (AGE - BSA) as an AGE modulate the mRNA expression 
of various genes in primary human osteoblast cultures. The following parameters
were included: RAGE (receptor for AGEs), alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin,
osterix and RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand). Primary
human osteoblast cultures were obtained from bone specimens of six patients with 
osteoarthrosis. Human osteoblasts were treated in AGE - BSA or control-BSA
(non-glycated BSA) containing medium (5 mg/ml each) over a time course of seven
days. After RT-PCR the mRNA expression was measured by real-time PCR. Related to 
control - BSA exposure, the mRNA expression of RAGE, RANKL and osterix increased 
during AGE - BSA treament. For alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin a tendency of
down-regulation was found. In summary, the study presents evidence that advanced 
glycation end products accumulated in bone alter osteoblasts by activation the
AGE - RAGE pathway (RAGE mRNA up-regulation), inducing enhanced
osteoclastogenesis (RANKL mRNA up-regulation) and impaired matrix mineralization 
(down-regulation of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin mRNA). Thus, AGEs may
play a functional role in the development of bone diseases (e.g. osteoporosis).

PMID: 17922311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Anal Chim Acta. 2006 Jul 28;573-574:445-52. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Instrumental analysis of bacterial cells using vibrational and emission Mössbauer
spectroscopic techniques.

Kamnev AA(1), Tugarova AV, Antonyuk LP, Tarantilis PA, Kulikov LA, Perfiliev YD, 
Polissiou MG, Gardiner PH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry of Plant-Bacterial Symbioses, Institute of
Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian Academy of
Sciences, 410049 Saratov, Russia. aakamnev@ibppm.sgu.ru

In biosciences and biotechnology, the expanding application of physicochemical
approaches using modern instrumental techniques is an efficient strategy to
obtain valuable and often unique information at the molecular level. In this
work, we applied a combination of vibrational (Fourier transform infrared (FTIR),
FT-Raman) spectroscopic techniques, useful in overall structural and
compositional analysis of bacterial cells of the rhizobacterium Azospirillum
brasilense, with 57Co emission Mössbauer spectroscopy (EMS) used for sensitive
monitoring of metal binding and further transformations in live bacterial cells. 
The information obtained, together with ICP-MS analyses for metals taken up by
the bacteria, is useful in analysing the impact of the environmental conditions
(heavy metal stress) on the bacterial metabolism and some differences in the
heavy metal stress-induced behaviour of non-endophytic (Sp7) and facultatively
endophytic (Sp245) strains. The results show that, while both strains Sp7 and
Sp245 take up noticeable and comparable amounts of heavy metals from the medium
(0.12 and 0.13 mg Co, 0.48 and 0.44 mg Cu or 4.2 and 2.1 mg Zn per gram of dry
biomass, respectively, at a metal concentration of 0.2 mM in the medium), their
metabolic responses differ essentially. Whereas for strain Sp7 the FTIR
measurements showed significant accumulation of polyhydroxyalkanoates as storage 
materials involved in stress endurance, strain Sp245 did not show any major
changes in cellular composition. Nevertheless, EMS measurements showed rapid
binding of cobalt(II) by live bacterial cells (chemically similar to metal
binding by dead bacteria) and its further transformation in the live cells within
an hour.

PMID: 17723559  [PubMed]


316. Anal Biochem. 2007 Nov 15;370(2):201-5. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Electrophysical characteristics of Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 during
interaction with antibodies to various cell surface epitopes.

Guliy OI(1), Matora LY, Burygin GL, Dykman LA, Ostudin NA, Bunin VD, Ignatov VV, 
Ignatov OV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Saratov 410049, Russian Federation.

This work was undertaken to examine the electrooptical characteristics of cells
of Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 during their interaction with antibodies
developed to various cell surface epitopes. We used the dependences of the cell
suspension optical density changes induced by electroorientation on the orienting
field frequency (740, 1000, 1450, 2000, and 2800kHz). Cell interactions with
homologous strain-specific antibodies to the A. brasilense Sp245 O antigen and
with homologous antibodies to whole bacterial cells brought about considerable
changes in the electrooptical properties of the bacterial suspension. When
genus-specific antibodies to the flagellin of the Azospirillum sheathed flagellum
and antibodies to the serologically distinct O antigen of A. brasilense Sp7 were 
included in the A. brasilense Sp245 suspension, the changes caused in the
electrooptical signal were slight and had values close to those for the above
changes. These findings agree well with the immunochemical characteristics of the
Azospirillum O antigens and with the data on the topographical distribution of
the Azospirillum major cell surface antigens. The obtained results can serve as a
basis for the development of a rapid test for the intraspecies detection of
microorganisms.

PMID: 17723223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Phytomedicine. 2007 Dec;14(12):806-14. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Resveratrol enhances proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation in human
mesenchymal stem cells via ER-dependent ERK1/2 activation.

Dai Z(1), Li Y, Quarles LD, Song T, Pan W, Zhou H, Xiao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University, Changsha 410078,
China.

In the present study, we investigated the in vitro effect of resveratrol (RSVL), 
a polyphenolic phytoestrogen, on cell proliferation and osteoblastic maturation
in human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell (HBMSC) cultures. RSVL
(10(-8)-10(-5) M) increased cell growth dose-dependently, as measured by
[(3)H]-thymidine incorporation, and stimulated osteoblastic maturation as
assessed by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, calcium deposition into the
extracellular matrix, and the expression of osteoblastic markers such as
RUNX2/CBFA1, Osterix and Osteocalcin in HBMSCs cell cultures. Further studies
found that RSVL (10(-6)M) resulted in a rapid activation of both extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling in HBMSCs cultures. The effects of RSVL were mimicked by
17beta-estrodial (10(-8) M) and were abolished by estrogen receptor (ER)
antagonist ICI182780. An ERK1/2 pathway inhibitor, PD98059, significantly
attenuated RSVL-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation, consistent with the reduction of 
cell proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation as well as expression of
osteoblastic markers. In contrast, SB203580, a p38 MAPK pathway blocker, blocked 
RSVL-induced p38 phosphorylation, but resulted in an increase of cell
proliferation and a more osteoblastic maturation. These data suggest that RSVL
stimulates HBMSCs proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation through an
ER-dependent mechanism and coupling to ERK1/2 activation.

PMID: 17689939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Oct;73(19):6254-61. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Engineering of a type III rubisco from a hyperthermophilic archaeon in order to
enhance catalytic performance in mesophilic host cells.

Yoshida S(1), Atomi H, Imanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

The hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus kodakaraensis harbors a type III
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rbc(Tk)). It has previously been
shown that Rbc(Tk) is capable of supporting photoautotrophic and
photoheterotrophic growth in a mesophilic host cell, Rhodopseudomonas palustris
Delta3, whose three native Rubisco genes had been disrupted. Here, we have
examined the enzymatic properties of Rbc(Tk) at 25 degrees C and have constructed
mutant proteins in order to enhance its performance in mesophilic host cells.
Initial sites for mutagenesis were selected by focusing on sequence differences
in the loop 6 and alpha-helix 6 regions among Rbc(Tk) and the enzymes from
spinach (mutant proteins SP1 to SP7), Galdieria partita (GP1 and GP2), and
Rhodospirillum rubrum (RR1). Loop 6 of Rbc(Tk) is one residue longer than those
found in the spinach and G. partita enzymes, and replacing Rbc(Tk) loop 6 with
these regions led to dramatic decreases in activity. Six mutant enzymes retaining
significant levels of Rubisco activity were selected, and their genes were
introduced into R. palustris Delta3. Cells harboring mutant protein SP6 displayed
a 31% increase in the specific growth rate under photoheterotrophic conditions
compared to cells harboring wild-type Rbc(Tk). SP6 corresponds to a complete
substitution of the original alpha-helix 6 of Rbc(Tk) with that of the spinach
enzyme. Compared to wild-type Rbc(Tk), the purified SP6 mutant protein exhibited 
a 30% increase in turnover number (k(cat)) of the carboxylase activity and a 17% 
increase in the k(cat)/K(m) value. Based on these results, seven further mutant
proteins were designed and examined. The results confirmed the importance of the 
length of loop 6 in Rbc(Tk) and also led to the identification of specific
residue changes that resulted in an increase in the turnover number of Rbc(Tk) at
ambient temperatures.

PMCID: PMC2075004
PMID: 17675435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dev Dyn. 2007 Aug;236(8):2245-57.

Identification of novel genes expressed during mouse tooth development by
microarray gene expression analysis.

Pemberton TJ(1), Li FY, Oka S, Mendoza-Fandino GA, Hsu YH, Bringas P Jr, Chai Y, 
Snead ML, Mehrian-Shai R, Patel PI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90033, USA.

To identify genes heretofore undiscovered as critical players in the biogenesis
of teeth, we have used microarray gene expression analysis of the developing
mouse molar tooth (DMT) between postnatal day (P) 1 and P10 to identify genes
differentially expressed when compared with 16 control tissues. Of the top 100
genes exhibiting increased expression in the DMT, 29 were found to have been
previously associated with tooth development. Differential expression of the
remaining 71 genes not previously associated with tooth development was confirmed
by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis. Further
analysis of seven of the latter genes by mRNA in situ hybridization found that
five were specific to the developing tooth in the craniofacial region (Rspo4,
Papln, Amtn, Gja1, Maf). Of the remaining two, one was found to be more widely
expressed (Sp7) and the other was found to be specific to the nasal serous gland,
which is close to, but distinct from, the developing tooth (Vrm).

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4457363
PMID: 17626284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Jan;214(1):173-82.

Osterix/Sp7 regulates mesenchymal stem cell mediated endochondral ossification.

Kaback LA(1), Soung do Y, Naik A, Smith N, Schwarz EM, O'Keefe RJ, Drissi H.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester, Rochester,
New York, USA.

We investigated the expression and regulation of the zinc finger protein Osterix 
(Osx) during endochondral ossification in mice. In studies to determine the
temporal and spatial regulation of Osx mRNA and protein during embryogenesis we
found it to be present throughout development, but its expression is restricted
to the immature chondro/osteoprogenitor cells and mature osteoblasts, excluding
hypertrophic chondrocytes. Using a fracture model, we show a consistent pattern
of Osx protein expression in mesenchymal progenitor cells in the periosteum and
immature chondrocytes and osteoblasts embedded in the fracture callus. In
contrast, hypertrophic chondrocytes, vessels and fibrous tissue were devoid of
Osx expression. Additionally, using RNA isolated from fracture callus throughout 
the healing process, we observe that Osx transcripts parallel that of Runx2 and
differentially overlap both cartilage and bone phenotypic markers. Furthermore,
using limb bud-derived MLB13MYC Clone 17 cells, we show that PTHrP inhibited
chondrocyte maturation while it enhanced mRNA levels of Osx in these
chondro/osteoprogenitor cells. Gain and loss of function of Osx function
experiments with these cells demonstrated that Osx serves as an inhibitor of
chondrogenesis and chondrocyte maturation, while it promotes osteoblast
maturation. Together, our findings provide the first demonstration of the
molecular mechanisms underlying Osx inhibition of chondrocyte differentiation,
and further suggest a role for this transcription factor in mediating
endochondral ossification during bone repair.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17579353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Prosthodont. 2007 Nov-Dec;16(6):431-8. Epub 2007 Jun 9.

Osteoblast differentiation is enhanced in rotary cell culture simulated
microgravity environments.

Ko YJ(1), Zaharias RS, Seabold DA, Lafoon J, Schneider GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA.

PURPOSE: As the aging population increases, more people will become reliant on
regenerative dental medicine for implant therapy. The objective of this study was
to test the hypothesis that 3D rotary cell culture (RCC) environments created by 
simulated microgravity would enhance osteogenic gene expression using integrin
mediated pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human embryonic palatal mesenchymal (HEPM, ATCC 1486)
pre-osteoblasts were cultured in either RCC to create 3D environments or in 2D
monolayers for 72 hours. Gross phenotypic analysis was performed using Alizarin
Red S staining for calcium and microscopy. Real-time PCR analysis was used to
detect differences in osteoblast gene expression. Aggregates developed in 3D RCC 
environments were treated with or without antibody to the collagen-I integrin
receptor alpha2beta1 to determine whether this molecular pathway might contribute
to the development of a mineralized matrix.
RESULTS: Microscopic analysis demonstrated that RCC environments promoted 3D
aggregate formation by 72 hours without any scaffold. The mass appeared
osseous-like with a white, shiny, translucent surface. The center was amorphous
with areas of vacuolization, tubule-like structures, and fibrous-like extensions.
Real-time PCR data showed that 3D environments enhanced osteogenic gene
expression as compared with 2D monolayer culturing conditions. At 72 hours,
changes in levels of osteogenic gene expression were noted. Cbfa1, a necessary
transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation, was expressed 33% higher (p=
0.26); Collagen 1, 69% higher (p= 0.05); Osterix, 49% higher (p= 0.001); and
BSPII, 54% higher (p= 0.001) than osteoblasts cultured for 72 hours in standard
2D monolayer conditions. When cultured in the presence of collagen alpha2beta1
integrin receptor antibody, 3D aggregates had decreased levels of mineralization 
as compared with non-treated aggregates.
CONCLUSION: RCC enhances osteoblast differentiation using integrin mediated
pathways.

PMID: 17559538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 2007 Mar-Apr;(2):60-5.

[Impact of bacterial lectin on functional activity of lymphocytes].

[Article in Russian]

Ponomareva EG, Emel'ianova NV, Nikitina VE, Zakharova NB.

Impact of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 lectin with carbohydrate specificity to
L-fucose on T- and B-lymphocytes production, activity of IL-1alpha, and TNF-alpha
was studied in vitro and compared with influence of red kidney bean
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) on the same parameters. Increase of growth of T- and
B-cells subpopulations has been shown that point to stimulatory effect of the
bacterial lectin. Bacterial lectin of A. brasilense also increased synthesis of
IL-1alpha and TNF-alpha. It has been shown that the bacterial lectin has more
pronounced stimulatory effect on functional activity of lymphocytes compared with
PHA.

PMID: 17523482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Tissue Eng. 2007 Jul;13(7):1513-23.

Osterix induces osteogenic gene expression but not differentiation in primary
human fetal mesenchymal stem cells.

Kurata H(1), Guillot PV, Chan J, Fisk NM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Fetal Medicine Group, Institute of Reproductive and Developmental
Biology, Imperial College London, UK. h.kurata@imperial.ac.uk

The transcription factor osterix (Osx) is a key regulator of osteoblast
differentiation and induces bone formation in embryonic but not adult stem cells.
We investigated the effect of up-regulating Osx on an intermediate stem cell
type, first trimester fetal mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which are more
expandable than adult MSCs. Human fetal (hf ) MSCs were transduced with a
lentiviral vector encoding human Osx. In undifferentiating MSCs cultures, forced 
expression of Osx stimulated osteopontin and alkaline phosphatase expression.
However, Osx did not up-regulate osteocalcin, a late marker of osteoblast
differentiation or result in extracellular calcium crystals, indicating that Osx 
does not directly mediate terminal differentiation in primary hfMSCs. To
understand the downstream effects of Osx expression in primary hfMSCs, we next
investigated the regulatory relationship between Osx, and the transcription
factors Dlx5, Runx2, and Msx2. Osx induced Dlx5 but did not affect Runx2 and
Msx2, whereas stealth ribonucleic acid interference of Osx inhibited Dlx5 without
affecting expression of Runx2 and Msx2. In conclusion, Osx regulates osteogenic
gene expression in hfMSCs but is insufficient to induce terminal osteogenic
differentiation.

PMID: 17518720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2159-69.

Conditional Kif3a ablation causes abnormal hedgehog signaling topography, growth 
plate dysfunction, and excessive bone and cartilage formation during mouse
skeletogenesis.

Koyama E(1), Young B, Nagayama M, Shibukawa Y, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M,
Maeda Y, Lanske B, Song B, Serra R, Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. eiki.koyama@jefferson.edu

The motor protein Kif3a and primary cilia regulate important developmental
processes, but their roles in skeletogenesis remain ill-defined. Here we created 
mice deficient in Kif3a in cartilage and focused on the cranial base and
synchondroses. Kif3a deficiency caused cranial base growth retardation and
dysmorphogenesis, which were evident in neonatal animals by anatomical and
micro-computed tomography (microCT) inspection. Kif3a deficiency also changed
synchondrosis growth plate organization and function, and the severity of these
changes increased over time. By postnatal day (P)7, mutant growth plates lacked
typical zones of chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy, and were instead
composed of chondrocytes with an unusual phenotype characterized by strong
collagen II (Col2a1) gene expression but barely detectable expression of Indian
hedgehog (Ihh), collagen X (Col10a1), Vegf (Vegfa), MMP-13 (Mmp13) and osterix
(Sp7). Concurrently, unexpected developmental events occurred in perichondrial
tissues, including excessive intramembranous ossification all along the
perichondrial border and the formation of ectopic cartilage masses. Looking for
possible culprits for these latter processes, we analyzed hedgehog signalling
topography and intensity by monitoring the expression of the hedgehog effectors
Patched 1 and Gli1, and of the hedgehog-binding cell-surface component syndecan
3. Compared with controls, hedgehog signaling was quite feeble within mutant
growth plates as early as P0, but was actually higher and was widespread all
along mutant perichondrial tissues. Lastly, we studied postnatal mice deficient
in Ihh in cartilage; their cranial base defects only minimally resembled those in
Kif3a-deficient mice. In summary, Kif3a and primary cilia make unique
contributions to cranial base development and synchondrosis growth plate
function. Their deficiency causes abnormal topography of hedgehog signaling,
growth plate dysfunction, and un-physiologic responses and processes in
perichondrial tissues, including ectopic cartilage formation and excessive
intramembranous ossification.

PMCID: PMC2776720
PMID: 17507416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Genet Genomics. 2007 Jul;278(1):43-51. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Identification of salt stress inducible genes that control cell envelope related 
functions in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Nagarajan T(1), Vanderleyden J, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Bacterial Genetics Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, India.

Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria such as Azospirillum brasilense are
agronomically important as they are frequently used for crop inoculation. But
adverse factors such as increasing soil salinity limit their survival,
multiplication and phytostimulatory effect. In order to understand the role of
the genes involved in the adaptation of A. brasilense Sp7 to salt stress, a
mutant library (6,800 mutants) was constructed after random integration of a
mini-Transposon Tn5 derivative containing a promoterless gusA and oriV. The
library was screened for salt stress inducible Gus activity on minimal malate
agar medium containing NaCl and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D: -glucuronide. 
Salt stress responsiveness of the promoters was estimated by quantifying GusA
activity in the presence and absence of NaCl stress using p-nitrophenyl-beta-D:
-glucuronide as a substrate. In 11 mutants showing high levels of gusA expression
in the presence of salt-stress, the partial nucleotide sequence of the DNA region
flanking the site of Tn5 insertion was determined and analysed using the
NCBI-BLAST programs. Similarity searches revealed that 10 out of the 11 genes
sequenced showed notable similarity with genes involved in functions related to
modulation in the composition of exopolysaccharides, capsular polysaccharides,
lipopolysaccharides, peptidoglycan and lipid bilayer of the cell envelope.
Induction of cell envelope related genes in response to salt stress and salt
sensitive phenotype of several mutants in A. brasilense indicate a prominent role
of cell envelope in salt-stress adaptation.

PMID: 17340145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):577-84.

Osterix is a key target for mechanical signals in human thoracic ligament flavum 
cells.

Fan D(1), Chen Z, Wang D, Guo Z, Qiang Q, Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.

Mechanical stress is considered to be an important factor in the progression of
thoracic ossification of the ligament flavum (TOLF). To elucidate the mechanism
underlying mechanical stress-induced TOLF, we investigated the effect of
stretching on cultured flavum ligament cells derived from TOLF and non-TOLF
patients. We found that the mRNA expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
osteocalcin, Runx2, and osterix, but not that of Dlx5 and Msx2, was significantly
increased by stretching in TOLF cells. In addition, the effect seems to be finely
tuned by stretching-triggered activation of distinct mitogen-activated protein
kinase cascades. Specifically, a p38 specific inhibitor, SB203580, significantly 
inhibited stretching-induced osterix expression as well as ALP activity, whereas 
a specific inhibitor of ERK1/2, U0126, prevented stretching-induced Runx2
expression. We showed that overexpression of osterix resulted in a significant
increase of ALP activity in TOLF cells, and osterix-specific RNAi completely
abrogated the stretching-induced ALP activity, indicating that osterix plays a
key role in stretching-stimulated osteogenic effect in TOLF cells. These results 
suggest that mechanical stress plays important roles in the progression of TOLF
through induction of osteogenic differentiation of TOLF cells, and our findings
support that osterix functions as a molecular link between mechanostressing and
osteogenic differentiation.

PMID: 17311298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Clin Calcium. 2007 Feb;17(2):209-16.

[Mechanisms of alveolar bone remodeling].

[Article in Japanese]

Kobayashi Y(1), Udagawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Matsumoto Dental University, Institute for Oral Science, Division of Hard
Tissue Research.

The maintenance of bone is achieved by a fine balance between bone formation and 
bone resorption. The differentiation and activation of osteoclasts are tightly
regulated by osteoblasts. Osteoblasts express at least two cytokines essential
for osteoclast differentiation; they are receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand
(RANKL) and macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF). On the other hand,
differentiation of osteoblasts is regulated by the transcription factors Runx2
and Osterix. The recent progress of genetic experiments has revealed that
osteoclasts also regulate the differentiation of osteblasts in vivo. This review 
describes the recent studies on the communication between osteoblasts and
osteoclasts in the process of bone remodeling.

PMID: 17272878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Plant Cell Rep. 2007 Jun;26(6):711-7. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

Micropropagation of photinia employing rhizobacteria to promote root development.

Larraburu EE(1), Carletti SM, Rodríguez Cáceres EA, Llorente BE.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Tissue Culture Laboratory, Department of Basic Sciences, National
University of Luján, Luján, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

An alternative protocol was developed for in vitro propagation of photinia
(Photinia x fraseri Dress), an ornamental shrub, using the plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR) Azospirillum brasilense and Azotobacter chroococcum during
rhizogenesis. Shoot tips from four-year-old mature plants, cut in spring and
summer, were used as initial explants. They were cultured on Murashige-Skoog (MS)
medium with Gamborg's vitamins, N(6)-benzyladenine (BA: 11.1 microM) and
gibberellic acid (GA(3): 1.3 microM), obtaining 63% of established explants. The 
highest shoot length (22.9 mm) and multiplication rate (4.3) was achieved by
cultivating for four weeks in the same basal medium supplemented with 4.4 microM 
BA. Both auxin induction and bacterial inoculation were used for rooting.
Elongated shoots were treated with two concentrations of indole-3-butyric acid
(IBA: 4.9 or 49.2 microM) during 6 days for auxin induction. Then, the shoots
were transferred to an auxin-free medium and inoculated with A. brasilense Cd,
Sp7 or A. chroococcum (local strain). Bacterial inoculation induced earlier
rooting of photinia shoots. A. brasilense Cd with 49.2 microM IBA pulse showed a 
significant increase (P <or= 0.05) in root fresh and dry weight (105%, 137%),
root surface area (65%) and shoot fresh and dry weight (32%, 62%). A. brasilense 
Sp7 enhanced the root fresh weight (34%) and root surface area (41%) while no
significant differences with A. chroococcum inoculation were detected. The PGPR
inoculated micro-cuttings in combination with auxin induction pulses may play a
useful role in root organogenesis of micropropagated plants.

PMID: 17205338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Kidney Int. 2007 Feb;71(3):201-9. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Chronic metabolic acidosis alters osteoblast differentiation from human
mesenchymal stem cells.

Disthabanchong S(1), Radinahamed P, Stitchantrakul W, Hongeng S, Rajatanavin R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. sineemd@hotmail.com

Bone histology of distal renal tubular acidosis patients showed decreased bone
formation with impaired bone matrix mineralization that is not entirely explained
by an alteration in the mineral balance. Data from in vitro studies suggests a
direct inhibitory effect of metabolic acidosis on osteoblast function. We
investigated the effects of chronic metabolic acidosis on osteoblast
differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Human MSCs were allowed to
differentiate into osteoblasts in culture. Concentrated hydrochloric acid was
added to the medium to lower the bicarbonate concentration and pH. The expression
of various osteoblastic genes and proteins and bone matrix mineralization were
examined. Chronic metabolic acidosis enhanced the messenger RNA (mRNA) and
protein expression of early osteoblast transcription factor, runx-2, whereas
inhibiting osterix and having no effect on ATF-4. The expression of type I
collagen, the most abundant bone matrix protein, was increased following the same
pattern of runx-2. Likewise, metabolic acidosis slightly enhanced the expression 
of mature osteoblastic gene, osteocalcin. Study on mineralization revealed
suppressed alkaline phosphatase mRNA and enzyme activity. Despite the augmented
collagen deposit in acidic culture, bone matrix mineralization was impaired. In
conclusion, chronic metabolic acidosis alters osteoblast differentiation from
MSCs through its diverse effect on osteoblastic genes and proteins resulting in
an impairment of bone formation.

PMID: 17183249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2007 Feb;267(1):72-9. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

Strain-specific salt tolerance and osmoregulatory mechanisms in Azospirillum
brasilense.

Chowdhury SP(1), Nagarajan T, Tripathi R, Mishra MN, Le Rudulier D, Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

Salinity stress inhibits the growth and nitrogen fixation ability of the plant
growth-promoting rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense. Five strains of A.
brasilense were isolated from the rhizosphere of Indian cereals and grasses and
identified on the basis of their phenotypic features and 16S rRNA gene sequence. 
The five Indian isolates and two standard strains of A. brasilense, Sp7 and Cd,
showed notable differences in growth, acetylene-reducing activity under salt
stress, and ability to take up and use glycine betaine for the restoration of
growth and acetylene-reducing activity under salt stress. Salt stress also
enhanced the production of exopolysaccharides and cell aggregates, the extent of 
which varied in different strains of A. brasilense at different carbon to
nitrogen ratios in the culture medium. It can be concluded that the production of
exopolysaccharides and cell aggregates is a more consistent physiological
response of A. brasilense to salt stress than is the uptake and osmoprotection by
glycine betaine.

PMID: 17156127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2006 Dec;265(2):186-94.

cDNA-AFLP reveals differentially expressed genes related to cell aggregation of
Azospirillum brasilense.

Valverde A(1), Okon Y, Burdman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Agricultural, Food 
and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 
Israel.

The response regulatory gene flcA controls the differentiation process of
Azospirillum brasilense from vegetative state to cyst-like forms, both in culture
and in association with plants. In contrast to the wild type parental strain Sp7,
strain Sp72002, a Tn5 induced flcA(-) mutant, does not aggregate, does not
differentiate from motile, vibroid cells into nonmotile, cyst-like forms and
lacks some of the exopolysaccharide material on its cell surface. Here we aimed
to identify differentially expressed genes whose expression could be modulated by
flcA. Using cDNA-amplified fragment length polymorphism, we detected 81
transcript-derived fragments showing differential expression during exponential
growth phase in an aggregation-inducing medium containing high C : N ratio. The
fragments were sequenced and analyzed, and expression of ten genes encoding known
proteins was compared between the two strains by reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction-(RT-PCR). RT-PCR analyses confirmed the differential patterns
observed by cDNA-AFLP in nine of those genes. Among them are genes homologous to 
nodQ, involved in sulfation; narK, involved in nitrite/nitrate transport, and
flp, involved in autoaggregation; as well as genes encoding a biopolymer
transport protein, and the signal recognition particle. This work demonstrates
the usefulness of the cDNA-AFLP approach to reveal genes that are differentially 
expressed during aggregation in Azospirillum brasilense and provides insights
into the aggregation process of this bacterium.

PMID: 17147763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Blood. 2007 Apr 1;109(7):3024-30.

HGF inhibits BMP-induced osteoblastogenesis: possible implications for the bone
disease of multiple myeloma.

Standal T(1), Abildgaard N, Fagerli UM, Stordal B, Hjertner O, Borset M, Sundan
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
therese.standal@ntnu.no

The bone disease in multiple myeloma is caused by an uncoupling of bone formation
from bone resorption. A key difference between patients with and patients without
osteolytic lesion is that the latter have fewer and less active osteoblasts.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is often produced by myeloma cells and is found at
high concentrations in the bone marrow of patients with multiple myeloma. Here we
show that HGF inhibited bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-induced in vitro
osteoblastogenesis. Thus, HGF inhibited BMP-induced expression of alkaline
phosphatase in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and the murine myoid cell
line C2C12, as well as mineralization by hMSCs. Furthermore, the expression of
the osteoblast-specific transcription factors Runx2 and Osterix was reduced by
HGF treatment. HGF promoted proliferation of hMSCs, and the BMP-induced halt in
proliferation was overridden by HGF, keeping the cells in a proliferative,
undifferentiating state. BMP-induced nuclear translocation of receptor-activated 
Smads was inhibited by HGF, providing a possible explanation of how HGF inhibits 
BMP signaling. The in vitro data were supported by the observation of a negative 
correlation between HGF and a marker of osteoblast activity, bone-specific
alkaline phosphatase (rho = -0.45, P = .008), in sera from 34 patients with
myeloma. These observations suggest that HGF inhibits bone formation in multiple 
myeloma.

PMID: 17138824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;21(2):376-87. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

The orphan receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2 promotes osteoblast differentiation and 
enhances ex vivo bone formation.

Liu Y(1), Bhat RA, Seestaller-Wehr LM, Fukayama S, Mangine A, Moran RA, Komm BS, 
Bodine PV, Billiard J.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Health and Musculoskeletal Biology, Wyeth Research, 500 Arcola Road,
Collegeville, Pennsylvania 19426, USA.

Ror2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase, the expression of which increases during
differentiation of pluripotent stem cells to osteoblasts and then declines as
cells progress to osteocytes. To test whether Ror2 plays a role in
osteoblastogenesis, we investigated the effects of Ror2 overexpression and
down-regulation on osteoblastic lineage commitment and differentiation.
Expression of Ror2 in pluripotent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) by
adenoviral infection caused formation of mineralized extracellular matrix, which 
is the ultimate phenotype of an osteogenic tissue. Concomitantly, Ror2
over-expression inhibited adipogenic differentiation of hMSCs as monitored by
lipid formation. Ror2 shifted hMSC fate toward osteoblastogenesis by inducing
osteogenic transcription factor osterix and suppressing adipogenic transcription 
factors CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha and peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor gamma. Infection with Ror2 virus also strongly promoted matrix
mineralization in committed osteoblast-like MC3T3-E1 cells. Expression of Ror2 in
a human preosteocytic cell line by stable transfection also promoted further
differentiation, as judged by inhibited alkaline phosphatase activity,
potentiated osteocalcin secretion, and increased cellular apoptosis. In contrast,
down-regulation of Ror2 expression by short hairpin RNA essentially abrogated
dexamethasone-induced mineralization of hMSCs. Furthermore, down-regulation of
Ror2 expression in fully differentiated SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells inhibited
alkaline phosphatase activity. We conclude that Ror2 initiates commitment of MSCs
to osteoblastic lineage and promotes differentiation at early and late stages of 
osteoblastogenesis. Finally, using a mouse calvariae ex vivo organ culture model,
we demonstrate that these effects of Ror2 result in increased bone formation,
suggesting that it may also activate mature osteoblasts.

PMID: 17095577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Curr Microbiol. 2006 Oct;53(4):317-23. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

Adenosine diphosphate ribosylation of dinitrogenase reductase and adenylylation
of glutamine synthetase control ammonia excretion in ethylenediamine-resistant
mutants of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Srivastava A(1), Tripathi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratary of Bacterial Genetics, School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, India.

Azospirillum brasilense is a nitrogen-fixing, root-colonizing bacterium that
brings about plant-growth-promoting effects mainly because of its ability to
produce phytohormones. Ethylenediamine (EDA)-resistant mutants of A. brasilense
were isolated and screened for their higher ability to decrease acetylene and
release ammonia in the medium. One of the mutants showed considerably higher
levels of acetylene decrease and ammonia excretion. Nitrogenase activity of this 
mutant was relatively resistant to inhibition by NH(4)Cl. Adenosine triphosphate 
ribosylation of dinitrogenase reductase in the mutant did not increase even in
presence of 10 mM NH(4)Cl. Although the mutant showed decreased glutamine
synthetase (GS) activity, neither the levels of GS synthesized by the mutant nor 
the NH (4) (+) -binding site in the GS differed from those of the parent. The
main reason for the release of ammonia by the mutant seems to be the fixation of 
higher levels of nitrogen than its GS can assimilate, as well as higher levels of
adenylylation of GS, which may decrease ammonia assimilation.

PMID: 16972125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Bone. 2007 Jan;40(1):57-67. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Influence of an LRP5 cytoplasmic SNP on Wnt signaling and osteoblastic
differentiation.

Guo J(1), Cooper LF.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Oral Biology, Bone Biology and Implant Therapy Laboratory, 404
Brauer Hall, CB# 7450 School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7455, USA.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) is a key
determinant of bone mass, via the Wnt signaling pathway control of osteoblast
function. This study examined human LRP5 signaling and the effects of an
intracellular domain single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP: p.V1525A) on osteoblast
differentiation and mineralization. Constitutively active LRP5 was constructed by
deletion of the extracellular domain of LRP5 (LRP5DeltaN). Expression of
LRP5DeltaN-V, which carries the allele p.1525V, induced higher
beta-catenin/TCF-LEF activity compared to LRP5DeltaN-A, which carries the allele 
p.1525A. In a yeast two-hybrid assay, LRP5DeltaN-V also demonstrated a stronger
interaction with AXIN than LRP5DeltaN-A. Expression of either of the alleles did 
not change cell proliferation. However, cells expressing LRP5DeltaN-V showed
increased alkaline phosphatase activity and bone nodule formation compared to
cells transfected with empty vector or LRP5DeltaN-A after osteogenic supplement
(OS: beta-glycerophosphate and l-ascorbic acid) treatment. Cells expressing
LRP5DeltaN-V revealed significantly increased bone sialoprotein (BSP) expression 
after 7 days of OS treatment and maintained elevated expression until day 21.
Osteocalcin (OCN) mRNA levels were increased after 14-21 days of OS treatment in 
LRP5DeltaN-V expressing cells. LRP5DeltaN-V expressing cells demonstrated
positive interaction with BMP-2 signaling of transcription at the SBE-luc
promoter. LRP5 signaling is affected by the cytoplasmic SNP, p.V1525A. mRNA
levels of Runx2 and Osterix were not affected by this SNP.

PMID: 16956801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2006 Aug;261(2):272-9.

Identification, cloning and characterization of cysK, the gene encoding
O-acetylserine (thiol)-lyase from Azospirillum brasilense, which is involved in
tellurite resistance.

Ramírez A(1), Castañeda M, Xiqui ML, Sosa A, Baca BE.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Microbiológicas, Instituto de Ciencias, Benemérita
Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Mexico.

O-Acetylserine (thiol)-lyase (cysteine synthase) was purified from Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7. After hydrolysis of the purified protein, amino acid sequences of
five peptides were obtained, which permitted the cloning and sequencing of the
cysK gene. The deduced amino acid sequence of cysteine synthase exhibited
homology with several putative proteins from Alpha- and Gammaproteobacteria.
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 cysK exhibited 58% identity (72% similarity) with
Escherichia coli K12 and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium cysteine
synthase proteins. An E. coli auxotroph lacking cysteine synthase loci could be
complemented with A. brasilense Sp7 cysK. The 3.0-kb HindIII-EcoRI fragment
bearing cysK contained two additional ORFs encoding a putative transcriptional
regulator and dUTPase. Insertional disruption of the cysK gene did not produce a 
cysteine auxotroph, indicating that gene redundancy in the cysteine biosynthetic 
or other biosynthetic pathways exists in Azospirillum, as already described in
other bacteria. Nitrogen fixation was not altered in the mutant strain as
determined by acetylene reduction. However, this strain showed an eight-fold
reduction in tellurite resistance as compared to the wild-type strain, which was 
only observed during growth in minimal medium. These data confirm earlier
observations regarding the importance of cysteine metabolism in tellurite
resistance.

PMID: 16907731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Parasitol. 2006 Jun;92(3):655-7.

Intrahepatic DNA vaccination: unexpected increased resistance against murine
cysticercosis induced by non-specific enhanced immunity.

Cruz-Revilla C(1), Sonabend AM, Rosas G, Toledo A, Meneses G, Lopez-Casillas F,
Hernández B, Fragoso G, Sciutto E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Ciudad Universitaria.

Experimental murine cysticercosis caused by Taenia crassiceps has proved to be a 
useful model with which to test the efficacy of new vaccine candidates and
delivery systems against pig cysticercosis. A high level of protection against
murine cysticercosis was previously observed by intramuscular or intradermal DNA 
immunization with the use of the sequence of the recombinant KETc7 antigen cloned
in pcDNA3 (pTc-sp7). To determine the effect of KETc7 differential expression in 
DNA vaccination, KETc7 was cloned in pGEM 11Zf(+) under the control of the
tissue-specific regulatory promoter phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (pPc-sp7). 
A high level of protection was induced by intrahepatic immunization with pPc-sp7,
pTc-sp7 and the empty vector in the absence of any specific immunity. The empty
vector pGEM 11Zf(+), the plasmid with the highest content of CpG sequences,
provided to the most efficient protection. This protection was related to an
increased number of splenocytes, enhanced nonspecific splenocyte proliferation,
and intensified intrahepatic INF-gamma production. Overall, intrahepatic plasmid 
CpG-DNA immunization provokes an exacerbated nonspecific immune response that can
effectively control Taenia crassiceps cysticercosis.

PMID: 16884018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Seikagaku. 2006 Jun;78(6):501-8.

[Molecular mechanisms of the regulation of osteoblast and chondrocyte
differentiation and bone formation].

[Article in Japanese]

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8588, Japan.

PMID: 16856560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Jun;20(6):666-9.

[Expressions of Cbfal and osterix in osteoblasts on human acellular amniotic
membrane].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi J(1), Yang Z, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu Sichuan, 610041, PR 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the differentiation of the human osteoblasts during the
construction of the tissue engineered periosteum with the human acellular
amniotic membrane (HAAM).
METHODS: To construct the tissue engineered periosteum (n=60) with HAAM, the
human fetal osteoblasts were used. The fetal osteoblasts were cultured for 2, 4, 
6, 8, and 10 days, and then their total RNA was extracted, which were reversely
transcripted to cDNA. The real-time PCR analysis was used to reveal Cbfal and
Osterix, and the cycle threshold (Ct) was also measured. The simply-cultured
osteoblasts were used as the control group (n=20).
RESULTS: The expression of Cbfal was higher in the experimental group on the 2nd 
day when compared with that on the 4th, 6th, and 8th day (P < 0.05). The same
result existed on the 10th day when compared with that on the 4th and 8th day.
The expression of Osterix increased and was highest on the 8th day when compared 
with the other results (P < 0.05). Both of the 2 gene expressions were decreased 
in the control group when compared with those in the experimental group, but with
no significant difference (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Cbfal and Osterix can be normally expressed by the osteoblasts after 
their integration with HAAM. As a scaffold, HAAM can be used to keep the
osteoblast phenotype and differentiation with an osteoconductive ability. Such a 
cell-scaffold complex may provide a basis for the osteogenesis.

PMID: 16827396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Curr Microbiol. 2006 Jul;53(1):43-7. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Relationship between in vitro enhanced nitrogenase activity of an Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 mutant and its growth-promoting activities in situ.

de Campos SB(1), Roesch LF, Zanettini MH, Passaglia LM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, CP, Brazil.

In this work, we further analyzed an Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 mutant
(Sp7::Tn5-33) showing a pleiotrophic phenotype due to a Tn5 insertion into an
open reading frame of 840 bp (orf280). The deduced amino acid sequence of this
region has high similarity to a family of universal stress proteins. Because the 
most interesting property exhibited by the Sp7::Tn5-33 mutant was an enhanced in 
vitro nitrogen fixation activity, we addressed the question of whether it could
benefit the host plant. We found that the increased nitrogenase activity at the
free-living state of the mutant bacterium was correlated with an increased
production of the nitrogenase reductase protein (NifH), in amounts approximately 
1.5 times higher than the wild type. The mutant strain exhibited the same level
of auxin production and the same colonization pattern of wheat roots as the wild 
type. We also observed that Sp7::Tn5-33 increased the total plant dry weight,
although the N content did not differ significantly between wheat plants
inoculated with mutant or wild-type strains.

PMID: 16775786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 May;21(5):661-73.

Sp1 family of transcription factors regulates the human alpha2 (XI) collagen gene
(COL11A2) in Saos-2 osteoblastic cells.

Goto T(1), Matsui Y, Fernandes RJ, Hanson DA, Kubo T, Yukata K, Michigami T,
Komori T, Fujita T, Yang L, Eyre DR, Yasui N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan.

Genes encoding type XI collagen, normally associated with chondrogenesis, are
also expressed by osteoblasts. By studying Saos-2 cells, we showed that the
transcription factors, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp7 (Osterix), regulate COL11A2 expression
through its proximal promoter. The findings indicate both ubiquitous and
osteoblast-specific mechanisms of collagen gene regulation.INTRODUCTION: Type XI 
collagen is essential for skeletal morphogenesis. Collagen XI gene regulation has
been studied in chondrocytes but not in osteoblasts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We cultured Saos-2 cells, a human osteosarcoma-derived
line of osteoblasts, and analyzed them for alpha2(XI) protein and COL11A2
regulatory mechanisms.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Although types I and V were the dominant collagens
deposited by Saos-2 cells, they expressed COL11A2 mRNA, and alpha2(XI) chains
were present in the extracellular matrix. The COL11A2 promoter region (from -149 
to -40) containing three Sp1 binding sites was required for promoter activity in 
transient transfection assays. All three Sp1 sites were critical for binding by
nuclear proteins in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Further analysis using
consensus oligonucleotides and specific antibodies as well as chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay implicated Sp1 and Sp3 in binding to this promoter
region. Overexpressing Sp1 or Sp3 significantly increased COL11A2 promoter
activity and endogenous COL11A2 gene expression, an effect that was suppressed by
the Sp1-binding inhibitor mithramycin A. Further experiments showed that Sp1,
Sp3, CREB-binding protein (CBP), p300, and histone deacetylase (HDAC) were
physically associated and HDAC inhibitors (trichostatin A or NaB) upregulated
COL11A2 promoter activity and endogenous gene expression. Another Sp1 family
member, Sp7 (Osterix), was expressed in Saos-2 cells, but not in chondrocytes,
and was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation to occupy the COL11A2 promoter.
Overexpressing Sp7 increased COL11A2 promoter activity and endogenous gene
expression, an effect also blocked by mithramycin A. Using siRNA to knockdown
Sp1, Sp3, or Sp7, it was shown that depression of any of them decreased COL11A2
promoter activity and endogenous gene expression. Finally, primary cultures of
osteoblasts expressed COL11A2 and Sp7, upregulated COL11A2 promoter activity and 
endogenous gene expression when Sp1, Sp3, or Sp7 were overexpressed, and
downregulated them when Sp1, Sp3, or Sp7 were selectively depressed. The results 
establish that Sp1 proteins regulate COL11A2 transcription by binding to its
proximal promoter and directly interacting with CBP, p300, and HDAC.

PMID: 16734381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Int Orthop. 2007 Apr;31(2):223-8. Epub 2006 May 20.

Gentamicin negatively influenced osteogenic function in vitro.

Ince A(1), Schütze N, Karl N, Löhr JF, Eulert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University Hospital Würzburg,
Brettreichstr. 11, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. akif_ince@hotmail.com

Local delivery of gentamicin is an accepted method of infection prophylaxis in
the surgery of open fractures. However, the few reports of studies into the
effect of locally applied gentamicin on osteoblasts used inadequate methods. In
our study, we used the well-characterised C2C12 cell line with reproducible
differentiation pathway into the osteoblast lineage. We investigated the
viability, cell number, alkaline phosphatase activity, and the expression of
osteogenic genes of C2C12 cells after exposure to gentamicin at concentrations of
12.5-800 microg/ml for 48 h. Exposure of C2C12 cells to gentamicin (12.5-800
mg/ml) for 48 h showed no significant changes in the cell number, but cell
viability was decreased by one-third at the tested concentrations of 200-800
microg/ml. The alkaline phosphatase activity was significantly decreased by
one-third to one-half at any tested concentration (12.5-800 microg/ml) of
gentamicin. Any tested concentration of gentamicin up to 800 microg/ml for 48 h
did not inhibit or decrease the osteogenic gene expression of osterix and
alkaline phosphatase of the C2C12 cells. In conclusion, gentamicin at high
concentrations as achieved by local application reduced cellular viability and
alkaline phosphatase activity in vitro and therefore may be detrimental for bone 
healing and repair in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2267553
PMID: 16710734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 May;48(4):263-9.

In vitro osteogenesis from human skin-derived precursor cells.

Buranasinsup S(1), Sila-Asna M, Bunyaratvej N, Bunyaratvej A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Medical Technology, Siriraj
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Embryonic tissue and organ development are initiated from three embryonic germ
layers: ectoderm (skin and neuron), mesoderm (blood, bone, muscle, cartilage and 
fat) and endoderm (respiratory and digestive tract). In former times, it was
believed that cell types in each germ layer are specific and do not cross from
one to another throughout life. A new finding is that one tissue lineage can
differentiate across to another tissue lineage, and this is termed
transdifferentiation. We were interested in studying the transdifferentiation of 
skin-derived precursor cells (ectoderm layer) to osteoblastic cells (mesoderm
layer). Human skin-derived precursor cells (hSKP) were isolated and induced into 
an osteoblastic lineage using osteogenic induction medium (alpha-MEM plus 10%
fetal bovine serum supplemented with ascorbic acid, beta-glycerophosphate and
dexamethasone). The specific characteristics of osteoblastic cells, including the
expression of enzyme alkaline phosphatase, the deposition of mineral and the
expression of osterix, bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin, were detected only from
the inductive group. The results in our study show that SKP from human skin are a
practically available source for osteogenesis. The samples are easily obtainable 
for autologous use with a high expansion capacity.

PMID: 16681651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Kokubyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2006 Mar;73(1):62-9.

[The expression of transcription factor Osterix in human periodontal ligament
cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueda-Maeda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Periodontology, Department of Hard Tissue Engineering, Division of Bio-Matrix,
Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

Periodontal ligament (PDL) has a heterogeneous cell population, where some of the
cells may be capable of differentiating into either cementoblasts or osteoblasts.
Recently, C 2 H 2 zinc finger transcription factor Osterix has been reported.
Osterix is one of the master regulators of bone cell differentiation and it has
two different isoforms. According to a recent report, osteogenic differentiation 
of murine embryonic stem cells can be induced by overexpression of Osterix. The
purpose of this study was to investigate about the expression of Osterix on human
PDL (hPDL), and whether the osteogenic differentiation of hPDL cells can be
induced by overexpression of Osterix. hPDL cells were obtained from healthy human
teeth indicated for extraction for orthodontic treatment. All procedure used in
this study was approved by the local ethical committee of Tokyo Medical and
Dental University. To investigate expression of Osterix mRNA in hPDL tissues and 
cells, RT-PCR experiments were performed. Two different isoform Osterix
expression vectors were made and transiently transfected into hPDL cells.
Osteogenic differentiation was assessed by RT-PCR for genes associated with the
osteoblast lineage such as Osteopontin, Osteocalcin, and Bone Sialoprotein.
RT-PCR analyses showed that osterix mRNA was expressed in both hPDL tissue and
cells. The expression of Osterix short isoform was higher than that of the long
isoform. Overexpression of Osterix induced upregulated expression of Bone
Sialoprotein mRNA. In expression levels of Osteopontin and Osteocalcin mRNA,
compared to the control, no difference was observed. In conclusion, Osterix plays
important roles in the osteoblastic differentiation in hPDL cells and modulates
the mineralization.

PMID: 16629472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Gene. 2006 May 10;372:62-70. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Runx2-mediated regulation of the zinc finger Osterix/Sp7 gene.

Nishio Y(1), Dong Y, Paris M, O'Keefe RJ, Schwarz EM, Drissi H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Orthopaedics, Box 665,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor Osterix (Osx) regulates bone formation and
osteoblast differentiation in vitro and in vivo. We investigated the
transcriptional mechanisms underlying the mouse Osx expression by isolating and
characterizing its 5' upstream region. We performed 5' RACE on mRNA isolated from
murine chondroprogenitor cells and determined a cap site of Osx approximately -99
nucleotides upstream of the initiation codon. Sequence analysis of this TATA-less
promoter shows several putative response elements for Sox9, VDRE, Runx and Sp1.
Transfection of the Osx promoter driving the luciferase reporter gene into
C3H10T1/2 and ATDC5 cells shows a strong basal promoter activity between 565 bp
and 2 kb. Deletion mutant analyses show that the most proximal 852 kb of the Osx 
promoter contains the highest activating domains, while strong repressive domains
were identified between 1.8 and 2 kb. Over-expression experiments indicate that
Runx2 significantly transactivates the Osx promoter by at least 2 fold indicating
that Osx is downstream of Runx2 in mesenchymal cells. This up-regulation was
abrogated when the Runx2 responsive element on the Osx promoter was mutated.
Finally, we show that Runx2 specifically binds to this DNA element in the Osx
promoter. Thus our results show for the first time Osx transcriptional regulation
through the bone and cartilage related transcription factor Runx2.

PMID: 16574347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Jul 1;98(4):992-1006.

Human endothelial cells inhibit BMSC differentiation into mature osteoblasts in
vitro by interfering with osterix expression.

Meury T(1), Verrier S, Alini M.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering Program, AO-Research Institute, Davos, Switzerland.

It is well accepted, that there is communication between osteoblasts and
endothelial cells. However, the influence of endothelial cells on the
differentiation of bone precursors into mature osteoblasts is not yet well
understood. We therefore studied the effect of human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVEC) on human bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) differentiation towards an
osteoblastic phenotype by culturing them in two different types of HUVEC-BMSC
cultures (indirect contact, HUVEC-conditioned medium). Typical bone markers (45Ca
incorporation, ALP activity, and gene expression of collagen 1 (COL1),
osteonectin (ON), matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP-13), bone morphogenetic
protein 2 (BMP-2)) and transcription factors (Runx2, osterix (OSX)) were
evaluated at different time points. The effect of stimulating HUVEC with vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) before co-cultures with BMSC was also evaluated.
As expected, BMSC in osteogenic medium (OM) (with dexamethasone) differentiated
towards the osteoblastic phenotype, as measured by increased matrix
mineralization, high ALP activity, and elevated expression of specific
osteoblastic marker genes, when compared to BMSC in non-OM. HUVEC reversibly
inhibited osteoblastic differentiation of BMSC in OM, independent of the
co-culture type. When HUVEC were removed from the cultures, BMSC differentiated
into osteoblasts, albeit at a faster rate than BMSC that were never co-cultured
with HUVEC. Stimulation of HUVEC with VEGF before co-culture enhanced the
inhibitory effect of HUVEC on BMSC differentiation. This inhibitory effect was
connected to a reversible suppression of OSX gene expression and was specific to 
endothelial cells. We conclude that HUVEC can inhibit dexamethasone-induced BMSC 
differentiation into osteoblasts in vitro, by interfering with OSX expression,
thereby arresting BMSC differentiation at a preosteoblastic stage.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16479590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Oral Dis. 2006 Mar;12(2):163-70.

Expression of bone morphogenetic proteins and their associated molecules in
ameloblastomas and adenomatoid odontogenic tumors.

Kumamoto H(1), Ooya K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Pathology, Department of Oral Medicine and Surgery, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.
kumamoto@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To further clarify the roles of regulators of embryonic development,
bone morphogenetic protein (BMPs) and their associated molecules, in oncogenesis 
and cytodifferentiation of odontogenic tumors, the expression of these regulator 
molecules were analyzed in epithelial odontogenic tumors as well as in tooth
germs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tooth germs, ameloblastomas, adenomatoid odontogenic
tumors, and malignant ameloblastomas were examined by RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry for detection of BMP-2, -4, -7, BMP receptors I and II
(BMPR-I, BMPR-II), core-binding factor alpha1 (CBFA1), and osterix.
RESULTS: mRNA expression of BMPs, BMPRs, CBFA1, and osterix was detected in all
odontogenic tissues. Immunohistochemical reactivity for BMPs, BMPRs, and CBFA1
was detected in both epithelial and mesenchymal cells of tooth germs and
epithelial odontogenic tumors. BMPs and BMPRs were evidently expressed in
odontogenic epithelial cells in tooth germs and epithelial odontogenic tumors.
Acanthomatous ameloblastomas showed increased BMP-7 reactivity in keratinizing
cells. Nuclear CBFA1 expression was detected scatteredly in odontogenic
epithelial cells in normal and neoplastic odontogenic tissues, as well as in some
mesenchymal cells in tooth germs and in some stromal cells in epithelial
odontogenic tumors. Ameloblastic carcinomas showed low reactivity for BMPs,
BMPRs, and CBFA1.
CONCLUSION: BMPs and their associated molecules might play a role in
cytodifferentiation of normal and neoplastic odontogenic epithelium via
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

PMID: 16476038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Calcif Tissue Int. 2006 Feb;78(2):98-102. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Gene expression of runx2, Osterix, c-fos, DLX-3, DLX-5, and MSX-2 in dental
follicle cells during osteogenic differentiation in vitro.

Morsczeck C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stiftung Caesar, Center of Advanced European Studies and Research, Ludwig
Erhard Allee 2, Bonn 53175, Germany. Morsczeck@gmx.de

Recently, osteogenic precursor cells were isolated from human dental follicles,
which differentiate into cementoblast- or osteoblast- like cells under in vitro
conditions. However, mechanisms for osteogenic differentiation are not known in
detail. Dental follicle cell long-term cultures supplemented with dexamethasone
or with insulin resulted in mineralized nodules, whereas no mineralization or
alkaline phosphatase activity was detected in the control culture without an
osteogenic stimulus. A real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) analysis was developed to investigate gene expression during osteogenic
differentiation in vitro. Expression of the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) gene was
detected during differentiation in the control culture and was similar to that in
cultures with dexamethasone and insulin. DLX-3, DLX-5, runx2, and MSX-2 are
differentially expressed during osteogenic differentiation in bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells. In dental follicle cells, gene expression of runx2,
DLX-5, and MSX-2 was unaffected during osteogenic differentiation in vitro.
Osteogenic differentiation appeared to be independent of MSX-2 expression; the
same was true of runx2 and DLX-5, which were protagonists of osteogenic
differentiation and osteocalcin promoter activity in bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells. Like in bone marrow-derived stem cells, DLX-3 gene expression was
increased in dental follicle cells during osteogenic differentiation but similar 
to control cultures. However, gene expression of osterix was not detected in
dental follicle cells during osteogenic differentiation; this gene is expressed
during osteogenic differentiation in bone marrow stem cells. These real-time PCR 
results display molecular mechanisms in dental follicle precursor cells during
osteogenic differentiation that are different from those in bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells.

PMID: 16467978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Curr Microbiol. 2006 Feb;52(2):123-7. Epub 2006 Jan 31.

Cloning and characterization of a fur homologue from Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Alahari A(1), Tripathi AK, Le Rudulier D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Interactions Plantes-Microorganismes et Santé végétale,
CNRS-INRA-Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, France.

A homologue of the ferric uptake regulator gene, fur, was identified from a
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 genomic DNA clone. Experiments performed with
transcriptional lacZ fusions demonstrated that the A. brasilense fur homologue
regulated the expression of two fur regulated Escherichia coli genes: fiu (ferric
iron uptake) and fhuF (ferric hydroxamate uptake). A differential regulation by
the cognate Fur and the heterologous Fur homologue in response to the iron status
of the growth medium was also observed.

PMID: 16450071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6297-306. Epub 2006 Jan 12.

Transcriptional regulation of the osterix (Osx, Sp7) promoter by tumor necrosis
factor identifies disparate effects of mitogen-activated protein kinase and NF
kappa B pathways.

Lu X(1), Gilbert L, He X, Rubin J, Nanes MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Lipids, Department of Medicine,
Emory University School of Medicine, Decatur, Georgia 30033, USA.

Osteoblast (OB) differentiation is suppressed by tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha), an inflammatory stimulus that is elevated in arthritis and
menopause. Because OB differentiation requires the expression of the
transcription factor osterix (Osx), we investigated TNF effects on Osx. TNF
inhibited Osx mRNA in pre-osteoblastic cells without affecting Osx mRNA
half-life. Inhibition was independent of new protein synthesis. Analysis of the
Osx promoter revealed two transcription start sites that direct the expression of
an abundant mRNA (Osx1) and an alternatively spliced mRNA (Osx2). Promoter
fragments driving the expression of luciferase were constructed to identify TNF
regulatory sequences. Two independent promoters were identified upstream of each 
transcription start site. TNF potently inhibited transcription of both promoters.
Deletion and mutational analysis identified a TNF-responsive region proximal to
the Osx2 start site that retained responsiveness when inserted upstream of a
heterologous promoter. The TNF response region was a major binding site for
nuclear proteins, although TNF did not change binding at the site. The roles of
MAPK and NFkappaB were investigated as signal mediators of TNF. Inhibitors of
MEK1 and ERK1, but not of JNK or p38 kinase, abrogated TNF inhibition of Osx mRNA
and promoter activity. TNF action was not prevented by blockade of NFkappaB
nuclear entry. The forced expression of high levels of NFkappaB uncovered a
proximal promoter enhancer; however, this site was not activated by TNF. The
inhibitory effect of TNF on Osx expression may decrease OB differentiation in
arthritis and osteoporosis.

PMID: 16410254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Rev Med Brux. 2006;27 Spec No:Sp7.

[The Nursing department].

[Article in French]

Rasquin M.

PMID: 21818885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Life Sci. 2006 May 1;78(23):2697-706. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Optimal compressive force induces bone formation via increasing bone
morphogenetic proteins production and decreasing their antagonists production by 
Saos-2 cells.

Mitsui N(1), Suzuki N, Maeno M, Yanagisawa M, Koyama Y, Otsuka K, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo
101-8310, Japan.

Orthodontic tooth movement induced alveolar bone resorption and formation around 
the teeth applied mechanical force. Although mechanical force can promote bone
formation, the molecular mechanism that underlies this phenomenon is not fully
understood. The purposes of this study were to determine how mechanical stress
affects the osteogenic response of human osteoblastic cells (Saos-2), and also to
examine the optimal compressive force for osteogenesis in vitro. Saos-2 cells
were cultured with or without continuously compressive force (0.5-3.0 g/cm2). The
expression of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), their antagonists, and
transcription factors which involved in osteogenesis were measured using
real-time PCR and/or Western blot analysis. Phosphorylation of Smad1 was
determined by Western blot. Loading with 1.0 g/cm2 of compressive force
significantly increased the expression of BMPs, Runx2 and osterix. In contrast,
the expression of BMP antagonists and AJ18 was decreased with 1.0 g/cm2 of
compressive force. Loading with 1.0 g/cm2 of compressive force also induced
phosphorylation of Smad1. Noggin inhibited the compressive force-induced
phosphorylation of Smad1 markedly, and also partially blocked compressive
force-induced Runx2 mRNA expression. Moreover, the conditioned medium from 1.0
g/cm2 of compressive force applied cells apparently increased calcium content in 
mineralized nodules of Saos-2 culture. This study demonstrates that an optimal
compressive force stimulates in vitro mineralization via increasing BMPs
production and decreasing their antagonists production.

PMID: 16337660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2005 Dec;16(6):650-6.

Effects of implant surface microtopography on osteoblast gene expression.

Masaki C(1), Schneider GB, Zaharias R, Seabold D, Stanford C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Prosthodontics, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

AIM: The promotion of osteoblast attachment and differentiation has been
evaluated on various implant surfaces. However, the effects of different implant 
surface properties on gene expression of key osteogenic factors are not fully
understood.
OBJECTIVE: The objectives of this study were to evaluate how topographical
effects on titanium surface alter the expression of bone-related genes and
transcription factors.
METHODS: Osteoblasts were cultured on titanium disks prepared with a titanium
dioxide grit blasting (TiOBlast) or grit blasted and etched with hydrofluoric
acid (Osseospeed), grit blasted and etched (SLA-1), or grit blasted, etched and
rinsed with N2 protection and stored in isotonic NaCl (SLA-2) commercially pure
titanium implant discs. High-density cultures of human mesenchymal
pre-osteoblastic cells (HEPM 1486, ATCC) were grown for 72 h and real-time PCR
used for quantitative analysis of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), core-binding factor
alpha1 (Cbfa1), Osterix, Type I Collagen, Osteocalcin and bone sialoprotein II
gene expression.
RESULTS: Real-time PCR showed significant (P<0.001) increases in ALP gene
expression in osteoblasts grown on SLA-2, relative to all other surfaces.
Cbfa1/RUNX-2 gene expression was significantly (P<0.01) increased on Osseospeed
and TiOBlast surface as compared with SLA-1 and SLA-2 surfaces. The expression of
Osterix had a trend similar to that of Cbfa1.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, implant surface properties may contribute to the
regulation of osteoblast differentiation by influencing the level of bone-related
genes and transcription factors in human mesenchymal pre-osteoblastic cells.

PMID: 16307571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Matrix Biol. 2006 Jan;25(1):47-58. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Both direct and collagen-mediated signals are required for active vitamin
D3-elicited differentiation of human osteoblastic cells: roles of osterix, an
osteoblast-related transcription factor.

Maehata Y(1), Takamizawa S, Ozawa S, Kato Y, Sato S, Kubota E, Hata R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Kanagawa Dental College,
Yokosuka, 238-8580, Japan.

In order to investigate the mechanisms by which 1alpha,25(OH)2 vitamin D3 (VD3)
stimulates the differentiation of human osteoblasts, we cultured MG-63, which is 
a human osteoblastic cell line, in the presence or absence of VD3 and/or
L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (Asc 2-P), a long-acting vitamin C derivative. The
cell growth rate was decreased by the presence of VD3 in the culture medium. Type
I collagen synthesis and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, which are markers
of early stage osteoblast differentiation, were stimulated by the presence of VD3
as well as by that of Asc 2-P. The co-presence of Asc 2-P and VD3 had a
synergistic effect on the collagen synthesis and ALP activity of the cells.
Inhibition of collagen synthesis by the addition of inhibitors of collagen
synthesis to the medium attenuated the stimulative effect of VD3 and Asc 2-P on
the ALP activity. Transfection of the cells with siRNA-expressing vectors for
COL1A1 decreased the expression level of ALP mRNA in addition to that of COL1A1. 
On the other hand, ALP activity was significantly increased, and the growth rate 
was decreased, when the cells were cultured on type I collagen-coated dishes.
These effects were not seen when the cells were cultured on dishes coated with
heat-denatured collagen. VD3 also increased the mRNA levels for Runx2 and
osterix, which are transcription factors critical for osteoblast differentiation,
as well as those of differentiation markers such as bone/liver/kidney type ALP,
COL1A1, (the gene for the alpha1 chain of type I collagen), and osteocalcin, in
the cells. Normal human osteoblasts and human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stem cells (hBMSC) showed quite similar responses to VD3. These results indicate 
that VD3-stimulated gene expression of type I collagen and that mature type I
collagen produced in the presence of Asc 2-P mediates at least a part of the
stimulative effects of Asc 2-P and VD3 on the differentiation of these human
osteoblastic cells. Levels of mRNAs for ALP and COL1A1 were increased, but the
level of Runx2 was decreased, by the expression of osterix in MG-63 cells. These 
results also suggest that VD3 controls the growth and differentiation of human
osteoblastic cells by regulating the gene expression of osteoblast-related
transcription factors as well as that of type I collagen, and that the
co-presence of both signals is essential for VD3 to express full activity toward 
the differentiation of human osteoblasts.

PMID: 16266799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 16;338(2):1075-82. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

The serine protease Sp7 is expressed in blood cells and regulates the
melanization reaction in Drosophila.

Castillejo-López C(1), Häcker U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science and Lund Strategic Research Center 
for Stem Cell Biology and Cell Therapy, Lund University, BMC B13, Klinikgatan 26,
22184 Lund, Sweden. Casimiro.Castillejo-Lopez@med.lu.se

Serine proteases play a central role in defense against pathogens by regulating
processes such as blood clotting, melanization of injured surfaces, and
proteolytic activation of signaling pathways involved in innate immunity. Here,
we present the functional characterization of the Drosophila serine protease Sp7 
(CG3006) by inducible RNA interference. We show that Sp7 is constitutively
expressed in blood cells during embryonic and larval stages. Silencing of the
gene impairs the melanization reaction upon injury. Our data demonstrate that Sp7
is required for phenoloxidase activation and its activity is restricted to a
subclass of blood cells, the crystal cells. Transcriptional up-regulation of Sp7 
was observed after clean, septic injury and in flies expressing an activated form
of Toll; however, mutations in the Toll or the IMD pathway did not abolish
expression of Sp7, indicating the existence of other regulatory pathways and/or
independent basal transcription.

PMID: 16256951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2005;19(1):91-5.

Effects of heavy metals on plant-associated rhizobacteria: comparison of
endophytic and non-endophytic strains of Azospirillum brasilense.

Kamnev AA(1), Tugarova AV, Antonyuk LP, Tarantilis PA, Polissiou MG, Gardiner PH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry of Plant-Bacterial Symbioses, Institute of
Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian Academy of
Sciences, 13 Prosp. Entuziastov, 410049 Saratov, Russia. aakamnev@ibppm.sgu.ru

The plant-associated nitrogen-fixing rhizobacterium Azospirillum brasilense
attracts world-wide attention owing to its plant growth-promoting activities.
Among hundreds of its strains known up to date, wild-type strain Sp245 has been
proved to be capable of colonising both the plant-root interior and exterior
(i.e. a facultative endophyte), whereas others are non-endophytes colonising the 
root surface only. Thus, the different ecological niches occupied by these
strains in the rhizosphere suggest that their responses to environmental
conditions might differ as well. In this study, responses of A. brasilense
strains Sp245 and Sp7 to several heavy metals (Co2+, Cu2+, Zn2+), present in the 
medium at tolerable concentrations (up to 0.2 mmol/l) and taken up by the
bacteria, were compared. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was used 
for controlling the compositional features of whole cells. The results obtained
show that in strain Sp7 (non-endophyte) the heavy metals induced an enhanced
accumulation of polyester compounds (poly-3-hydroxybutyrate; PHB). In contrast,
the response of the endophytic strain Sp245 to heavy metal uptake was found to be
much less pronounced. These dissimilarities in their behaviour may be caused by
different adaptation abilities of these strains to stress conditions owing to
their different ecological status. It was also found that adding 0.2 mmol/l Cu2+ 
or Cd2+ in the culture medium resulted in noticeably reducing the levels of
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA, auxin) produced by both the strains of the bacterium. 
This can directly affect the efficiency of associative plant-bacterial symbioses 
involving A. brasilense in heavy-metal-contaminated soil.

PMID: 16240678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Environ Microbiol. 2005 Nov;7(11):1839-46.

Comparative in situ analysis of ipdC-gfpmut3 promoter fusions of Azospirillum
brasilense strains Sp7 and Sp245.

Rothballer M(1), Schmid M, Fekete A, Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Soil
Ecology, Department of Rhizosphere Biology, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany. rothballer@gsf.de

Inoculation of wheat roots with Azospirillum brasilense results in an increase of
plant growth and yield, which is proposed to be mainly due to the bacterial
production of indole-3-acetic acid in the rhizosphere. Field inoculation
experiments had revealed more consistent plant growth stimulation using A.
brasilense strain Sp245 as compared with the strain Sp7. Therefore, the in situ
expression of the key gene ipdC (indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase) was examined in
these two strains. Within the ipdC promoter of strain Sp245 a region of 150 bases
was identified, which was missing in strain Sp7. Thus, three different
translational ipdC promoter fusions with gfpmut3 were constructed on plasmid
level: the first contained the part of the Sp245 promoter region homologous to
strain Sp7, the second was bearing the complete promoter region of Sp245
including the specific insertion and the third comprised the Sp7 promoter region.
By comparing the fluorescence levels of these constructs after growth on mineral 
medium with and without inducing amino acids, it could be demonstrated that ipdC 
expression in A. brasilense Sp245 was subject to a stricter control compared with
strain Sp7. Microscopic detection of these reporter strains colonizing the
rhizoplane documented for the first time an in situ expression of ipdC.

PMID: 16232298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Environ Microbiol. 2005 Nov;7(11):1769-74.

The nodPQ genes in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 are involved in sulfation of
lipopolysaccharides.

Vanbleu E(1), Choudhury BP, Carlson RW, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Kasteelpark Arenberg 20, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium.

Here we report on the presence of sulfated lipopolysaccharide molecules in
Azospirillum brasilense, a plant growth-promoting rhizosphere bacterium. Chemical
analysis provided structural data on the O-antigen composition and demonstrated
the possible involvement of the nodPQ genes in O-antigen sulfation.

PMID: 16232291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Prikl Biokhim Mikrobiol. 2005 Jul-Aug;41(4):444-8.

[Extracellular proteolytic enzymes of Azospirillum brasilensis strain Sp7 and
regulation of their activity by a homologous lectin].

[Article in Russian]

Chernyshova MP, Alen'kina SA, Nikitina VE, Ignatov VV.

It was found that Azospirillum brasilensis strain Sp7 is able to produce
extracellular proteolytic enzymes. The enzymes were active within a broad range
of pH values, with two peaks of activity being located in the acid and alkaline
pH areas; required calcium ions; and exhibited substrate specificity with respect
to azogelatin. Zymography allowed at least four proteolytic enzymes with
molecular weights of 32, 45, 52, and 174 kDa to be detected in A. brasilense Sp7 
culture liquid. It was shown that the lectin from A. brasilense Sp7 can inhibit
proteolytic enzymes.

PMID: 16212042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Sep;63(9):1671-7.

[Functions of BMPs, Runx2, and osterix in the development of bone and cartilage].

[Article in Japanese]

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Cytology and Cell Biology, Department of Developmental and
Reconstructive Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences.

BMP signaling plays important roles in craniofacial development, limb
development, and joint formation. BMPs enhance chondrocyte differentiation and
proliferation but inhibit the terminal differentiation of chondrocytes. Runx2 and
Runx3 are essential for chondrocyte maturation, and Runx2 and Osterix are
essential for osteoblast differentiation. Runx2 and Runx3 induce Ihh, which
enhances chondrocyte proliferation and inhibits chondrocyte maturation, in
prehypertrophic chondrocytes, and Ihh induces Runx2 in the perichondrial cells
leading to their differentiation into osteoblasts.

PMID: 16164229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Sep;63(9):1523-8.

[Bone formation and inflammation].

[Article in Japanese]

Koinuma D(1), Imamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, the Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research.

Role of BMP signaling is crucial in the osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation. BMP induces expression of Runx2, a master gene for osteogenesis, and
cooperates with Runx2 in mature osteoblast to express target genes. These
functions are suppressed by TGF-beta-induced Smad7 together with Smurf1 by
various mechanisms, including degradation of type I receptor, Smadl/5, and Runx2.
Bone remodeling is achieved by "coupling" of osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
Although excess maturation and activation of osteoclasts is well described during
inflammation, effect of inflammation to the osteoblast function is still unclear.
Further exploration in this area thus might lead to discovery of novel
therapeutic targets of inflammatory bone diseases.

PMID: 16164206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Oct 15;96(3):533-42.

Induction of osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells by
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Cho HH(1), Park HT, Kim YJ, Bae YC, Suh KT, Jung JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Pusan National University,
Pusan 602-739, Korea.

Valproic acid (VPA) has been used as an anticonvulsant agent for the treatment of
epilepsy, as well as a mood stabilizer for the treatment of bipolar disorder, for
several decades. The mechanism of action for these effects remains to be
elucidated and is most likely multifactorial. Recently, VPA has been reported to 
inhibit histone deacetylase (HDAC) and HDAC has been reported to play roles in
differentiation of mammalian cells. In this study, the effects of HDAC inhibitors
on differentiation and proliferation of human adipose tissue-derived stromal
cells (hADSC) and bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSC) were determined. VPA
increased osteogenic differentiation in a dose dependent manner. The pretreatment
of VPA before induction of differentiation also showed stimulatory effects on
osteogenic differentiation of hMSC. Trichostatin A (TSA), another HDAC inhibitor,
also increased osteogenic differentiation, whereas valpromide (VPM), a structural
analog of VPA which does not possess HDAC inhibitory effects, did not show any
effect on osteogenic differentiation on hADSC. RT-PCR and Real-time PCR analysis 
revealed that VPA treatment increased osterix, osteopontin, BMP-2, and Runx2
expression. The addition of noggin inhibited VPA-induced potentiation of
osteogenic differentiation. VPA inhibited proliferation of hADSC and hBMSC. Our
results suggest that VPA enhance osteogenic differentiation, probably due to
inhibition of HDAC, and could be useful for in vivo bone engineering using hMSC.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16088945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31353-9. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

BMP-2 and insulin-like growth factor-I mediate Osterix (Osx) expression in human 
mesenchymal stem cells via the MAPK and protein kinase D signaling pathways.

Celil AB(1), Campbell PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Genetic studies place the transcription factor Osterix (Osx) downstream of Runx2,
but limited information is available about Osx regulation during osteoblastic
differentiation. An important role for bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) on Osx expression and the requirement for
p38 for the BMP-2-mediated effect was reported previously by our group. In this
study, we continued to investigate the molecular mechanisms by which BMP-2 and
IGF-1 regulate Osx expression during osteoblast lineage progression.
IGF-I-mediated Osx expression required all three MAPK components (Erk, p38, and
JNK), whereas BMP-2 required p38 and JNK signaling. As a common mediator of
growth factor signaling, we also investigated the involvement of protein kinase
C/D (PKC/D) signaling. BMP-2- and IGF-I-mediated Osx expression was blocked in
response to a PKD inhibitor. A selective inhibitor of conventional PKCs had no
effect on the BMP-2-mediated Osx expression. BMP-2 and IGF-I induced a selective 
phosphorylation of PKD, and PKD was required for mineralization. PKC/D and MAPK
signaling also mediate Runx2 activity. Therefore, to document the implication for
Runx2 in Osx regulation, we blocked Runx2 activity using a dominant negative
Runx2 construct and an ubiquitination mediator for Runx2 degradation. We showed
that blocking Runx2 activity inhibited the BMP-2-mediated induction of Osx. These
studies implicated that multiple signaling pathways mediate Osx, a critical gene 
for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. In addition to Runx2, other
signaling components may be necessary to regulate Osx during osteoblast lineage
progression.

PMID: 16000303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mikrobiologiia. 2005 Mar-Apr;74(2):224-30.

[Analysis of DNA, lipopolysaccharide structure, and some cultural and
morphological properties in closely related strains of Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Petrova LP, Matora LIu, Burygin GL, Borisov IV, Fatsy EI.

We studied closely related Azospirillum brasilense strains Sp7 and Cd. For
probing of their genomes, the fragments of 85-MDa (p85) and 120-MDa (p120) from
A. brasilense Sp245 plasmids were hybridized with 115-MDa (p115) and 90-Mda (p90)
plasmids of strain Sp7, respectively. Strain Cd was found to lose the 115-Mda
plasmid and one of the two EcoRI restriction fragments of the total DNA
(localized within p115 and the chromosome) that was homologous to an
EcoRI-generated p85 fragment of 2.4 kb. On the contrary, in the total DNA of
strain Sp7-S, in spite of the previously established disappearance of the 115-Mda
replicon, two fragments homologous to p85 were revealed, as with strain Sp7. It
is suggested that the Sp7-S genome contains the total p115 DNA or at least a
certain part of it. Strains Sp7 and Cd were found to differ in size and
morphology of colonies on solid and semisolid media, in the levels of resistance 
to a cation surfactant cetavlon, and in the antigen structure of
lipopolysaccharides.

PMID: 15938399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mikrobiologiia. 2005 Mar-Apr;74(2):198-203.

[The electrooptical parameters of suspensions of Escherichia coli XL-1 cells
interacting with helper phage M13K07].

[Article in Russian]

Bunin VD, Ignatov OV, Gulii OI, Zaitseva IS, O'Neil D, Ivnitskii D.

The electrophysical properties of Escherichia coli XL-1 cells interacting with
helper phage M13K07 were studied as a function of the phage-to-cell ratio and the
contact time. The electro-optical signal of bacterial cells changed considerably 
as soon as 10 min after the onset of their incubation with phage particles,
presumably due to phage adsorption on the cell surface. The maximum changes in
the orientational spectra of cell suspensions were observed when the
phage-to-cell ratio was 20. Selectivity studies showed that E. coli XL-1 cells
interacting with the helper phage M13K07 in the presence of foreign microflora,
such as E. coli K-12 or Azospirillum brasilense Sp7, can be identified by using
their electrophysical properties. Changes in the orientational spectra of cell
suspensions are interpreted with the stage of phage-bacterium interaction taken
into account. The results obtained can probably be used to devise a new rapid
method for identification of microorganisms and to study the particular stages of
cell infection by bacteriophages.

PMID: 15938396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Arch Virol. 2005 Sep;150(9):1813-31. Epub 2005 May 2.

Identification of previously unknown antigenic epitopes on the S and N proteins
of avian infectious bronchitis virus.

Ignjatovic J(1), Sapats S.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong,
Vic., Australia. Jagoda.Ignjatovic@csiro.au

This paper describes mapping of antigenic and host-protective epitopes of
infectious bronchitis virus proteins by assessing the ability of defined peptide 
regions within the S1, S2 and N proteins to elicit humoral, cell-mediated and
protective immune responses. Peptides corresponding to six regions in the S1
(Sp1-Sp6), one in the S2 (Sp7) and four in the N protein (Np1-Np4) were
synthesized and coupled to either diphtheria toxoid (dt) or biotin (bt).
Bt-peptides were used to assess if selected regions were antigenic and contained 
B- or T-cell epitopes and dt-peptides if regions induced an antibody response and
protection against virulent challenge. All S1 and S2 peptides were antigenic,
being recognised by IBV immune sera and also induced an antibody response
following inoculation into chicks. Three S1-and one S2-bt peptides also induced a
delayed type hypersensitivity response indicating the presence of T-cell
epitopes. The S2 peptide Sp7 (amino acid position 566-584) previously identified 
as an immundominant region, was the most antigenic of all peptides used in this
study. Two S1 (Sp4 and Sp6) and one S2 peptide (Sp7), protected kidney tissue
against virulent challenge. From four N peptides located in the amino-terminal
part of the N protein, only one, Np2 (amino acid position 72-86), was antigenic
and also induced a delayed type hypersensitivity response. None of the N peptides
induced protection against virulent challenge. The results suggest that the S1
glycoprotein carries additional antigenic regions to those previously identified 
and that two regions located in the S1 and one in the S2 at amino acid positions 
294-316 (Sp4), 532-537 (Sp6) and 566-584 (Sp7) may have a role in protection.

PMID: 15868095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biofizika. 2005 Mar-Apr;50(2):316-21.

[Investigation of electrophysical properties of Listeria monocytogenes cells
during the interaction with monoclonal antibodies].

[Article in Russian]

Bunin VD, Ignatov OV, Gulii OI, Voloshin AG, Dykman LA, O'Neil D, Ivnitskii D.

An electrooptical approach was used in studies of Listeria monocytogenes-antibody
binding. An electrooptical analyzer, which has been developed at the State
Research Center for Applied Microbiology (Obolensk, Russia), was used as a basic 
instrument for electrooptical measurements. The analyzer consists of the
following modules: a sample preparation module, a mixer, an AC field generator,
an EO-flow cell, a microcontroller for transfer of liquid, a thermal system, an
operator interface, and an image processor. The sample preparation module
includes a unit for an automatic filter changing device and a hydraulic system.
Since the AC electrokinetic effects depend on the dielectric properties of
bioparticles, their composition, morphology, phenotype, the medium, and the
frequency of applied electrical field, the electroorientational spectra were used
for discrimination of different types of bacteria, a given type being
"controlled" (and identified) by the selective choice of binding agents
(antibodies). The measurements were performed using a discrete set of frequencies
of the orienting electric field (10, 100, 250, and 500 kHz). During biospecific
interactions, an antibody is bound to the microorganism, causing a change in the 
dielectric properties of the microorganism-antibody complex, and the electrooptic
signal reaches its maximum at 100-200 kHz. It was shown that the biospecific
interactions of Listeria monocytogenes cells with anti-Listeria antibody in the
presence of E. coli K-12, and A. brasilense sp7 significantly change the
electrooptical signals. Thus, the determination of the presence of particular
bacteria within a mixed sample may be achieved by selection and matching of
antibodies specific to individual bacterium types and by comparing the spectra of
bacterium in the presence and in the absence of specific binding agent
(antibody).

PMID: 15856991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Jun 1;95(3):518-28.

Osx transcriptional regulation is mediated by additional pathways to BMP2/Smad
signaling.

Celil AB(1), Hollinger JO, Campbell PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 induces Osterix (Osx) in mouse C2C12 cells and
chondrocytes. Genetic studies place Osx downstream to the BMP-2/Smad/Runx2
signaling pathway; however, limited information is available on the mediators of 
Osx expression in osteoblast lineage commitment. Several lines of research
implicate the presence of Runx2-independent ossification. Therefore, the purpose 
of this study was to identify possible mediators of Osx expression beyond the
BMP-2/Smad pathway. Using real-time RT-PCR, we showed upregulation of Osx in
response to BMP-2 in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC). Insulin-like growth
factor (IGF)-I upregulated Osx, but not Runx2. Further, IGF-I in combination with
BMP-2 was synergistic for Osx, suggesting a pathway beyond Smad signaling. MAPK
was tested as a common mediator across BMP-2 and IGF-I signaling pathways.
Inhibition of MAPK component ERK1/2 did not affect Runx2 gene expression, but
inhibited Osx expression and matrix mineralization. BMP-2-mediated Osx expression
was downregulated in response to p38 inhibition. We therefore conclude that
during osteogenic lineage progression, in addition to the BMP-2/Smad pathway,
IGF-I and MAPK signaling may mediate Osx.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15786511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Am J Manag Care. 2005 Jan;11 Spec No:SP7-13.

The effect of access restrictions on the vintage of drugs used by Medicaid
enrollees.

Lichtenberg FR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA.
frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine the extent to which recent Medicaid drug access
restrictions, such as preferred drug lists (PDLs), may affect the vintage (or
time since Food and Drug Administration approval) of 6 types of drugs used by
Medicaid beneficiaries.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective claims database analysis using National Drug Code
pharmacy claims data.
METHODS: A regression model was developed to analyze the effect that Medicaid
access restrictions had on the vintage of medications prescribed in 6 different
therapeutic categories. A "difference in differences" approach was used to
compare the change in vintage of medications prescribed in Medicaid versus
non-Medicaid patients between the January-June 2001 and July-December 2003 study 
periods.
RESULTS: The results of the regression model showed that PDLs increased the age
of Medicaid prescriptions by less than 1 year for drugs in 5 of the 6 therapeutic
classes analyzed. In the case of pain management medications, the increase was
more than 1.2 years.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the regression model suggest that Medicaid drug
access restriction programs (e.g., PDLs) have resulted in an increase in the age 
of drugs prescribed for Medicaid beneficiaries versus non-Medicaid patients.
Since previous research has suggested a clinical and economic advantage to
utilizing newer versus older drugs, further research should be conducted to
explore how these medication restriction policies may unduly affect Medicaid
beneficiaries compared with privately insured patients.

PMID: 15700904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mikrobiologiia. 2004 Nov-Dec;73(6):849-50.

[A comparative study of the effect of the lectins of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 
and its mutant on the activity of some enzymes in plant cells].

[Article in Russian]

Alen'kina SA, Paiusova OA, Nikitina VE.

PMID: 15688946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Endocrinology. 2005 Mar;146(3):1012-7. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Minireview: transcriptional regulation in development of bone.

Kobayashi T(1), Kronenberg H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Regulation of gene expression by transcription factors is one of the major
mechanisms for controlling cellular functions. Recent advances in genetic
manipulation of model animals has allowed the study of the roles of various genes
and their products in physiological settings and has demonstrated the importance 
of specific transcription factors in bone development. Three lineages of bone
cells, chondrocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts, develop and differentiate
according to their distinct developmental programs. These cells go through
multiple differentiation stages, which are often regulated by specific
transcription factors. In this minireview, we will discuss selected transcription
factors that have been demonstrated to critically affect bone cell development.
Further study of these molecules will lead to deeper understanding in mechanisms 
that govern development of bone.

PMID: 15604211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Occup Environ Med. 2004 Nov;46(11):1174-9.

Prevalence of respiratory symptoms in children and air quality by village in
rural Indonesia.

Hong CY(1), Chia SE, Widjaja D, Saw SM, Lee J, Munoz C, Koh D.

Author information: 
(1)Special Projects Department, Research & Information Management Division,
Health Promotion Board, Singapore.

AIM: This study compared prevalence of respiratory symptoms in three Indonesian
villages and related this to air quality.
METHODS: We interviewed caregivers of 382 children, using the International Study
of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC) questionnaire, and monitored air
quality during the survey period.
RESULTS: Respiratory symptom prevalence was highest in Kerinci (40.5%), followed 
by SP7 (33.3%) and Pelalawan (19.8%). Compared with Pelalawan, adjusted odds
ratios were 3.17 (95% confidence interval, 1.43-7.07) for Kerinci, and 2.03
(1.04-3.96) for SP7. Ambient air quality levels were highest in Kerinci for PM10 
and hydrocarbon (means: 102.9 microg/m3, 10.5 microg/m3), followed by SP7 (73.7
microg/m3, 6.3 microg/m3) and Pelalawan (26.1 microg/m3, 4.7 microg/m3).
CONCLUSIONS: The higher prevalence of respiratory symptoms in Kerinci and SP7
could be the result of higher PM10 and hydrocarbon levels in these locations.

PMID: 15534505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Jan 1;94(1):202-15.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 induces expression of murine zinc finger
transcription factor ZNF450.

Edgar AJ(1), Dover SL, Lodrick MN, McKay IJ, Hughes FJ, Turner W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, King's College, 
Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom. alasdair.edgar@kcl.ac.uk

The bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) is a potent secreted factor that
promotes osteoblast differentiation during development. Exposure to BMP-2 is
sufficient to cause a lasting change in cell fate presumably by activating
specific target genes. To identify genes downstream of BMP-2 we treated the
murine pluripotent embryonic cell line, C3H10T1/2 that can be induced to form an 
osteoblastic phenotype, with 100 ng/ml BMP-2 for 24 h. Using suppression
subtractive hybridisation we found the novel zinc finger transcription factor,
ZNF450 was upregulated. The single-copy ZNF450 gene spans 15.6 kb on chromosome
10B1 and consists of seven exons, the first of which is untranslated. The open
reading frame encodes a 710 reside protein. Analysis of the protein sequence
reveals a highly conserved amino-terminal BTB/POZ dimerisation domain, an AT-hook
motif, and eight C2H2 zinc fingers. Library screening identified a second mRNA
isoform encoding a short protein isoform with one zinc finger. Using reverse
transcriptase-real time PCR to measure mRNA expression we found that ZNF450,
Runx2/Cbfa-1, and Sp7/osterix were induced by BMP-2 after 4 h in C2C12 myoblast
cells. Treatment of C2C12 cells with BMP-2 causes a shift from a myoblastic to
osteoblastic phenotype. ZNF450 was upregulated three to fivefold after 24 h in
C3H10T1/2 cells and required 100 ng/ml BMP-2. Expression of the 3 kb major
transcript was highest in liver, testis, and kidney. However, ZNF450 mRNA was
found also in a wide range of adult tissues. The consistent induction of ZNF450
by BMP-2 after 4 h in three murine pluripotent cell lines suggests that ZNF450
may play a role in the BMP-2 signalling pathway.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15526281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Gene. 2004 Oct 27;341:101-10.

Molecular cloning, structure, expression, and chromosomal localization of the
human Osterix (SP7) gene.

Gao Y(1), Jheon A, Nourkeyhani H, Kobayashi H, Ganss B.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) Group in Matrix Dynamics,
Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Fitzgerald Building, Room 239, 150
College Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E2.

We report the isolation of the human orthologue of the mouse Osterix (Osx/Sp7)
gene, a C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor of the SP gene family and putative 
"master" regulator of bone cell differentiation. The human SP7 cDNA encodes a
putative 431 amino acid protein that contains three consecutive C2H2 zinc finger 
repeats. The SP7 protein is highly conserved between mice and humans with an
overall sequence identity of 95%. The expression of a SP7 mRNA transcript of
approximately 3.2 kb is restricted to bone-derived cell lines in vitro but
undetectable in any adult tissues including mandibular bone by Northern blot
hybridization. The specific expression of SP7 mRNA in osteoblasts in vivo was
further confirmed by in situ hybridization on human embryonic tissues. The highly
restricted expression pattern and the divergence of the sequence outside of the
zinc finger region distinguish SP7 as a unique member of the SP family. The SP7
gene consists of two exons, with exon 2 containing most of the protein coding
sequence. The gene locus was mapped to chromosome 12q13.13 by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH). The identification and initial characterization of the SP7 
gene will facilitate the study of the molecular regulation of osteoblast
differentiation in humans.

PMID: 15474293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 17;279(51):53323-30. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

Phosphophoryn regulates the gene expression and differentiation of NIH3T3,
MC3T3-E1, and human mesenchymal stem cells via the integrin/MAPK signaling
pathway.

Jadlowiec J(1), Koch H, Zhang X, Campbell PG, Seyedain M, Sfeir C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Pathology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Terrace St., Pittsburgh, PA 15261-1964, USA.

Extracellular matrix proteins (ECMs) serve as both a structural support for cells
and a dynamic biochemical network that directs cellular activities. ECM proteins 
such as those of the SIBLING family (small integrin-binding ligand glycoprotein) 
could possess inherent growth factor activity. In this study, we demonstrate that
exon 5 of dentin matrix protein 3 (phosphophoryn (PP)), a non-collagenous dentin 
ECM protein and SIBLING protein family member, up-regulates osteoblast marker
genes in primary human adult mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), a mouse osteoblastic
cell line (MC3T3-E1), and a mouse fibroblastic cell line (NIH3T3). Quantitative
real-time PCR technology was used to quantify gene expression levels of bone
markers such as Runx2, Osx (Osterix), bone/liver/kidney Alp (alkaline
phosphatase), Ocn (osteocalcin), and Bsp (bone sialoprotein) in response to
recombinant PP and stably transfected PP. PP up-regulated Runx2, Osx, and Ocn
gene expression. PP increased OCN protein production in hMSCs and MC3T3-E1. ALP
activity and calcium deposition was increased by PP in hMSC. Furthermore, an
alpha(v)beta(3) integrin-blocking antibody significantly inhibited recombinant
PP-induced expression of Runx2 in hMSCs, suggesting that signaling by PP is
mediated through the integrin pathway. PP was also shown to activate p38, ERK1/2,
and JNK, three components of the MAPK pathway. These data demonstrate a novel
signaling function for PP in cell differentiation beyond the hypothesized role of
PP in biomineralization.

PMID: 15371433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 Aug 15;237(2):195-203.

Arabinose content of extracellular polysaccharide plays a role in cell
aggregation of Azospirillum brasilense.

Bahat-Samet E(1), Castro-Sowinski S, Okon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology and The Otto Warburg Minerva
Center for Agricultural Biotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Faculty of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences, P.O. Box 12,
76100 Rehovot, Israel.

Extracellular polysaccharides play an important role in aggregation and surface
colonization of plant-associated bacteria. In this work, we report the time
course production and monomer composition of the exopolysaccharide (EPS) produced
by wild type strain and several mutants of the plant growth promoting
rhizobacterium (PGPR) Azospirillum brasilense. In a fructose synthetic medium,
wild type strain Sp7 produced a glucose-rich EPS during exponential phase growth 
and an arabinose-rich EPS during stationary and death phase growth. D-glucose or 
L-arabinose did not support cell growth as sole carbon sources. However, glucose 
and arabinose-rich EPSs, when used as carbon source, supported bacterial growth. 
Cell aggregation of Sp7 correlated with the synthesis of arabinose-rich EPS. exoB
(UDP-glucose 4'-epimerase), exoC (phosphomannomutase) and phbC
(poly-beta-hydroxyburyrate synthase) mutant strains, under tested conditions,
produced arabinose-rich EPS and exhibited highly cell aggregation capability. A
mutant defective in LPS production (dTDP 4-rhamnose reductase; rmlD) produced
glucose-rich EPS and did not aggregate. These results support that arabinose
content of EPS plays an important role in cell aggregation. Cell aggregation
appears to be a time course phenomenon that takes place during reduced metabolic 
cell activity. Thus, aggregation could constitute a protected model of growth
that allows survival in a hostile environment. The occurrence of exoC and rmlD
was detected in several species of Azospirillum.

PMID: 15321662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biosens Bioelectron. 2004 Jul 15;19(12):1759-61.

Studies of Listeria monocytogenes-antibody binding using electro-orientation.

Bunin VD(1), Ignatov OV, Guliy OI, Voloshin AG, Dykman LA, O'Neil D, Ivnitski D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Microbiology, Obolensk, Moscow Region, Russia.

An electro-optical (EO) approach has been used for studies of Listeria
monocytogenes-antibody binding. The EO analyzer, which has been developed at the 
State Research Center for Applied Microbiology, Obolensk, was used as a basic
instrument for EO measurements. AC electro-kinetic effects depend on dielectric
properties of bioparticles, their composition, morphology, the medium, and the
frequency of applied electrical field. Electro-orientational spectra were used
for discrimination of bacteria before and after selective binding with
antibodies. The measurements were performed using a discrete set of frequencies
of the orienting electric field (10, 100, 250, and 500 kHz). During biospecific
interactions an antibody is bound to the microorganism causing a change in the
dielectric properties of the microorganism-antibody complex and the EO signal
reaches its maximum at 100-200 kHz. It has been shown that the biospecific
interactions of L. monocytogenes cells with anti-Listeria antibody in the
presence of Escherichia coli K-12, and Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 change the EO 
signals significantly. Thus, the determination of the presence of particular
bacteria within a mixed sample may be achieved by selection and matching of
antibodies specific to individual bacterium types and by comparing spectra of
bacterium in the presence and in the absence of specific antibody.

PMID: 15142611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Anal Biochem. 2004 May 15;328(2):181-6.

Electrooptical analysis of the Escherichia coli-phage interaction.

Bunin VD(1), Ignatov OV, Guliy OI, Zaitseva IS, O'Neil D, Ivnitski D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Microbiology, Obolensk, Moscow Region, Russian
Federation.

This article describes electrooptical (EO) characterization of biospecific
binding between the bacterium Escherichia coli XL-1 and the phage M13K07. The
electrooptical analyzer (ELUS EO), which has been developed at the State Research
Center for Applied Microbiology, Obolensk, Russia, was used as the basic
instrument for EO measurements. The operating principle of the analyzer is based 
on the polarizability of microorganisms, which depends strongly on their
composition, morphology, and phenotype. The principle of analysis of the
interaction of E. coli with the phage M13K07 is based on registration of changes 
of optical parameters of bacterial suspensions. The phage-cell interaction
includes the following stages: phage adsorption on the cell surface, entry of
viral DNA into the bacterial cell, amplification of phage within infected host,
and phage ejection from the cell. In this work, we used M13K07, a filamentous
phage of the family Inoviridae. Preliminary study had shown that combination of
the EO approach with a phage as a recognition element has an excellent potential 
for mediator-less detection of phage-bacteria complex formation. The interaction 
of E. coli with phage M13K07 induces a strong and specific EO signal as a result 
of substantial changes of the EO properties of the E. coli XL-1 suspension
infected by the phage M13K07. The signal was specific in the presence of foreign 
microflora (E. coli K-12 and Azospirillum brasilense Sp7). Integration of the EO 
approach with a phage has the following advantages: (1) bacteria from biological 
samples need not be purified, (2) the infection of phage to bacteria is specific,
(3) exogenous substrates and mediators are not required for detection, and (4) it
is suitable for any phage-bacterium system when bacteria-specific phages are
available.

PMID: 15113695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Z Orthop Ihre Grenzgeb. 2004 Mar-Apr;142(2):248-53.

[The effect of growth/differentiation factor-5 (GDF-5) on genotype and phenotype 
in human adult mesenchymal stem cells].

[Article in German]

Koch H(1), Jadlowiec JA, Fu FH, Nonn J, Merk HR, Hollinger JO, Campbell PG.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Orthopädie und orthopädische Chirurgie, Universität Greifswald.
hannjoerg.koch@uni-greifswald.de

AIM: To evaluate the effects of GDF-5 on genotype and phenotype of human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC).
HYPOTHESIS: GDF-5 leads to up-regulation of the Type I-collagen (Col) gene
without altering bone marker genes or alkaline phosphatase activity.
METHODS: To test our hypothesis hMSC were treated with rmGDF-5. Using
quantitative real-time PCR we analyzed mRNA for Col, Runx2 and Osterix (Osx).
Furthermore, we analyzed alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) as a phenotypical
bone marker. ANOVA and post hoc statistical analyses were used to determine
differences among treatments (p < 0.05).
RESULTS: HMSC showed a biphasic response in both Col and Runx2 after rmGDF-5.
Initial up-regulation was followed by a significant down-regulation below
controls. Interestingly, the controls presented with changes for Col and Runx2
over time. There was no Osx expression in either treated hMSC or controls. No
significant differences could be detected in ALP.
CONCLUSION: Increased expression of Col and Runx2 might indicate differentiation 
towards both osteoblast and fibroblast lineage. However, no Osx expression and no
change in ALP support the assumption that rmGDF-5 does not lead to an osteoblast 
phenotype in hMSC. Our in vitro studies confirm a possible therapeutic benefit of
GDF-5 in the treatment of tendon and ligament injuries and tissue engineering
approaches. Further research is necessary to prove its clinical value.

PMID: 15106072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Clin Lab Immunol. 2003;52:23-40.

Antibodies to Acinetobacter bacteria and bovine brain peptides, measured in
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in an attempt to develop an ante-mortem
test.

Wilson C(1), Hughes LE, Rashid T, Ebringer A, Bansal S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health and Life Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.

Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) is a neurological disease of cattle.
Antibody responses to Acinetobacter radioresistens and six other bacteria, as
well as to bovine myelin basic protein and bovine neurofilaments were measured in
128 BSE positive animals, 63 BSE negative animals and 64 healthy control animals.
Animals positive for BSE had the highest levels of antibodies to Acinetobacter
radioresistens (p < 0.0001) and also autoantibodies to bovine myelin basic
protein (p < 0.0001) and bovine neurofilaments (p < 0.0001). In an endeavour to
develop an antemortem test for BSE, 12 different strains of Acinetobacter were
further tested in a MAN (myelin-Acinetobacter-neurofilament) assay involving 28
BSE positive and 18 BSE negative animals and defined bovine brain peptides. Five 
out of the 12 Acinetobacter bacteria tested [Acinetobacter (sp3), A. haemolyticus
(sp4), A. johnsonii (sp7), A. lwoffii (sp8) and Acinetobacter (sp9)] gave 100%
sensitivity and 100% specificity for detecting BSE. The highest anti-bacterial
antibody level compared to controls was obtained with A. johnsonii. Further field
studies are required to determine the validity of the MAN assay in detecting
animals affected with BSE.

PMID: 15079887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 Mar 19;232(2):165-72.

Annotation of the pRhico plasmid of Azospirillum brasilense reveals its role in
determining the outer surface composition.

Vanbleu E(1), Marchal K, Lambrecht M, Mathys J, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3001
Heverlee, Belgium.

The plant growth-promoting soil bacterium Azospirillum brasilense enhances growth
of economically important crops, such as wheat, corn and rice. In order to
improve plant growth, a close bacterial association with the plant roots is
needed. Genes encoded on a 90-MDa plasmid, denoted pRhico plasmid, present in A. 
brasilense Sp7, play an important role in plant root interaction. Sequencing,
annotation and in silico analysis of this 90-MDa plasmid revealed the presence of
a large collection of genes encoding enzymes involved in surface polysaccharide
biosynthesis. Analysis of the 90-MDa plasmid genome provided evidence for its
essential role in the viability of the bacterial cell.

PMID: 15033235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Cell Sci. 2004 Mar 15;117(Pt 8):1457-68.

MyoD enhances BMP7-induced osteogenic differentiation of myogenic cell cultures.

Komaki M(1), Asakura A, Rudnicki MA, Sodek J, Cheifetz S.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Matrix Dynamics, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON M5S 3E2, Canada.

The muscle-specific, basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor MyoD can induce 
cells from other mesenchymal lineages to express a skeletal muscle phenotype.
Interestingly, MyoD is initially upregulated in myogenic cells incubated with
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), a treatment that induces osteogenic
differentiation, suggesting that MyoD has a role in BMP-induced osteogenesis of
myogenic cells. This possibility is supported by our observations that muscle
satellite cells derived from adult MyoD(-/-) mice show severely impaired
osteogenic induction by BMP-7 (osteogenic protein 1; OP-1) as indicated by the
decreased gene expression of the bone markers alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, 
Runx2/Cbfa1, and Osterix. Ectopic expression of MyoD increased alkaline
phosphatase activity and Osterix mRNA expression in response to BMP treatment.
Similarly, ectopic expression of MyoD in the pluripotent mesenchymal cell line
C3H10T1/2 increased alkaline phosphatase activity induced by BMP-7. Transcription
assays showed that transfection with a MyoD-expression vector, but not other
myogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (Myf5, myogenin) increased 
Runx2/Cbfa1 transactivation of a reporter gene construct containing either six
OSE sequences in tandem or a single OSE site. This effect was enhanced by BMP
treatment. These studies, therefore, demonstrate that the muscle transcription
factor MyoD is required for efficient BMP-induced osteogenesis of myogenic cells 
and indicate that MyoD might exert its effects through co-operative interactions 
with Runx2/Cbfa1.

PMID: 15020674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Bone. 2004 Mar;34(3):393-401.

Expression of preosteoblast markers and Cbfa-1 and Osterix gene transcripts in
stromal tumour cells of giant cell tumour of bone.

Huang L(1), Teng XY, Cheng YY, Lee KM, Kumta SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

In giant cell tumour of bone (GCT), mononuclear stromal cells, which represent
the neoplastic component of this lesion, regulate the formation of multinucleated
osteoclast-like giant cells which are the characteristic hallmark of this tumour.
However, the origin of stromal tumour cells has not yet been clearly defined. In 
this study, we evaluated several osteoblast markers including collagen type I,
bone sialoprotein (BSP), osteonectin and osteocalcin in GCT using
immunohistochemical techniques. Amongst the 13 GCT specimens and 7 GCT stromal
cell (GCTSC) cultures studied, majority of the GCTSC synthesized type I collagen,
BSP and osteonectin proteins but did not produce the differentiated osteoblast
marker, osteocalcin. We further examined the regulation of several important
osteogenic genes such as Cbfa-1, osterix and osteocalcin, and regulation of ALP
activity in GCTSC in culture by bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2). Real-time
PCR analysis indicated that Cbfa-1, osterix and osteocalcin mRNA were present in 
primary cultures of GCTSC. The addition of BMP-2 upregulated Cbfa-1 and osterix
gene expression within 12 h and the enhancement was still observed at 24 h. ALP
activity was minimal in untreated GCTSC in cultures. The number of ALP-positive
GCTSC was significantly increased following treatment with BMP-2 or combinations 
with beta-glycerophosphate and ascorbic acid. In contrast, BMP enhancement of
osterix mRNA level and ALP activity was also seen in SaOS2 osteoblast-like cells,
but not in the primary culture of normal human skin fibroblasts. In summary, our 
data suggest that GCT stromal tumour cells may have an osteoblastic lineage and
retain the ability to differentiate into osteoblasts.

PMID: 15003787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. BMC Genomics. 2003 Nov 7;4:43.

Expression of alternatively spliced isoforms of human Sp7 in osteoblast-like
cells.

Milona MA(1), Gough JE, Edgar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
athinam@well.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Osteogenic and chondrocytic differentiation involves a cascade of
coordinated transcription factor gene expression that regulates proliferation and
matrix protein formation in a defined temporo-spatial manner. Bone morphogenetic 
protein-2 induces expression of the murine Osterix/Specificity protein-7 (Sp7)
transcription factor that is required for osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation. Regulation of its expression may prove useful for mediating skeletal
repair.
RESULTS: Sp7, the human homologue of the mouse Osterix gene, maps to 12q13.13,
close to Sp1 and homeobox gene cluster-C. The first two exons of the 3-exon gene 
are alternatively spliced, encoding a 431-residue long protein isoform and an
amino-terminus truncated 413-residue short protein isoform. The human Sp7 protein
is a member of the Sp family having 78% identity with Sp1 in the three, Cys2-His2
type, DNA-binding zinc-fingers, but there is little homology elsewhere. The Sp7
mRNA was expressed in human foetal osteoblasts and craniofacial osteoblasts,
chondrocytes and the osteosarcoma cell lines HOS and MG63, but was not detected
in adult femoral osteoblasts. Generally, the expression of the short (or beta)
protein isoform of Sp7 was much higher than the long (or alpha) protein isoform. 
No expression of either isoform was found in a panel of other cell types.
However, in tissues, low levels of Sp7 were detected in testis, heart, brain,
placenta, lung, pancreas, ovary and spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: Sp7 expression in humans is largely confined to osteoblasts and
chondrocytes, both of which differentiate from the mesenchymal lineage. Of the
two protein isoforms, the short isoform is most abundant.

PMCID: PMC280673
PMID: 14604442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Appl Microbiol. 2003;95(4):832-8.

Effect of Azospirillum-mediated plant growth promotion on the development of
bacterial diseases on fresh-market and cherry tomato.

Romero AM(1), Correa OS, Moccia S, Rivas JG.

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Fitopatología, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. romeroa@agro.uba.ar

AIMS: Plant growth-promoting (PGP) activity of two Azospirillum strains and their
effects on foliar and vascular bacterial diseases were evaluated on fresh market 
and cherry tomato.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Tomato seeds were inoculated with A. brasilense Sp7 or
Azospirillum sp. BNM-65. Four-week-old plants were challenge-inoculated with
Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis (bacterial canker) or with
Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (bacterial spot). Azospirillum-induced PGP
was greater on cherry than on fresh-market tomato. Cherry tomato was more
resistant to bacterial canker but more susceptible to bacterial spot than the
fresh-market tomato. Canker severity was not affected by Azospirillum seed
treatments. However, leaf- and plant-death were delayed on Azospirillum-treated
plants compared with nontreated controls. Azospirillum increased the bacterial
spot severity on cherry but not on fresh-market tomato.
CONCLUSIONS: PGP was observed on both tomato genotypes, although growth effects
were larger on cherry tomato. Also, Azospirillum treatments may alter tomato
susceptibility to bacterial diseases.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The interaction between PGP rhizobacteria
like Azospirillum spp., not known to induce systemic resistance, with plant
pathogens distantly located is frequently overlooked. This work demonstrates the 
importance of this kind of evaluation.

PMID: 12969298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Sep 26;309(3):689-94.

BMP-2-induced Osterix expression is mediated by Dlx5 but is independent of Runx2.

Lee MH(1), Kwon TG, Park HS, Wozney JM, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 700-422, Republic of Korea.

BMP-2 stimulates the expression of three osteogenic master transcription factors:
Runx2, Dlx5, and Osterix (Osx). However, the hierarchical regulatory
relationships among them are not yet clearly understood. Osx was commonly
stimulated in osteogenic and non-osteogenic cells in response to BMP-signaling,
as Dlx5 was in our previous report. A cycloheximide experiment indicated that Osx
expression by BMP-2 requires new protein synthesis. Even if Osx has been
suggested as a downstream target of Runx2, the results of this study indicated
that Osx expression was still induced by BMP-2 treatment in Runx2 null cells, but
not induced by Runx2 overexpression in myogenic C2C12 cells. Instead, Osx
expression by BMP-2 was completely abrogated by the antisense blocking of Dlx5.
Depending upon the coincident expression pattern of Osx and Dlx5, and the
blocking of Osx expression by the antisense Dlx5, BMP-2-induced Osx expression is
mainly mediated not by Runx2, but by Dlx5.

PMID: 12963046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Jun;69(6):3244-50.

Involvement of the reserve material poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate in Azospirillum
brasilense stress endurance and root colonization.

Kadouri D(1), Jurkevitch E, Okon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Agricultural, Food 
and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

When grown under suboptimal conditions, rhizobacteria of the genus Azospirillum
produce high levels of poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate (PHB). Azospirillum brasilense
strain Sp7 and a phbC (PHB synthase) mutant strain in which PHB production is
impaired were evaluated for metabolic versatility, for the ability to endure
various stress conditions, for survival in soil inoculants, and for the potential
to promote plant growth. The carbon source utilization data were similar for the 
wild-type and mutant strains, but the generation time of the wild-type strain was
shorter than that of the mutant strain with all carbon sources tested. The
ability of the wild type to endure UV irradiation, heat, osmotic pressure,
osmotic shock, and desiccation and to grow in the presence of hydrogen peroxide
was greater than that of the mutant strain. The motility and cell aggregation of 
the mutant strain were greater than the motility and cell aggregation of the wild
type. However, the wild type exhibited greater chemotactic responses towards
attractants than the mutant strain exhibited. The wild-type strain exhibited
better survival than the mutant strain in carrier materials used for soil
inoculants, but no difference in the ability to promote plant growth was detected
between the strains. In soil, the two strains colonized roots to the same extent.
It appears that synthesis and utilization of PHB as a carbon and energy source by
A. brasilense under stress conditions favor establishment of this bacterium and
its survival in competitive environments. However, in A. brasilense, PHB
production does not seem to provide an advantage in root colonization under the
conditions tested.

PMCID: PMC161532
PMID: 12788722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mikrobiologiia. 2003 Jan-Feb;72(1):60-3.

[Atypical R-S dissociation in Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Matora LIu(1), Serebrennikova OB, Petrova LP, Burygin GL, Shchegolev SIu.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, pr. Entuziastov 13, Saratov, 410049 Russia.
larisa@ibppm.sgu.ru

It was found that atypical R-S dissociation in the type strain A. brasilense Sp7 
is not accompanied by drastic changes in the carbohydrate moieties of bacterial
lipopolysaccharides but is rather due to different contributions of two
O-specific polysaccharides (found in both R and S dissociants) to the
age-dependent architectonics of the cell surface.

PMID: 12698793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Bone Miner Res. 2003 Apr;18(4):716-22.

Telomerase accelerates osteogenesis of bone marrow stromal stem cells by
upregulation of CBFA1, osterix, and osteocalcin.

Gronthos S(1), Chen S, Wang CY, Robey PG, Shi S.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases Branch, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Telomerase activity can prevent telomere shortening and replicative senescence in
human somatic cells. We and others have previously demonstrated that forced
expression of telomerase in human bone marrow stromal stem cells (BMSSCs) was
able to extend their life-span and enhance their bone-forming capability, without
inducing malignant transformation. In this study, we determined that telomerase
was able to accelerate calcium accumulation of human BMSSCs under osteogenic
inductive conditions. Similarly, xenogeneic transplantation of
telomerase-expressing BMSSCs (BMSSC-Ts) yielded ectopic bone formation at 2 weeks
post-transplantation, 2-4 weeks earlier than typically seen with BMSSCs
transfected with empty vector (BMSSC-Cs). Low-density DNA array analysis revealed
that telomerase activity increases the expression of G1 regulating genes
including cyclin D3, cyclin E1, E2F-4, and DP2, associated with
hyperphosphorylation of retinoblastoma (pRb), leading to the extended
proliferative capacity of BMSSC-Ts. Importantly, BMSSC-T transplants showed a
higher number of human osteogenic cells at 8 weeks post transplantation compared 
with the BMSSC-C transplants, coupled with a significantly increased osteogenic
capacity. One possible mechanism leading to accelerated osteogenesis by BMSSC-Ts 
may be attributed, at least in part, to the upregulation of the important
osteogenic genes such as CBFA1, osterix, and osteocalcin in vitro. Taken
together, these findings show that telomerase can accelerate cell cycle
progression from G1-to-S phase and enhance osteogenic differentiation of BMSSCs, 
because of the upregulation of CBFA1, osterix, and osteocalcin.

PMID: 12674332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Virol. 2003 Mar;77(6):3409-17.

Strain-dependent structural variants of herpes simplex virus type 1 ICP34.5
determine viral plaque size, efficiency of glycoprotein processing, and viral
release and neuroinvasive disease potential.

Mao H(1), Rosenthal KS.

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown, Ohio 44272,
USA.

The ability of certain strains of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) to cause
encephalitis or neuroinvasive disease in the mouse upon peripheral infection is
dependent on a combination of activities of specific forms of viral proteins. The
importance of specific variants of ICP34.5 to neuroinvasive disease potential and
its correlation with small-plaque production, inefficient glycoprotein
processing, and virus release were suggested by comparison of ICP34.5 from the
SP7 virus, originally obtained from the brain of a neonate with disseminated
disease, and the tissue culture-passaged progeny of SP7 (SLP5 and SLP10) and the 
KOS321 virus. SLP5, SLP10, and KOS321 are attenuated and exhibit a large-plaque
phenotype, including efficient glycoprotein processing and viral release. We show
that expression of the KOS321 ICP34.5 protein in cells infected with SP7 or
ICP34.5 deletion mutants promotes large plaque formation and efficient viral
glycoprotein processing, while expression of the SP7 ICP34.5 protein decreases
efficiency of viral glycoprotein processing. In addition, a recombinant virus,
4hS1, with the SP7 ICP34.5 gene replacing the KOS321-like ICP34.5 gene in the
SLP10a background, rescues the small-plaque phenotype and neuroinvasive disease. 
The major difference in the ICP34.5 gene product is the number of Pro-Ala-Thr
repeats in the middle region of the protein, with 18 for SP7 and 3 for KOS321.
Strain-dependent differences in the ICP34.5 protein can therefore alter the
tissue culture behavior and the virulence of HSV-1.

PMCID: PMC149531
PMID: 12610116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2001 Dec;41(6):655-61.

[Cloning sequencing and expression pattern, functional analysis of nifA gene in
Azospirillum brasilense Yu62].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Chen S, Ma L, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biology Science, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094,
China.

The nifA gene of Azospirillum brasilense Yu62 was cloned and sequenced. The
expression of nifA gene was investigated in wild type strain Azospirillum
brasilense Yu62. The results show that expression of nifA gene is not repressed
by ammounium and oxygen completely. But the expression of Yu62 nifA gene is
different from that of strain Sp7 nifA gene. Expression of Yu62 nifA seems more
sensitive to oxygen than that of Sp7 nifA which shows the highest expression in
condition of aerobic, while the Yu62 nifA gene shows the highest expression in
the condition of microaerobic. The regulation of NifA protein activity by ammonia
and oxygen was investigated. Results showed that the NifA protein is repressed by
ammonia, 1 mmol/L NH4Cl can inhibit activity of NifA protein completely. Oxygen
concentration affects activity of NifA protein. NifA protein is highly active in 
0.4%-0.5% O2.

PMID: 12552819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2002 Oct 20;80(2):195-200.

Sensitivity function-based model reduction: A bacterial gene expression case
study.

Smets I(1), Bernaerts K, Sun J, Marchal K, Vanderleyden J, Van Impe J.

Author information: 
(1)BioTeC - Bioprocess Technology and Control, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Kasteelpark Arenberg 22 B-3001, Leuven, Belgium.

Mathematical models used to predict the behavior of genetically modified
organisms require 1). a (rather) large number of state variables, and 2).
complicated kinetic expressions containing a large number of parameters. Since
these models are hardly identifiable and of limited use in model-based
optimization and control strategies, a generic methodology based on sensitivity
function analysis is presented to reduce the model complexity at the level of the
kinetics, while maintaining high prediction power. As a case study to illustrate 
the method and results obtained, the influence of the dissolved oxygen
concentration on the cytN gene expression in the bacterium Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 is modeled. As a first modeling approach, available mechanistic
knowledge is incorporated into a mass balance equation model with 3 states and 14
parameters. The large differences in order of magnitude of the model parameters
identified on the available experimental data indicate 1). possible structural
problems in the kinetic model and, associated with this, 2). a possibly too high 
number of model parameters. A careful sensitivity function analysis reveals that 
a reduced model with only seven parameters is almost as accurate as the original 
model.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12209775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biotechnol. 2002 Aug 28;97(3):243-52.

Monitoring Azospirillum-wheat interactions using the gfp and gusA genes
constitutively expressed from a new broad-host range vector.

Ramos HJ(1), Roncato-Maccari LD, Souza EM, Soares-Ramos JR, Hungria M, Pedrosa
FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UFPR, C.
Postal 19046, CEP 81531-990 Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

To monitor the colonization of wheat roots by Azospirillum brasilense, we
constructed several plasmids based on the pBBR1 replicon expressing the gfp and
gusA genes constitutively. Both genes were placed under control of the gentamycin
resistance gene promoter resulting in high levels of expression in Escherichia
coli and A. brasilense. The constructed plasmids were stably maintained in A.
brasilense strains even in the absence of selective pressure. The colonization of
wheat plants grown under controlled conditions in sterilized vermiculite by A.
brasilense strain FP2 (a Sp7-derivative) transconjugants containing these
plasmids was monitored. Bacteria expressing GFP were easily observed in fresh
plant material by fluorescence microscopy. Cell aggregates and single bacteria
were visualized on the surfaces of young root zones, such as roots hairs and
lateral roots. Large cellular clumps were observed at the points of lateral root 
emergence or at intercellular spaces of root epidermal cells 30 days after
inoculation. Although we failed to detected bacteria in internal cortical and
xylem tissues of wheat roots, the initial stage of endophytic colonization by A. 
brasilense may involve the sites detected in this work.

PMID: 12084480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Jun;68(6):2943-9.

Identification and isolation of genes involved in poly(beta-hydroxybutyrate)
biosynthesis in Azospirillum brasilense and characterization of a phbC mutant.

Kadouri D(1), Burdman S, Jurkevitch E, Okon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology and The Otto Warburg Center for
Agricultural Biotechnology, Faculty of Agricultural, Food and Environmental
Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Like many other prokaryotes, rhizobacteria of the genus Azospirillum produce high
levels of poly(beta-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) under suboptimal growth conditions.
Utilization of PHB by bacteria under stress has been proposed as a mechanism that
favors their compatible establishment in competitive environments, thus showing
great potential for the improvement of bacterial inoculants for plants and soils.
The three genes that are considered to be essential in the PHB biosynthetic
pathway, phbA (beta-ketothiolase), phbB (acetoacetyl coenzyme A reductase), and
phbC (PHB synthase), were identified in Azospirillum brasilense strain Sp7,
cloned, and sequenced. The phbA, -B, and -C genes were found to be linked
together and located on the chromosome. An A. brasilense phbC mutant was obtained
by insertion of a kanamycin resistance cassette within the phbC gene. No PHB
production was detected in this mutant. The capability of the wild-type strain to
endure starvation conditions was higher than that of the mutant strain. However, 
motility, cell aggregation, root adhesion, and exopolysaccharide (EPS) and
capsular polysaccharide (CPS) production were higher in the phbC mutant strain
than in the wild type.

PMCID: PMC123958
PMID: 12039753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mikrobiologiia. 2002 Mar-Apr;71(2):211-4.

[Antigenic identity of the capsule lipopolysaccharides, exopolysaccharides, and
O-specific polysaccharides in Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Matora LIu(1), Shchegolev SIu.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, pr. Entuziastov 13, Saratov, 410015 Russia.

The antigenic identity (and close values of electrophoretic mobility) of capsular
polysaccharides, exopolysaccharides, and O-specific polysaccharides was revealed 
in the Azospirillum brasilense strains Sp7 and Sp245 by the immunodiffusion and
immunoelectrophoretic methods. Together with the literature data on the identity 
of the monosaccharides composition of these polymers, this gives evidence of the 
absence of a specific capsular antigen in the bacteria studied. Thus,
extracellular Azospirillum brasilense polysaccharides are likely to represent
O-antigenic lipopolysaccharide fragments excreted by the bacteria into the
culture medium, and their identification as a capsule or as an exopolysaccharide 
depends on the strength of the attachment of these polysaccharides to the cell
surface.

PMID: 12024821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Curr Microbiol. 2002 May;44(5):363-7.

Inhibition of biosynthesis and activity of nitrogenase in Azospirillum brasilense
Sp7 under salinity stress.

Tripathi AK(1), Nagarajan T, Verma SC, Rudulier DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Genetics, School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi - 221005, India. tripathianil@hotmail.com

Azospirillum brasilense is a microaerophilic, plant growth-promoting bacterium,
whose nitrogenase activity has been shown to be sensitive to salinity stress.
Growth of A. brasilense in semi-solid medium showed that diazotrophic growth in
N-free medium was relatively less sensitive to high NaCl concentrations (200-400 
mM) than that in presence of NH4+. Increase in salinity stress to diazotrophic A.
brasilense in the semi-solid medium led to the migration of the pellicle to
deeper anaerobic zones. Assays of acetylene reduction and nifH- lacZ and nifA-
lacZ fusions indicated that salinity stress inhibited nitrogenase biosynthesis
more strongly than nitrogenase activity. Under salt stress, the amount of
dinitrogenase reductase inactivated by ADP-ribosylation was strongly reduced,
indicating that the dinitrogenase reductase ADP ribosyl transferase (DRAT)
activity was also inhibited by increased NaCl concentrations. Movement of the
pellicle to the anaerobic zone and inhibition of DRAT might be adaptive responses
of A. brasilense to salinity stress under diazotrophic conditions.
Supplementation of glycine betaine, which alleviates salt stress, partially
reversed both responses.

PMID: 11927988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Apr;68(4):1919-24.

Towards growth of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi independent of a plant host.

Hildebrandt U(1), Janetta K, Bothe H.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, D-50923 Cologne, Germany.

When surface-sterilized spores of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus (AMF) Glomus 
intraradices Sy167 were germinated on agar plates in the slightly modified
minimum mineral medium described by G. Bécard and J. A. Fortin (New Phytol.
108:211-218, 1988), slime-forming bacteria, identified as Paenibacillus validus, 
frequently grew up. These bacteria were able to support growth of the fungus on
the agar plates. In the presence of P. validus, hyphae branched profusely and
formed coiled structures. These were much more densely packed than the so-called 
arbuscule-like structures which are formed by AMF grown in coculture with carrot 
roots transformed with T-DNA from Agrobacterium rhizogenes. The presence of P.
validus alone also enabled G. intraradices to form new spores, mainly at the
densely packed hyphal coils. The new spores were not as abundant as and were
smaller than those formed by AMF in the monoxenic culture with carrot root
tissues, but they also contained lipid droplets and a large number of nuclei. In 
these experiments P. validus could not be replaced by bacteria such as
Escherichia coli K-12 or Azospirillum brasilense Sp7. Although no conditions
under which the daughter spores regerminate and colonize plants have been found
yet, and no factor(s) from P. validus which stimulates fungal growth has been
identified, the present findings might be a significant step forward toward
growth of AMF independent of any plant host.

PMCID: PMC123902
PMID: 11916713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Genetika. 2002 Feb;38(2):182-9.

[The use of fragments of the 85- and 120-MDa plasmids of Azospirillum brasilense 
Sp245 to study the plasmid rearrangement in this bacterium and to search for
homologous sequences in plasmids of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7].

[Article in Russian]

Katsy EI(1), Borisov IV, Petrova LP, Matora LIu.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Saratov, 410015 Russia.

A spontaneous loss of the 85- (p85) and 120-MDa (p120) replicons and simultaneous
generation of a plasmid of more than 300 MDa were associated with defects in
synthesis of O-specific and Calcofluor-binding polysaccharides and had no effect 
on flagellation and motility of the Azospirillum brasilense Sp245.5 mutant. The
plasmid rearrangement was studied by hybridization of DNAs from the wild-type
Sp245 strain and the Sp245.5 mutant with p85 and p120 fragments that contained
loci involved in formation of the polar (fla) and lateral (laf) flagella,
synthesis of O-specific and Calcofluor-binding polysaccharides (lps/cal),
swimming (mot), and swarming (swa) of bacteria. Hybridization with the p120
fragments revealed incorporation of the intact fla/swa loci and the altered
lps/cal loci into a new megaplasmid. Two EcoRI fragments homologous to the
fla/laf/mot/swa loci of p85 were found in A. brasilense Sp245 DNA, whereas only
one copy was preserved in the Sp245.5 mutant. Hybridization of the p120 and p85
fragments of Sp245 to the A. brasilense Sp7 DNA for the first time revealed
regions of substantial homology to these fragments in the 90- and 115-MDa Sp7
plasmids, respectively.

PMID: 11898609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Feb;68(2):985-8.

Involvement of glnB, glnZ, and glnD genes in the regulation of
poly-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis by ammonia in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Sun J(1), Van Dommelen A, Van Impe J, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics. BioTeC-Bioprocess Technology and
Control, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenburg 20, B-3001
Heverlee, Belgium.

The role of three key nitrogen regulatory genes, glnB (encoding the P(II)
protein), glnZ (encoding the P(z) protein), and glnD (encoding the GlnD protein),
in regulation of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) biosynthesis by ammonia in
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 was investigated. It was observed that glnB glnZ and 
glnD mutants produce substantially higher amounts of PHB than the wild type
produces during the active growth phase. glnB and glnZ mutants have PHB
production phenotypes similar to that of the wild type. Our results indicate that
the P(II)-P(z) system is apparently involved in nitrogen-dependent regulation of 
PHB biosynthesis in A. brasilense Sp7.

PMCID: PMC126674
PMID: 11823250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mikrobiologiia. 2001 Sep-Oct;70(5):647-50.

[Relationship between lectin, alpha-, beta-glucosidase, and beta-galactosidase
activities of Azospirillum].

[Article in Russian]

Alen'kina SA(1), Nikitina VE, Borisova-Golovko MV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, pr. Entuziastov 13, Saratov, 410015 Russia.

The activities of alpha-glucosidase, beta-glucosidase, and beta-galactosidase
were studied during the isolation and purification of lectins from Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 and Azospirillum lipoferum 59b cells. These enzymatic activities
were revealed in crude extracts of surface proteins, protein fraction
precipitated with ammonium sulfate or ethanol-acetone mixture, and protein
fraction obtained by gel filtration on Sephadex G-75. The distribution of the
enzymes between different protein fractions varied among the azospirilla studied.
The cofunction of the A. brasilense Sp7 lectin and beta-galactosidase on the cell
surface is assumed. A strong interaction between the A. lipoferum 59b lectin and 
glucosidases was revealed. The lectin from A. lipoferum 59b may possess
saccharolytic activity.

PMID: 11763784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. DNA Res. 2001 Oct 31;8(5):215-9.

Characterization of expressed genes in the SLL2 region of self-compatible
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Takada Y(1), Ito A, Ninomiya C, Kakizaki T, Takahata Y, Suzuki G, Hatakeyama K,
Hinata K, Shiba H, Takayama S, Isogai A, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Morioka, Japan.

Self-incompatibility in Brassica species is regulated by a set of S-locus genes: 
SLG, SRK, and SP11/SCR. In the vicinity of the S-locus genes, several expressed
genes, SLL2 and SP2/ClpP, etc., were identified in B. campestris. Arabidopsis
thaliana is a self-compatible Brassica relative, and its complete genome has been
sequenced. From comparison of the genomic sequences between B. campestris and A. 
thaliana, microsynteny between gene clusters of Arabidopsis and Brassica SLL2
regions was observed, though the S-locus genes, SLG, SRK, and SP11/SCR were not
found in the region of Arabidopsis. Almost all genes predicted in this region of 
Arabidopsis were expressed in both vegetative and reproductive organs, suggesting
that the genes in the SLL2 region might not be related to self-incompatibility.
Considering the recent speculation that the S-locus genes were translocated as a 
single unit between Arabidopsis and Brassica, the translocation might have
occurred in the region between the SLL2 and SP7 genes.

PMID: 11759841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2001 Nov;34(11):1379-95.

Sequencing and promoter analysis of the nifENXorf3orf5fdxAnifQ operon from
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Potrich DP(1), Bressel TA, Schrank IS, Passaglia LM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Av. Benito Gonçalves, 9500 Prédio 43421, 91501-970 Porto Alegre,
RS, Brazil.

A 40-kb DNA region containing the major cluster of nif genes has been isolated
from the Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 genome. In this region three nif operons
have been identified: nifHDKorf1Y, nifENXorf3orf5fdxAnifQ and orf2nifUSVorf4. The
operons containing nifENX and nifUSV genes are separated from the structural
nifHDKorf1Y operon by about 5 kb and 10 kb, respectively. The present study shows
the sequence analysis of the 6045-bp DNA region containing the nifENX genes. The 
deduced amino acid sequences from the open reading frames were compared to the
nif gene products of other diazotrophic bacteria and indicate the presence of
seven ORFs, all reading in the same direction as that of the nifHDKorf1Y operon. 
Consensus sigma54 and NifA-binding sites are present only in the promoter region 
upstream of the nifE gene. This promoter is activated by NifA protein and is
approximately two-times less active than the nifH promoter, as indicated by the
beta-galactosidase assays. This result suggests the differential expression of
the nif genes and their respective products in Azospirillum.

PMID: 11668346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mikrobiologiia. 2001 Jul-Aug;70(4):471-6.

[The role of cell surface bacterial lectins in the aggregation of Azospirilla].

[Article in Russian]

Nikitina VE(1), Ponomareva EG, Alen'kina SA, Konnova SA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, pr. Entuziastov 13, Saratov, 410015 Russia.
root@ibfrm.saratov.su

The mutant strain Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.2.3 with impaired lectin activity
exhibited poorer cell aggregation than its parent strain A. brasilense Sp7(S)
both in the exponential and stationary growth phases. The pretreatment of
bacterial cells with the specific haptens (L-fucose and D-galactose) of a lectin 
located at the cell surface of the mutant strain was found to inhibit the
aggregation of azospirilla. The specific binding of the A. brasilense Sp7(S)
lectin to the extracellular polysaccharide-containing complexes of this strain
was revealed by dot immunoblotting on nitrocellulose membrane filters. The
interaction of the lectins of A. brasilense 75, A. brasilense Sp7, and A.
lipoferum 59b with the polysaccharide-containing complexes that were isolated
from these strains was not specific. No interstrain cross-interaction between the
exopolysaccharides and lectins of azospirilla was found. A coflocculation of A.
brasilense Sp7 cells with Bacillus polymyxa 1460 cells was shown. The involvement
of autogenous lectins in the aggregation of bacterial cells is discussed.

PMID: 11558272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Aug;67(8):3350-7.

Quantitative analysis of bacterial gene expression by using the gusA reporter
gene system.

Sun J(1), Smets I, Bernaerts K, Van Impe J, Vanderleyden J, Marchal K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium.

An Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 strain containing a plasmid-borne translational
cytN-gusA fusion was grown in a continuous culture to quantitatively evaluate the
influence of extracellular signals (such as O(2)) on expression of the cytNOQP
operon. The dissolved oxygen concentration was shifted at regular time intervals 
before the steady state was reached. The measured beta-glucuronidase activity was
used to monitor cytN gene expression. However, as the beta-glucuronidase activity
in the experimental setup not only depended on altered transcription of the
hybrid gene when the signal was varied but was also influenced by cellular
accumulation, degradation, and dilution of the hybrid fusion protein, a
mathematical method was developed to describe the intrinsic properties of the
dynamic bioprocess. After identification and validation of the mathematical
model, the apparent specific rate of expression of the fusion, which was
independent of the experimental setup, could be deduced from the model and used
to quantify gene expression regulated by extracellular environmental signals. In 
principle, this approach can be generalized to assess the effects of external
signals on bacterial gene expression.

PMCID: PMC93027
PMID: 11472903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Virus Res. 2001 Aug;76(2):127-35.

Changes in BiP (GRP78) levels upon HSV-1 infection are strain dependent.

Mao H(1), Palmer D, Rosenthal KS.

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine, 4209 State Route 44, Box
95, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

BiP (grp78) is a chaperone protein which can also regulate the unfolded protein
response of the cell. Levels of BiP increased in cells infected by the small
plaque producing, cell associated, neuroinvasive strains of HSV-1 (SP7, 490) but 
decreased in cells infected with KOS, a large plaque, attenuated strain. BiP
protein synthesis continued early in infection and BiP was sequestered and its
degradation was limited during SP7 infection. BiP protein synthesis stopped and
the protein was degraded in KOS infected cells. These viral strain dependent
differences in BiP concentration may influence other aspects of the viral
interaction with the target cell and its host.

PMID: 11410313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Gen Genet. 2000 Nov;264(4):521-30.

Physiological evidence for differently regulated tryptophan-dependent pathways
for indole-3-acetic acid synthesis in Azospirillum brasilense.

Carreño-Lopez R(1), Campos-Reales N, Elmerich C, Baca BE.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA D2172, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Disruption of ipdC, a gene involved in indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) production by
the indole pyruvate pathway in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7, resulted in a mutant 
strain that was not impaired in IAA production with lactate or pyruvate as the
carbon source. A tryptophan auxotroph that is unable to convert indole to
tryptophan produced IAA if tryptophan was present but did not synthesise IAA from
indole. Similar results were obtained for a mutant strain with additional
mutations in the genes ipdC and trpD. This suggests the existence of an
alternative Trp-dependent route for IAA synthesis. On gluconate as a carbon
source, IAA production by the ipdC mutant was inhibited, suggesting that the
alternative route is regulated by catabolite repression. Using permeabilised
cells we observed the enzymatic conversion of tryptamine and
indole-3-acetonitrile to IAA, both in the wild-type and in the ipdC mutant. IAA
production from tryptamine was strongly decreased when gluconate was the carbon
source.

PMID: 11129057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. DNA Seq. 2000;11(3-4):287-93.

Isolation and sequence analysis of the trpBA gene cluster, encoding tryptophan
synthase, from Azospirillum brasilense.

Dosselaere F(1), Lambrecht M, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, K. U. Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium.

The trpBA gene cluster of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 was isolated by
complementation of an Escherichia coli trpBA mutant. Both genes code for the two 
subunits of tryptophan synthase, which catalyzes the last step in tryptophan
biosynthesis. No structural features indicating transcriptional regulation could 
be identified. Upstream of the trpBA cluster an open reading frame encoding a
putative periplasmic binding protein, involved in amino acid transport, was
identified. Analysis of the downstream region of the trpBA cluster revealed the
presence of a putative open reading frame encoding a subunit of the
acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase carboxyl transferase complex.

PMID: 11092742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2000 May;66(5):2175-84.

Mutants with enhanced nitrogenase activity in hydroponic Azospirillum
brasilense-wheat associations.

Pereg Gerk L(1), Gilchrist K, Kennedy IR.

Author information: 
(1)SUNFix Center for Nitrogen Fixation, Department of Agricultural Chemistry and 
Soil Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.
Lily.Pereg-Gerk@uni-koeln.de

The effect of a mutation affecting flocculation, differentiation into cyst-like
forms, and root colonization on nitrogenase expression by Azospirillum brasilense
is described. The gene flcA of strain Sp7 restored these phenotypes in
spontaneous mutants of both strains Sp7 and Sp245. Employing both constitutive
pLA-lacZ and nifH-lacZ reporter fusions expressed in situ, the colony morphology,
colonization pattern, and potential for nitrogenase activity of spontaneous
mutants and flcA Tn5-induced mutants were established. The results of this study 
show that the ability of Sp7 and Sp245 mutant strains to remain in a vegetative
form improved their ability to express nitrogenase activity in association with
wheat in a hydroponic system. Restoring the cyst formation and colonization
pattern to the spontaneous mutant Sp7-S reduced nitrogenase activity rates in
association with plants to that of the wild-type Sp7. Although Tn5-induced flcA
mutants showed higher potentials for nitrogenase expression than Sp7, their
potentials were lower than that of Sp7-S, indicating that other factors in this
strain contribute to its exceptional nitrogenase activity rates on plants. The
lack of lateral flagella is not one of these factors, as Sp7-PM23, a spontaneous 
mutant impaired in swarming and lateral-flagellum production but not in
flocculation, showed wild-type nitrogenase activity and expression. The results
also suggest factors of importance in evolving an effective symbiosis between
Azospirillum and wheat, such as increasing the availability of microaerobic
niches along the root, increased supply of carbon sources by the plant, and the
retention of the bacterial cells in vegetative form for faster metabolism.

PMCID: PMC101470
PMID: 10788397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Parasitol. 2000 Feb;86(1):67-74.

Taenia crassiceps cysticercosis: protective effect and immune response elicited
by DNA immunization.

Cruz-Revilla C(1), Rosas G, Fragoso G, López-Casillas F, Toledo A, Larralde C,
Sciutto E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, México, DF.

The nucleotide sequence of a protective recombinant antigen of Taenia crassiceps 
cysticerci present in all stages of Taenia solium (KETc7), cloned into pcDNA3
plasmid with the signal peptide sequence of the beta-glycan receptor (pTc-sp7),
has been shown to be effective in protecting mice against experimental infection 
of T. crassiceps. To explore further the possibilities of this form of
immunization and the immune response induced, mice were injected intramuscularly 
(i.m.) or intradermally (i.d.) with 3 doses of pTc-sp7. Similar levels of
resistance were found using either i.m. or i.d. immunization. Spleen cells from
i.d. and i.m. DNA immunized mice induced a specific T-cell response to T.
crassiceps antigens and to a synthetic peptide from the immunogen itself (GK-1). 
Proliferated cells were especially enriched in CD8+ CD4- T-lymphocytes. A clear
increase in the percentage of CD3+ cells that produce gamma-interferon and
interleukin-2 was detected when measuring the intracellular cytokine production, 
an indication of the pTc-sp7 capacity to induce an effective cellular response.
These results provide encouraging information on the use of KETc7 in the
prevention of cysticercosis as well as a first insight into the characterization 
of the immune response induced by pTc-sp7 that hints to the relevance of cellular
immunity in protection.

PMID: 10701566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Appl Microbiol. 1999 Dec;87(6):877-883.

Response to NaCl of nitrate assimilation and nitrogenase activity of the
cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 and its mutants.

Rai AK(1), Tiwari SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

The presence of NaCl in the nutrient solution promoted nitrate uptake in parent
Anabaena sp. PCC 7120, mutants SP7 (defective in nitrate reductase activity) and 
SP17 (partially defective in nitrate reductase activity), but not in the mutant
SP9 (defective in nitrate transport and reduction). Nitrate reductase activity of
the parent and mutant SP17 increased with increasing concentration of nitrate in 
saline medium, while mutants SP7 and SP9 did not respond to the altered salinity.
Although Na+ was not required for nitrate reductase activity, its presence in the
nutrient solution enhanced nitrate reduction. Complete removal of Na+ from the
nutrient solution markedly reduced nitrogenase activity in all the strains, while
raising the concentration of NaCl to 50 mmol l-1 or above, was equally toxic to
nitrogenase activity. External NaCl at 200 mmol l-1 brought down the nitrogenase 
activity to the same residual level as observed without Na+.

PMID: 10692073  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


411. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2000 Jan;66(1):113-7.

The ntrB and ntrC genes are involved in the regulation of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate 
biosynthesis by ammonia in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Sun J(1), Peng X, Van Impe J, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F. A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, K.U. Leuven, B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium.

Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and its ntrA (rpoN), ntrBC, and ntrC mutants have
been evaluated for their capabilities of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB)
accumulation in media with high and low ammonia concentrations. It was observed
that the ntrBC and ntrC mutants can produce PHB in both low- and high-C/N-ratio
media, while no significant PHB production was observed for the wild type or the 
ntrA mutant in low-C/N-ratio media. Further investigation by fermentation
analysis indicated that the ntrBC and ntrC mutants were able to grow and
accumulate PHB simultaneously in the presence of a high concentration of ammonia 
in the medium, while little PHB was produced in the wild type and ntrA (rpoN)
mutant during active growth phase. These results provide the first genetic
evidence that the ntrB and ntrC genes are involved in the regulation of PHB
synthesis by ammonia in A. brasilense Sp7.

PMCID: PMC91793
PMID: 10618211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 Dec 10;10(18):3031-44.

Delivery and expression of fluid shear stress-inducible promoters to the vessel
wall: applications for cardiovascular gene therapy.

Houston P(1), White BP, Campbell CJ, Braddock M.

Author information: 
(1)Endothelial Cell Gene Expression Group, Vascular Diseases Unit, Glaxo Wellcome
Medicines Research Centre, Stevenage, Herts, England.

In atherosclerosis, endothelial cells at sites of stenosis experience elevated
levels of shear stress. We have constructed a series of shear stress-inducible
transcription units (SITUs) expressing the luciferase reporter gene and
determined their activation by fluid shear stress in transfected endothelial
cells. Chimeric promoters were constructed that comprised basal transcription
factor-binding sites coupled to a shear stress response element (SSRE). We have
used consensus binding sites for transcription factors NF-kappaB, Ap1, Sp1, Oct1,
and Egr-1/Sp1 in either the presence or absence of the previously defined
"GAGACC" SSRE. The response of the promoters to shear stress was determined after
transfection into human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). After
transient transfection into HUVECs, fluid shear stress activated the promoters by
between two- and eightfold. The most responsive SITUs comprised an overlapping
Sp1/Egr-1-binding site linked to a TATA box with (SP5) or without (SP7) the
GAGACC SSRE. Instillation of SP5 DNA in vivo into the left carotid artery of
rabbit and subsequent generation of a stenosis using a mechanical wire occluder
caused a 10-fold upregulation of luciferase reporter gene expression at the site 
of vessel occlusion. These vectors show promise for therapeutic gene expression
at sites of occlusive vascular disease.

PMID: 10609662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Sep;264(3):746-55.

Mapping of an epitope recognized by a neutralizing monoclonal antibody specific
to toxin Cn2 from the scorpion Centruroides noxius, using discontinuous synthetic
peptides.

Calderon-Aranda ES(1), Selisko B, York EJ, Gurrola GB, Stewart JM, Possani LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Recognition, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

The Na+-channel-affecting toxin Cn2 represents the major and one of the most
toxic components of the venom of the Mexican scorpion Centruroides noxius
Hoffmann. A monoclonal antibody BCF2 raised against Cn2 has been shown previously
to be able to neutralize the toxic effect of Cn2 and of the whole venom of C.
noxius. In the present study the epitope was mapped to a surface region
comprising the N- and C-terminal segments of Cn2, using continuous and
discontinuous synthetic peptides, designed on the basis of the sequence and a
three-dimensional model of Cn2. The study of peptides of varying length resulted 
in the identification of segments 5-14 and 56-65 containing residues essential
for recognition by BCF2. The peptide (abbreviated SP7) with the highest affinity 
to BCF2 (IC50 = 5.1 microM) was a synthetic heterodimer comprising the amino acid
sequence from position 3-15 (amidated) of Cn2, bridged by disulfide to peptide
from position 54-66, acetylated and amidated. Similar affinity was found with
peptide SP1 [heterodimer comprising residues 1-14 (amidated) of Cn2, bridged with
synthetic peptide 52-66 (acetylated)]. SP1 and SP7 were used to induce
anti-peptide antibodies in mouse and rabbit. Both peptides were highly
immunogenic. The sera obtained were able to recognize Cn2 and to neutralize Cn2
in vitro. The most efficient protection (8.3 microgram Cn2 neutralized per mL of 
serum) was induced by rabbit anti-SP1 serum.

PMID: 10491120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Curr Microbiol. 1999 Nov;39(5):237-43.

Mutants of the cyanobacterium anabaena sp. PCC 7120 altered in nitrate transport 
and reduction

Rai AK(1), Tiwari SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221 005, India.

Nitrate assimilation-defective mutants SP7, SP9, and SP17 of the cyanobacterium
Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 were isolated by use of transposon mutagenesis and screened
on medium containing chlorate. SP7 and SP17 represented nitrate
reductase-defective nature, while mutant SP9 appeared to be a regulatory mutant
exhibiting pleiotropic behavior. Kinetics of nitrate uptake system exhibited K(s)
values of 31-38 &mgr;M for parent, SP7, and SP17 strains; however, mutant SP9
exhibited a high K(s) value of 109.5 &mgr;M. Defective nitrate reductase was
apparent in mutant SP7 and SP9, while mutant SP17 exhibited partial defective
nature. Methyl viologen-dependent NR activity in parent strain presented a
biphasic nature with K(m) values of 0.13 and 2.47 mM, whereas a single K(m) value
(2.96 mM) was observed for mutant SP17. Mutant SP9 was also defective in nitrite 
uptake and reduction. Mutant strains exhibited derepressed nitrogenase activity
in the presence of nitrate, while glutamine synthetase activity remained
unaltered.http://link.springer-ny.
com/link/service/journals/00284/bibs/39n5p237.html</HEA

PMID: 10489430  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


415. Mikrobiologiia. 1998 Nov-Dec;67(6):815-20.

[Immunochemical analysis of O-specific polysaccharides from the soil
nitrogen-fixing bacteria Azospirillum brasilense].

[Article in Russian]

Matora LIu(1), Shvartsburd BI, Shchegolev SIu.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants and Microorganisms, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Saratov, Russia.

Immunochemical reactivity of O-specific polysaccharide and the monosaccharide
composition of O-antigenic determinants of the lipopolysaccharide isolated from
the type strain Sp7 of Azospirillum brasilense were studied. An original
modification of the method of spectroturbidimetry for disperse biological systems
and a nonstandard procedure for the preparation of monospecific antibodies
against cell surface antigens were used. The polysaccharide fraction, which
contained residues of galactose, rhamnose, and galacturonic acid, was able to
bind about 50% of the antibodies raised against whole bacterial cells. Twelve
immunodeterminant groups were shown to be present in its molecule. Galactose and,
less effectively, rhamnose but not galacturonic acid inhibited the
antigen-antibody reactions. It is concluded that the serotype of the strain
studied is determined by galactose residues.

PMID: 10234653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):3843-53.

Intrastrain variants of herpes simplex virus type 1 isolated from a neonate with 
fatal disseminated infection differ in the ICP34.5 gene, glycoprotein processing,
and neuroinvasiveness.

Bower JR(1), Mao H, Durishin C, Rozenbom E, Detwiler M, Rempinski D, Karban TL,
Rosenthal KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northeastern Ohio Universities
College of Medicine, Rootstown, Ohio, USA.

Two intrastrain variants of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) were isolated
from a newborn with fatal disseminated infection. A small-plaque-producing
variant (SP7) was the predominant virus (>99%) in the brain, and a
large-plaque-producing variant (LP5) was the predominant virus (>99%) in the lung
and gastrointestinal tract. EcoRI and BamHI restriction fragment patterns
indicated that SP7 and LP5 are related strains. The large-plaque variants
produced plaques similar in size to those produced by HSV-1 KOS. Unlike LP5 or
KOS, SP7 was highly cell associated and processing of glycoprotein C and
glycoprotein D was limited to precursor forms in infected Vero cells. The
large-plaque phenotype from KOS could be transferred into SP7 by cotransfection
of plasmids containing the EK or JK EcoRI fragment or a 3-kb plasmid with the
UL34.5 gene of HSV-1 KOS together with SP7 DNA. PCR analysis using primers from
within the ICP34.5 gene indicated differences for SP7, LP5, and KOS. Sequencing
data indicated two sets of deletions in the UL34.5 gene that distinguish SP7 from
LP5. Both SP7 and LP5 variants were neurovirulent (lethal following intracranial 
inoculation of young BALB/c mice); however, the LP5 variant was much less able to
cause lethal neuroinvasive disease (footpad inoculation) whereas KOS caused no
disease. Passage of SP7 selected for viruses (SLP-5 and SLP-10) which were
attenuated for lethal neuroinvasive disease, were not cell-associated, and
differed in the UL34.5 gene. UL34.5 from SLP-5 or SLP-10 resembled that of KOS.
These findings support a role for UL34.5 in promoting virus egress and for
neuroinvasive disease.

PMCID: PMC104162
PMID: 10196279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Bacteriol. 1998 Nov;180(21):5689-96.

A cytochrome cbb3 (cytochrome c) terminal oxidase in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 
supports microaerobic growth.

Marchal K(1), Sun J, Keijers V, Haaker H, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, KULeuven, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium.

Spectral analysis indicated the presence of a cytochrome cbb3 oxidase under
microaerobic conditions in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 cells. The corresponding
genes (cytNOQP) were isolated by using PCR. These genes are organized in an
operon, preceded by a putative anaerobox. The phenotype of an A. brasilense cytN 
mutant was analyzed. Under aerobic conditions, the specific growth rate during
exponential phase (mu(e)) of the A. brasilense cytN mutant was comparable to the 
wild-type specific growth rate (m(e) of approximately 0.2 h-1). In microaerobic
NH4+-supplemented conditions, the low respiration of the A. brasilense cytN
mutant affected its specific growth rate (mu(e) of approximately 0.02 h-1)
compared to the wild-type specific growth rate (mu(e) of approximately 0.2 h-1). 
Under nitrogen-fixing conditions, both the growth rates and respiration of the
wild type were significantly diminished in comparison to those under
NH4+-supplemented conditions. Differences in growth rates and respiration between
the wild type and the A. brasilense cytN mutant were less pronounced under these 
nitrogen-fixing conditions (mu(e) of approximately 0.03 h-1 for the wild type and
0.02 h-1 for the A. brasilense cytN mutant). The nitrogen-fixing capacity of the 
A. brasilense cytN mutant was still approximately 80% of that determined for the 
wild-type strain. This leads to the conclusion that the A. brasilense cytochrome 
cbb3 oxidase is required under microaerobic conditions, when a high respiration
rate is needed, but that under nitrogen-fixing conditions the respiration rate
does not seem to be a growth-limiting factor.

PMCID: PMC107629
PMID: 9791120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Parasitol. 1998 Jun;84(3):516-23.

Taenia crassiceps cysticercosis: humoral immune response and protection elicited 
by DNA immunization.

Rosas G(1), Cruz-Revilla C, Fragoso G, López-Casillas F, Pérez A, Bonilla MA,
Rosales R, Sciutto E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, DF, México.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate DNA vaccination in cysticercosis
prevention by using a Taenia crassiceps cDNA of a recombinant antigen (KETc7)
that has been reported as protective against murine cysticercosis. The KETc7 cDNA
was cloned into the pcDNA3 plasmid alone or with the betaglycan signal peptide
sequence (pTc-7 and pTc-sp7, respectively). Positive expression of the pTc-sp7
product was confirmed by transfection of C33 cells and immunofluorescence using
sera of mice infected with T. crassiceps. Immunization of mice with 3 injections 
of pTc-sp7 DNA at the higher dose (200 microg) was the most effective to induce
antibody with or without bupivacaine. Immunization with pTc-sp7 induced
protection against challenge with T. crassiceps cysticerci as successfully as
previously observed with the KETc7 recombinant protein. Antibodies elicited by
DNA immunization with pTc-sp7 specifically reacted with the native protein of 56 
kDa previously reported, which is immunolocalized in the tegument of T.
crassiceps cysticerci. The 56-kDa antigen is also present in Taenia solium
oncospheres, cysticerci, and adult tissue. The protection induced in
DNA-immunized mice and the observation that the injected plasmid remains as an
episomic form within muscle cells, encouraged us to continue testing this
procedure to prevent T. solium cysticercosis.

PMID: 9645849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Curr Microbiol. 1998 Jun;36(6):327-31.

Identification and isolation of the indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase gene from
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7: sequencing and functional analysis of the gene
locus.

Zimmer W(1), Wesche M, Timmermans L.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institut für Atmosphärische Umweltforschung,
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.

The root-associated bacterium Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 produces the
growth-stimulating phytohormone indole-3-acetic acid (= IAA) via the
indole-3-pyruvate pathway. The DNA region containing ipdC, the structural gene
for indole-3-pyruvate decarboxylase, was identified in a cosmid gene library of
strain Sp7 by hybridization and has been sequenced. Upstream of the gene, two
other ORF homologous to gltX and cysS were sequenced that are transcribed in the 
opposite direction. A functional analysis of the cloned ipdC region has been
performed. To test the expression of the gene, a lacZ-Km cartridge was introduced
into the gene. By this construct, tryptophan-dependent stimulation of gene
expression in A. brasilense Sp7 was observed. Evidences for the existence of
another copy of the ipdC gene in the Azospirillum genome are also reported.

PMID: 9608743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 1997 Oct;34(5):435-48.

NMR and molecular dynamics studies of tachykinins: conformation of the C-terminal
pentapeptide of substance P(SP7-11).

Saran A(1), Srivastava S, Coutinho E, Kamath S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Physics Group, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Colaba,
Mumbai.

Substance P belongs to the tachykinin family of neuropeptides which exhibit
diverse pharmacological activity. The conformation of
Phe1-Phe2-Gly3-Leu4-Met5-NH2 the C-terminal pentapeptide of substance P (SP7-11) 
has been studied by NMR and molecular dynamics (MD) methods. NMR studies were
carried out both in DMSO-d6 and 95% H2O. Based on the observed chemical shifts,
3JNH alpha coupling constants, temperature coefficients of chemical shifts of NH 
resonances and the pattern of inter- and intraresidue NOE's, a predominantly
extended backbone conformation has been deduced for the peptide in both DMSO and 
H2O. MD calculations carried out in vacuo indicate that the global minimum energy
conformation of the molecule is folded with an intramolecular hydrogen bond
between the protonated N-terminal and the C-terminal CONH2 group. The simulation 
shows that beta-turns are energetically unfavourable, while alpha-helices are
seen to be unstable for the peptide. gamma-Bends at either Gly3 or Leu4 are the
most preferred ones. Simulations carried out in DMSO as well as in water show a
preference for a nearly extended conformation.

PMID: 9594424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1998 Feb 15;159(2):151-8.

Sequencing and complementation analysis of the nifUSV genes from Azospirillum
brasilense.

Frazzon J(1), Schrank IS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal de Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil.

The functionality of nitrogenase in diazotrophic bacteria is dependent upon nif
genes other than the structural nifH, D, and K genes which encode the enzyme
subunit proteins. Such genes are involved in the activation of nif gene
expression, maturation of subunit proteins, cofactor biosynthesis, and electron
transport. In this work, approximately 5500 base pairs located within the major
nif gene cluster of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 have been sequenced. The deduced 
open reading frames were compared to the nif gene products of Azotobacter
vinelandii and other diazotrophs. This analysis indicates the presence of five
ORFs encoding ORF2, nifU, nifS, nifV, and ORF4 in the same sequential
organization as found in other organisms. Consensus sigma 54 and NifA binding
sites are present in the putative promoter region upstream of ORF2 in the A.
brasilense sequence. The nifV gene of A. brasilense but not nifU or nifS
complemented corresponding mutants strains of A. vinelandii.

PMID: 9503607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 1998 Mar;11(3):177-87.

A transcriptional regulator of the LuxR-UhpA family, FlcA, controls flocculation 
and wheat root surface colonization by Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Pereg-Gerk L(1), Paquelin A, Gounon P, Kennedy IR, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1300 CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Genetic complementation of a spontaneous mutant, impaired in flocculation, Congo 
red binding, and colonization of root surface, led to the identification of a new
regulatory gene in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7, designated flcA. The deduced
amino acid sequence of flcA shared high similarity with a family of
transcriptional activators of the LuxR-UphA family. The most significant match
was with the AgmR protein, an activator for glycerol metabolism in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Derivatives of Sp7 resulting from site-directed Tn5 mutagenesis in
the flcA coding sequence were constructed by marker exchange. Characterization of
the resulting mutant strains showed that flcA controls the production of capsular
polysaccharides, the flocculation process in culture, and the colonization of the
root surface of wheat. This study provides new information on the genetic control
of the mechanism of plant root colonization by Azospirillum.

PMID: 9487693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1997 Jun 20;54(6):513-9.

Biodegradation and plant protection from the herbicide 2,4-D by plant-microbial
associations in cotton production systems.

Feng L(1), Kennedy IR.

Author information: 
(1)Cooperative Research Centre for Sustainable Cotton Production, Deparatment of 
Agricultural Chemistry and Soil Science, University of Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia.

A significant "biosafening" protection of plants from the effect of 2,4-D in
plant-microbial associations has been demonstrated in this study. The
2,4-D-degrading plasmid, pJP4 was transferred into Rhizobium sp. CB1024, which
nodulates Dolichos lablab, and Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 carrying a nifA-lacZ
gene marker, which can colonize cotton roots. Both transconjugants degraded 2,4-D
in pure culture via cometabolism up to 50 microg mL(-1). When the transconjugants
were inoculated onto Dolichos lablab and cotton, respectively, such plants were
resistant to this herbicide when the nutrient solution was treated with 2,4-D up 
to 10 microg mL(-1) for Dolichos lablab and 0.5 microg mL(-1) for cotton. Plants 
inoculated with wild-type strains were dead (Dolichos lablab) or dying (cotton). 
Because cotton is more sensitive to herbicides, only incomplete protection of
plants was achieved with the transconjugant. Improving the effect of colonization
of Azospirillum on cotton roots may be critical for a complete degradation and
plant protection. The transconjugant of Rhizobium sp. CB1024 was still able to
nodulate Dolichos lablab, N(2)-fixing activity was only slightly affected. Other 
pesticide-degrading capacities may also be inserted into those plant-associated
bacterial strains for the degradation of these chemicals by plant-microbial
associations. Whether such systems will be successful when applied in the field
with competition from other bacteria is being examined. (c) 1997 John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. Biotechnol Bioeng 53: 513-519, 1997.

PMID: 18636407  [PubMed]


424. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1997;36(2):105-7.

[Antigenicity of nine synthetic peptides of human immunodeficiency virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Mao P(1), He H, Hong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, 302 Hospital of PLA, Beijing.

To establish a ELISA method to detect the infection of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), we synthesized nine peptides ranging in length between 10-27 amino
acid (aa) of HIV located in the regions of gp41, p24 of HIV-1 and gp36 of HIV-2, 
according to the published amino acid sequence and the position of antigenic
determinants of viruses, by a solid-phase method. We detected 10 positive sera of
HIV-1 and 4 positive sera of HIV-2 by a indirect ELISA using these synthetic
peptides as the coating antigen. The results indicated that all of 10 serum
specimens of HIV-1 were positive using SP1, 5, 6, and 7 derived from gp41, and
SP7 was the best in antigenicity. The 4 serum specimens of HIV-2 were positive
using SP8 and SP9 in the region of gp36 and their antigenicity to HIV-2 were
similar, but the antigenicity of SP8 to HIV-1 was higher than that of SP9. All
sera of HIV-1 and HIV-2 were positive using SP7 and SP8 as the mixed coating
antigen. A comparison of our reagent with UBI reagent in detection of 60 positive
and 96 negative control sera for HIV showed that the coincident rate for positive
ness was 98.33% (59/60), for negative ness was 100%, and the general coincident
rate was 99.36% (155/156). It is concluded that SP7 and SP8 as the mixed coating 
antigen are applicable in the diagnosis of HIV infection.

PMID: 9812570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Chin J Biotechnol. 1997;13(3):143-52.

Cloning and sequencing of draTG genes and their downstream region of Azospirillum
brasilense Yu62.

Ma L(1), Li J.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, Beijing Agricultural University, 
China.

An 8-kb fragment was cloned by probing the gene library of Azospirillum
brasilense Yu62 with the 4.0-kb draTG fragment of A. brasilense Sp7. DNA
hybridization of this fragment demonstrated that draTG genes were located in a
3.0-kb EcoR I-Kpn I fragment, and were contiguous to the nifH gene. This 3.0-kb
fragment was completely sequenced on both strands. Sequence analysis of the
fragment revealed that it included the full-length draTG genes and two ORFs
downstream of draG (ORF3 and incomplete ORF4). The draTG and downstream ORF3 are 
presumed to be cotranscribed as a single operon. Promoter element analysis of the
sequenced region showed that there were some elements of the sigma 54-dependent
promoter (DPEs and UASs) in the upstream region of draG and ORF3. This suggests
that the draG and ORF3 might be transcribed independently in addition to being
cotranscribed with draT. Both the DNA and amino acid sequences of the draTG genes
from A. brasilense Yu62 were compared with those of other nitrogen-fixing
bacteria. The results showed the draTG genes were highly conservative. There were
only a few changes among strains and/or species. Homology analysis of ORF
revealed that the ORF3 immediately downstream of draG was homologous not only
with the ORF at the same position in Rhodospirillum rubrum and A. lipoferum, but 
also with the ORF14 of Azotobacter vinelandii and the ORF4 showed extensive
similarity to yafJ of Escherichia coli.

PMID: 9429775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Bacteriol. 1996 Aug;178(16):5017-9.

Expression of the structural gene, laf1, encoding the flagellin of the lateral
flagella in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Moens S(1), Schloter M, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Heverlee, Belgium.

The induction of the lateral flagella of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 was studied 
by using a translational fusion between the laf1 promoter and gusA. The fusion
was induced when cells were grown on solid media but not when they were grown in 
broth. The fusion was also induced by incubation of liquid-grown cells with an
anti-polar flagellum polyclonal antiserum. Hindrance of polar-flagellum rotation 
is suggested to be the signal for this induction.

PMCID: PMC178288
PMID: 8759869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 1996 Jul;12(4):319-22. doi: 10.1007/BF00340207.

Encapsulation as a response of Azospirillum brasilense sp7 to zinc stress.

Gowri PM(1), Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1), .

Azospirillum brasilense sp7 was exposed to 2MM Zn(2+) in minimal medium upon
which the cells turned black and non-motile within 24 h. A streptomycin-resistant
variant did not exhibit this phenomenon and is sensitized to zinc. A prelude to
encystation was the elution of a melanin-like pigment into the medium.

PMID: 24415306  [PubMed]


428. J Invertebr Pathol. 1996 May;67(3):236-52.

Analysis and Modeling of Time-Dose-Mortality of Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta
migratoria migratorioides, and Schistocerca gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) from
Beauveria, Metarhizium, and Paecilomyces Isolates from Madagascar

Nowierski RM(1), Zeng Z, Jaronski S, Delgado F, Swearingen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, 59717

A complementary log-log (CLL) model was used to model time-dose-mortality
relationships from bioassay tests of 26 fungal isolates mostly from Madagascar,
Africa, against three acridid species, all referred to here as "grasshoppers."
The fungal pathogens included 15 isolates of Beauveria bassiana, 9 isolates of
Metarhizium flavoviridae, and 2 isolates of Paecilomyces spp. Grasshopper species
tested included Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta migratoria migratorioides, and
Schistocerca gregaria. The scaled deviance, mean deviance, Pearson X2 statistic, 
Hosmer-Lemeshow (H-L) C statistic, and three-dimensional time-dose-mortality
graphs were used to assess extra-binomial variation, data points that were
potential outliers, conformance of the scaled deviance statistic and Pearson's X2
statistic to a chi2 distribution, and the fit of the CLL model. The H-L C
statistic also was found to be useful in showing the goodness of fit of the CLL
model for the fungal isolates prior to modeling the extra-binomial variation.
After the extra-binomial variation was modeled using Williams' method, the slope 
from maximum likelihood estimation, modified log(LD50) estimates (which were
corrected for background mortality using the CLL model), a dynamic ranking of the
log(LD50) values over time, and a three-dimensional plot of time, dose, and
mortality of the three grasshopper species were used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the fungal isolates. In general, the CLL model provided a rather
poor fit of the fungal isolates which had a large number of replicate trials in
the bioassay tests (i.e., a large sample size) due to extra-binomial variation.
The CLL model provided an excellent fit of the time-dose-mortality relationships 
of such isolates after the extra-binomial variation was modeled and included in
the CLL model. Metarhizium isolates MFV and SP5 were found to be the most
virulent isolates tested against M. sanguinipes, followed by Metarhizium
isolates: SP8, SP7, SP9, SP6, and SP1, and Beauveria isolate S33B. Metarhizium
isolates SP3, SP5, SP6, and SP9, and Beauveria isolates SP11, SP12, SP13, and
SP16 showed higher levels of virulence against L. migratoria migratorioides over 
more of the time periods tested than the other pathogen isolates examined.
Metarhizium isolates SP9 and SP5 were the most effective isolates tested against 
S. gregaria. In general, the Metarhizium isolates were more virulent against the 
grasshoppers than the Beauveria isolates, which were more virulent than the
Paecilomyces isolates. The CLL model was found to be very useful in describing
grasshopper mortality as a function of time and dose. This approach combined with
model and fungal isolate assessment statistics will be helpful for determining
which pathogen isolates have the greatest potential for controlling grasshoppers 
and other pests in the future.

PMID: 8812605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


429. Can J Microbiol. 1996 May;42(5):467-78.

The Azospirillum brasilense rpoN gene is involved in nitrogen fixation, nitrate
assimilation, ammonium uptake, and flagellar biosynthesis.

Milcamps A(1), Van Dommelen A, Stigter J, Vanderleyden J, de Bruijn FJ.

Author information: 
(1)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing
48824, USA.

The rpoN (ntrA) gene (encoding sigma 54) of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 was
isolated by using conserved rpoN primers and the polymerase chain reaction, and
its nucleotide sequence was determined. The deduced amino acid sequence of the
RpoN protein was found to share a high degree of homology with other members of
the sigma 54 family. Two additional open reading frames were found in the
Azospirillum brasilense rpoN region, with significant similarity to equivalent
regions surrounding the rpoN locus in other bacteria. An rpoN mutant of
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 was constructed by gene replacement and found to be
defective in nitrogen fixation, nitrate assimilation, and ammonium uptake. Lack
of ammonium uptake was also found in previously isolated Azospirillum brasilense 
ntrB and ntrC mutants, further supporting the role of the ntr system in this
process. In addition, the rpoN mutant was found to be nonmotile, suggesting a
role of RpoN in Azospirillum brasilense flagellar biosynthesis.

PMID: 8640606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1996 Feb 15;21(4):421-6.

The effect of substance P on proliferation and proteoglycan deposition of cells
derived from rabbit intervertebral disc.

Ashton IK(1), Eisenstein SM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Spinal Studies, Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital,
Oswestry, United Kingdom.

STUDY DESIGN: This study is an in vitro investigation of the effects of substance
P on intervertebral disc cell metabolism.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the neuropeptide, substance P, affects cells
isolated from the intervertebral disc.
SUMMARY OF THE BACKGROUND DATA: Nerve fibers containing substance P are present
in the anulus fibrosus and may be released from the nerve terminals as in other
tissues. Substance P is mitogenic for a variety of immune and connective tissue
cells, and a fragment of the peptide affects the metabolism of articular
chondrocytes.
METHODS: Cells were isolated enzymically from the anulus fibrosus of
intervertebral disc of 8-week-old rabbits. The effects of substance P and the
C-terminal pentapeptide fragment SP7-11 on cell proliferation and proteoglycan
deposition were determine by crystal violet and Alcian blue staining,
respectively.
RESULTS: Substance P ((10)-11-(10)-7 mol/l) had a small stimulatory effect on
disc cell proliferation. Proteoglycan deposition in the cell layer increased
concomitantly. A greater proliferative effect was observed with substance P
fragment 7-11 or with the addition of the neutral endopeptidase inhibitor,
phosphoramidon.
CONCLUSIONS: Substance P has small mitogenic effects on rabbit intervertebral
disc cells in vitro. Further investigation is required to establish whether this 
might have biologic relevance in relation to the maintenance or repair of the
intervertebral disc.

PMID: 8658244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;177(19):5419-26.

Cloning, sequencing, and phenotypic analysis of laf1, encoding the flagellin of
the lateral flagella of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Moens S(1), Michiels K, Keijers V, Van Leuven F, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F. A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Heverlee, Belgium.

Azospirillum brasilense can display a single polar flagellum and several lateral 
flagella. The A. brasilense Sp7 gene laf1, encoding the flagellin of the lateral 
flagella, was isolated and sequenced. The derived protein sequence is extensively
similar to those of the flagellins of Rhizobium meliloti, Agrobacterium
tumefaciens, Bartonella bacilliformis, and Caulobacter crescentus. An amino acid 
alignment shows that the flagellins of these bacteria are clustered and are
clearly different from other known flagellins. A laf1 mutant, FAJ0201, was
constructed by replacing an internal part of the laf1 gene by a kanamycin
resistance-encoding gene cassette. The mutant is devoid of lateral flagella but
still forms the polar flagellum. This phenotype is further characterized by the
abolishment of the capacities to swarm on a semisolid surface and to spread from 
a stab inoculation in a semisolid medium. FAJ0201 shows a normal wheat root
colonization pattern in the initial stage of plant root interaction.

PMCID: PMC177346
PMID: 7559324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995 May;61(5):1987-95.

A mutant of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 impaired in flocculation with a modified 
colonization pattern and superior nitrogen fixation in association with wheat.

Katupitiya S(1), Millet J, Vesk M, Viccars L, Zeman A, Lidong Z, Elmerich C,
Kennedy IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry and Soil Science, University of Sydney,
NSW, Australia.

We report here significant phenotypic and genetic differences between
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and spontaneous mutant Sp7-S and their related
properties in association with wheat. In contrast to the wild-type strain of Sp7,
colonies of Sp7-S stained weakly with Congo red when grown on agar media
containing the dye and did not flocculate in the presence of fructose and
nitrate. Scanning and transmission electron micrographs showed clearly that the
Sp7-S strain lacked surface materials present as a thick layer on the surface of 
the wild-type Sp7 strain. Different patterns of colonization on wheat roots
between Sp7 and Sp7-S, revealed by in situ studies using nifA-lacZ as a reporter 
gene, were related to a large increase in nitrogenase activity (acetylene
reduction) with Sp7-S in association with normal and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic
acid-treated wheat for assays conducted under conditions in which the nitrogenase
activity of free-living Azospirillum organisms was inhibited by an excess of
oxygen. Randomly amplified polymorphic DNA analysis indicated the close genetic
relationship of Sp7-S to several other sources of Sp7, by comparison to other
recognized strains of A. brasilense. Genetic complementation of Sp7-S was
achieved with a 9.4-kb fragment of DNA cloned from wild-type Sp7, restoring Congo
red staining and flocculation.

PMCID: PMC167461
PMID: 7646034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995 Mar;61(3):1013-9.

In Situ Localization of Azospirillum brasilense in the Rhizosphere of Wheat with 
Fluorescently Labeled, rRNA-Targeted Oligonucleotide Probes and Scanning Confocal
Laser Microscopy.

Assmus B, Hutzler P, Kirchhof G, Amann R, Lawrence JR, Hartmann A.

The colonization of wheat roots by Azospirillum brasilense was used as a model
system to evaluate the utility of whole-cell hybridization with fluorescently
labeled, rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes for the in situ monitoring of
rhizosphere microbial communities. Root samples of agar- or soil-grown 10- and
30-day-old wheat seedlings inoculated with different strains of A. brasilense
were hybridized with a species-specific probe for A. brasilense, a probe
hybridizing to alpha subclass proteobacteria, and a probe specific for the domain
Bacteria to identify and localize the target bacteria. After hybridization, about
10 to 25% of the rhizosphere bacteria as visualized with
4(prm1),6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) gave sufficient fluorescence signals to
be detected with rRNA-targeted probes. Scanning confocal laser microscopy was
used to overcome disturbing effects arising from autofluorescence of the object
or narrow depth of focus in thick specimens. This technique also allowed
high-resolution analysis of the spatial distribution of bacteria in the
rhizosphere. Occurrence of cells of A. brasilense Sp7 and Wa3 was restricted to
the rhizosphere soil, mainly to the root hair zone. C-forms of A. brasilense were
demonstrated to be physiologically active forms in the rhizosphere. Strain Sp245 
also was found repeatedly at high density in the interior of root hair cells. In 
general, the combination of fluorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes and
scanning confocal laser microscopy provided a very suitable strategy for detailed
studies of rhizosphere microbial ecology.

PMCID: PMC1388383
PMID: 16534951  [PubMed]


434. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 1995 Mar-Apr;8(2):322-6.

Isolation and characterization of a locus from Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 that
complements the tumorigenic defect of Agrobacterium tumefaciens chvB mutant.

Raina S(1), Raina R, Venkatesh TV, Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Engineering Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Dehli, India.

The chromosomal virulence gene chvB of Agrobacterium tumefaciens is required for 
pathogenesis. A DNA fragment from the chvB locus can hybridize to DNA from
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7. This DNA fragment could restore the tumorigenic
activity of the chvB mutant strain A. tumefaciens A1011 towards leaf disks of
Nicotiana tabacum. An NH2-terminal open reading frame, 480 codons long, was most 
likely responsible for the restoration of the tumorigenic activity. The A.
brasilense sequence showed good homology with the NH2-terminal region of the ndvB
gene of Rhizobium meliloti.

PMID: 7756697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mikrobiologiia. 1994 Nov-Dec;63(6):1020-30.

[Properties of polysaccharide complexes produced by Azospirillum brasilense and
polysaccharides isolated from these complexes].

[Article in Russian]

Konnova SA, Skvortsov IM, Makarov OE, Ignatov VV.

Azospirillum brasilense strains Sp7, Sp7 (S-form), Sp107, Sp245, Sp246, S17, and 
15 when cultivated in a liquid synthetic malate medium up to the end of the
logarithmic phase of growth were shown to produce at least two complex
polysaccharide-containing components. The components were arbitrarily called
lipopolysaccharide-protein complex (LPPC) and polysaccharide-lipid complex
(PSLC). The LPPCs and PSLCs from the strains Sp7, Sp107, Sp245, Sp246, and S17
were shown to interact with a wheat germ agglutinin (WGA). From PSLCs, acidic
polysaccharides (PS) were isolated and their specific rotation, molecular masses,
affinity for WGA, and monosaccharide composition were determined. The PSs of all 
strains contained rhamnose, galacturonic acid, and galactose (except the strain
Sp246), and glucosamine (except the strain Sp7 (S-form)), while the PSs of the
strains Sp7 and S17 also contained fucose and mannose, respectively. It is
suggested that LPPCs and PSLCs may be involved in the process of interaction of
azospirilla with wheat root surfaces, and that PSsare probably active parts of
the LPPCs and PSLCs. The ability of LPPCs and PSs to interact with Congo red in
aqueous solutions was investigated.

PMID: 7760764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1994 Jan 15;115(2-3):273-7.

Identification and sequencing of pyrG, the CTP synthetase gene of Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7.

Zimmer W(1), Hundeshagen B.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, FRG.

An 18.5-kb DNA fragment carrying the trpGDC cluster of Azospirillum brasilense
Sp7 was previously cloned, yielding cosmid pAB1005. Attempts to identify trpA in 
the vicinity of trpGDC failed but led to the detection of a locus strongly
homologous to pyrG, the structural gene for the CTP synthetase. The function of
the A. brasilense pyrG gene was verified by complementation of the
cytidine-requiring PyrG-deficient mutant JF646 of Escherichia coli. A second open
reading frame was identified downstream of pyrG. The deduced amino acid sequence 
showed homology to dienelactone hydrolases of Pseudomonas and Alcaligenes,
enzymes involved in utilization of halogenated aromatic compounds.

PMID: 8138139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1994 Jan 1;115(1):57-62.

Control of nifH transcription in Azospirillum brasilense: involvement of NifA and
of cis-acting sequences.

Fancelli S(1), Fani R, Grifoni A, Mugnai M, Pastorelli R, Bazzicalupo M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale e Genetica, Università di Firenze, Florence, 
Italy.

The regulatory sequences of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 nifH gene were fused with
the cam reporter gene and used for studying the factors controlling nifH
transcription. A DNA sequence, downstream the ATG codon of nifH, that could be
involved in the negative regulation of nifH transcription, was identified. The
effect of 1 and 2 mM of ammonium on the transcription of the A. brasilense nifH
gene and on the nitrogenase activity, in the presence of the Klebsiella
pneumoniae NifA protein, was examined.

PMID: 8125248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Gen Genet. 1993 Aug;240(2):188-96.

Characterization of the ntrBC genes of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7: their
involvement in the regulation of nitrogenase synthesis and activity.

Liang YY(1), Arsène F, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

A 7.1 kb EcoRI fragment from Azospirillum brasilense, that hybridized with a
probe carrying the ntrBC genes from Bradyrhizobium japonicum, was cloned. The
nucleotide sequence of a 3.8 kb subfragment was established. This led to the
identification of two open reading frames, encoding polypeptides of 401 and 481
amino acids, that were similar to NtrB and NtrC, respectively. A broad host range
plasmid containing the putative Azospirillum ntrC gene was shown to restore
nitrogen fixation under free-living conditions to a ntrC-Tn5 mutant of
Azorhizobium caulinodans. Several Tn5 insertion mutants were isolated in the
ntrBC coding region in A brasilense. These mutants were prototrophic and Nif+.
However, their nitrogenase activity was slightly lower than in the wild type and 
they were unable to grow on nitrate as sole nitrogen source. Under
microaerobiosis and in the absence of ammonia, a nifA-lacZ fusion was expressed
in the mutants at about 60% of the level in the wild type. In the presence of
ammonia, the fusion was similarly expressed (60% of the maximum) both in the wild
type and mutants. Addition of ammonia to a nitrogen-fixing culture of ntrBC
mutants did not abolish nitrogenase activity, in contrast with the wild type. It 
thus appears that in Azospirillum the ntrBC genes are not essential for nitrogen 
fixation, although NtrC controls nifA expression to some extent. They are,
however, required for the switch-off of nitrogenase activity.

PMID: 8355653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Regul Pept. 1993 Jul 2;46(1-2):195-7.

A role for the C-terminal fragment of substance P,SP7-11 in the pathogenesis of
arthritis.

Halliday DA(1), McNeil JD, Betts WH, Scicchitano R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Australia.

PMID: 7692488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 May 28;1173(2):237-8.

Identification of a nifW-like gene in Azospirillum brasilense.

Milcamps A(1), Keyers V, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Laboratory for Genetics, University of Leuven, Heverlee,
Belgium.

A small ORF, 5' upstream of the fixABC operon in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7, has
been identified. Sequence comparison shows significant homology to the
Azotobacter vinelandii and Azorhizobium caulinodans nifW gene.

PMID: 8504172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Med Hypotheses. 1993 Apr;40(4):227-31.

A metabolite of substance P, SP7-11 is involved in the pathogenesis of
inflammatory joint disease.

Halliday DA(1), McNeil JD, Scicchitano R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, South Australia.

The possibility that neuropeptides, in particular members of the tachykinin
family are involved in inflammatory joint disease is widely disputed. Both
clinical and experimental observations indicate that the tachykinin substance P
(SP) may be involved in the pathogenesis of arthritis. We have studied the
effects of tachykinins and the metabolites of SP on chondrocyte function. We have
shown that the C-terminal pentapeptide sequence; H-Phe-Phe-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2 is
biologically active in bovine chondrocyte cultures. The production of SP7-11 is
limited by hydrolysis of the intact peptide by neutral endopeptidase (E.C.
3.4.24.11). The regulation of this enzyme would modulate the activity of
substance P on articular cartilage chondrocytes.

PMID: 7686613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Immunology. 1993 Apr;78(4):629-34.

Activation of human neutrophils by tachykinins: effect on
formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine- and platelet-activating factor-stimulated 
superoxide anion production and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

Wozniak A(1), Betts WH, McLennan G, Scicchitano R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, South Australia.

This study examines the contribution of tachykinins to the processes of
inflammation. Neurokinin A (NKA), neurokinin B (NKB) and eledoisin (E) but not
kassinin (K) have similar effects to substance P (SP) in priming neutrophils for 
increased superoxide anion (O2-) production in response to
formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP). This similarity in activity may be 
due to the carboxy amino acid terminal end of these tachykinins being highly
conserved. This was confirmed by demonstrating that SP fragment 7-11 (SP7-11) had
the same priming effect as the whole molecule, whereas, the amino end fragment
1-4 (SP1-4) inhibited the response to FMLP. The priming effect of tachykinins was
not confined to a single stimulus, such as FMLP, since NKA, NKB and SP also
enhanced O2- production stimulated by platelet-activating factor (PAF), an
important mediator of inflammation but a weak stimulus of O2- production on its
own. In addition, all the tachykinins studied increased neutrophil
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) towards opsonized target
cells. In contrast to their effects on FMLP-induced O2- production, both SP
fragments, SP1-4 and SP7-11, stimulated neutrophil ADCC and had a synergistic
effect when used together.

PMCID: PMC1421903
PMID: 7684358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Exp Brain Res. 1993;92(3):467-72.

A selective tachykinin receptor agonist promotes differentiation but not survival
of rat chromaffin cells in vitro.

Barker R(1), Dunnett S, Fawcett J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cambridge Brain Repair Centre, UK.

Rat chromaffin cells display phenotypic plasticity postnatally. In the presence
of glucocorticoids, they retain a chromaffin cell phenotype, whilst in the
presence of nerve growth factor and the absence of glucocorticoids they adopt a
sympathetic neuronal phenotype. The tachykinins have some of the characteristics 
of a neurotrophic factor and are present in the form of a substance P afferent
input in the rat adrenal medulla. We investigated the effects of stable NK1 and
NK2 tachykinin receptor agonists, Ava[L-Pro,N-Me-Leu-10]SP7-11 (GR73632) and
[Lys-3,Gly-8,R-Lac-Leu-9]NKA3-10 (GR64349), respectively, on the survival and
phenotype of P5-7 rat chromaffin cells in vitro. GR73632 promoted neurite
outgrowth, characteristic of the sympathetic neuronal phenotype, in the absence
of NGF and glucocorticoids, but was without effect on survival after 2 weeks in
culture. GR64349 was without effect.

PMID: 7681011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1992 Dec 15;100(1-3):113-9.

Regulation of nitrogen fixation in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7: involvement of
nifA, glnA and glnB gene products.

Liang YY(1), de Zamaroczy M, Arsène F, Paquelin A, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The expression of nifA-, niH- and nifB-lacZ fusions was examined in different
mutants of Azospirillum brasilense. Mutations in nifA, glnA and glnB severely
impaired the expression of nifH- and nifB-lacZ fusions. By contrast, a nifA-lacZ 
fusion was not affected in a nifA or a glnB background and was only partially
impaired in glnA mutants. It is proposed that in A. brasilense, the PII protein
and glutamine synthetase are involved in a post-translational modification of
NifA.

PMID: 1362170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Clin Chem. 1992 Dec;38(12):2430-4.

Lactate measured in diluted and undiluted whole blood and plasma: comparison of
methods and effect of hematocrit.

Toffaletti J(1), Hammes ME, Gray R, Lineberry B, Abrams B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

We evaluated a new analyzer that measures lactate in undiluted whole blood by
direct (or undiluted) amperometry [Nova Stat Profile 7 Analyzer (SP7); Nova
Biomedical, Waltham, MA] by comparing it with two other analyzers, one for
measuring lactate in whole blood by indirect (or diluted) amperometry [Model
2300; Yellow Springs Instrument Co. (YSI), Yellow Springs, OH] and another for
measuring lactate in plasma by enzymatic colorimetry (aca; Du Pont Co.,
Wilmington, DE). All between-method comparisons of the three methods showed that 
the results for plasma were comparable (Sy/x = 0.24-0.33 mmol/L). Within-method
comparisons by the YSI differed substantially between plasma and whole blood
(Sy/x = 0.48 mmol/L), but within-method comparisons by the SP7 produced better
agreement between plasma and whole blood (Sy/x = 0.18 mmol/L). The difference
between whole blood and plasma by YSI is related to hematocrit, with the greatest
differences noted for samples with the highest hematocrit. Serum lactate measured
by SP7 had between-day imprecision (CV) ranging from 12% at 0.5 mmol/L to 4.2% at
3.7 mmol/L, showed a linear standard curve to at least 11.5 mmol/L, and was
independent of hematocrit. There was a mean bias of approximately 0.4 mmol/L for 
results in the reference range for both plasma and whole blood by SP7 compared
with plasma results by either aca or YSI.

PMID: 1458580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem Pharmacol. 1992 Nov 3;44(9):1773-7.

Inactivation of substance P by granulation tissue-derived gelatinase.

Nakagawa H(1), Debuchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Japan.

An active gelatinase has been purified from the conditioned medium of granulation
tissue culture formed by carrageenin injection in rats. The purified gelatinase
gave a single band corresponding to a M(r) of 57 kDa on both sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and SDS-gelatin PAGE. The
granulation tissue-derived gelatinase selectively cleaved the Gln6-Phe7 bond of
substance P (SP) with a Km of 0.17 mM and a Vmax of 0.027 nmol
SP7-11/min/micrograms protein, resulting in the generation of biologically
inactive fragments, SP1-6 and SP7-11. Our data suggest that the gelatinase
produced by granulation tissue participates in the inactivation of SP in the
inflammatory site.

PMID: 1280434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1992 Oct 6;1137(1):29-33.

Failure of tachykinins including substance P and its fragments to influence
proteoglycan and protein synthesis in bovine chondrocytes in vitro.

Halliday DA(1), McNeil JD, Scicchitano R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Royal
Adelaide Hospital, Australia.

Adult bovine articular chondrocytes were exposed to substance P, neurokinins A
and B or substance P fragments, SP1-4, SP1-6 and SP7-11 in vitro. Proteoglycan
synthesis was assessed by measuring proteoglycans which were released into the
culture medium or incorporated into the cell layer. The intact tachykinins or
substance P fragments had no direct effect on proteoglycan synthesis. Nor was
total protein production affected. Gel chromatography, under dissociative
conditions, revealed that sulphated proteoglycans detected in the medium or cell 
layer following treatment of chondrocytes with substance P, contained
proteoglycans of similar molecular weight to those produced by cells exposed only
to diluent controls. Therefore, we conclude that the acceleration of arthritis by
substance P does not appear to be mediated through an effect on chondrocyte
synthetic function.

PMID: 1382607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol. 1992 Sep-Oct;(9-10):8-10.

[Plasmid P85 from Azospirillum brasilense SP245: study of the circle of possible 
hosts and incompatibility with plasmids from Azospirillum brasilense SP7].

[Article in Russian]

Katsy EI.

The possibility of the stable inheritance of the plasmid p85 mobilized
derivatives from Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 in the cells of the bacterial
genera Rizobiaceae (Agrobacterium tumfaciens) and Pseudomonadaceae (Pseudomonas
putida) has been shown. The plasmid p85 participates in coding for the
physiologically active products (the plant hormones). It is not inherited by the 
Escherichia coli strains. For the first time the incompatibility of azospirillium
plasmids has been demonstrated on the example of the plasmid p85 from
Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 and the plasmid p115 from Azospirillum brasilense
Sp7.

PMID: 1298886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Mol Gen Genet. 1992 Feb;231(3):375-84.

Characterization of an Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 gene homologous to Alcaligenes
eutrophus phbB and to Rhizobium meliloti nodG.

Vieille C(1), Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

A 4 kb SalI fragment from Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 that shares homology with a
6.8 kb EcoRI fragment carrying nodGEFH and part of nodP of Rhizobium meliloti 41 
was cloned in pUC18 to yield pAB503. The nucleotide sequence of a 2 kb SalI-SmaI 
fragment of the pAB503 insert revealed an open reading frame, named ORF3,
encoding a polypeptide sharing 40% identity with R. meliloti NodG. The deduced
polypeptide also shared 60% identity with the Alcaligenes eutrophus
NADPH-dependent acetoacetyl-CoA (AA-CoA) reductase, encoded by the phbB gene and 
involved in poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) synthesis. Northern blot analysis and
promoter extension mapping indicated that ORF3 is expressed as a monocistronic
operon from a promoter that resembles the Escherichia coli sigma 70 consensus
promoter. An ORF3-lacZ translational fusion was constructed and was very poorly
expressed in E. coli, but was functional and constitutively expressed in
Azospirillum. Tn5-Mob insertions in ORF3 did not affect growth, nitrogen
fixation, PHB synthesis or NAD(P)H-linked AA-CoA reductase activity. An ORF3 DNA 
sequence was used to probe total DNA of several Azospirillum strains. No ORF3
homologues were found in A. irakense, A. amazonense, A. halopraeferens or in
several A. lipoferum strains.

PMID: 1538694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Microbiol. 1991 Nov;5(11):2735-44.

Identification of a nifA-like regulatory gene of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7
expressed under conditions of nitrogen fixation and in the presence of air and
ammonia.

Liang YY(1), Kaminski PA, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Physiologie Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

A gene bank of Azospirillum lipoferum Br17 constructed in the vector lambda GEM11
was screened with a Bradyrhizobium japonicum nifA gene probe. A 7.3 kb EcoRI
fragment carrying a nifA-like gene was thereby isolated and subsequently used to 
screen a gene bank of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 constructed in pUC18. Two EcoRI
fragments of 5.6 kb and 3.6 kb covering the nifA-homology region were found.
Mutants with Nif- phenotype were obtained by site-directed Tn5 mutagenesis of the
5.6 kb fragment and subsequent recombination into the A. brasilense Sp7 genome.
The mutations were clustered into two loci located at each extremity of the
fragment. One of these loci corresponded to nifA and the other to nifB. The
nucleotide sequence of nifA of A. brasilense Sp7 was determined. Comparison of
the deduced amino acid sequences of NifA of A. brasilense Sp7 and NifA of B.
japonicum, Rhizobium leguminosarum biovar trifolii and Klebsiella pneumoniae
confirmed that it was a nifA-like gene. Construction of a nifA-lacZ fusion and
mapping of the RNA transcriptional start site showed that the nifA-like gene was 
expressed from an unidentified promoter, under conditions of nitrogen fixation
and in the presence of oxygen and ammonia.

PMID: 1779763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Gen Genet. 1991 Sep;229(1):41-51.

Relationship between tryptophan biosynthesis and indole-3-acetic acid production 
in Azospirillum: identification and sequencing of a trpGDC cluster.

Zimmer W(1), Aparicio C, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Physiologie Cellulaire, CNRS URA 1300, Institut Pasteur, Dept. des
Biotechnologies, Paris, France.

Screening the tryptophan (Trp)-dependent indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) production of
different Azospirillum species revealed that A. irakense KA3 released 10 times
less IAA into the medium than A. brasilense Sp7. A cosmid library of strain Sp7
was transferred into A. irakense KA3 with the aim of characterizing genes
involved in IAA biosynthesis. Trp-dependent IAA production was increased in two
transconjugants which both contained an identical 18.5 kb HindIII fragment from
Sp7. After Tn5 mutagenesis, cosmids carrying Tn5 insertions at 36 different
positions of the 18.5 kb fragment were isolated and transferred into strain KA3. 
IAA production by the recipient strains was screened by HPLC. The Tn5 insertions 
of 4 clones with decreased IAA production were mapped on a 2 kb SalI-SphI
fragment. Recombination of Tn5 insertions at this locus into the genome of strain
Sp7 led to Trp auxotrophic mutants. A 5.2 kb EcoRI-SalI fragment including the 2 
kb SalI-SphI fragment was sequenced and six open reading frames were identified. 
Three of them were clustered and their deduced amino acid sequences showed
significant similarity to TrpG, TrpD and TrpC, which are enzymes involved in
tryptophan biosynthesis. One of the remaining open reading frames probably
encodes an acetyltransferase. The region responsible for the enhanced
Trp-dependent IAA production in strain KA3 corresponded to trpD, coding for the
phosphoribosyl anthranilate transferase.

PMID: 1896020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Plasmid. 1991 Sep;26(2):83-93.

Identification and mapping of loci involved in motility, adsorption to wheat
roots, colony morphology, and growth in minimal medium on the Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 90-MDa plasmid.

Croes C(1), Van Bastelaere E, DeClercq E, Eyers M, Vanderleyden J, Michiels K.

Author information: 
(1)F. A. Janssens Laboratory of Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven,
Heverlee, Belgium.

We have constructed a cosmid library of the Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 90-MDa
plasmid (p90) and established the EcoRI restriction map of this plasmid. The
central regions of cloned p90 DNA fragments from several recombinant cosmids were
deleted by restriction endonuclease digestion and replaced by a DNA cassette
encoding kanamycin resistance. Using these in vitro constructed deletions for
marker exchange in Sp7, we made six different p90 deletion derivatives spanning
all together 50% of the total length of p90. Comparison of the deletion
derivatives with Sp7 for several properties revealed p90 loci involved in colony 
morphology, growth on minimal medium, motility, and adsorption to wheat roots. In
analogy with the rhizobial symbiotic plasmids (pSym), we propose to denote the
p90 plasmid as a rhizocoenotic plasmid (pRhico), carrying several genes involved 
in the A. brasilense-plant root interaction.

PMID: 1749822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biochimie. 1991 Sep;73(9):1187-93.

Characterization of an osmoregulated periplasmic glycine betaine-binding protein 
in Azospirillum brasilense sp7.

Riou N(1), Poggi MC, Le Rudulier D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Végétale et Microbiologie, URA CNRS 1114, Faculté des 
Sciences et des Techniques, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, France.

Azospirillum brasilense is able to use glycine betaine as a powerful
osmoprotectant; the uptake of this compound is strongly stimulated by salt
stress, but significantly reduced by cold osmotic shock. Non-denaturing PAGE in
the presence of [methyl-14C] glycine betaine and autoradiography demonstrated the
presence of one glycine betaine-binding protein (GBBP) in periplasmic shock fluid
obtained from high-osmolarity-grown cells. The binding activity was absent in
periplasmic fractions from cells grown at low osmolarity. SDS-PAGE analysis
showed that the osmotically inducible GBBP has an apparent molecular weight of
32,000. The isoelectric point was between 5.9 and 6.6, as determined by
isoelectric focusing. This protein bound glycine betaine with high affinity (KD
of 3 microM), but had no affinity for either other betaines (proline betaine,
gamma-butyrobetaine, pipecolate betaine, trigonelline, homarine) or related
compounds (choline, glycine betaine aldehyde, glycine and proline). Optimum
binding activity occurred at pH 7.0 to 7.5, and was not altered whether or not
the binding assays were done at low or high osmolarity. Immunoprecipitation and
Western blotting showed that immunoadsorbed anti-GBBP antibody from E coli
cross-reacted with the GBBP produced by A brasilense cells grown at high
osmolarity.

PMID: 1747385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Bacteriol. 1991 Jan;173(1):365-71.

Detection of alternative nitrogenases in aerobic gram-negative nitrogen-fixing
bacteria.

Fallik E(1), Chan YK, Robson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Georgia, Athens 30602.

Strains of aerobic, microaerobic, nonsymbiotic, and symbiotic dinitrogen-fixing
bacteria were screened for the presence of alternative nitrogenase (N2ase) genes 
by DNA hybridization between genomic DNA and DNA encoding structural genes for
components 1 of three different enzymes. A nifDK gene probe was used as a control
to test for the presence of the commonly occurring Mo-Fe N2ase, a vnfDGK gene
probe was used to show the presence of V-Fe N2ase, and an anfDGK probe was used
to detect Fe N2ase. Hitherto, all three enzymes have been identified in
Azotobacter vinelandii OP, and all but the Fe N2ase are present in Azotobacter
chroococcum ATCC 4412 (MCD1). Mo-Fe N2ase and V-Fe N2ase structural genes only
were confirmed in this strain and in two other strains of A. chroococcum (ATCC
480 and ATCC 9043). A similar pattern was observed with Azotobacter beijerinckii 
ATCC 19360 and Azotobacter nigricans ATCC 35009. Genes for all three systems are 
apparently present in two strains of Azotobacter paspali (ATCC 23367 and ATCC
23833) and also in Azomonas agilis ATCC 7494. There was no good evidence for the 
existence of any genes other than Mo-Fe N2ase structural genes in several
Rhizobium meliloti strains, cowpea Rhizobium strain 32H1, or Bradyrhizobium
japonicum. Nitrogenase and nitrogenase genes in Azorhizobium caulinodans behaved 
in an intermediate fashion, showing (i) the formation of ethane from acetylene
under Mo starvation, a characteristic of alternative nitrogenases, and (ii) a
surprising degree of cross-hybridization to the vnfDGK, but not the anfDGK,
probe. vnfDGK- and anfDGK-like sequences were not detected in two saccharolytic
Pseudomonas species or Azospirillum brasilense Sp7. The occurrence of alternative
N2ases seems restricted to members of the family Azotobacteraceae among the
aerobic and microaerobic diazotrophs tested, suggesting that an ability to cope
with O2 when fixing N2 may be an important factor influencing the distribution of
alternative nitrogenases.

PMCID: PMC207195
PMID: 1987127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Arch Microbiol. 1991;156(1):62-9.

The production and utilization of nitric oxide by a new, denitrifying strain of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Vosswinkel R(1), Neidt I, Bothe H.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, Federal Republic of Germany.

When a new strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa was grown aerobically and then
transferred to anaerobic conditions, cells reduced NO3- quantitatively to NO2- in
NO3(-)-respiration. In the absence of nitrate, NO2- was immediately reduced to NO
or N2O but not to N2 indicating that NO2(-)-reductase but not N2O-reductase was
active. The formation of the products NO or N2O depended on the pH in the medium 
and the concentration of NO2- present. When P. aeruginosa was grown anaerobically
for at least three days N2O-reductase was also active. Such cells reduced NO to
N2 via N2O. The new strain generated at H(+)-gradient and grew by reducing N2O to
N2 but not by converting NO to N2O. For comparison, Azospirillum brasilense Sp7
showed the same pattern of NO-reduction. In contrast, Paracoccus denitrificans
formed 3.5 H+/NO during the reduction of NO to N2O in oxidant pulse experiments
but could not grow in the presence of NO. Thus the NO-reduction pattern in P.
denitrificans on one side and P. aeruginosa and A. brasilense on the other was
very different. The mechanistic implications of such differences are discussed.

PMID: 1772347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Gen Genet. 1990 Dec;224(3):421-30.

Characterization of three different nitrogen-regulated promoter regions for the
expression of glnB and glnA in Azospirillum brasilense.

de Zamaroczy M(1), Delorme F, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Physiologie Cellulaire and CNRS URA 1300, Département des
Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The complete nucleotide sequence of the open reading frame (ORF) located upstream
of the glnA structural gene for glutamine synthetase (GS) in Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 was determined. This ORF, which codes for a 12 kDa protein, was
identified as glnB, the structural gene for the PII protein, a component of the
adenylylation cascade involved in the regulation of GS activity in some
gram-negative bacteria. Transcription analysis and mRNA mapping of glnB and glnA 
of A. brasilense was performed with bacteria grown under different physiological 
conditions. The glnA gene can be transcribed either as a glnB-A mRNA of 2.4 kb or
as a glnA mRNA of 1.5 kb. Differential expression of the two mRNAs was found to
depend on the nitrogen source. The glnB-A mRNA was the major transcript under
nitrogen fixation conditions, while the synthesis of the glnA mRNA was almost
completely abolished. The glnA mRNA was predominantly produced in
NH4(+)-containing medium. Transcription start site analysis revealed the presence
of three different types of nitrogen-regulated promoters. GlnB-A mRNA was
transcribed selectively from tandem promoters. One of them is similar to the
NtrA-dependent promoter and the other to the Escherichia coli sigma 70 promoter. 
The synthesis of glnA mRNA was regulated by a promoter, which was repressed (or
non-activated) only under conditions of nitrogen fixation, when moleuclar
nitrogen was the sole nitrogen source. The transcriptional initiation site in
front of glnA is not preceded by a canonical E. coli sigma 70 promoter. A
sequence reminiscent of the NtrA-dependent promoter consensus, except for a
fundamental mismatch, was found at positions -33 to -21. This sequence overlapped
a putative "weak" NtrC-binding site, similar to those identified in enteric
bacteria. From these results, it is postulated that glnA mRNA is controlled by a 
novel type of nitrogen-regulated promoter.

PMID: 1702507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 1990 Nov-Dec;3(6):389-400.

Characterization of two Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 plasmid genes homologous to
Rhizobium meliloti nodPQ.

Vieille C(1), Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1300, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Bacteria belonging to the Azospirillum genus are nitrogen fixers that colonize
the roots of grasses, but do not cause the formation of differentiated
structures. Sequences from total DNA of several Azospirillum strains are
homologous to restriction fragments containing Rhizobium meliloti nodulation
genes. A 10-kilobase (kb) EcoRI fragment from A. brasilense Sp7, sharing homology
with a 6.8-kb EcoRI fragment carrying nodGEFH and part of nodP of R. meliloti 41,
was cloned in pUC18 to yield pAB502. The nucleotide sequence of a 3.5-kb
EcoRI-SmaI fragment of the pAB502 insert revealed 60% homology with R. meliloti
nodP and nodQ genes. The nodP gene product shares no homology to any known
protein sequence. The Azospirillum nodQ gene product shares homology with a
family of initiation and elongation factors as does the R. meliloti nodQ gene
product. Since the nodQ gene overlaps the nodP gene, the two genes might be
cotranscribed. Azospirillum contains large plasmids, and the nodPQ genes were
found on the 90-MDa plasmid (p90). A translational nodP-lacZ fusion was
constructed in the broad host range plasmid pGD926. No beta-galactosidase
activity was detected in Escherichia coli, but the fusion was functional in
Azospirillum and constitutively expressed. Deletions and mutations of nodPQ did
not modify growth, nitrogen fixation, or interaction with wheat seedlings.

PMID: 2131098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Immunol. 1990 Sep;27(9):887-90.

Immunoregulatory activity of substance P fragments.

Siemion IZ(1), Nawrocka E, Slon J, Pedyczak A, Kubik A, Spiegel K, Zimecki M,
Wieczorek Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Wroclaw University, Poland.

The C-terminal SP7-11 pentapeptide (Phe-Phe-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2) was found to
suppress in vitro the immune response in a dose of 1-5 micrograms/ml. It produced
also a distinct immunosuppression in vivo, by both per os and intraperitoneal,
applications. In contrast, the N-terminal SP1-4 fragment (Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro)
suppressed the response at a dose of 0.1 microgram/ml, but stimulated it slightly
at higher doses (1-5 micrograms/ml). A structural analog of SP1-4
(Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro tetrapeptide) was found to be a strong immunosuppressor at a
dose of 5 micrograms/ml, indicating the importance of N-terminal basic residue
for the immunoregulatory activity of intact SP.

PMID: 1699121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Gen Genet. 1990 Aug;223(1):152-5.

Construction of an Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 recA mutant.

Croes C(1), Vanderleyden J, Michiels K.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Memorial Laboratory for Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven,
Heverlee, Belgium.

Cosmid clones encoding the recA gene of Azospirillum brasilense were isolated by 
intergeneric complementation of an Escherichia coli recA mutant. Site-directed
Tn5 mutagenesis and subcloning of one complementing cosmid clone allowed us to
localize the A. brasilense recA gene on a 1.2 kb DNA fragment. One Tn5 insertion 
that inactivates the cloned recA gene was crossed into the chromosome of A.
brasilense by marker exchange. The resulting A. brasilense recA mutant showed
increased sensitivity to the DNA methylating agent methyl methanesulfonate and to
ultraviolet light and had at least one hundredfold reduced recombinational
activity compared to the parent strain.

PMID: 2175386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Plasmid. 1990 May;23(3):169-82.

Physical map and properties of a 90-MDa plasmid of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Onyeocha I(1), Vieille C, Zimmer W, Baca BE, Flores M, Palacios R, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1300 CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Homology was previously detected between the DNA restriction fragments containing
Rhizobium meliloti nodulation genes and the 90-MDa plasmid, p90, of Azospirillum 
brasilense Sp7. Two DNA loci from Sp7 genome that complement mutations in the
exopolysaccharide synthesis genes, exoB and exoC, of R. meliloti were also shown 
to be present on the plasmid. A more detailed characterization of the plasmid was
undertaken to establish its physical map and to localize the nod homologies and
other specific regions. Six loci were mapped, the region homologous to the
nodulation genes, nodPQ, of R. meliloti, the exoB and exoC mutation-correcting
loci, a locus for Ap resistance, a bla homology region different from the Ap
resistance locus, and a region necessary for the maintenance of p90 as an
independent replicon. Mobilization into Agrobacterium tumefaciens of p90-Tn5-Mob 
was obtained at a frequency of 10(-4), with the plasmid helper pJB3JI.
Self-transfer of p90 was not demonstrated. Fragments of p90 hybridized with a
plasmid of 90 MDa present in most A. brasilense and some A. lipoferum strains,
suggesting a plasmid family in Azospirillum.

PMID: 2217570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1990 Apr;56(4):1160-1.

Nitrogen Fixation in Continuous Culture with NH(4)Cl-Containing Media.

Fritzsche C(1), Niemann EG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, University of Hannover, Herrenhaeuser Strasse 2, 3000
Hannover 21, Federal Republic of Germany.

N balance and N dilution were determined from growth of Azospirillum brasilense
Sp7 and two unidentified gram-negative nitrogen-fixing microorganisms in
continuous culture supplied with NH(4)Cl. At the 1.1 and 2.2 mM NH(4)Cl steady
states (N-to-C ratios of 1:68 and 1:34, respectively), the organisms grew with
NH(4)Cl and N(2) as N sources simultaneously under carbon limitation. No ammonium
could be detected in the supernatant of these cultures.

PMCID: PMC184360
PMID: 16348161  [PubMed]


462. Mol Gen Genet. 1989 Dec;220(1):88-94.

Regulation of transcription and promoter mapping of the structural genes for
nitrogenase (nifHDK) of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

de Zamaroczy M(1), Delorme F, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Physiologie Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Transcription of the structural genes for nitrogenase (nifHDK) in Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7 was analysed using Northern blots of total RNA extracted from
cultures grown under nitrogen-fixing conditions. Hybridization with an internal
nifH probe revealed two transcripts, a major one (by concentration) of 1.1 kb
corresponding to nifH and a minor one of 5.6 kb corresponding to nifHDK.
Hybridization with nifD or nifK probes revealed the minor transcript of 5.6 kb.
This confirms that the nifHDK genes are organized as a single transcription unit 
and suggests regulation at the level of termination of transcription. The
complete nucleotide sequence of nifH was established and the DNA region upstream 
of the initiation codon was analysed for transcription and translation signals.
The nifH open reading frame (ORF) is preceded by an NtrA-dependent promoter and
two elements homologous to upstream activator sequences (UAS) required for
NifA-mediated activation in other diazotrophs. Promoter mapping with S1 nuclease 
revealed two start sites located 10 bp and 40 bp downstream of the NtrA-dependent
promoter.

PMID: 2608030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1989 Aug;55(8):2056-60.

Cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of the Azospirillum brasilense Sp7
gene encoding ampicillin resistance.

Verreth C(1), Cammue B, Swinnen P, Crombez D, Michielsen A, Michiels K, Van Gool 
A, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F. A. Janssens Memorial Laboratory for Genetics, University of Leuven,
Heverlee, Belgium.

The Azospirillum brasilense ATCC 29145 gene coding for beta-lactamase was cloned 
in Escherichia coli. The gene was expressed in E. coli from its own promoter as a
30-kilodalton protein, conferring resistance to high levels of beta-lactam
antibiotics. The DNA sequence containing the beta-lactamase gene was found to be 
highly amplified in the Azospirillum genome, scattered in the chromosomal as well
as in the plasmidic DNA.

PMCID: PMC203002
PMID: 2675764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Anal Biochem. 1989 Jul;180(1):110-3.

A semicontinuous, high-performance liquid chromatography-based assay for
stromelysin.

Harrison R(1), Teahan J, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Enzymology, Merck Sharp and Dohme Research Laboratories, Rahway,
New Jersey 07065.

A search for low molecular weight peptide substrates for the
metalloendoproteinase, human fibroblast stromelysin, resulted in the discovery
that substance P (Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro-Gln-Gln-Phe-Phe-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2) is a substrate
for this enzyme and is cleaved exclusively at the Gln6-Phe7 bond. On the basis of
this observation, a semicontinuous HPLC-based assay was developed that monitors
the production of the hydrolysis product, fragment 7-11 (SP7-11). Steady-state
velocities for the production of SP7-11 have been determined as a function of
substrate concentration and obey simple, Michaelis-Menten kinetics. For a 1-ml
reaction volume, Vmax = (2.4 nmol SP7-11/min)/micrograms protein and Km = 0.38
mM.

PMID: 2479283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Gen Microbiol. 1989 May;135(5):1047-59.

Identification of DNA regions homologous to nitrogen fixation genes nifE, nifUS
and fixABC in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Galimand M(1), Perroud B, Delorme F, Paquelin A, Vieille C, Bozouklian H,
Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Physiologie Cellulaire, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

A 30 kb DNA region from Azospirillum brasilense Sp7, containing the nitrogenase
structural genes (nifHDK), has been cloned. The presence of nif genes, in the 20 
kb located next to nifHDK, was explored by Tn5 mutagenesis after subcloning
various restriction fragments in the broad-host-range suicide vehicle pSUP202.
Over 25 mutations due to Tn5 random insertions were obtained in the 20 kb and
each recombined into the genome of strain Sp7. Four new nif loci were identified,
located at about 4, 9, 12 and 18 kb downstream from nifK respectively.
Hybridization with heterologous nif probes from Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Bradyrhizobium japonicum and Azorhizobium caulinodans was performed to
characterize the new nif regions. The region proximal to nifK appears to contain 
nifE and the region distal to nifK contains genes homologous to nifUS and fixABC.
nifgene(s) from the fourth locus were not identified. Mutants in this locus,
which were devoid of nitrogenase activity when tested under nitrogen-free
conditions, displayed a high nitrogenase activity when glutamate was added to the
growth medium. This phenomenon was also observed with mutants of the fixABC
homology region, but to a lesser extent. Homology between strain Sp7 total DNA
and a nifB-containing probe from B. japonicum was detected, although the
hybridizing region was not part of the nif cluster described above.

PMID: 2695597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Plasmid. 1989 Mar;21(2):142-6.

Plasmid localization and mapping of two Azospirillum brasilense loci that affect 
exopolysaccharide synthesis.

Michiels K(1), De Troch P, Onyeocha I, Van Gool A, Elmerich C, Vanderleyden J.

Author information: 
(1)F. A. Janssens Memorial Laboratory for Genetics, Catholic University of
Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium.

Two Azospirillum brasilense loci that correct Rhizobium meliloti exoB and exoC
mutants for exopolysaccharide (EPS) synthesis have been identified previously (K.
W. Michiels, J. Vanderleyden, A. P. Van Gool, E. R. Signer, J. Bacteriol.,
1988b). A. brasilense exo mutants produce EPS of lower molecular weight than the 
wild type strain. Here, we show by hybridization that these exo loci are located 
on a 90-MDa plasmid in A. brasilense Sp7. In four other Azospirillum strains but 
not in A. lipoferum SpBr17, the loci are likewise located on a plasmid of
approximately the same size. Transposon Tn5 insertions in these loci were
isolated and mapped on the cloned DNA by restriction analysis. Hybridization of
restriction digests of purified 90-MDa plasmid DNA with probes containing the exo
loci confirmed their plasmid location. This is the first report on plasmid
localization of genes in Azospirillum.

PMID: 2544914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Planta. 1988 Dec;176(3):333-42. doi: 10.1007/BF00395413.

An alternative explanation for plant growth promotion by bacteria of the genus
Azospirillum.

Zimmer W(1), Roeben K, Bothe H.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut der Universität Köln, Gyrhofstrasse 15, D-5000, Köln 41, 
Federal Republic of Germany.

Experiments were performed to identify the substances that are excreted by the
soil bacterium Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and that were reported to stimulate
the formation of lateral roots and of root hairs of grasses. Azospirillum forms
indole-3 acetic acid (IAA) but only in the late stationary growth phase or when
tryptophan is present in the medium, but not in continuous cultures or in the
logarithmic growth phase of batch cultures. Formation of IAA by Azospirillum
requires aerobic conditions. Nitrite can replace IAA in several phytohormone
assay, and is even more active than IAA in a test with wheat root segments in
which the increase of wet weight is determined. Higher amounts of nitrite are
necessary for activity in other classical auxin assays. Nitrite shows 40-60% of
the activity of IAA in the straight-growth test of Avena coleoptiles and in the
formation of C2H4 by pea epicotyl segments. Like IAA, nitrite is inactive in
promoting C2H4 formation by ripe apple tissues. Since nitrite alone can hardly
exert phytohormonal effects, it is postulated that nitrite reacts with a
substance in the cells and that a product formed by this reaction functions as
auxin. Such a substance could be ascorbate. Exogenously added ascorbate enhances 
the rate of nitrite-dependent C2H4 formation by pea epicotyl sections and the
nitrite-dependent increase in the wet weight of wheat root segments. Nitrite is
formed by nitrate respiration of Azospirillum. The findings that nitrite can have
phytohormonal effects offers an alternative explanation of the promotion of the
growth of roots and the enhancement of mineral uptake of grasses by Azospirillum.
Indole-acetic acid completely and nitrite partly substitute for an inoculation
with Azospirillum in an assay where the increase of the dry weight of intact
wheat roots is determined after an incubation for 10 d. Nitrite and IAA are,
therefore, possibly the only factors causing an enhancement of the growth of
roots of grasses.

PMID: 24220861  [PubMed]


468. Brain Res. 1988 May 1;468(1):1-9.

An isolated growth cone-enriched fraction from developing rat brain has substance
P binding sites.

Lockerbie RO(1), Beaujouan JC, Saffroy M, Glowinski J.

Author information: 
(1)Collège de France-INSERM U 114, Chaire de Neuropharmacologie, Paris.

A fraction enriched in neuronal growth cones isolated from developing rat
forebrain was shown to possess binding sites for the substance P analog,
Bolton-Hunter substance P [( 125I]BHSP). Specific binding of this ligand reached 
an equilibrium after 10 min at 20 degrees C, and was reversible and
temperature-dependent. Removal of extracellular Na+ did not block but rather
augmented [125I]BHSP binding suggesting that the labeled analog was not
transported into the growth cone fraction. Scatchard analysis of the binding
indicated a single class of non-interacting binding sites in the growth cone
fraction (Kd: 257 pM; Bmax: 56 fmol/mg protein). From competition studies using
substance P and other tachykinins, their rank order of potency for inhibiting
[125I]BHSP binding was SP greater than physalaemin much greater than eledoisin
greater than kassinin greater than NKB greater than or equal to NKA. Such order
is consistent with the presence of an SP receptor (Neurokinin-1) in the growth
cone fraction. The N-terminal fragments of substance P, SP1-7 and SP1-11 free
acids, and the C-terminal fragment, SP7-11, were devoid of affinity for the
[125I]BHSP binding site. However SP6-11 and SP1-11 methyl esters showed more
potency.

PMID: 2454147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Ann Parasitol Hum Comp. 1988;63(1):76-84.

[The experimental pathogenic effect of Spiroplasma isolated from mosquitoes on
the hatching of Aedes aegypti ova and the growth of larva hatched from these
eggs].

[Article in French]

Simitzis-Le Flohic AM(1), Devau B, Prigent Y, Gruffaz R, Le Goff F, Gilot B,
Chastel C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Santé
Publique, Faculté de Médecine, Brest.

The authors did study the experimental effects on Aedes aegypti ova of different 
Spiroplasma strains, isolated from mosquitoes in French Savoy and in Taiwan. The 
SP7 strain, from Armigeres subalbatus (Taiwan), demonstrates a true pathogenic
effect on the larval evolution, without sex ratio modifications, nor bacterial
transmission to the adult mosquitoes. The authors present their results and
emphasize the difficult use of Spiroplasmas sp.

PMID: 3400962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Pulm Pharmacol. 1988;1(3):113-8.

Airway responses to substance P and substance P fragments in the guinea pig.

Shore SA(1), Drazen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Biology Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
02115.

Airway responses to rapid intravenous infusions of substance P (SP), selected
carboxy terminal fragments (SP3-11, SP5-11, SP7-11, and SP9-11), and an amino
terminal fragment (SP1-9) were measured in anesthetized, mechanically ventilated 
guinea pigs. The dose of each peptide required to decrease pulmonary conductance 
(GL) to 50% of baseline value was calculated in each animal. The order of ED50GL 
was: SP5-11 less than SP3-11 less than SP less than SP7-11. SP9-11 and SP1-9 were
inactive at doses up to 1000 nmol/kg i.v. The effects of the neutral
metalloendopeptidase (NEP) inhibitor, thiorphan, and the angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, captopril, on airway responses to SP5-11 were examined in
order to test the hypothesis that differences in degradation of SP and SP5-11
contribute to the difference in airway responsiveness to the two peptides.
Thiorphan (0.5 mg/animal, i.v.) caused a significant decrease in ED50GL for
SP5-11, as has been previously noted for SP. In contrast, captopril (1.7
mg/animal i.v.) had no effect on ED50GL for SP5-11, although it has a substantial
effect on SP responses. These results indicate that while the carboxy terminal of
SP is essential for peptide bronchoactivity, loss of amino terminal peptides (up 
to four residues) actually enhances bronchoconstrictor responses to the peptide. 
Part of this enhancement appears to result from differences in the degradation of
SP and SP5-11 by ACE. The data suggest that cleavage of SP by dipeptidyl
aminopeptidases could enhance its bioactivity.

PMID: 2485179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol. 1987 Aug;(8):16-8.

[Characteristics of dissociation in cultures of Aspergillus brasilense Sp7].

[Article in Russian]

Matveev VIu, Petrova LP, Zhuravleva EA, Panasenko VI.

Peculiarities of dissociation in the cultures of nitrogen-fixating soil
microorganism Azospirillum brasilense have been studied. The possible transfer
among colony-morphology variants is established. The relations between variants
are described by the following scheme: R in equilibrium with SR----S
Electrophoretic analysis of plasmid contents in different variants of
Azospirillum brasilense supposes the possible participation of plasmid DNA in the
dissociation process in this microorganism.

PMID: 3683426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1987 Feb;53(2):410-5.

Transposon Mutagenesis of Azospirillum brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum:
Physical Analysis of Tn5 and Tn5-Mob Insertion Mutants.

Vanstockem M(1), Michiels K, Vanderleyden J, Van Gool AP.

Author information: 
(1)F.A. Janssens Memorial Laboratory of Genetics, University of Leuven, B-3030
Heverlee, Belgium.

Tn5-induced insertion mutants were generated in Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and
A. lipoferum SpBr17 by mating with Escherichia coli strains carrying suicide
plasmid vectors. The sources of Tn5 were the suicide plasmids pGS9 and pSUP2021. 
Kanamycin-resistant Azospirillum colonies appeared from crosses with E. coli at
maximum frequencies of 10 per recipient cell. Transposon Tn5 also conferred
streptomycin resistance on Azospirillum colonies as was observed earlier for
Rhizobium sp. Eight Tn5-induced Km SmA. brasilense Sp7 mutants with reduced
nitrogen-fixing capacity were isolated. The potential use of Tn5-Mob for labeling
and mobilization of Azospirillum-indigenous plasmids was demonstrated by
isolating Tn5-Mob insertions in the megaplasmids of A. brasilense Sp7.

PMCID: PMC203674
PMID: 16347289  [PubMed]


473. Biochimie. 1986 Oct-Nov;68(10-11):1181-7.

Nucleotide sequence of the Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 glutamine synthetase
structural gene.

Bozouklian H, Elmerich C.

The complete nucleotide sequence of the glnA gene, encoding the glutamine
synthetase subunit of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7, was established. This is the
first Azospirillum gene sequenced. The gene encodes a 468 residue polypeptide of 
MW 51,917. The similarity coefficient (SAB) between the polypeptidic sequence of 
Azospirillum and Anabaena 7120, which is the only other glnA sequence available, 
is 58%. No significant homology with E. coli canonical and ntr promoters, or with
the promoter region of the Anabaena glnA gene was found. When fused to an E. coli
promoter, the gene could be translated in E. coli, despite a very biased codon
usage and an atypical Shine-Dalgarno sequence.

PMID: 2878685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Ann Inst Pasteur Microbiol. 1986 Jul-Aug;137B(1):3-18.

Cloning and characterization of the glnA gene of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7.

Bozouklian H(1), Fogher C, Elmerich C.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris.

A plasmid which, by complementation, restored a Gln+Nif+ phenotype to the
Gln-Nif- Azospirillum brasilense mutant 7029, was isolated from a gene bank of
total DNA of A. brasilense Sp7 (ATCC 29145) constructed in the broad host range
vector pVK100. This plasmid contained the structural gene (glnA) for glutamine
synthetase. The glnA gene was mapped by Tn5 insertion and DNA hybridization with 
a Klebsiella pneumoniae glnA probe. The direction of transcription of glnA was
determined. The glnA product was identified as a 50-Kd polypeptide which could be
adenylylated in Escherichia coli, and glutamine synthetase activity was
characterized in E. coli. Plasmids containing the glnA gene restored
glutamine-independent growth and a Nif+ phenotype to Gln-Nif- and Gln-Nifc
mutants of Azospirillum.

PMID: 2893582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1986 Apr;51(4):855-61.

Comparison of Two Cellulomonas Strains and Their Interaction with Azospirillum
brasilense in Degradation of Wheat Straw and Associated Nitrogen Fixation.

Halsall DM(1), Gibson AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Industry, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation, Canberra, A.C.T. 2601, Australia.

A mutant strain of Cellulomonas sp. CS1-17 was compared with Cellulomonas gelida 
2480 as the cellulolytic component of a mixed culture which was responsible for
the breakdown of wheat straw to support asymbiotic nitrogen fixation by
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 (ATCC 29145). Cellulomonas sp. strain CSI-17 was more
efficient than was C. gelida in cellulose breakdown at lower oxygen
concentrations and, in mixed culture with A. brasilense, it supported higher
nitrogenase activity (C(2)H(2) reduction) and nitrogen fixation with straw as the
carbon source. Based on gravimetric determinations of straw breakdown and total N
determinations, the efficiency of nitrogen fixation was 72 and 63 mg of N per g
of straw utilized for the mixtures containing Cellulomonas sp. and C. gelida,
respectively. Both Cellulomonas spp. and Azospirillum spp. exhibited a wide range
of pH tolerance. When introduced into sterilized soil, the Cellulomonas
sp.-Azospirillum brasilense association was more effective in nitrogen fixation
at a pH of 7.0 than at the native soil pH (5.6). This was also true of the
indigenous diazotrophic microflora of this soil. The potential implications of
this work to the field situation are discussed.

PMCID: PMC238973
PMID: 16347043  [PubMed]


476. Endocr Res. 1986;12(3):293-304.

Studies on high-affinity [3H]substance P binding sites in bovine pineal gland.

Govitrapong P, Ebadi M.

The presence of substance P in numerous mammalian pineal glands prompted us to
search for its binding sites in the bovine pineal gland. The binding assays to
pineal membrane were carried out in polypropylene microcentrifuge tubes in a
final volume of 500 microliters of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing
aliquots of 200-500 micrograms protein, 0.02% BSA, 6 micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4
micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, and 50
microliters of [3H]substance P (3H-SP, 45.7 Ci/mmol to yield a final
concentration of 0.02-20 nM) to start the reactions, which were incubated for 20 
min at 20 degrees C. The reactions were terminated by centrifugation in a Fisher 
Microcentrifuge Model 235A for 30 seconds at 13,000 X g, and the pellets were
washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 0.02% BSA, 6 
micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4 micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml
bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2. The
bottoms of the tubes were cut, the membrane pellets were dissolved in 5 ml of
Triton X-100/toluene fluor (1:3) scintillation fluid, and the radioactivity was
counted. The specific [3H]-substance P binding at 1-2 nM was 40-50% of the total 
binding, and the non-specific binding was assessed by using 2 microM of
unlabelled substance P. These studies identified in bovine pineal gland a high
affinity receptor site for [3H]SP with a KD value of 0.43 nM and a Bmax value of 
71.14 fmol/mg protein. The relative affinity of various substance P analogues or 
fragments was: substance P greater than physalaemin greater than SP2-11 greater
than SP3-11 greater than SP4-11 greater than SP6-11 greater than substance K =
eledoisin greater than kassinin greater than SP7-11 greater than SP free acid.
Substance P did not alter the basal or the norepinephrine-induced stimulation of 
the activity of serotonin N-acetyltransferase in rat pineal gland in culture.

PMID: 2430788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Bacteriol. 1985 Dec;164(3):1271-7.

Purification and properties of the nitrogenase of Azospirillum amazonense.

Song SD, Hartmann A, Burris RH.

The nitrogenase of the free-living, microaerobic, N2-fixing bacterium
Azospirillum amazonense (strain Y1) was purified by chromatography on DEAE-52
cellulose, by heat treatment, and by preparative polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. The specific nitrogenase activities were 2,400 nmol of C2H4
formed per min per mg of protein for dinitrogenase (MoFe protein) and 1,800 nmol 
of C2H4 formed per min per mg of protein for dinitrogenase reductase (Fe
protein). The MoFe protein was composed of a minimum of 1,852 amino acid
residues, had an isoelectric point of 5.2, and contained 2 atoms of Mo, 24 atoms 
of Fe, and 28 atoms of acid-labile sulfide per molecule. The Fe protein had 624
amino acid residues and an isoelectric point of 4.6 and contained four atoms of
Fe and six atoms of acid-labile sulfide per molecule. The purified MoFe protein
showed two subunits with molecular weights of 55,000 and 50,000. The purified Fe 
protein revealed two polypeptides on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis with apparent molecular weights of 35,000 and 31,000. The two Fe 
protein polypeptides were demonstrated with immunological techniques in the
purified, highly active enzyme as well as in extracts. Also, Azotobacter
vinelandii Fe protein showed two closely migrating polypeptides that migrated
differently from the Fe protein polypeptides of Azospirillum brasilense or
Rhodospirillum rubrum. The nitrogenase activity of Azospirillum amazonense Y1 was
independent of Mn2+, and the addition of activating enzyme had no effect. No
activating enzyme could be found in Azospirillum amazonense. Obviously, the
nitrogenase system of Azospirillum amazonense Y1 is different from that of
Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and resembles the Azotobacter system.

PMCID: PMC219325
PMID: 3864779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Bacteriol. 1985 Aug;163(2):716-23.

Flocculation in Azospirillum brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum:
exopolysaccharides and cyst formation.

Sadasivan L, Neyra CA.

The phenomena of flocculation and floc formation by Azospirillum brasilense Sp7
(ATCC 29145) and Azospirillum lipoferum Sp59b (ATCC 29707) were studied in
aerobic liquid cultures. Carbon sources representative of various entry pathways 
in combination with various nitrogen sources induced flocculation in both species
of azospirilla. Noticeably, the combination of fructose and nitrate was the most 
effective in terms of floc yields. Phase-contrast microscopic observations
revealed a transition in cell morphology from freely motile, vibrioid cells to
nonmotile, highly refractile encysting forms during the formation of flocs. The
nonmotile forms in flocs appeared to be entangled within a fibrillar matrix, and 
the cells were highly resistant to desiccation. Dried flocs kept for almost 6
months still maintained the highly refractile encysting forms, and their
viability was confirmed by pellicle formation and acetylene reduction in
semisolid malate medium. Electron microscopic observations of the desiccated
flocs revealed the presence of cell forms containing abundant poly
beta-hydroxybutyrate granules within a central body and surrounded by a thick
layer of exopolysaccharides. The latter were characterized by alkali and acid
digestion, crude cellulase hydrolysis, and calcofluor staining. It was concluded 
that the overproduction of exocellular polymers induces the flocculent growth and
is associated with the concomitant transformation of vegetative cells to the
desiccation-resistant encysting forms under limiting cultural conditions.

PMCID: PMC219180
PMID: 3894333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1985 Jan;25(1):69-75.

Specificity of antisera obtained to substance P and its C-terminal hexapeptide.

Babinska A, Cierniewski CS, Koziolkiewicz W, Janecka A.

Synthetic fragments and analogs were used to characterize specificity of antisera
to SP and SP6-11. [Tyr8] SP and [Lys6] SP6-11 were both used as radioiodinated
ligands. The latter was conjugated with Bolton-Hunter reagents before labelling. 
In both systems, the C-terminal pentapeptide SP7-11 was the shortest fragment
showing antigenic identity with Substance P molecule. Substitution of different
amino acid residues in SP6-11 by His or Gly showed that all but Glu6 take part in
the structure of the antigenic determinant.

PMID: 2579923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1984 Dec;48(6):1208-13.

Root hair deformation, bacterial attachment, and plant growth in
wheat-azospirillum associations.

Jain DK(1), Patriquin DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4J1,
Canada.

Seven Azospirillum strains induced more deformation of root hairs of wheat than
did strains of Rhizobium leguminosarum, Azotobacter chroococcum, or Escherichia
coli. Azospirillum sp. strain Sp245 caused the most deformation. Strain Sp245
(isolated from surface sterile roots of wheat) and strain Sp7 (isolated from the 
rhizosphere of a forage grass) were compared with regard to their effects on root
hair deformation, their attachment to roots, and their effects on the growth of
four wheat cultivars. The amount of deformation caused by the two strains in the 
four cultivars increased in the following order: cv. Tobari, cv. Tonari, cv.
BH1146, cv. Lagoa. Strain Sp245 attached to the roots of all cultivars in low
numbers, and attachment did not increase with time (up to 48 h). Strain Sp7
attached in higher numbers, and attachment increased with time. Inoculation of
the four cultivars of wheat had pronounced effects on root mass measured at
maturity. The magnitude of the effects in the four cultivars increased in the
following order: Tobari, Tonari, BH1146, Lagoa; these effects were progressively 
more positive for strain Sp245 and progressively more negative for strain Sp7.
Concentrations of N in wheat did not vary substantially between cultivars or
strains. Concentrations of K and P did not vary substantially between cultivars
but did vary between strains, Sp245 effecting increases and Sp7 effecting
decreases.

PMCID: PMC241711
PMID: 16346680  [PubMed]


481. J Exp Med. 1984 Oct 1;160(4):971-86.

Frequency of expressed immunoglobulin light chain genes in
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated BALB/c spleen cells.

Zhu D, Lefkovits I, Köhler G.

Variants of four hybridoma lines secreting antibodies specific for either
trinitrophenyl (TNP) or sheep erythrocytes (SRBC) were isolated which have lost
either the specific heavy (H) chain or the specific light (L) chain. They were
fused to lipopolysaccharide-stimulated mouse spleen cells and the resulting
secondary hybridomas were screened for the restoration of the original antibody
specificity. Antibody activity was 37 times more frequently restored with fusion 
lines donating H chain than with those donating L chain. We obtained a variety of
different (spleen cell derived) L chains in association with one H chain and one 
specificity. We found that those L chains originally associated with a given H
chain were rescued most often. Their frequencies were 1:74 and 1:490 for an
anti-SRBC- and an anti-TNP-restoring kappa L chain, respectively. Two most
commonly observed V-J kappa combinations in one anti-SRBC complementation group
were detected with a 5- and 30-fold reduced frequency in two anti-TNP groups,
indicating somatic diversification of kappa chains. It is shown that the Sp7/HK
line resumes anti-TNP activity with a mutated, non-germline lambda 1 chain, which
was found in 30% of lambda 1-expressing hybridomas.

PMCID: PMC2187469
PMID: 6434691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Bacteriol. 1984 Oct;160(1):103-6.

Hydrogenase activity in Azospirillum brasilense is inhibited by nitrite, nitric
oxide, carbon monoxide, and acetylene.

Tibelius KH, Knowles R.

Nitrite, NO, CO, and C2H2 inhibited O2-dependent H2 uptake (H3H oxidation) in
denitrifying Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 grown anaerobically on N2O or NO3-. The 
apparent Ki values for inhibition of O2-dependent H2 uptake were 20 microM for
NO2-, 0.4 microM for NO, 28 microM for CO, and 88 microM for C2H2. These
inhibitors also affected methylene blue-dependent H2 uptake, presumably by acting
directly on the hydrogenase. Nitrite and NO inhibited H2 uptake irreversibly,
whereas inhibition due to CO was easily reversed by repeatedly evacuating and
backfilling with N2. The C2H2 inhibition was not readily reversed, partly due to 
difficulty in removing the last traces of this gas from solution. The NO2-
inhibition of malate-dependent respiration was readily reversed by repeatedly
washing the cells, in contrast to the effect of NO2- on H2-dependent respiration.
These results suggest that the low hydrogenase activities observed in
NO3(-)-grown cultures of A. brasilense may be due to the irreversible inhibition 
of hydrogenase by NO2- and NO produced by NO3- reduction.

PMCID: PMC214687
PMID: 6384189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Immunol. 1984 Aug;21(8):727-30.

Immunogenic and antigenic properties of the COOH-terminal hexapeptide of
substance P.

Babinska A, Cierniewski CS, Kosiolkiewicz W, Janecka A.

Substance P (SP) and its COOH-terminal fragment (6-11) were coupled to bovine
serum albumin by glutaraldehyde and used to elicit antibodies. Anti-SP and
anti-SP6-11 antibodies bound to the same extent 125I-[Tyr8]-SP and
125I-[T-Lys6]-SP6-11. The latter was obtained after conjugation of the
[Lys6]-SP6-11 with cold Bolton-Hunter reagent and then labelling by the
chloramine-T method. In contrast to 125I-[Tyr8]-SP, 125I-[Tyr8]-SP6-11 was poorly
bound by both anti-SP and anti-SP6-11 antibodies. Synthetic fragments of SP
shorter than SP7-11 did not react with anti-SP6-11 antibodies. It is concluded
that the antigenic determinant is within the COOH-terminal pentapeptide, and that
Phe7, Phe8, Leu10 and Met11 contribute significantly to both anti-SP and
anti-SP6-11 immunoreactivity.

PMID: 6205258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Bacteriol. 1984 Jul;159(1):80-5.

Catabolism of carbohydrates and organic acids and expression of nitrogenase by
azospirilla.

Martinez-Drets G, Del Gallo M, Burpee C, Burris RH.

Fructose, galactose, L-arabinose, gluconate, and several organic acids support
rapid growth and N2 fixation of Azospirillum brasiliense ATCC 29145 (strain Sp7) 
as a sole source of carbon and energy. Growth of Azospirillum lipoferum ATCC
29707 (strain Sp59b) is also supported by glucose, mannose, mannitol, and
alpha-ketoglutarate. Oxidation of fructose and gluconate by A. brasiliense Sp7
and of glucose, gluconate, and fructose by A. lipoferum Sp59b was achieved
through inducible enzymatic mechanisms. Both strains exhibited all of the enzymes
of the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway, and strain Sp59b also possesses all the
enzymes of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway. Fluoride inhibited growth on fructose
(strains Sp7 and Sp59b) or on glucose (strain Sp59b) but not on malate. There was
no activity via the oxidative hexose monophosphate pathway in either strain.
There was greater activity with 1-phosphofructokinase than with
6-phosphofructokinase in both strains. Strain Sp59b formed fructose-6-phosphate
via hexokinase, an enzyme that is lacking in strain Sp7. A. brasiliense and A.
lipoferum exhibited the enzymes both of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and of the
glyoxylate shunt; iodoacetate, fluoropyruvate, and malonate were inhibitory. A.
brasiliense Sp7 could not transport [14C]glucose and alpha-[14C]ketoglutarate
into its cells.

PMCID: PMC215595
PMID: 6588050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Bacteriol. 1984 Jan;157(1):84-8.

Uptake hydrogenase activity in denitrifying Azospirillum brasilense grown
anaerobically with nitrous oxide or nitrate.

Tibelius KH, Knowles R.

zospirillum brasilense Sp7 was grown anaerobically with N2O as the terminal
electron acceptor and NH4Cl as the nitrogen source. Hydrogen uptake activity
(O2-dependent H3H oxidation) was expressed in the presence and absence of 5% H2; 
it reached its maximum in late logarithmic phase as the malate became limiting.
This activity was very stable in stationary phase, even in the absence of
exogenous H2, compared with microaerobically grown cultures; this supports the
hypothesis that the exclusion of O2 is critical for maintaining the integrity of 
the H2 uptake system in this organism. Oxygen, as well as methylene blue and N2O,
supported H2 uptake, indicating the presence of electron transport components
leading to O2 in anaerobically grown A. brasilense. Nitrite (0.5 mM) inhibited H2
uptake. In cultures grown with NO3- as the terminal electron acceptor and NH4Cl
as the nitrogen source, in the presence and absence of exogenous H2, only low H2 
uptake activity was observed. Methylene blue, O2, N2O, NO3-, and NO2- were all
capable of acting as the electron acceptor for H2 oxidation. Nitrite (0.5 mM) did
not inhibit H2 uptake in NO3--grown cells, as it did in N2O-grown cells. A.
brasilense appears to be one of the few organisms capable of expressing the H2
uptake system under denitrifying conditions in the absence of molecular H2.

PMCID: PMC215133
PMID: 6690429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Acta Physiol Scand. 1984 Jan;120(1):21-6.

Interaction of substance P with dispersed pancreatic acinar cells from the guinea
pig. Relationships between structure, binding and biological activity.

Sjödin L, Brodin E, Srivastava G.

Binding of 125I-[Tyr8]-SP to isolated pancreatic acinar cells was inhibited in a 
concentration-dependent way by SP, [Tyr8]-SP and longer C-terminal fragments of
SP. SP6-11 was the shortest sequence to bind significantly to SP-receptors as
well as to stimulate amylase release from dispersed pancreatic acini. SP7-11 and 
shorter fragments did not inhibit binding of 125I-[Tyr8]-SP and did not stimulate
secretion of amylase significantly. SP augmented the stimulatory effect of
cholecystokinin on amylase release. Two SP-antagonists, [D-Pro2, D-Trp7,9]-SP and
[D-Pro2,4, D-Lys3, D-Gln5,6, D-Trp7,9]-SP inhibited binding of 125I-[Tyr8]-SP in 
a concentration dependent manner and tended at a high concentration to reduce
release of amylase evoked by submaximal concentrations of SP.

PMID: 6202096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Bacteriol. 1983 Dec;156(3):1369-72.

Metabolism of various carbon sources by Azospirillum brasilense.

Westby CA, Cutshall DS, Vigil GV.

Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 and two mutants were examined for 19 carbon
metabolism enzymes. The results indicate that this nitrogen fixer uses the
Entner-Doudoroff pathway for gluconate dissimilation, lacks a catabolic but has
an anabolic Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas hexosephosphate pathway, has amphibolic
triosephosphate enzymes, lacks a hexose monophosphate shunt, and has lactate
dehydrogenase, malate dehydrogenase, and glycerokinase. The mutants are severely 
deficient in phosphoglycerate and pyruvate kinase and also have somewhat reduced 
levels of other carbon enzymes.

PMCID: PMC217993
PMID: 6417113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Brain Res. 1981 Oct 5;222(1):65-74.

Extinction of hippocampal theta rhythm evoked by mid-brain stimulation after
intracerebroventricular administration of substance P fragment and enkephalin
administration in rabbits.

Kosinski S, Gregorowicz K, Antkowiak K.

Repetitive stimulation of the midbrain reticular formation with electrical
stimuli causes extinction of the hippocampal theta rhythm. This phenomenon was
used as an indicator of the effect of intracerebroventricular administration of
the C-terminal hexapeptide substance P fragment (SP6-11), Leu- and Met-enkephalin
on hippocampal electrical activity in the experiments performed on rabbits.
Intracerebroventricular administration of SP6-11 caused an increase in the number
of trains of pulses required to produce the extinction of the theta rhythm. Both 
of the enkephalins had opposite effects, the effect of Met-enkephalin being more 
than twice as strong as Leu-enkephalin. Control administration of C-terminal
pentapeptide substance P fragment (SP7-11) and 0.9% NaCl solution had no
significant effect on the tested phenomenon.

PMID: 6170389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1977 Nov;34(5):582-5.

Nitrogen fixation, denitrification, and pleomorphic growth in a highly pigmented 
Spirillum lipoferum.

Eskew DL, Focht DD, Ting IP.

A strain of Spirillum lipoferum with intense red pigmentation was isolated from
the roots of Cynodon dactylon "Coastal." This isolate vigorously reduced
acetylene when grown in N-free, Na-malate, semisolid agar, and it was identical
to S. lipoferum strain SP7 by standard taxonomic tests. Both S. lipoferum SP7 and
the C. dactylon root isolate displayed the unique features of being denitrifiers 
as well as N2 fixers. The N2-dependent growth curve was biphasic: cells in
younger cultures showed the characteristic spiral shape and motility, but those
in older cultures developed larger, nonmotile, cystlike forms. Nitrogenase
activity seemed associated only with younger spiral forms. The red pigment may be
a b- or c-type cytochrome. The strong red color, which this strain develops,
could be used as a marker in evaluating soil inoculation experiments.

PMCID: PMC242704
PMID: 22311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Eur J Immunol. 1976 Jul;6(7):511-9.

Derivation of specific antibody-producing tissue culture and tumor lines by cell 
fusion.

Köhler G, Milstein C.

Cell fusion techniques have been used to produce hybrids between myeloma cells
and antibody-producing cells. The hybrid lines derived are permanently adapted to
grow in tissue culture and are capable of inducing antibody-producing tumors in
mice. Spleens from mice immunized against sheep red blood cells (SRBC) were fused
to an 8-azaguanine-resistant clone (X63-Ag8) of MOPC 21 myeloma. Over 50% of the 
derived hybrid lines produce and secrete immunoglobulins different from the MOPC 
21 myeloma. About 10% of the hybrid lines exhibit anti-SRBC activity. The high
proportion of antibody-producing hybrids suggests that the fusion involves a
restricted fraction of the spleen cell population, probably cells committed to
antibody production. In order to avoid the presence of the MOPC 21 heavy chain in
the specific hybrids, another myeloma cell line (NSI/1-Ag4-1) has been used. This
is a nonsecreting variant of the MOPC 21 myeloma which does not express heavy
chains. Three anti-SRBC (probably of the mu, gamma2b and gamma1 classes,
respectively) and two anti-2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (of the mu class)
antibody-producing hybrids have been repeatedly cloned. By random selection and
by selection of specific clones according to their lytic activity (clone plaque
selection), a number of different lines have been constructed. Such lines express
different combinations of the four possible chains of each hybrid line: the
myeloma gamma and K chains and the specific antibody heavy and light chains. In
three cases (Sp1, Sp2 and Sp7) it is shown that only the specific H and L
combination has activity and that the myeloma chains are unable to substitute for
them. In most cases lines have been derived which no longer express the MOPC 21
chains but only the specific antibody chains.

PMID: 825377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Br J Cancer. 1971 Jun;25(2):365-76.

Albumin metabolism in rabbits and rats with transplanted tumours.

Wraight EP.

Albumin distributions and turnover rates have been studied using (131)I labelled 
tracer material in rabbits with Vx2 carcinoma and rats bearing SP7 fibrosarcoma
in comparison with control animals. Albumin concentrations were reduced in the
tumour bearing animals but plasma volumes increased as the tumours developed.
Relative increases were seen in the extravascular distribution of albumin, due
partly to albumin pooling in and around the tumours and possibly also to general 
increases in capillary permeability. In the rats there was a considerable
increase in the catabolic rate of albumin which was not related to urinary
protein loss. The tumour bearing rabbits showed evidence both of increased
catabolism and of decreased synthesis and the combination of the two effects
resulted in a greater lowering of albumin concentration than was seen in the
rats. Possible mechanisms for these findings and their significance in human
malignant disease are discussed.

PMCID: PMC2008445
PMID: 5115834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Bacteriol. 1965 Dec;90(6):1655-63.

Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages.

Brodetsky AM, Romig WR.

Brodetsky, Anna M. (University of California, Los Angeles), and W. R. Romig.
Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages. J. Bacteriol. 90:1655-1663.
1965.-A group of six phages, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, and SP13, which use the
Marburg strain of Bacillus subtilis as host was characterized. These phages,
referred to as group 1, were examined for the following properties: host range,
plaque morphology, stability, adsorption kinetics, one-step growth
characteristics, calcium requirements, serum neutralization, thermal
inactivation, and inactivation by ultraviolet irradiation. Five unrelated B.
subtilis phages, SP3, SP10, PBS1, SP alpha, and SP beta, were included in the
studies. When first isolated, none of the group 1 phages was able to replicate
efficiently on B. subtilis SB19, a mutant of the "transforming" B. subtilis 168. 
Host range mutants capable of growth in SB19 were isolated for all of the group 1
phages except SP13, and are designated the "star" phages (SP5* through SP9*). For
characterization, SB19 was used as host for the star phages, and another B.
subtilis mutant, 168B, was host for SP13.

PMCID: PMC315874
PMID: 4955056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


