
61. J Virol. 2006 Nov;80(22):11200-8. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Epstein-Barr virus EBNA-3C is targeted to and regulates expression from the
bidirectional LMP-1/2B promoter.

Jiménez-Ramírez C(1), Brooks AJ, Forshell LP, Yakimchuk K, Zhao B, Fulgham TZ,
Sample CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, MS 340, 332 North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN
38105, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA-3C) is essential for
EBV-mediated immortalization of human B lymphocytes and regulates both the cell
cycle and transcription. Transient reporter gene assays have implicated a pivotal
role for EBNA-3C in the regulation of transcription of the majority of
latency-associated genes expressed during the EBV growth program, including the
viral oncoprotein LMP-1. To examine the regulation of latency gene expression by 
EBNA-3C, we generated an EBV-positive cell line that inducibly expresses EBNA-3C.
This cell line allowed us to examine expression from the endogenous latency gene 
promoters in the context of an actual latent infection and the presence of other 
EBNA proteins, in particular EBNA-2, which is presumed to coregulate
transcription with EBNA-3C. EBNA-3C induced the expression of both LMP-1 and
LMP-2B mRNAs from the bidirectional LMP-1/LMP-2B promoter. In contrast, no effect
was seen on expression from the common EBNA promoter Cp, which is responsive to
EBNA-3C in reporter assays. Activation of LMP expression was not the consequence 
of increases in EBNA-2, PU.1 or Spi-B transcription factors, all of which are
believed to be critical for activation of LMP-1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays furthermore indicated that EBNA-3C is present at the bidirectional
LMP-1/LMP-2B promoter. These results indicate that EBNA-3C directly activates the
expression of LMP-1 and LMP-2B but is unlikely to significantly regulate EBNA
expression via Cp under normal growth conditions.

PMCID: PMC1642179
PMID: 16956945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 1;103(31):11665-70. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

The Ets factor Spi-B is a direct critical target of the coactivator OBF-1.

Bartholdy B(1), Du Roure C, Bordon A, Emslie D, Corcoran LM, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

OBF-1 (Bob.1, OCA-B) is a lymphoid-specific transcriptional coactivator that
associates with the transcription factors Oct-1 or Oct-2 on the conserved octamer
element present in the promoters of several ubiquitous and lymphoid-specific
genes. OBF-1-deficient mice have B cell-intrinsic defects, lack germinal centers,
and have severely impaired immune responses to T cell-dependent antigens. Crucial
genes that are regulated by OBF-1 and that might explain the observed phenotype
of OBF-1 deficiency have remained elusive to date. Here we have generated
transgenic mice expressing OBF-1 specifically in T cells and examined these
together with mice lacking OBF-1 to discover transcriptional targets of this
coactivator. Using microarray analysis, we have identified the Ets transcription 
factor Spi-B as a direct target gene critically regulated by OBF-1 that can help 
explain the phenotype of OBF-1-deficient mice. Spi-B has been implicated in
signaling pathways downstream of the B cell receptor and is essential for
germinal center formation and maintenance. The present findings establish a
hierarchy between these two factors and provide a molecular link between OBF-1
and B cell receptor signaling.

PMCID: PMC1513538
PMID: 16861304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2006 May-Jun;54(3):149-63. Epub 2006 May 2.

ETS transcription factors and regulation of immunity.

Gallant S(1), Gilkeson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatolog, Medical University of South
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas St. Suite 912, PO Box 250637, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. gallant@musc.edu

The ETS family is a diverse group of transcription factors that control the
expressions of genes that participate in an array of cellular activities, ranging
from mitosis to apoptosis. As a consequence of regulating these processes, most
ETS factors are oncogenic. However, there is growing evidence that ETS factors
are also essential to regulation of the immune system. Of the 29 recognized ETS
factors, nine are known to regulate genes involved in immunity, including Ets1,
Ets2, GABP, Fli1, Elf1, MEF, ESE1, PU.1, and SpiB. These ETS factors typically
activate the transcription of genes associated with pathogen and tumor defense,
but several also demonstrate ability to repress transcription. Ets1 and PU.1
appear to have the greatest impact on immunity, primarily through their control
of immune cell development. Alterations of Fli1 and Elf1 expression are
associated with autoimmunity, emphasizing the role of ETS factors as not only
positive, but also negative regulators of immunity. This review summarizes the
roles of ETS factors in development of the immune system, defense against
pathogens and malignancies, and self-tolerance.

PMID: 16652219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Immunol Rev. 2006 Feb;209:212-36.

Progression of regulatory gene expression states in fetal and adult pro-T-cell
development.

David-Fung ES(1), Yui MA, Morales M, Wang H, Taghon T, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Precursors entering the T-cell developmental pathway traverse a progression of
states characterized by distinctive patterns of gene expression. Of particular
interest are regulatory genes, which ultimately control the dwell time of cells
in each state and establish the mechanisms that propel them forward to subsequent
states. Under particular genetic and developmental circumstances, the transitions
between these states occur with different timing, and environmental feedbacks may
shift the steady-state accumulations of cells in each state. The fetal transit
through pro-T-cell stages is faster than in the adult and subject to somewhat
different genetic requirements. To explore causes of such variation, this review 
presents previously unpublished data on differentiation gene activation in pro-T 
cells of pre-T-cell receptor-deficient mutant mice and a quantitative comparison 
of the profiles of transcription factor gene expression in pro-T-cell subsets of 
fetal and adult wildtype mice. Against a background of consistent gene
expression, several regulatory genes show marked differences between fetal and
adult expression profiles, including those encoding two basic helix-loop-helix
antagonist Id factors, the Ets family factor SpiB and the Notch target gene
Deltex1. The results also reveal global differences in regulatory alterations
triggered by the first T-cell receptor-dependent selection events in fetal and
adult thymopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4157939
PMID: 16448545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Blood. 2006 Mar 15;107(6):2446-52. Epub 2005 Nov 29.

Delta-like1-induced Notch1 signaling regulates the human plasmacytoid dendritic
cell versus T-cell lineage decision through control of GATA-3 and Spi-B.

Dontje W(1), Schotte R, Cupedo T, Nagasawa M, Scheeren F, Gimeno R, Spits H, Blom
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology of the AMC, University of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Human early thymic precursors have the potential to differentiate into multiple
cell lineages, including T cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). This
decision is guided by the induction or silencing of lineage-specific
transcription factors. The ETS family member Spi-B is a key regulator of pDC
development, whereas T-cell development is critically dependent on GATA-3. Here
we show that triggering of the Notch1 signaling pathway by Delta-like1 controls
the T/pDC lineage decision by regulating the balance between these factors. CD34+
CD1a- thymic progenitor cells express Notch1, but down-regulate this receptor
when differentiating into pDCs. On coculture with stromal cell lines expressing
either human Delta-like1 (DL1) or Jagged1 (Jag1) Notch ligands, thymic precursors
express GATA-3 and develop into CD4+ CD8+ TCRalphabeta+ T cells. On the other
hand, DL1, but not Jag1, down-regulates Spi-B expression, resulting in impaired
development of pDCs. The Notch1-induced block in pDC development can be relieved 
through the ectopic expression of Spi-B. These data indicate that DL1-induced
activation of the Notch1 pathway controls the lineage commitment of early thymic 
precursors by altering the levels between Spi-B and GATA-3.

PMID: 16317090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Leuk Res. 2006 Jun;30(6):665-76. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

The chemosensitivity to therapy of childhood early B acute lymphoblastic leukemia
could be determined by the combined expression of CD34, SPI-B and BCR genes.

Talby L(1), Chambost H, Roubaud MC, N'Guyen C, Milili M, Loriod B, Fossat C,
Picard C, Gabert J, Chiappetta P, Michel G, Schiff C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), CNRS-INSERM-Univ.
Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy, Case 906, 13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France.

We have identified genes differentially expressed in childhood early B acute
lymphoblastic leukemia at diagnosis, according to chemosensitivity.
Chemosensitive (M1) and chemoresistant (M3) patients present <5% and >25% of
residual leukemic blasts at 21 days of treatment, respectively. The expression
profiles of 4205 genes for 32 patients included in the FRALLE93 protocol have
been determined using microarray. From differential analysis, CD34, SPI-B and BCR
distinguished M1 from M3 patients using microarray and RT-PCR data. Linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) and cross-validation show that the combined
expression of these three genes classify and predict correctly around 90% and 80%
of patients, respectively.

PMID: 16297978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 30;280(52):43264-71. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

c-Myb and members of the c-Ets family of transcription factors act as molecular
switches to mediate opposite steroid regulation of the human glucocorticoid
receptor 1A promoter.

Geng CD(1), Vedeckis WV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Stanley S. Scott Cancer
Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana
70112, USA.

Steroid auto-regulation of the human glucocorticoid receptor (hGR) 1A promoter in
lymphoblast cells resides largely in two DNA elements (footprints 11 and 12). We 
show here that c-Myb and c-Ets family members (Ets-1/2, PU.1, and Spi-B) control 
hGR 1A promoter regulation in T- and B-lymphoblast cells. Two T-lymphoblast
lines, CEM-C7 and Jurkat, contain high levels of c-Myb and low levels of PU.1,
whereas the opposite is true in IM-9 B-lymphoblasts. In Jurkat cells,
overexpression of c-Ets-1, c-Ets-2, or PU.1 effectively represses
dexamethasone-mediated up-regulation of an hGR 1A promoter-luciferase reporter
gene, as do dominant negative c-Myb (c-Myb DNA-binding domain) or Ets proteins
(Ets-2 DNA-binding domain). Overexpression of c-Myb in IM-9 cells confers
hormone-dependent up-regulation to the hGR 1A promoter reporter gene. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays show that hormone treatment causes the recruitment of 
hGR and c-Myb to the hGR 1A promoter in CEM-C7 cells, whereas hGR and PU.1 are
recruited to this promoter in IM-9 cells. These observations suggest that the
specific transcription factor that binds to footprint 12, when hGR binds to the
adjacent footprint 11, determines the direction of hGR 1A promoter
auto-regulation. This leads to a "molecular switch" model for auto-regulation of 
the hGR 1A promoter.

PMID: 16263717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gene. 2005 Jun 20;353(1):134-46.

Spi-1 and Spi-B control the expression of the Grap2 gene in B cells.

Garrett-Sinha LA(1), Hou P, Wang D, Grabiner B, Araujo E, Rao S, Yun TJ, Clark
EA, Simon MC, Clark MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, 140
Farber Hall, 3435 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA. leesinha@buffalo.edu

The Ets family members Spi-1 and Spi-B have been implicated in the regulation of 
genes important for B cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling. Mice deficient in
Spi-B exhibit reduced B cell proliferation in response to BCR cross-linking and
impaired T cell-dependent immune responses. This defect is exacerbated in the
presence of Spi-1 haplo-insufficiency (Spi1+/- SpiB-/-). Tyrosine phosphorylation
and calcium mobilization induced by BCR engagement is diminished in Spi1+/-
SpiB-/- B lymphocytes, although many key BCR signaling proteins are expressed,
suggesting that Spi-1 and Spi-B regulate expression of additional, unidentified
signaling molecules. We now demonstrate that expression of the adaptor protein
Grap2 is impaired in Spi1+/- SpiB+/- and Spi1+/- SpiB-/- B lymphocytes. Analysis 
of two alternate murine Grap2 promoters revealed a functionally important Spi-1
and Spi-B DNA binding element located in the downstream promoter. Ectopic
expression of Grap2 in Grap2-deficient B cells reduced the recruitment of BLNK to
Igalpha and the phosphorylation of specific substrates. Regulation of BLNK
recruitment was dependent upon the Grap2 proline-rich domain, while modulation of
phosphorylation was dependent upon both the proline-rich and SH2 domains. These
data indicate that Spi-1 and Spi-B directly regulate the expression of Grap2 and 
that Grap2 functions to modulate BCR signaling, but that reduced Grap2 expression
is unlikely to account for the BCR signaling defects observed in Spi1+/- SpiB-/- 
B cells.

PMID: 15936902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):6184-94.

Enforced expression of Spi-B reverses T lineage commitment and blocks
beta-selection.

Lefebvre JM(1), Haks MC, Carleton MO, Rhodes M, Sinnathamby G, Simon MC,
Eisenlohr LC, Garrett-Sinha LA, Wiest DL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Working Group, Division of Basic Sciences, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The molecular changes that restrict multipotent murine thymocytes to the T cell
lineage and render them responsive to Ag receptor signals remain poorly
understood. In this study, we report our analysis of the role of the Ets
transcription factor, Spi-B, in this process. Spi-B expression is acutely induced
coincident with T cell lineage commitment at the CD4(-)CD8(-)CD44(-)CD25(+) (DN3)
stage of thymocyte development and is then down-regulated as thymocytes respond
to pre-TCR signals and develop beyond the beta-selection checkpoint to the
CD4(-)CD8(-)CD44(-)CD25(-) (DN4) stage. We found that dysregulation of Spi-B
expression in DN3 thymocytes resulted in a dose-dependent perturbation of
thymocyte development. Indeed, DN3 thymocytes expressing approximately five times
the endogenous level of Spi-B were arrested at the beta-selection checkpoint, due
to impaired induction of Egr proteins, which are important molecular effectors of
the beta-selection checkpoint. T lineage-committed DN3 thymocytes expressing even
higher levels of Spi-B were diverted to the dendritic cell lineage. Thus, we
demonstrate that the prescribed modulation of Spi-B expression is important for T
lineage commitment and differentiation beyond the beta-selection checkpoint; and 
we provide insight into the mechanism underlying perturbation of development when
that expression pattern is disrupted.

PMID: 15879115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Toxicol Rev. 2004;23(3):135-43.

Digoxin-specific antibody fragments: how much and when?

Bateman DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Poisons Information Service (Edinburgh Centre), Scottish Poisons
Information Bureau, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland.
spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

Digitalis glycoside poisoning is an important clinical problem and the
development of digoxin-specific antibody fragments (Fab) 30 years ago has changed
clinical practice. Nevertheless, doubts still exist as to the appropriate dose
indications for therapy. This paper reviews relevant literature, describes the
difficulties associated with current treatment protocols and proposes an approach
to therapy, which is based on theoretical principles and evidence gleaned from
currently available clinical data sets. In patients with 'acute' poisoning, serum
digoxin concentrations do not equate to the total body burden, as tissue
distribution will not have occurred, and the calculations for present protocols, 
which use serum concentrations, are therefore likely to result in too much
antibody being administered. Since a therapeutic quantity of digoxin will have
little effect in a normal individual, complete neutralisation of all digoxin is
also unnecessary. The pharmacokinetic and dynamic logic of using a smaller
initial loading dose than predicted from total body calculations is rational. It 
is recommended that half the calculated loading dose, either based on serum
concentration or history, should be administered and the impact on clinical
features observed. If a clinical response is not seen within 1-2 hours, a further
similar dose should be given. In the event of a full response, patients should be
monitored for 6-12 hours; a second dose should only be given in the event of
recurrence of toxicity. In patients with 'chronic' digoxin poisoning, the serum
digoxin concentration will reflect the total body load. However, since such
patients are invariably receiving digoxin for therapeutic purposes, full
neutralisation is again not indicated. In addition, tissue redistribution of
digoxin from deeper stores will occur following the binding of biologically
active digoxin in the circulation. This process will occur over a number of hours
and if the total calculated dose of antibody is administered in a single bolus,
significant quantities will be excreted prior to redistribution of digoxin.
Pharmacokinetic logic, therefore, suggests that half the calculated loading dose,
based on serum concentration, should be administered and the impact on clinical
features observed; a second dose should be given in the event of recurrence of
toxicity.

PMID: 15862081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 1;174(1):367-75.

Tracing the pre-B to immature B cell transition in human leukemia cells reveals a
coordinated sequence of primary and secondary IGK gene rearrangement, IGK
deletion, and IGL gene rearrangement.

Klein F(1), Feldhahn N, Mooster JL, Sprangers M, Hofmann WK, Wernet P, Wartenberg
M, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Stem Cell Biology, Center for Biomedical Research and
Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The BCR-ABL1 kinase expressed in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) drives
malignant transformation of pre-B cells and prevents further development. We
studied whether inhibition of BCR-ABL1 kinase activity using STI571 can relieve
this differentiation block. STI571 treatment of leukemia patients induced
expression of the Ig L chain-associated transcription factors IRF4 and SPIB,
up-regulation of RAG1 and RAG2, Ckappa and Clambda germline transcription, and
rearrangement of Ig kappa L chain (IGK) and Ig lambda L chain (IGL) genes.
However, STI571-treated pre-B ALL cells expressed lambda L, but almost no kappa L
chains. This could be explained by STI571-induced rearrangement of the
kappa-deleting element (KDE), which can delete productively rearranged
Vkappa-Jkappa joints. Amplifying double-strand breaks at recombination signal
sequences within the IGK, KDE, and IGL loci revealed a coordinated sequence of
rearrangement events induced by STI571: recombination of IGK gene segments was
already initiated within 1 h after STI571 treatment, followed by KDE-mediated
deletion of Vkappa-Jkappa joints 6 h later and, ultimately, IGL gene
rearrangement after 12 h. Consistently, up-regulation of Ckappa and Clambda
germline transcripts, indicating opening of IGK and IGL loci, was detected after 
1 and 6 h for IGK and IGL, respectively. Continued activity of the recombination 
machinery induced secondary IGK gene rearrangements, which shifted preferential
usage of upstream located Jkappa- to downstream Jkappa-gene segments. Thus,
inhibition of BCR-ABL1 in pre-B ALL cells 1) recapitulates early B cell
development, 2) directly shows that IGK, KDE, and IGL genes are rearranged in
sequential order, and 3) provides a model for Ig L chain gene regulation in the
human.

PMID: 15611260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Exp Med. 2004 Dec 6;200(11):1503-9.

The ETS transcription factor Spi-B is required for human plasmacytoid dendritic
cell development.

Schotte R(1), Nagasawa M, Weijer K, Spits H, Blom B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 15, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlands.

A number of transcription factors that act as molecular switches for
hematopoietic lineage decisions have been identified. We recently described the
ETS transcription factor Spi-B to be exclusively expressed in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs), but not in myeloid DCs. To assess whether Spi-B is
required for pDC development we used an RNA interference knock down approach to
specifically silence Spi-B protein synthesis in CD34(+) precursor cells. We
observed that a knock down of Spi-B mRNA strongly inhibited the ability of
CD34(+) precursor cells to develop into pDCs in both in vitro assays as well as
in vivo upon injection into recombination activating gene 2(-/-) gamma
common(-/-) mice. The observed effects were restricted to the pDC lineage as the 
differentiation of pro-B cells and CD14(+) myeloid cells was not inhibited but
slightly elevated by Spi-B knock down. Knock down of the related ETS factor PU.1 
also inhibited in vitro development of CD34(+) cells into pDCs. However, in
contrast to Spi-B, PU.1 knock down inhibited B cell and myeloid cell development 
as well. These results identify Spi-B as a key regulator of human pDC
development.

PMCID: PMC2211952
PMID: 15583020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2004 May;60(3):221-4. Epub 2004 Apr 9.

Are selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors associated with an increased risk of
self-harm by antidepressant overdose?

Bateman DN(1), Chick J, Good AM, Kelly CA, Masterton G.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Poisons Information Bureau (NPIS Edinburgh), Royal Infirmary of
Edinburgh, 51 Little France Crescent, EH10 4SA Edinburgh, Scotland.
spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

Erratum in
    Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2005 Mar;61(1):73.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate likelihood of self-harm by overdose with antidepressant
drugs of different types by examining hospital admission data and poisons
inquiries and relating them to prescribing.
DESIGN: Retrospective analysis of prospectively collected data on overdose
admissions, poisons inquiries and prescribing of antidepressants in Edinburgh and
Scotland.
SETTING: Poisons treatment unit of the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh and its
surrounding catchment for overdose cases and Scotland for poisons inquiries.
PARTICIPANTS: All patients admitted to the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh between 1
January 2000 and 31 December 2002 with an overdose involving an antidepressant.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Overdose admissions (patients) in relation to prescribing 
in Edinburgh and poisons inquiries in relation to prescription rates in Scotland.
RESULTS: There were 1656 admissions involving 1343 patients. The likelihood of
admission for an individual patient in relation to volume of prescribing
(likelihood ratio: 95%CI) in the catchment was somewhat smaller for amitriptyline
(0.83:0.74-0.92) and sertraline (0.79:0.63-0.99), and somewhat greater for
mirtazapine (1.99:1.57-2.51), trazadone (1.30:1.09-1.54) and venlafaxine
(0.97:1.81-1.16) [corrected] For poisons inquiries in Scotland, the excess for
venlafaxine and mirtazapine was confirmed and likelihood of an inquiry lowest for
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
CONCLUSIONS: There was no evidence of an excess likelihood of presentation with
overdose with SSRIs, and the likelihood was reduced with sertraline. There was a 
small excess of both admissions and poisons inquiries for mirtazapine and
venlafaxine. This is a concern in view of the increased toxicity of venlafaxine
in overdose in comparison with SSRIs.

PMID: 15083251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):144-54.

Analysis of gene expression and Ig transcription in PU.1/Spi-B-deficient
progenitor B cell lines.

Schweitzer BL(1), DeKoter RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Medical Sciences Building 3006, 231 Albert
Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

A number of presumptive target genes for the Ets-family transcription factor PU.1
have been identified in the B cell lineage. However, the precise function of PU.1
in B cells has not been studied because targeted null mutation of the PU.1 gene
results in a block to lymphomyeloid development at an early developmental stage. 
In this study, we take advantage of recently developed PU.1(-/-)Spi-B(-/-) IL-7
and stromal cell-dependent progenitor B (pro-B) cell lines to analyze the
function of PU.1 and Spi-B in B cell development. We show that contrary to
previously published expectations, PU.1 and/or Spi-B are not required for Ig H
chain (IgH) gene transcription in pro-B cells. In fact, PU.1(-/-)Spi-B(-/-) pro-B
cells have increased levels of IgH transcription compared with wild-type pro-B
cells. In addition, high levels of Igkappa transcription are induced after IL-7
withdrawal of wild-type or PU.1(-/-)Spi-B(-/-) pro-B cells. In contrast, we found
that Iglambda transcription is reduced in PU.1(-/-)Spi-B(-/-) pro-B cells
relative to wild-type pro-B cells after IL-7 withdrawal. These results suggest
that Iglambda, but not IgH or Igkappa, transcription, is dependent on PU.1 and/or
Spi-B. The PU.1(-/-)Spi-B(-/-) pro-B cells have other phenotypic changes relative
to wild-type pro-B cells including increased proliferation, increased CD25
expression, decreased c-Kit expression, and decreased RAG-1 expression. Taken
together, our observations suggest that reduction of PU.1 and/or Spi-B activity
in pro-B cells promotes their differentiation to a stage intermediate between
late pro-B cells and large pre-B cells.

PMID: 14688320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Genome Res. 2003 Dec;13(12):2708-16.

Toward a functional annotation of the human genome using artificial transcription
factors.

Lee DK(1), Park JW, Kim YJ, Kim J, Lee Y, Kim J, Kim JS.

Author information: 
(1)ToolGen, Inc., Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea, 305-390.

We have developed a novel, high-throughput approach to collecting randomly
perturbed gene-expression profiles from the human genome.A human 293 cell library
that stably expresses randomly chosen zinc-finger transcription factors was
constructed, and the expression profile of each cell line was obtained using cDNA
microarray technology.Gene expression profiles from a total of 132 cell lines
were collected and analyzed by (1) a simple clustering method based on
expression-profile similarity, and (2) the shortest-path analysis method. These
analyses identified a number of gene groups, and further investigation revealed
that the genes that were grouped together had close biological relationships. The
artificial transcription factor-based random genome perturbation method thus
provides a novel functional genomic tool for annotation and classification of
genes in the human genome and those of many other organisms.

PMCID: PMC403813
PMID: 14656973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2003 Jun;55(6):596-603.

Effects of licence change on prescribing and poisons enquiries for antipsychotic 
agents in England and Scotland.

Bateman DN(1), Good AM, Afshari R, Kelly CA.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Poisons Information Bureau, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK. spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

AIMS: To examine the effect of licence change for thioridazine at the end of 2000
on the prescription of antipsychotic drugs in England and Scotland, and
investigate changes in poisons information inquiries and, for Edinburgh, poisons 
admissions.
METHODS: Prescription data for antipsychotic drugs were obtained for England and 
Scotland and quarterly trends examined for 2000 and 2001. Accesses to the UK
National Poisons Information Service website TOXBASE for antipsychotic products
were examined for the same period. For Scotland telephone enquiry data, and
admission data to the Edinburgh Poisons Unit were also evaluated. Trends in
poisonings were compared with prescribing change.
RESULTS: In England prescriptions for thioridazine fell rapidly in 2001 from
approximately 35% of market share to less than 5%, and were replaced by
risperidone, chlorpromazine and olanzapine. TOXBASE accesses fell from 39.3% of
antipsychotics to 4.4%. Accesses for chlorpromazine, olanzapine and risperidone
increased. In Scotland prescribing of thioridazine was similar to changes in
England, but it was principally replaced by chlorpromazine. These changes were
mirrored by TOXBASE accesses, telephone enquiries and in-patient admissions. The 
ratio of TOXBASE accesses for thioridazine to prescription numbers for the drug
increased after the licence change.
CONCLUSIONS: Licence change produced rapid change in prescribing behaviour within
3 months. Prescribing behaviour in England and Scotland was different. Changes in
prescribing were mirrored by changes in accesses for poisons information in both 
England and Scotland, and in Edinburgh by hospital admissions. The increase in
the ratio of TOXBASE accesses to prescriptions for thioridazine suggests doctors 
may have become more aware of its potential toxicity.

PMCID: PMC1884257
PMID: 12814455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Oncogene. 2003 May 15;22(19):2882-96.

Identification and characterization of a PU.1/Spi-B binding site in the bovine
leukemia virus long terminal repeat.

Dekoninck A(1), Calomme C, Nizet S, de Launoit Y, Burny A, Ghysdael J, Van Lint
C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Service de Chimie Biologique, Institut
de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) is a B-lymphotropic oncogenic retrovirus whose
transcriptional promoter is located in the viral 5' long terminal repeat (LTR).
To date, no B-lymphocyte-specific cis-regulatory element has been identified in
this region. Since ETS proteins are known to regulate transcription of numerous
retroviruses, we searched for the presence in the BLV promoter region of binding 
sites for PU.1/Spi-1, a B-cell- and macrophage-specific ETS family member. In
this report, nucleotide sequence analysis of the viral LTR identified a PUbox
located at -95/-84 bp. We demonstrated by gel shift and supershift assays that
PU.1 and the related Ets transcription factor Spi-B interacted specifically with 
this PUbox. A 2-bp mutation (GGAA-->CCAA) within this motif abrogated PU.1/Spi-B 
binding. This mutation caused a marked decrease in LTR-driven basal gene
expression in transient transfection assays of B-lymphoid cell lines, but did not
impair the responsiveness of the BLV promoter to the virus-encoded transactivator
Tax(BLV). Moreover, ectopically expressed PU.1 and Spi-B proteins transactivated 
the BLV promoter in a PUbox-dependent manner. Taken together, our results provide
the first demonstration of regulation of the BLV promoter by two B-cell-specific 
Ets transcription factors, PU.1 and Spi-B. The PU.1/Spi-B binding site identified
here could play an important role in BLV replication and B-lymphoid tropism.

PMID: 12771939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Virol. 2003 May;77(10):5639-48.

Transcriptional regulatory properties of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C
are conserved in simian lymphocryptoviruses.

Zhao B(1), Dalbiès-Tran R, Jiang H, Ruf IK, Sample JT, Wang F, Sample CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA-3C) is a large transcriptional 
regulator essential for EBV-mediated immortalization of B lymphocytes. We
previously identified interactions between EBNA-3C and two cellular transcription
factors, J kappa and Spi proteins, through which EBNA-3C regulates transcription.
To better understand the contribution of these interactions to EBNA-3C function
and EBV latency, we examined whether they are conserved in the homologous
proteins of nonhuman primate lymphocryptoviruses (LCVs), which bear a strong
genetic and biological similarity to EBV. The homologue of EBNA-3C encoded by the
LCV that infects baboons (BaLCV) was found to be only 35% identical in sequence
to its EBV counterpart. Of particular significance, this homology localized
predominantly to the N-terminal half of the molecule, which encompasses the
domains in EBNA-3C that interact with J kappa and Spi proteins. Like EBNA-3C,
both BaLCV and rhesus macaque LCV (RhLCV) 3C proteins bound to J kappa and
repressed transcription mediated by EBNA-2 through its interaction with J kappa. 
Both nonhuman primate 3C proteins were also able to activate transcription
mediated by the Spi proteins in the presence of EBNA-2. Like EBNA-3C, a domain
encompassing the putative basic leucine zipper motif of the BaLCV-3C protein
directly interacted with both Spi-1 and Spi-B. Surprisingly, a recently
identified motif in EBNA-3C that mediates repression was not identifiable in the 
BaLCV-3C protein. Finally, although the C terminus of BaLCV-3C bears minimal
homology to EBNA-3C, it nonetheless contains a C-terminal domain rich in
glutamine and proline that was able to function as a potent transcriptional
activation domain, as does the C terminus of EBNA-3C. The conservation of these
functional motifs despite poor overall homology among the LCV 3C proteins
strongly suggests that the interactions of EBNA-3C with J kappa and Spi do indeed
play significant roles in the life cycle of EBV.

PMCID: PMC154039
PMID: 12719556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. QJM. 2003 Feb;96(2):125-32.

Changes in paracetamol, antidepressants and opioid poisoning in Scotland during
the 1990s.

Bateman DN(1), Bain M, Gorman D, Murphy D.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Poisons Information Bureau, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, UK.
spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Overdose is one of the commonest causes of medical admissions to UK
hospitals. In Scotland (pop. 5.1 million), all NHS hospital discharge data is
uniquely linked to enable identification of individuals re-presenting with the
same diagnosis.
AIM: To examine trends in discharges for poisoning, in particular paracetamol,
antidepressants and opioids from 1990-99.
DESIGN: Retrospective analysis.
METHODS: Discharge data from the Scottish Morbidity Record (SMR01) and mortality 
data from the General Register Office for Scotland (GROS) were analysed for
1990-99 by age and gender for the relevant codes.
RESULTS: Overall discharge rates increased until 1997, after which they fell.
This pattern was seen in paracetamol-related discharges, but not for
antidepressants or for opioids. Overdose was more common in females, except for
opioids. Discharges related to opioids increased in an exponential manner over
the decade, five-fold in women and six-fold in men in 10 years.
DISCUSSION: Increases in opioid-related presentations are of major concern.
Changes in paracetamol pack-size have been associated with reduced discharge
rates. In Scotland the age group with the highest rate of discharge (15-24 years)
with paracetamol overdose is not the one with the highest mortality.

PMID: 12589010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jan;4(1):31-7. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

A small molecule Abl kinase inhibitor induces differentiation of Abelson
virus-transformed pre-B cell lines.

Muljo SA(1), Schlissel MS.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, Division of 
Immunology, 439 Life Sciences Addition, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.

Abelson murine leukemia virus-transformed cell lines have provided a critical
model system for studying the regulation of B cell development. However,
transformation by v-Abl blocks B cell development, resulting in the arrest of
these transformants in an early pre-B cell-like state. We report here that
treatment of Abelson virus-transformed pre-B cell lines with the small molecule
Abl kinase inhibitor (STI571) results in their differentiation to a late pre-B
cell-like state characterized by induction of immunoglobulin (Ig) light chain
gene rearrangement. DNA microarray analyses enabled us to identify two genes
inhibited by v-Abl that encode the Igk 3' enhancer-binding transcription factors 
Spi-B and IRF-4. We show that enforced expression of these two factors is
sufficient to induce germline Igk transcription in Abelson-transformed pro-B cell
lines. This suggests a key role for these factors, and perhaps for c-Abl itself, 
in the regulated activation of Ig light chain gene rearrangement.

PMID: 12469118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Immunol. 2003 Jan;39(10):577-83.

The transcription factor Spi-B is not required for somatic hypermutation.

Kim N(1), Martin TE, Simon MC, Storb U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Mice with a homozygous inactivation of the transcription factor gene Spi-B(-)/(-)
have abnormal B cell functions and a defect in germinal center (GC) formation. We
report here that somatic hypermutation (SHM) of VH1 and VH11 genes is not
diminished in Peyer's patches of Spi-B(-)/(-) mice. However, the mutation pattern
shows an increase in the ratio of replacement to silent mutations in the
framework sequences of the variable regions, suggesting that selection of mutated
B cells based on functionality is affected. In support of this, two of the six
sequences from Spi-B mutant mice have a point mutation in the framework which
introduces predicted steric clashes with another amino acid in the variable
region. This mutation (Leu81Phe) has not been observed in 120 mutated VH1 or VH11
genes of germinal center B cells from Spi-B wildtype mice. The mutation also does
not exist in any of 136 published heavy chain proteins of the same VH family. The
mutations causing the change to Phe are transitions which are favored by the SHM 
process over transversions. Clearly, Phe-81 must arise relatively frequently, but
is not selected in Spi-B wildtype mice.

PMID: 12431391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Blood. 2003 Feb 1;101(3):1015-23. Epub 2002 Sep 19.

The transcription factor Spi-B is expressed in plasmacytoid DC precursors and
inhibits T-, B-, and NK-cell development.

Schotte R(1), Rissoan MC, Bendriss-Vermare N, Bridon JM, Duhen T, Weijer K,
Brière F, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology of the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), also called type 2 dendritic cell
precursors or natural interferon (IFN)-producing cells, represent a cell type
with distinctive phenotypic and functional features. They are present in the
thymus and probably share a common precursor with T and natural killer (NK)
cells. In an effort to identify genes that control pDC development we searched
for genes of which the expression is restricted to human pDC using a cDNA
subtraction technique with activated monocyte-derived DCs (Mo-DCs) as competitor.
We identified the transcription factor Spi-B to be expressed in pDCs but not in
Mo-DCs. Spi-B expression in pDCs was maintained on in vitro maturation of pDCs.
Spi-B was expressed in early CD34(+)CD38(-) hematopoietic progenitors and in
CD34(+)CD1a(-) thymic precursors. Spi-B expression is down-regulated when
uncommitted CD34(+)CD1a(-) thymic precursors differentiate into committed
CD34(+)CD1a(+) pre-T cells. Overexpression of Spi-B in hematopoietic progenitor
cells resulted in inhibition of development of T cells both in vitro and in vivo.
In addition, development of progenitor cells into B and NK cells in vitro was
also inhibited by Spi-B overexpression. Our results indicate that Spi-B is
involved in the control of pDC development by limiting the capacity of progenitor
cells to develop into other lymphoid lineages.

PMID: 12393575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Blood. 2002 Nov 1;100(9):3295-303.

Subtractive hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulin-like
transcript 7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells.

Rissoan MC(1), Duhen T, Bridon JM, Bendriss-Vermare N, Péronne C, de Saint Vis B,
Brière F, Bates EE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunological Research, Schering-Plough, 27 Chemin des
Peupliers, BP11, 69571 Dardilly, France.

Recent studies in humans have highlighted the importance of a distinct cellular
entity, the plasmacytoid dendritic cell (PDC). To identify genes for which
expression is restricted to human PDCs, a cDNA subtraction technique was applied 
using cDNA from activated monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs) as competitor. In the 650 
sequences analyzed, 25% were for B-cell transcripts. We also found
lymphoid-related genes, immunoglobulinlike transcript 7 (ILT7), granzyme B (GrB),
Spi-B, and the receptor tyrosine kinase Eph-B1. Granzyme B was up-regulated on
activation, and protein was detected only in PDCs. Eph-B1 protein was expressed
in the cytoplasm and the nuclei of PDCs and MDDCs, respectively. Interestingly,
several novel molecules have been identified that were predicted to encode for a 
type 2 transmembrane protein (BRI(3)), a putative cytokine (C-15, a
cysteine-rich-secreted protein), and a type 1 leucine-rich repeat protein (MAPA).
The identification of genes expressed in PDCs provides new insights into their
function and origin.

PMID: 12384430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40(5):567-9.

Delivery of poisons information to health professionals: telephone or Internet?
The Scottish experience.

Bateman DN(1), Good AM, Kelly CA, Laing WJ.

Author information: 
(1)NPIS Edinburgh Centre, Scottish Poisons Information Bureau, Royal Infirmary of
Edinburgh, UK. spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

PMID: 12215052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Ann Clin Biochem. 2002 Jul;39(Pt 4):328-39.

Laboratory analyses for poisoned patients: joint position paper.

National Poisons Information Service; Association of Clinical Biochemists.

To enable consistency of investigation and the establishment of best practice
standards, consensus guidelines have been formulated jointly by the UK National
Poisons Information Service (NPIS) and the Association of Clinical Biochemists
(ACB). The types of laboratory investigation required for poisoned patients were 
categorized as either (a) essential common laboratory investigations or (b)
specific toxicological assays, and also as either (i) common or (ii) specialist
or infrequent. Tests in categories (a) and (bi) are expected to be available 24 h
per day, with a maximum turnaround time of 2 h. For the specialist assays, i.e.
category (bii), availability and turnaround times have been specified
individually. The basis for selection of these times has been clinical utility.
The adoption of these guidelines, along with the use of the NPIS online poisons
information resource TOXBASE (www.spib.axl.co.uk), will enable the poisoned
patient to receive appropriate, 'best practice' investigations according to their
clinical needs and will avoid the use of unnecessary investigations.

PMID: 12117436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. EMBO J. 2002 May 1;21(9):2220-30.

Spi-B can functionally replace PU.1 in myeloid but not lymphoid development.

Dahl R(1), Ramirez-Bergeron DL, Rao S, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Mature macrophages, neutrophils and lymphoid cells do not develop in PU.1(-/-)
mice. In contrast, mice lacking the highly related protein Spi-B generate all
hematopoietic lineages but display a B-cell receptor signaling defect. These
distinct phenotypes could result from functional differences between PU.1 and
Spi-B or their unique temporal and tissue-specific expression (PU.1: myeloid and 
B cells; Spi-B: B cells only). To address this question, we introduced the Spi-B 
cDNA into the murine PU.1 locus by homologous recombination. In the absence of
PU.1, Spi-B rescued macrophage and granulocyte development when assayed by in
vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cells. Adherent, CD11b(+)/F4/80(+) cells 
capable of phagocytosis were detected in PU.1(Spi-B/Spi-B) embryoid bodies, and
myeloid colonies were present in hematopoietic progenitor assays. Despite its
ability to rescue myeloid differentiation, Spi-B did not rescue lymphoid
development in a RAG-2(-/-) complementation assay. These results demonstrate an
important difference between PU.1 and Spi-B. Careful comparison of these Ets
factors will delineate important functional domains of PU.1 involved in
lymphocyte lineage commitment and/or maturation.

PMCID: PMC125373
PMID: 11980719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Br J Ophthalmol. 2002 May;86(5):551-4.

The effects of new topical treatments on management of glaucoma in Scotland: an
examination of ophthalmological health care.

Bateman DN(1), Clark R, Azuara-Blanco A, Bain M, Forrest J.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Poisons Information Bureau, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Scotland.
spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: The management of glaucoma has been changed in the past decade by the
introduction of new drugs. The impact of these changes on clinical care of
patients was examined by examining operation and prescribing rates for glaucoma
in four geographical areas of Scotland for the years 1994 to 1999.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of national health statistics: primary care
prescribing data, hospital derived operation rates, consultant numbers,
optometrist numbers, and eye test data, expressed by estimated population at risk
of glaucoma. The outcome measures were prescribing volume and cost for glaucoma
medications, and operation rates, corrected for population estimated to be at
risk of glaucoma (PEG), for trabeculectomy, for Scotland as a whole, and for four
geographical "regions" (north east, south east, central, and south west
Scotland).
RESULTS: Prescribed items per 1000 population estimated to have glaucoma (PEG)
increased by 24.9% between 1994 and 1999. This was above the general increase in 
prescribing in Scotland (17.8%). This increase varied in the four health regions 
evaluated (14.3% to 31.9%). Prescribing of topical beta blockers increased little
(6.4%), but there was a large increase in the use of new products (topical
prostaglandins, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and alpha(2) agonists), at the
expense of miotics (47.7% fall), and older sympathomimetics. This change in
prescribing pattern was accompanied by a 61.5% increase in cost (range 42.2% to
73.4% in the four regions). New drugs accounted for more than half of total
glaucoma expenditure in 1999. Operation rates (corrected for PEG) fell by 45.9%
(range 43.1 to 58.6%) between 1994 and 1999. Other indicators suggested increased
activity in ophthalmic areas (for example, cataract operations, eye tests,
numbers of optometrists and ophthalmic surgeons all increased). Within north east
Scotland operation rates decreased and prescribing increased less than in other
regions, both from lowest regional baseline in 1994.
CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of new drug classes has had dramatic effects on the
prescribing of glaucoma treatments. There has been a decline in older treatments 
and an increase in new agents, which has been associated with a large reduction
in operation rates for glaucoma in Scotland over 6 years. Comparison of
prescribing and operation data indicates regional differences in healthcare
delivery for glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC1771141
PMID: 11973253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Immunity. 2002 Feb;16(2):297-309.

PU.1 regulates expression of the interleukin-7 receptor in lymphoid progenitors.

DeKoter RP(1), Lee HJ, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell
Biology, The University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Ave., MC1028, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Development of the lymphoid system is dependent on the Ets family transcription
factor PU.1. We demonstrate that PU.1(-/-) hematopoietic progenitors fail to
express IL-7Ralpha transcripts. Promoter and chromatin crosslinking analyses
suggest that PU.1 directly regulates transcription of the IL-7Ralpha gene.
Retroviral transduction of IL-7Ralpha into PU.1(-/-) progenitors restores
IL-7-dependent proliferation and induces, at low frequency, the generation of
pro-B cells undergoing an apparently normal program of differentiation. Although 
the related factor Spi-B can substitute for PU.1 in early B cell development, it 
is not required. These results demonstrate that PU.1 functions to regulate early 
B cell development in part by controlling the expression of the IL-7Ralpha gene.

PMID: 11869689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cell Growth Differ. 2002 Feb;13(2):69-75.

Interaction between the hematopoietic Ets transcription factor Spi-B and the
coactivator CREB-binding protein associated with negative cross-talk with c-Myb.

Yamamoto H(1), Kihara-Negishi F, Yamada T, Suzuki M, Nakano T, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

We have previously shown that the hematopoietic Ets transcription factor PU.1
interacts with the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). In
this study, we further investigated whether Spi-B, another hematopoietic Ets
transcription factor, also interacts with CBP. Direct physical interaction of
Spi-B with CBP was demonstrated by glutathione S-transferase binding assay.
Analysis using several deletion mutants of Spi-B and CBP revealed that the
NH2-terminal region including the activation domain of Spi-B interacted with the 
region spanning amino acid residues 1283-1915 of CBP in vitro. The interaction of
Spi-B with CBP was also observed in vivo. CBP potentiated Spi-B-mediated
transcription of the reporter gene driven by the multimerized PU.1/Spi-B binding 
sites. This transcriptional activation by Spi-B and CBP was inhibited by
expression of c-Myb, and the transcriptional activation by c-Myb and CBP was
inhibited by expression of Spi-B, suggesting competition for CBP between these
two transcription factors. Our results suggest that CBP acts as a transcriptional
coactivator of Spi-B and mediates synergistic or antagonistic interactions
between other transcription factors.

PMID: 11864910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Br J Haematol. 2002 Feb;116(2):429-35.

Expression of transcription factors Pu.1, Spi-B, Blimp-1, BSAP and oct-2 in
normal human plasma cells and in multiple myeloma cells.

Nagy M(1), Chapuis B, Matthes T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Differentiation of B lymphocytes into plasma cells is regulated by the
interaction of distinct transcription factors (TFs) which activate gene
expression in a lineage- and stage-specific pattern. Using reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction, we studied the expression of five TFs (octamer binding
factor oct-2, ets family members PU.1 and Spi-B, pax gene family member BSAP, and
Blimp-1) in (1) human cell lines with a plasma cell phenotype, (2) primary
malignant plasma cells [obtained from patients with plasma cell leukaemia (PCL)
and multiple myeloma], and (3) normal human plasma cells generated in vitro or
isolated from normal bone marrows. The expression pattern was compared with TFs
expressed by normal CD19+ B lymphocytes and by B cells from chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia patients. Our results showed that plasma cells expressed a restricted
set of TFs compared with CD19+ B lymphocytes, with continued expression of Spi-B 
and oct-2, increased Blimp-1 expression, and downregulation of BSAP and PU.1.
Cells from PCL lost Spi-B and PU.1 expression completely and expressed only oct-2
and Blimp-1, and thus resembled plasma cell lines. Human plasma cell
differentiation therefore seems to be positively regulated by Blimp-1; whether
this TF has any oncogenic potential will have to be analysed in future studies.

PMID: 11841448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Emerg Med J. 2002 Jan;19(1):31-4.

TOXBASE: poisons information on the internet.

Bateman DN(1), Good AM, Laing WJ, Kelly CA.

Author information: 
(1)National Poisons Information Service (Edinburgh), Scottish Poisons Information
Bureau, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, UK. spib@luht.scot.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVES: To assess the uptake, usage and acceptability of TOXBASE, the
National Poisons Information Service internet toxicology information service.
METHODS: An observational study of database usage, and a questionnaire of users
were undertaken involving users of TOXBASE within the UK between August 1999,
when the internet site was launched, and May 2000. The main outcome measures were
numbers of registered users, usage patterns on the database, responses to user
satisfaction questionnaire.
RESULTS: The number of registered users increased from 567 to 1500. There was a
68% increase in accident and emergency departments registered, a 159% increase in
general practitioners, but a 324% increase in other hospital departments. Between
January 2000 and the end of May there had been 60 281 accesses to the product
database, the most frequent to the paracetamol entry (7291 accesses). Ecstasy was
the seventh most frequent entry accessed. Altogether 165 of 330 questionnaires
were returned. The majority came from accident and emergency departments, the
major users of the system. Users were generally well (>95%) satisfied with ease
and speed of access. A number of suggestions for improvements were put forward.
CONCLUSIONS: TOXBASE has been extensively accessed since being placed on the
internet (http://www.spib.axl.co.uk). The pattern of enquiries mirrors clinical
presentation with poisoning. The system seems to be easily used. It is a model
for future delivery of treatment guidelines at the point of patient care.

PMCID: PMC1725757
PMID: 11777868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Immunity. 2001 Oct;15(4):545-55.

PU.1/Spi-B regulation of c-rel is essential for mature B cell survival.

Hu CJ(1), Rao S, Ramirez-Bergeron DL, Garrett-Sinha LA, Gerondakis S, Clark MR,
Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) mice exhibit reduced numbers of immature and mature B
lymphocytes, which exhibit severe defects in response to BCR-mediated stimulation
and poor survival. We found that expression of c-rel, a member of the
Rel/NF-kappa B family, is dramatically reduced in PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) splenic B
cells. Analysis of the murine c-rel promoter identified three PU.1/Spi-B binding 
sites critical for c-rel promoter activity. Furthermore, reintroduction of Rel
protein restored wild-type B cell numbers to mice reconstituted with
PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) bone marrow. These findings are the first to demonstrate that
a member of the Rel/NF-kappa B family is directly regulated by Ets proteins and
dissect the molecular basis for the function of two Ets factors, PU.1 and Spi-B, 
in promoting B lymphocyte survival.

PMID: 11672537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Blood. 2001 May 1;97(9):2908-12.

PU.1 exhibits partial functional redundancy with Spi-B, but not with Ets-1 or
Elf-1.

Garrett-Sinha LA(1), Dahl R, Rao S, Barton KP, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pathology, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

Previously it was shown that the Ets proteins, PU.1 and Spi-B, exhibit functional
redundancy in B lymphocytes. To investigate the possibility that PU.1 or Spi-B or
both share overlapping roles with Ets-1 or Elf-1, PU.1(+/-)Ets-1(-/-),
PU.1(+/-)Elf-1(-/-), and Spi-B(-/-)Ets-1(-/-) animals were generated. No blood
cell defects were observed in these animals except those previously reported for 
Ets-1(-/-) mice. Therefore, no genetic overlap was detected between PU.1 or Spi-B
with Ets-1 or Elf-1. In contrast, the results confirmed functional redundancy for
PU.1 and Spi-B in that PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) bone marrow progenitors yielded
smaller colonies in methylcellulose cultures than did wild-type, PU.1(+/-) or
Spi-B(-/-) progenitors. In addition, PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(+/+), PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(+/-),
and PU.1(+/-) Spi-B(-/-) mice displayed extramedullary splenic hematopoiesis. In 
summary, PU.1 and Spi-B regulate common target genes required for proliferation
of hematopoietic progenitors or their committed descendants, whereas Ets-1 or
Elf-1 do not appear to regulate shared target genes with PU.1 or Spi-B.

PMID: 11313289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6443-54.

Mouse models in the study of the Ets family of transcription factors.

Bartel FO(1), Higuchi T, Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors is one of a growing number of master
regulators of development. This family was originally defined by the presence of 
a conserved DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. To date, nearly 30 members of
this family have been identified and implicated in a wide range of physiological 
and pathological processes. Despite the likely importance of Ets-family members, 
each of their precise roles has not been delineated. Herein, we describe the
elucidation of essential functions of a few of these family members in vivo using
knockout mouse models. Of the knockouts generated to date, the majority shows
important functions in hematopoiesis, ranging from PU.1, a principle regulator of
myelo-lymphopoiesis, to Spi-B which regulates the proper function of terminally
differentiated cells. Ets1 was shown to be of intermediate importance as a
regulator of pan-lymphoid development. Other Ets family members such as Fli1 and 
TEL1 display distinct and/or overlapping functions in vasculo/angiogenesis,
hemostasis and hematopoiesis. The remaining knockouts generated, Ets2 and Er81,
show non-hematopoietic defects related to extraembryonic development and
neurogenesis, respectively. The pioneering group of knockout models described
reveals only the most distinct functions of each of these Ets family members. A
better understanding of the roles and hierarchies of Ets family members in
cellular differentiation will come with the generation of new null alleles in
previously untargeted family members, more mutant alleles in members already
disrupted, double knockouts, ES cell differentiation and chimera rescue
experiments, and tissue-specific inducible knockouts.

PMID: 11175360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 16;98(2):553-8. Epub 2001 Jan 9.

Evolution of hematopoiesis: Three members of the PU.1 transcription factor family
in a cartilaginous fish, Raja eglanteria.

Anderson MK(1), Sun X, Miracle AL, Litman GW, Rothenberg EV.

Collaborators: Rothenberg EV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes are present in jawed vertebrates, including
cartilaginous fishes, but not in jawless vertebrates or invertebrates. The
origins of these lineages may be understood in terms of evolutionary changes in
the structure and regulation of transcription factors that control lymphocyte
development, such as PU.1. The identification and characterization of three
members of the PU.1 family of transcription factors in a cartilaginous fish, Raja
eglanteria, are described here. Two of these genes are orthologs of mammalian
PU.1 and Spi-C, respectively, whereas the third gene, Spi-D, is a different
family member. In addition, a PU.1-like gene has been identified in a jawless
vertebrate, Petromyzon marinus (sea lamprey). Both DNA-binding and
transactivation domains are highly conserved between mammalian and skate PU.1, in
marked contrast to lamprey Spi, in which similarity is evident only in the
DNA-binding domain. Phylogenetic analysis of sequence data suggests that the
appearance of Spi-C may predate the divergence of the jawed and jawless
vertebrates and that Spi-D arose before the divergence of the cartilaginous fish 
from the lineage leading to the mammals. The tissue-specific expression patterns 
of skate PU.1 and Spi-C suggest that these genes share regulatory as well as
structural properties with their mammalian orthologs.

PMCID: PMC14625
PMID: 11149949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 20;97(13):7417-22.

Do lampreys have lymphocytes? The Spi evidence.

Shintani S(1), Terzic J, Sato A, Saraga-Babic M, O'hUigin C, Tichy H, Klein J.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biologie, Abteilung Immungenetik, Correnstrasse 42,
D-7076 Tübingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 20;97(13):6924-6.

It is generally accepted that living jawless vertebrates (lampreys and hagfishes)
lack the capability of mounting an adaptive immune response. At the same time,
however, there are reports describing histological evidence for the presence in
agnathan tissues of lymphocytes, the key players in adaptive immunity. The
question therefore arises whether the cells identified morphologically as
lymphocytes are true lymphocytes in terms of their genetic developmental program.
In this study, evidence is provided that the lampreys express a member of the
purine box 1 (PU.1)/spleen focus-forming virus integration B (Spi-B) gene family 
known to be critically and specifically involved in the differentiation of
lymphocytes in jawed vertebrates. The lamprey gene is expressed in the
lymphocyte-like cells of the digestive tract and inexplicably also in the ovary.

PMCID: PMC16560
PMID: 10840049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 4;275(31):23674-84.

Involvement of STAT-1 and ets family members in interferon-gamma induction of
CD40 transcription in microglia/macrophages.

Nguyen VT(1), Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Univeristy of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0005, USA.

Cluster of differentiation (CD)-40 is a cell surface receptor belonging to the
tumor necrosis factor receptor family that plays a critical role in the
regulation of immune responses. We have previously shown that the cytokine
interferon (IFN)-gamma induces CD40 expression in microglia. Herein, we have
elucidated the molecular mechanisms underlying IFN-gamma induction of CD40 gene
expression in microglia/macrophages. IFN-gamma up-regulates CD40 expression at
the transcriptional level, and this regulation involves the STAT-1alpha
transcription factor. Microglia from STAT-1alpha-deficient mice were refractive
to IFN-gamma induction of CD40 expression, illustrating the importance of
STAT-1alpha in this response. Functional analysis of the CD40 promoter indicates 
that two gamma activated sequence elements as well as two Ets elements are
involved in IFN-gamma induction of CD40 promoter activity. STAT-1alpha binds to
the gamma activated sequence elements, whereas PU.1 and/or Spi-B bind to the Ets 
elements. The expression of PU.1 and Spi-B, in conjuction with STAT-1alpha
activation, correlates with IFN-gamma inducibility of CD40 expression.
Collectively, our data demonstrate the involvement of STAT-1alpha, PU.1, and
Spi-B in IFN-gamma induction of CD40 gene expression in cells of the macrophage
lineage.

PMID: 10823830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Virol. 2000 Jun;74(11):5151-60.

Epstein-barr virus nuclear antigen 3C activates the latent membrane protein 1
promoter in the presence of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2 through
sequences encompassing an spi-1/Spi-B binding site.

Zhao B(1), Sample CE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Viral Oncogenesis and Tumor Immunology, Department of Virology and 
Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee
38105, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA-3C) protein is a
transcriptional regulator of viral and cellular genes that is essential for
EBV-mediated immortalization of B lymphocytes in vitro. EBNA-3C can inhibit
transcription through an association with the cellular DNA-binding protein
Jkappa, a function shared by EBNA-3A and EBNA-3B. Here, we report a mechanism by 
which EBNA-3C can activate transcription from the EBV latent membrane protein 1
(LMP-1) promoter in conjunction with EBNA-2. Jkappa DNA-binding sites were not
required for this activation, and a mutant EBNA-3C protein unable to bind Jkappa 
activated transcription as efficiently as wild-type EBNA-3C, indicating that
EBNA-3C can regulate transcription through a mechanism that is independent of
Jkappa. Furthermore, activation of the LMP-1 promoter is a unique function of
EBNA-3C, not shared by EBNA-3A and EBNA-3B. The DNA element through which EBNA-3C
activates the LMP-1 promoter includes a Spi-1/Spi-B binding site, previously
characterized as an important EBNA-2 response element. Although this element has 
considerable homology to mouse immunoglobulin light chain promoter sequences to
which the mouse homologue of Spi-1 binds with its dimerization partner IRF4, we
demonstrate that the IRF4-like binding sites in the LMP-1 promoter do not play a 
role in EBNA-3C-mediated activation. Both EBNA-2 and EBNA-3C were required for
transcription mediated through a 41-bp region of the LMP-1 promoter encompassing 
the Spi binding site. However, EBNA-3C had no effect on transcription mediated in
conjunction with the EBNA-2 activation domain fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain, suggesting that it does not function as an adapter between EBNA-2 and the
cellular transcriptional machinery. Like EBNA-2, EBNA-3C bound directly to both
Spi-1 and Spi-B in vitro. This interaction was mediated by a region of EBNA-3C
encompassing a likely basic leucine zipper (bZIP) domain and the ets domain of
Spi-1 or Spi-B, reminiscent of interactions between bZIP and ets domains of other
transcription factors that result in their targeting to DNA. There are many
examples of regulation of the hematopoietic-specific Spi transcription factors
through protein-protein interactions, and a similar regulation by EBNA-3C, in
conjunction with EBNA-2, is likely to be an important and unique contribution of 
EBNA-3C to EBV-mediated immortalization.

PMCID: PMC110868
PMID: 10799590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2000;38(2):107-9.

Management of pyrethroid exposure.

Bateman DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Poisons Information Bureau, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
spib@compuserve.com

OVERVIEW: Severe pyrethroid insecticide poisoning is uncommon in the developed
world, but more common in developing countries because of its wide use in
agriculture. This short review proposes a management strategy for pyrethroid
poisoning based on the present literature. It also mentions an experimental
approach, which will require further study in animals and may have eventual
relevance for man.

PMID: 10778906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 31;464(3):164-8.

Phosphorylation of the Spi-B transcription factor reduces its intrinsic
stability.

Ray-Gallet D(1), Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité 248, Institut Curie, 26 rue díUlm, 75248, Paris, France.

The Spi-B transcription factor is an Ets protein expressed in B lymphoid cells
and closely related to the Spi-1/PU.1 oncoprotein. By mutational analysis, we
showed that Spi-B is phosphorylated by casein kinase II in vitro on four serine
residues. Mutation of these four serines to alanines prevented the
phosphorylation of Spi-B in vivo, increased the ability of Spi-B to transactivate
expression of a reporter gene and led to a decrease of Spi-B stability. We
propose that the phosphorylation of Spi-B may participate in the modulation of
Spi-B functional activity by controlling its intracellular protein level.

PMID: 10618498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34245-52.

The Ets factors PU.1 and Spi-B regulate the transcription in vivo of P2Y10, a
lymphoid restricted heptahelical receptor.

Rao S(1), Garrett-Sinha LA, Yoon J, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

To investigate the in vivo functions of PU.1 and Spi-B, two highly related Ets
transcription factors, we previously generated PU. 1(+/+)Spi-B(-/-) and
PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) mice and demonstrated a significant decrease in B-cell
receptor (BCR) signaling in mutants. Major components of BCR signaling appear to 
be expressed at normal levels in these mice, implying that PU.1 and Spi-B
cooperate in the transcription of additional target genes important for antigen
receptor signaling. We used subtractive hybridization to identify novel in vivo
PU.1/Spi-B target genes and determined that the expression of a heptahelical
receptor, P2Y10, is dramatically reduced in PU.1(+/-)Spi-B(-/-) B-cells. Further 
analysis shows that P2Y10 expression is restricted to lymphoid cells and
parallels that of Spi-B in B-lymphocytes. Lastly, the P2Y10 promoter contains a
PU. 1/Spi-B binding site functionally required for efficient transcription in
B-cells. Thus, P2Y10 is likely to be a direct in vivo transcriptional target for 
PU.1 and Spi-B and provides a unique model to explore transcriptional regulation 
by this Ets factor subfamily. Furthermore, P2Y10 suggests an intriguing
connection between heterotrimeric G-proteins and BCR signaling.

PMID: 10567398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int Immunol. 1999 Sep;11(9):1423-9.

Prf, a novel Ets family protein that binds to the PU.1 binding motif, is
specifically expressed in restricted stages of B cell development.

Hashimoto S(1), Nishizumi H, Hayashi R, Tsuboi A, Nagawa F, Takemori T, Sakano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

During the development of lymphocytes, expression of the Ig genes is strictly
regulated in a tissue-specific manner and in a time-ordered fashion. We have
previously shown that the PU.1 binding motif in the Igkappa 3' enhancer
(kappaE3') and a novel Ets family protein other than PU.1 may be possibly
involved in the control of V(kappa)-J(kappa) joining. In the attempt to isolate
the novel Ets family protein, we have screened cDNA libraries with the yeast
one-hybrid method and identified a new PU.1-related factor, Prf. This novel Ets
family protein is shown to interact with the PU.1 binding sequences in various
promoters and enhancers, including kappaE3'. It was found that expression of the 
prf gene is predominant in the B-lineage cells, with the exception of immature B 
cells. Since Prf does not exhibit functions of transcriptional activity, this
novel protein may act as an antagonist against other Ets family proteins, e.g.
PU.1 and Spi-B. Possible roles of Prf with respect to the B cell differentiation 
are discussed.

PMID: 10464163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Infect Immun. 1999 Sep;67(9):4879-85.

Contribution of Salmonella typhimurium virulence factors to diarrheal disease in 
calves.

Tsolis RM(1), Adams LG, Ficht TA, Bäumler AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4467, USA.

Limited knowledge is available about the virulence mechanisms responsible for
diarrheal disease caused by Salmonella typhimurium. To assess the contribution to
diarrheal disease of virulence determinants identified in models of infection, we
tested a collection of S. typhimurium mutants for their ability to cause
enteritis in calves. S. typhimurium strains carrying mutations in the virulence
plasmid (spvR), Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2) (spiB), or SPI-5 (sopB)
caused mortality and acute diarrhea in calves. An S. typhimurium rfaJ mutant,
which is defective for lipopolysaccharide outer core biosynthesis, was of
intermediate virulence. Mutations in SPI-1 (hilA and prgH) or aroA markedly
reduced virulence and the severity of diarrhea. Furthermore, histopathological
examination of calves infected with SPI-1 or aroA mutants revealed a marked
reduction or absence of intestinal lesions. These data suggest that virulence
factors, such as SPI-1, which are required during intestinal colonization are
more important for pathogenicity in calves than are genes required during the
systemic phase of S. typhimurium infection, including SPI-2 or the spv operon.
This is in contrast to the degree of attenuation caused by these mutations in the
mouse.

PMCID: PMC96822
PMID: 10456944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3131-48.

Precise developmental regulation of Ets family transcription factors during
specification and commitment to the T cell lineage.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
evroth@its.caltech.edu

Ets family transcription factors control the expression of a large number of
genes in hematopoietic cells. Here we show strikingly precise differential
expression of a subset of these genes marking critical, early stages of mouse
lymphocyte cell-type specification. Initially, the Ets family member factor Erg
was identified during an arrayed cDNA library screen for genes encoding
transcription factors expressed specifically during T cell lineage commitment.
Multiparameter fluorescence-activated cell sorting for over a dozen cell surface 
markers was used to isolate 18 distinct primary-cell populations representing
discrete T cell and B cell developmental stages, pluripotent lymphoid precursors,
immature NK-like cells and myeloid hematopoietic cells. These populations were
monitored for mRNA expression of the Erg, Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Tel, Elf-1,
GABPalpha, PU.1 and Spi-B genes. The earliest stages in T cell differentiation
show particularly dynamic Ets family gene regulation, with sharp transitions in
expression correlating with specification and commitment events. Ets, Spi-B and
PU.1 are expressed in these stages but not by later T-lineage cells. Erg is
induced during T-lineage specification and then silenced permanently, after
commitment, at the beta-selection checkpoint. Spi-B is transiently upregulated
during commitment and then silenced at the same stage as Erg. T-lineage
commitment itself is marked by repression of PU.1, a factor that regulates B-cell
and myeloid genes. These results show that the set of Ets factors mobilized
during T-lineage specification and commitment is different from the set that
maintains T cell gene expression during thymocyte repertoire selection and in all
classes of mature T cells.

PMID: 10375504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int J Biol Macromol. 1999 Mar-Apr;24(2-3):89-101.

High molecular mass complexes of aquatic silk proteins.

Case ST(1), Thornton JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson 39216-4505, USA. stcase@biochem.umsmed.edu

Little is known about specific protein protein associations that take place
during formation of Chironomus tentans silk. The aim of this study was to learn
if C. tentans salivary glands contain biochemically discrete silk protein
complexes. Examination of native extracts by non-denaturing agarose gel
electrophoresis and immunoblotting revealed two SDS-resistant complexes: C1a,
nominally containing silk proteins spIa, sp185 and sp140, and C1b, containing
spIb, sp185 and sp140. The data also implied that C1a and C1b can further
associate into SDS-sensitive homo- or hetero-oligomers. Sedimentation of extracts
in preparative glycerol gradients resulted in a heterogeneous distribution of C1a
and C1b centered near 30S. Examination of gradient fractions by denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting indicated that C1a and C1b 
co-sediment with spIs, sp185, and sp140; however, these fractions also contained 
sp40, sp17 and sp12. In contrast, two other silk proteins sedimented throughout
the gradient. Electron micrographs of a complex-containing fraction showed
discrete, sometimes oligomeric lattice-like structures that, over time, assembled
in vitro into multistranded beaded fibers. It is proposed that C1a and C1b are
quaternary structures that are intermediates in the assembly pathway of C.
tentans silk.

PMID: 10342752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Immunity. 1999 Apr;10(4):399-408.

PU.1 and Spi-B are required for normal B cell receptor-mediated signal
transduction.

Garrett-Sinha LA(1), Su GH, Rao S, Kabak S, Hao Z, Clark MR, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

PU.1 and Spi-B have previously been implicated in the regulation of genes
encoding B cell receptor (BCR) signaling components. Spi-B-/- B lymphocytes
respond poorly to BCR stimulation; PU.1-/- mice, however, lack B cells,
precluding an analysis of BCR responses. We now show that PU.1+/- Spi-B-/- B
cells exhibit more extensive defects than Spi-B-/- B cells, indicating that both 
PU.1 and Spi-B are required for normal BCR signaling. Strikingly, BCR
cross-linking results in substantially reduced protein tyrosine phosphorylation
in mutant B cells. Further analysis shows that Igalpha is phosphorylated and syk 
is recruited and becomes phosphorylated but that BLNK and PLCgamma
phosphorylation are defective in mutant cells. Our data support the existence of 
a novel component coupling syk to downstream targets.

PMID: 10229183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 16;274(16):11115-24.

SPI-B activates transcription via a unique proline, serine, and threonine domain 
and exhibits DNA binding affinity differences from PU.1.

Rao S(1), Matsumura A, Yoon J, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

SPI-B is a B lymphocyte-specific Ets transcription factor that shares a high
degree of similarity with PU.1/SPI-1. In direct contrast to PU.1(-/-) mice that
die in utero and lack monocytes, neutrophils, B cells, and T cells, Spi-B-/- mice
are viable and exhibit a severe B cell proliferation defect. Since PU.1 is
expressed at wild type levels in Spi-B-/- B cells, the mutant mice provide
genetic evidence that SPI-B and PU.1 have at least some non-redundant roles in B 
lymphocytes. To begin to understand the molecular basis for these defects, we
delineated functional domains of SPI-B for comparison to those of PU.1. By using 
a heterologous co-transfection system, we identified two independent
transactivation domains in the N terminus of SPI-B. Interestingly, only one of
these domains (amino acids 31-61), a proline/serine/threonine-rich region, unique
among Ets proteins, is necessary for transactivation of the immunoglobulin lambda
light chain enhancer. This transactivation motif is in marked contrast to PU.1,
which contains acidic and glutamine-rich domains. In addition, we describe a
functional PU.1 site within the c-FES promoter which SPI-B fails to bind
efficiently and transactivate. Finally, we show that SPI-B interacts with the
PU.1 cofactors Pip, TBP, c-Jun and with lower affinity to nuclear factor
interleukin-6beta and retinoblastoma. Taken together, these data suggest that
SPI-B binds DNA with a different affinity for certain sites than PU.1 and harbors
different transactivation domains. We conclude that SPI-B may activate unique
target genes in B lymphocytes and interact with unique, although currently
unidentified, cofactors.

PMID: 10196196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Bacteriol. 1998 Sep;180(17):4370-9.

Pas, a novel protein required for protein secretion and attaching and effacing
activities of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli.

Kresse AU(1), Schulze K, Deibel C, Ebel F, Rohde M, Chakraborty T, Guzmán CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, GBF-National Research Centre for Biotechnology,
D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) exhibits a pattern of localized
adherence to host cells, with the formation of microcolonies, and induces a
specific histopathological phenotype collectively known as the attaching and
effacing lesion. The genes encoding the products responsible for this phenotype
are located on a 35-kb pathogenicity island designated the locus of enterocyte
effacement, which is also shared by enteropathogenic E. coli. We have identified 
an open reading frame (ORF) which is located upstream of the espA, espB, and espD
genes on the complementary strand and which exhibits high homology to the genes
spiB from Salmonella, yscD from Yersinia, and pscD from Pseudomonas. Localization
studies showed that the encoded product is present in the cytoplasmic and inner
membrane fractions of EHEC. The construction and characterization of a
recombinant clone containing an in-frame deletion of this ORF demonstrated that
the encoded product is a putative member of a type III system required for
protein secretion. Disruption of this ORF, designated pas (protein associated
with secretion), abolished the secretion of Esp proteins. The mutant adhered only
poorly and lost its capacities to trigger attaching and effacing activity and to 
invade HeLa cells. These results demonstrate that Pas is a virulence-associated
factor that plays an essential role in EHEC pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC107443
PMID: 9721271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1998;36(4):277-85.

Mechanism of action and value of N-acetylcysteine in the treatment of early and
late acetaminophen poisoning: a critical review.

Jones AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Poisons Information Bureau, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Scotland.
SPIB@compuserve.com

INTRODUCTION: The mechanism of action of N-acetylcysteine in early acetaminophen 
poisoning is well understood, but much remains to be learned of the mechanism of 
its possible benefit in acetaminophen poisoning presenting beyond 15 hours.
METHODS: Selective review of medical literature. N-acetylcysteine should be used 
in all cases of early acetaminophen poisoning where the plasma acetaminophen
concentration lies "above the line;" which line is chosen depends on individual
preference and whether enzyme induction is suspected. Particular care should be
taken with the use of the nomogram for patients with chronic excess ingestion of 
acetaminophen or for those who have taken slow-release formulations.
CONCLUSIONS: While there is a trend suggesting a beneficial effect of
N-acetylcysteine in some patients presenting beyond 15 hours, further research is
necessary to establish just how effective N-acetylcysteine is, particularly in
patients presenting with fulminant hepatic failure. Candidate mechanisms for a
beneficial effect in-clude improvement of liver blood flow, glutathione
replenishment, modification of cytokine production, and free radical or oxygen
scavenging. Hemody-namic and oxygen delivery and utilization parameters must be
monitored carefully during delayed N-acetylcysteine treatment of patients with
fulminant hepatic failure, as unwanted vasodilation may be deleterious to the
maintenance of mean arterial blood pressure.

PMID: 9711192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Gene. 1998 Jan 30;207(2):209-18.

Two promoters direct expression of the murine Spi-B gene, an Ets family
transcription factor.

Chen HM(1), Gonzalez DA, Radomska HS, Voso MT, Sun Z, Zhang P, Zhang DE, Tenen
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

Spi-B and PU.1 (Spi-1) comprise the most divergent subfamily of the Ets
transcription factor family. Spi-B and PU.1 bind to similar DNA sequences, and
can activate the same B-cell and myeloid promoters in vitro. However, PU.1
knockout mice demonstrate defective hematopoietic development of multiple
hematopoietic lineages, indicating that Spi-B was not able to compensate for loss
of PU.1. One explanation for these results is that, in contrast to PU.1, which is
expressed in myeloid and B-cell lines, Spi-B expression is restricted to B-cells.
In order to begin to understand the control of regulation of the Spi-B gene,
murine Spi-B cDNA and genomic clones were isolated. The exon/intron organization 
and transcriptional start sites were determined; two major transcriptional start 
sites were detected. The two Spi-B promoters were isolated and characterized, and
displayed differential activity in B-cell lines matching that of the endogenous
gene. Further study of the two Spi-B promoters will provide insight into the
molecular events regulating the tissue-specific and developmental stage-specific 
expression of Spi-B in B-cells.

PMID: 9511763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. EMBO J. 1997 Dec 1;16(23):7118-29.

Defective B cell receptor-mediated responses in mice lacking the Ets protein,
Spi-B.

Su GH(1), Chen HM, Muthusamy N, Garrett-Sinha LA, Baunoch D, Tenen DG, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637, USA.

Spi-B is a hematopoietic-specific Ets family transcription factor closely related
to PU.1. Previous gene targeting experiments have shown that PU.1 is essential
for the production of both lymphocytes and monocytes. We have now generated mice 
with a null mutation at the Spi-B locus. Unlike PU.1 mutant mice, Spi-B-/- mice
are viable, fertile and possess mature B and T lymphocytes. However, Spi-B-/-
mice exhibit severe abnormalities in B cell function and selective T
cell-dependent humoral immune responses. First, although Spi-B-/- splenic B cells
respond normally to lipopolysaccharide stimulation in vitro, these B cells
proliferate poorly and die in response to B cell receptor (surface IgM)
cross-linking. Secondly, Spi-B-/- mice display abnormal T-dependent antigenic
responses in vivo and produce low levels of antigen-specific IgG1, IgG2a and
IgG2b after immunization. Finally, Spi-B-/- mice show a dramatic defect in
germinal center formation and maintenance. In contrast to wild-type animals,
germinal centers in Spi-B-/- mice are smaller and short-lived with significantly 
increased numbers of apoptotic B cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that Spi-B is essential for antigen-dependent expansion of B cells, T-dependent
immune responses and maturation of normal germinal centers in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1170313
PMID: 9384589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mamm Genome. 1997 Jun;8(6):452-3.

The gene encoding the transcription factor Spi-B maps to mouse chromosome 7.

Peters LL(1), Ciciotte SL, Su GH, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

PMID: 9166596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 7;13(9):1955-64.

Cell specific expression of human Bruton's agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase
gene (Btk) is regulated by Sp1- and Spi-1/PU.1-family members.

Müller S(1), Sideras P, Smith CI, Xanthopoulos KG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for BioTechnology, Karolinska Institute, Department of Bioscience at
NOVUM, Huddinge, Sweden.

Bruton's agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (Btk) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine
kinase involved in the human disease X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA). The gene 
is expressed in all hematopoietic cells with the exception of T-cells and plasma 
cells. For this expression pattern the first 280 bp upstream of the major
transcriptional start site seems to be sufficient. In vitro footprinting analysis
within this part of the promoter revealed two Sp1 binding sites as well as a
PU-box. The transcription factor Spi-1/PU.1 as well as the closely related factor
Spi-B bound to the PU-box in B-cells. In the erythroleukemia cell line K562, due 
to the absence of Spi-B, only PU.1 bound to the Btk promoter. Mutation of either 
site reduced the expression in transient transfection experiments. However,
mutation of the PU box had no effect in the T-cell line Jurkat, where none of the
Spi-1 family members is expressed. In addition Spi-B as well as PU.1 were able to
transactivate Btk expression. In fetal liver of PU.1-/- mice, which lack lymphoid
and myeloid cells, expression of Btk was reduced two- to threefold but not
abolished. Collectively this study shows that expression of the Btk gene is
regulated by the combined action of Sp1- and PU.1-family members.

PMID: 8934542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul 23;93(15):7800-4.

Identification of a pathogenicity island required for Salmonella survival in host
cells.

Ochman H(1), Soncini FC, Solomon F, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY 14627, USA.

We have identified a region unique to the Salmonella typhimurium chromosome that 
is essential for virulence in mice. This region harbors at least three genes: two
(spiA and spiB) encode products that are similar to proteins found in type III
secretion systems, and a third (spiR) encodes a putative regulator. A strain with
a mutation in spiA was unable to survive within macrophages but displayed
wild-type levels of epithelial cell invasion. The culture supernatants of the spi
mutants lacked a modified form of flagellin, which was present in the supernatant
of the wild-type strain. This suggests that the Spi secretory apparatus exports a
protease, or a protein that can alter the activity of a secreted protease. The
"pathogenicity island" harboring the spi genes may encode the virulence
determinants that set Salmonella apart from other enteric pathogens.

PMCID: PMC38828
PMID: 8755556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Exp Med. 1996 Jul 1;184(1):203-14.

The Ets protein Spi-B is expressed exclusively in B cells and T cells during
development.

Su GH(1), Ip HS, Cobb BS, Lu MM, Chen HM, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Spi-B and PU.1 are hematopoietic-specific transcription factors that constitute a
subfamily of the Ets family of DNA-binding proteins. Here we show that contrary
to previous reports, PU.1 and Spi-B have very different expression patterns. PU.1
is expressed at high levels in B cells, mast cells, megakaryocytes, macrophages, 
neutrophils, and immature erythroid cells and at lower levels in mature
erythrocytes. PU.1 is completely absent from peripheral T cells and most T cell
lines based on sensitive RT-PCR assays. In contrast, Spi-B is expressed
exclusively in lymphoid cells and can be detected in early fetal thymus and
spleen. In situ hybridizations of adult murine tissues demonstrate Spi-B mRNA in 
the medulla of the thymus, the white pulp of the spleen, and the germinal centers
of lymph nodes. Spi-B expression is very abundant in B cells and both Spi-B mRNA 
and protein are detected in some T cells. In situ hybridization and Northern blot
analysis suggest that Spi-B gene expression increases during B cell maturation
and decreases during T cell maturation. Gel-retardation experiments show that
Spi-B can bind to all putative PU.1 binding sites, but do not reveal any
preferred Spi-B binding site. Finally, both PU.1 and Spi-B function as
transcriptional activators of the immunoglobulin light-chain enhancer E lambda
2.4 when coexpressed with Pip (PU.1-interaction partner) in NIH-3T3 cells. Taken 
together, these data suggest that differences in patterns of expression between
Spi-B and PU.1 distinguish the function of each protein during development of the
immune system.

PMCID: PMC2192671
PMID: 8691135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jun 14;223(2):257-63.

An alternatively spliced isoform of the Spi-B transcription factor.

Ray-Gallet D(1), Tavitian A, Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.248, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Spi-B is an Ets transcription factor related to the oncoprotein Spi-1/PU.1 and
highly expressed in B lymphoid cells. The Ets proteins share a conserved Ets
domain that mediates specific DNA binding. Spi-B binds DNA sequences containing a
core 5'-GGAA-3' and activates transcription through this motif. Up to date, the
biological function of Spi-B remains unknown. Here, we describe the
characterization of an alternatively spliced variant of Spi-B, named deltaSpi-B, 
which has lost the Ets domain. In B lymphoid cells, deltaspi-B and spi-B mRNAs
were present simultaneously in a ratio of around 10%. DeltaSpi-B product was not 
able to bind DNA and was recovered in cytoplasmic cellular extracts. We raise the
hypothesis that delta Spi-B might affect Spi-B function by recruiting factors
involved in Spi-B activity.

PMID: 8670269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncogene. 1996 Feb 15;12(4):863-73.

Differential phosphorylations of Spi-B and Spi-1 transcription factors.

Mao C(1), Ray-Gallet D, Tavitian A, Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 248, Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière-Saint Louis, Paris, France.

Spi-1/PU-1 and Spi-B are hematopoietic transcription factors, which, in vitro,
display similar affinities for DNA target sequences containing the consensus
binding site 5'-GGAA-3'. While the role of Spi-1 in the transcriptional
regulation of B cell and myeloid specific genes has been largely demonstrated,
the biological function of Spi-B still remains to be elucidated. Since Spi-B and 
Spi-1 are very divergent in their transactivator domain, these domains might
acquire functional specificity in vivo by interacting with different co-factors
and/or by undergoing different phosphorylations. First, we observed that casein
kinase II phosphorylates Spi-B as well as Spi-1, in vitro. Then, by affinity
chromatographies and in vitro kinase assays with fusion proteins between
glutathione-S-transferase and the transactivator domain of Spi-B, two kinases
were identified on their ability to interact and phosphorylate this domain; the
MAP kinase ERK1 and the stress activated protein kinase JNK1. The Threonine 56
was defined as the ERK1 phosphorylation site by using phosphoamino-acid analyses 
and a Spi-B mutant version with the substitution T56 to A56. Strikingly, ERK1
failed to phosphorylate Spi-1, in vitro, whereas JNK1, like CK II, phosphorylated
Spi-B and Spi-1. In addition, other purified Spi-B-kinase activities,
unidentified as yet, display similar specificity than ERK1 for Spi-B versus
Spi-1. Furthermore, the evident interaction of pRb protein with the
transactivator domain of Spi-B in an unphosphorylated state disappeared when this
domain was first phosphorylated in vitro either by ERK1 or by the purified
Spi-B-kinase activities. Our data revealed multiple phosphorylation sites within 
Spi-B whose some of them appeared specific for Spi-B versus Spi-1 and which may
account for differential regulation of their activities.

PMID: 8632909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1549-60.

PU.1 (Spi-1) autoregulates its expression in myeloid cells.

Chen H(1), Ray-Gallet D, Zhang P, Hetherington CJ, Gonzalez DA, Zhang DE,
Moreau-Gachelin F, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

PU.1 (Spi-1), a member of the Ets transcription factor family, is predominantly
expressed in myeloid (granulocytes, monocytes and macrophages) and B cells. PU.1 
is upregulated early during commitment of multipotential progenitors to the
myeloid lineages and inhibition of PU.1 function in human CD34+ progenitors prior
to this upregulation blocks myeloid colony formation. Since PU.1 expression
appears to play a role in hematopoietic development, we characterized the PU.1
promoter. Here we report that the murine PU.1 promoter, as well as the human
promoter, demonstrate tissue-specific reporter gene expression in myeloid cell
lines but not in T cells and HeLa (non-hematopoietic cells) cells. Deletion
analysis of the PU.1 promoter indicates that tissue-specific functional elements 
are encoded in the -61 to -39 bp and -7 to +34 bp regions. The first region
contains a functional octamer (Oct) site at -54 bp and an Sp1 site at -39 bp. The
second contains a binding site at +20 bp for both PU.1 itself and the related ets
family member Spi-B. In vivo footprinting assays demonstrate that a
hypersensitive band was detected at the PU.1 site in myeloid cells but not in
HeLa. A mutation of the PU.1 site which abolished PU.1 binding caused a
significant decrease in promoter activity. Mutation of the Oct and/or Sp1 site
results in a lesser decrease of promoter activity in myeloid cells.
Co-transfection of PU.1 or Spi-B in cells lacking PU.1 and Spi-B specifically
transactivated a minimal promoter containing the PU.1 binding site, indicating
that PU.1 can activate its own promoter elements in an autoregulatory loop.
Positive autoregulation of the PU.1 promoter may play an important role in the
function of PU.1 in myeloid cells.

PMID: 7478579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 1995 Jul 20;11(2):303-13.

DNA binding specificities of Spi-1/PU.1 and Spi-B transcription factors and
identification of a Spi-1/Spi-B binding site in the c-fes/c-fps promoter.

Ray-Gallet D(1), Mao C, Tavitian A, Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 248 INSERM, Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Spi-1/PU.1 and Spi-B encode hematopoietic-specific transcription factors that are
the most distantly related members of the Ets family. The Ets proteins share a
conserved 85 amino acids DNA binding domain, the Ets domain and recognize various
DNA target sites around a common core 5'-GGAA/T-3'. The DNA binding specificities
of Spi-1 and Spi-B were investigated by using the method of polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-mediated random site selection. The deduced Spi-1 and Spi-B
consensus binding sites are very similar suggesting that the functional
activities of Spi-1 and Spi-B cannot be distinguished on the basis of their DNA
binding specificities. We identified a putative Spi-1/Spi-B binding site in the
promoter region of the c-fes/c-fps protooncogene which encodes a tyrosine kinase 
expressed predominantly in myeloid cells. In vitro translated Spi-1 and Spi-B
proteins were capable to bind this site similarly and to activate the c-fes
promoter in HeLa transfected cells. We showed that Spi-1 binds the Spi-1/Spi-B
binding site of c-fes in HL-60 cells suggesting that Spi-1 may be involved in the
regulation of c-fes transcription in myeloid cells. Intriguingly, we detected
only Spi-1 binding to this site in the Raji cell line which express both Spi-1
and Spi-B proteins. This suggests that Spi-1 and Spi-B exhibit different DNA
binding activities in vivo although they share similar DNA binding specificities 
in vitro.

PMID: 7624145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Blood. 1995 May 15;85(10):2918-28.

Neutrophils and monocytes express high levels of PU.1 (Spi-1) but not Spi-B.

Chen HM(1), Zhang P, Voso MT, Hohaus S, Gonzalez DA, Glass CK, Zhang DE, Tenen
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02215, USA.

PU.1 (the Spi-1 oncogene) and Spi-B are closely related members of the ets
transcription factor family, sharing similar DNA binding specificities mediated
by similar DNA binding domains. PU.1 and Spi-B have been previously described as 
being predominantly expressed coordinately in macrophages and B cells, but their 
expression in early hematopoietic stages and during the course of myeloid
differentiation to monocytes and macrophages or to neutrophils has not been
extensively investigated. Here, we report that PU.1 mRNA is upregulated during
myeloid differentiation of human purified CD34+ cells and murine multipotential
FDCP-mix A4 cells, suggesting that PU.1 is upregulated as an early event during
differentiation of multipotential progenitor cells. PU.1 expression is maintained
at stable levels during differentiation of myeloid cell lines U937 and HL-60 to
monocytic and neutrophilic cells. PU.1 is expressed at highest levels in mature
human monocytes and human peripheral blood neutrophils. In contrast to PU.1,
significant levels of Spi-B mRNA and protein are found only in some B-cell lines 
and spleen but are not found in myeloid cell lines, neutrophils, or macrophages. 
In vitro translated Spi-B protein can bind to PU.1 binding sites in myeloid
promoters and transactivate these promoters in nonmyeloid cells. Therefore,
although PU.1 and Spi-B may bind to similar DNA control elements and have
redundancy of transactivation function in vitro, the lack of significant levels
of Spi-B in myeloid cells makes it unlikely that Spi-B plays a significant role
in myeloid lineage development and gene expression. In contrast, PU.1 is
expressed at high levels not only in monocytes and macrophages but also in
neutrophils, indicating that PU.1 can activate gene expression in both major
myeloid lineages.

PMID: 7742552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 1;13(23):5624-32.

The Spi-1/PU.1 and Spi-B ets family transcription factors and the recombination
signal binding protein RBP-J kappa interact with an Epstein-Barr virus nuclear
antigen 2 responsive cis-element.

Laux G(1), Adam B, Strobl LJ, Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Molekularbiologie und Tumorgenetik,
GSF-Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit GmbH, München, Germany.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) immortalizes resting human B cells very efficiently in
vitro. The EBV nuclear protein EBNA2 is absolutely required for this process. It 
also activates transcription of cellular, as well as viral, genes. It is assumed 
that EBNA2 contributes to B cell immortalization by its transactivating
potential, since its transforming and transactivating functions could not be
separated. Mutational analysis of the 80 bp EBNA2 responsive cis-element within
the viral bidirectional LMP/TP2 promoter region identified two sequence elements,
which are both essential for transactivation by EBNA2. These sequences harbour
putative consensus binding sites for Spi-1 oncoprotein and recombination signal
binding protein RBP-J kappa, the homologue of Drosophila Suppressor of Hairless. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated the high affinity binding of
Spi-1 and Spi-B, both members of the Ets family of transcription factors, to one 
sequence element. The other element bound RBP-J kappa with low affinity. In
addition, co-transfections showed that the replacement of the Spi-1/Spi-B binding
site in the bi-directional LMP/TP2 promoter by the analogous SV40 Spi-1
responsive element did not impair its function on EBNA2-mediated transactivation.
It is concluded that the transcriptional regulators Spi-1 and Spi-B as well as
RBP-J kappa play an essential role in transactivating the LMP/TP2 promoter by
EBNA2 and therefore in the immortalization of B cells by EBV.

PMCID: PMC395527
PMID: 7988559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Brain Res. 1992 Oct 23;594(1):75-83.

Developmental expression of brain beta-spectrin isoform messenger RNAs.

Zimmer WE(1), Ma Y, Zagon IS, Goodman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, College of Medicine, University
of South Alabama, Mobile 36688.

We have investigated the expression of brain beta SpIIa and beta SpIb (previously
referred to as the beta-subunits of brain spectrin (240/235) and brain spectrin
(240/235E), respectively) during mouse brain development. The 9 kb transcript
which encodes beta SpIIa is present in fetal mouse brain tissue and increases to 
a maximal level in a 30-day-old mouse. There is a coordinate accumulation of the 
7.8 kb alpha SpIIa mRNA (with beta SpIIa) during mouse brain development. The
coordinate expression of alpha SpIIa and beta SpIIa at the mRNA and protein level
allows formation of (alpha SpIIa/beta SpIIa)2 tetramers (brain spectrin(240/235))
early in premitotic neuronal development; and avoids turnover of unassembled
alpha and beta-subunits. An 11 kb transcript which encodes beta SpIb is not
produced in embryonic tissue, and is first seen in a 6-day-old mouse. The protein
translation products beta SpIIa and beta SpIb have previously been demonstrated
by our laboratory to first appear in fetal mouse brain tissue and at postnatal
day 6-8, respectively [J. Neurosci., 7 (1987) 864-874]. The expression of beta
SpIb mRNA on postnatal day 6-8, and the appearance of brain spectrin(240/235E) in
postmitotic and postmigratory neurons of the cerebellum at this same time;
suggests that brain spectrin(240/235E) is involved in differentiated functions of
the neuron (formation of cell-cell contacts, formation of dendritic processes and
postsynaptic contacts). Thus, the data from the present study demonstrates that
the expression of these two neuronal beta-spectrin isoforms is regulated at the
level of mRNA expression.

PMID: 1467942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Oct;12(10):4297-304.

Characterization of Spi-B, a transcription factor related to the putative
oncoprotein Spi-1/PU.1.

Ray D(1), Bosselut R, Ghysdael J, Mattei MG, Tavitian A, Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière Saint-Louis, INSERM U-248, Paris, France.

We have cloned a human cDNA from a new gene, spi-B, on the basis of its homology 
with the DNA-binding domain of the Spi-1/PU.1 putative oncogene product. spi-B
codes for a protein of 262 amino acids presenting 43% overall identity with
Spi-1. Its highly basic carboxy-terminal region exhibits 34% sequence identity
with the DNA-binding domain of the Ets-1 protein. We showed that the Spi-B
protein is able to bind the purine-rich sequence (PU box) recognized by
Spi-1/PU.1 and to activate transcription of a reporter plasmid containing PU
boxes. Chromosome in situ hybridization allowed us to map spi-B to the
19q13.3-19q13.4 region of the human genome. spi-B, like spi-1, was found to be
expressed in various murine and human hematopoietic cell lines except T lymphoid 
cell lines.

PMCID: PMC360353
PMID: 1406622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Chromosoma. 1989 Dec;98(6):428-32.

Identification of the spI products of Balbiani ring genes in Chironomus thummi.

Cortés E(1), Botella LM, Barettino D, Díez JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (C.S.I.C.), Madrid, Spain.

The spI fraction of high molecular weight secretory proteins was analysed in
Chironomus thummi. These proteins are encoded by giant Balbiani ring (BR) genes
which develop specifically in salivary gland cells. Each component of the spI
fraction was studied electrophoretically from early and middle 4th instar larvae 
and prepupae, as well from galactose-treated larvae where changes in the relative
puffing pattern of BR1 and BR2 are known to occur. The spI fraction consists of
at least two bands with electrophoretic mobilities slower than those of the spI
components of Camptochironomus. The slow migrating component remains throughout
the 4th larval instar, while the amount of the faster component changes, being
abundant in early 4th instar and prepupae, but not present (or very weak) in
middle 4th instar. The correlated shifts in BR puffing pattern during these
developmental stages suggest that the slow and fast components are encoded by BR2
and BR1. The spI fraction is modified by galactose treatment, the fast component 
being induced in parallel with a decrease in the slow component. These changes
are correlated with changes in the steady-state levels of RNA: an increase in BR1
RNA and a decrease in BR2 RNA, and of proteins. These proteins could correspond
to the spIb and spIa fractions allocated to BR2 and BR1, respectively, in
Camptochironomus. After galactose treatment a new faster band sometimes appears, 
that could correspond to the spIc fraction of Camptochironomus. A possible spId
equivalent was also identified. In conclusion the main features of the spI family
in C. thummi are similar to those of spI in Camptochironomus.

PMID: 2627801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Ment Defic. 1977 May;81(6):603-5.

Reliability and validity of the Social and Prevocational Information Battery for 
mildly retarded individuals.

Irvin LK, Halpern AS.

The reliability and validity of the Social and Prevocational Information Battery 
(SPIB) for EMR individuals was evaluated with samples other than those on whom
the battery was developed. Results substantiated initially reported reliability
and validity indices and provided encouraging evidence for the general
appropriateness of the SPIB for use with mildly retarded adolescents and young
adults.

PMID: 868930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


