
1. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater. 2016 Feb 18. doi: 10.1002/jbm.b.33638. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Induction of cell self-organization on weakly positively charged surfaces
prepared by the deposition of polyion complex nanoparticles of thermoresponsive, 
zwitterionic copolymers.

Iwai R(1), Haruki R(1), Nemoto Y(2), Nakayama Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Engineering and Materials, National Cerebral and
Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Osaka, Japan. (2)Development
Department, Chemical Products Division, Bridgestone Co, Tokyo, Japan.

We have developed inducible cell self-organization through weakly positively
charged culture surfaces. In this study, a thermoresponsive and zwitterionic
copolymer comprised of N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA) and
methacrylic acid (MA) (PDMAEMA-co-PMA; Mn: ~9.7 × 10(4) g/mol; PDMAEMA/PMA ratio:
10) was designed for inducing cell self-organization. The copolymer formed single
polymer-derived polyion complex (sPIC) nanoparticles following dissolution in an 
aqueous solution. The sPIC nanoparticles had a positive charge (ca. 25 mV).
Self-organization occurred in adipose-derived vascular stromal cell monolayers
cultivated on sPIC-deposited surfaces. There were dramatic morphological changes 
of these cells with the formation of capillary-like networks and single-cell
aggregates with little cytotoxicity. This was a significant improvement compared 
with cells grown on previously developed surfaces deposited with PIC, a mixture
of PDMAEMA and plasmid DNA. Thus, sPICs of PDMAEMA-co-PMA may allow for the
accurate evaluation of a variety of cell behaviors with less cytotoxicity, and
may facilitate additional potential medical applications such as cell-based
therapy and drug discovery. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res
Part B: Appl Biomater, 2016.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26892839  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Exp Med. 2016 Feb 8;213(2):209-23. doi: 10.1084/jem.20151048. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

RAG-mediated DNA double-strand breaks activate a cell type-specific checkpoint to
inhibit pre-B cell receptor signals.

Bednarski JJ(1), Pandey R(2), Schulte E(1), White LS(1), Chen BR(2), Sandoval
GJ(2), Kohyama M(2), Haldar M(2), Nickless A(1), Trott A(1), Cheng G(3), Murphy
KM(2), Bassing CH(4), Payton JE(2), Sleckman BP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110. (2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110. (3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Molecular Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095. (4)Division 
of Cancer Pathobiology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center
for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104. (5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110 bas2022@med.cornell.edu.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) activate a canonical DNA damage response,
including highly conserved cell cycle checkpoint pathways that prevent cells with
DSBs from progressing through the cell cycle. In developing B cells, pre-B cell
receptor (pre-BCR) signals initiate immunoglobulin light (Igl) chain gene
assembly, leading to RAG-mediated DNA DSBs. The pre-BCR also promotes cell cycle 
entry, which could cause aberrant DSB repair and genome instability in pre-B
cells. Here, we show that RAG DSBs inhibit pre-BCR signals through the ATM- and
NF-<U+03BA>B2-dependent induction of SPIC, a hematopoietic-specific transcriptional
repressor. SPIC inhibits expression of the SYK tyrosine kinase and BLNK adaptor, 
resulting in suppression of pre-BCR signaling. This regulatory circuit prevents
the pre-BCR from inducing additional Igl chain gene rearrangements and driving
pre-B cells with RAG DSBs into cycle. We propose that pre-B cells toggle between 
pre-BCR signals and a RAG DSB-dependent checkpoint to maintain genome stability
while iteratively assembling Igl chain genes.

© 2016 Bednarski et al.

PMCID: PMC4749927 [Available on 2016-08-08]
PMID: 26834154  [PubMed - in process]


3. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Dec;34(6):445-6. doi:
10.1089/mab.2015.0063.

Monoclonal Antibody Against SpiC Protein from Salmonella.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 26683188  [PubMed - in process]


4. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Dec;34(6):432-5. doi:
10.1089/mab.2015.0035.

Preparation of Monoclonal Antibodies Against SpiC Protein Secreted by T3SS-2 of
Salmonella spp.

Geng S(1), Qian S(1), Pan Z(1), Sun L(1), Chen X(1), Jiao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou University , Yangzhou, China .

SpiC protein, a member of Salmonella spp. type III secretion system (T3SS)-2, is 
necessary for the survival of Salmonella within macrophages, and it plays a vital
role in Salmonella pathogenesis. To develop and test monoclonal antibodies (MAbs)
against SpiC protein, two recombinant proteins, rHis-SpiC and rGST-SpiC, were
expressed in vitro in the prokaryotic expression vectors pET-30(a) and pGEX-6p-1,
respectively, and rHis-SpiC protein used to immunize mice. Hybridomas were
generated from the splenocytes of these mice and the monoclonal antibodies
produced by these cells were assessed using indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) with rGST-SpiC as the coating antigen. An immunoblotting analysis
indicated that all seven of the MAbs developed in this study could specifically
recognize the SpiC protein. These MAbs will be very useful in the study of SpiC
function and for use in the immunodiagnosis of Salmonella infection.

PMID: 26683183  [PubMed - in process]


5. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2015 Nov 15;7(11):285-91. doi:
10.4251/wjgo.v7.i11.285.

Breakthrough therapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis of gastric cancer:
Intraperitoneal chemotherapy with taxanes.

Yamaguchi H(1), Kitayama J(1), Ishigami H(1), Kazama S(1), Nozawa H(1), Kawai
K(1), Hata K(1), Kiyomatsu T(1), Tanaka T(1), Tanaka J(1), Nishikawa T(1), Otani 
K(1), Yasuda K(1), Ishihara S(1), Sunami E(1), Watanabe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hironori Yamaguchi, Joji Kitayama, Hironori Ishigami, Shinsuke Kazama, Hiroaki
Nozawa, Kazushige Kawai, Keisuke Hata, Tomomichi Kiyomatsu, Toshiaki Tanaka,
Junichiro Tanaka, Takeshi Nishikawa, Kensuke Otani, Koji Yasuda, Soichiro
Ishihara, Eiji Sunami, Toshiaki Watanabe, Department of Surgical Oncology, the
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The effect of chemotherapy on peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) of gastric cancer
remains unclear. Recently, the intraperitoneal (IP) administration of taxanes
[e.g., paclitaxel (PTX) and docetaxel (DOC)] during the perioperative period has 
shown promising results. Herein, we summarized the rationale and methodology for 
using IP chemotherapy with taxanes and reviewed the clinical results. IP
administered taxanes remain in the IP space at an extremely high concentration
for 48-72 h. The drug directly infiltrates peritoneal metastatic nodules from the
surface and then produces antitumor effects, making it ideal for IP chemotherapy.
There are two types of perioperative IP chemotherapy with taxanes: neoadjuvant
intraperitoneal and systemic chemotherapy and sequential perioperative
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (SPIC). In SPIC, patients receive neoadjuvant IP
chemotherapy and the same regimen of IP chemotherapy after cytoreductive surgery 
(CRS) until disease progression. Usually, a taxane dissolved in 500-1000 mL of
saline at ordinary temperature is administered through an IP access port on an
outpatient basis. According to phase<U+200A>I<U+200A>studies, the recommended doses (RD) are as
follows: IP DOC, 45-60 mg/m(2); IP PTX [without intravenous (IV) PTX], 80
mg/m(2); and IP PTX (with IV PTX), 20 mg/m(2). Phase II studies have reported a
median survival time of 14.4-24.6 mo with a 1-year overall survival of 67%-78%. A
phase III study comparing S-1 in combination with IP and IV PTX to S-1 with IV
cisplatin started in 2011. The prognosis of patients who underwent CRS was better
than that of those who did not; however, this was partly due to selection bias.
Although several phase II studies have shown promising results, a randomized
controlled study is needed to validate the effectiveness of IP chemotherapy with 
taxanes for PC of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC4644851
PMID: 26600928  [PubMed]


6. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015 Aug 18;12(8):9692-713. doi:
10.3390/ijerph120809692.

Prevalence of Antimicrobial Resistant and Virulent Salmonella spp. in Treated
Effluent and Receiving Aquatic Milieu of Wastewater Treatment Plants in Durban,
South Africa.

Odjadjare EC(1), Olaniran AO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville Campus, Private
Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa. ecodjadjare@yahoo.com. (2)Discipline of
Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture, Engineering and
Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville Campus, Private Bag X54001,
Durban 4000, South Africa. olanirana@ukzn.ac.za.

In this study, we evaluated the impact of treated wastewater effluent from two
wastewater treatment plants on the physicochemical parameters and Salmonella spp.
load of receiving rivers. Presumptive Salmonella spp. were obtained at all
sampled points including the discharge points, with counts ranging from 0 to 4.14
log cfu/mL at both plants. Turbidity, chemical and biological oxygen demand were 
found to be high and mostly above the required limit for treated wastewater
discharge. However, recorded nitrate and phosphate values were very low. Of the
200 confirmed Salmonella spp. isolates recovered from the treated effluent and
receiving surface waters, 93% harbored the spiC gene, 84% harbored the misL gene,
and 87.5% harbored the orfL gene while 87% harbored the pipD gene. The antibiotic
resistance profile revealed that the isolates were resistant to sulfamethoxazole,
nalidixic acid and streptomycin, but susceptible to quinolones and third
generation ß-lactams. These results indicate that in South Africa treated
effluents are still a major source of contamination of rivers with pathogens such
as Salmonella. Appropriate steps by the regulatory authorities and workers at the
treatment plants are needed to enforce stipulated guidelines in order to prevent 
pollution of surface water resources due to the discharge of poorly treated
effluents.

PMCID: PMC4555307
PMID: 26295245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 11;5:12940. doi: 10.1038/srep12940.

Splenic red pulp macrophages are intrinsically superparamagnetic and contaminate 
magnetic cell isolates.

Franken L(1), Klein M(1), Spasova M(2), Elsukova A(2), Wiedwald U(2), Welz M(3), 
Knolle P(4), Farle M(2), Limmer A(5), Kurts C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Sigmund-Freud-Straße 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Faculty for Physics and Center for Nanointegration Duisburg-Essen (CENIDE),
University Duisburg-Essen, Lotharstraße 1, 47057 Duisburg, Germany. (3)1]
Institute of Experimental Immunology, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University,
Sigmund-Freud-Straße 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany [2] Institute of Molecular
Immunology, Technical University Munich, Schneckenburgerstr. 8, 81675 Munich,
Germany. (4)Institute of Molecular Immunology, Technical University Munich,
Schneckenburgerstr. 8, 81675 Munich, Germany. (5)Clinic for Orthopaedics and
Trauma Surgery Bonn, University Clinic Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Straße 25, 53105 Bonn,
Germany.

A main function of splenic red pulp macrophages is the degradation of damaged or 
aged erythrocytes. Here we show that these macrophages accumulate ferrimagnetic
iron oxides that render them intrinsically superparamagnetic. Consequently, these
cells routinely contaminate splenic cell isolates obtained with the use of MCS, a
technique that has been widely used in immunological research for decades. These 
contaminations can profoundly alter experimental results. In mice deficient for
the transcription factor SpiC, which lack red pulp macrophages, liver Kupffer
cells take over the task of erythrocyte degradation and become superparamagnetic.
We describe a simple additional magnetic separation step that avoids this problem
and substantially improves purity of magnetic cell isolates from the spleen.

PMCID: PMC4531335
PMID: 26260698  [PubMed - in process]


8. Sci Rep. 2015 May 14;5:10127. doi: 10.1038/srep10127.

Trichostatin A specifically improves the aberrant expression of transcription
factor genes in embryos produced by somatic cell nuclear transfer.

Inoue K(1), Oikawa M(2), Kamimura S(1), Ogonuki N(2), Nakamura T(3), Nakano T(3),
Abe K(1), Ogura A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Bioresource Center, RIKEN, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0074 Japan 
[2] Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Ten-noudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8572 Japan. (2)Bioresource Center, RIKEN,
3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0074 Japan. (3)Department of Pathology,
Medical School and Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871 Japan.

Although mammalian cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) has been
established in various species, the low developmental efficiency has hampered its
practical applications. Treatment of SCNT-derived embryos with histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors can improve their development, but the underlying
mechanism is still unclear. To address this question, we analysed gene expression
profiles of SCNT-derived 2-cell mouse embryos treated with trichostatin A (TSA), 
a potent HDAC inhibitor that is best used for mouse cloning. Unexpectedly, TSA
had no effect on the numbers of aberrantly expressed genes or the overall gene
expression pattern in the embryos. However, in-depth investigation by gene
ontology and functional analyses revealed that TSA treatment specifically
improved the expression of a small subset of genes encoding transcription factors
and their regulatory factors, suggesting their positive involvement in de novo
RNA synthesis. Indeed, introduction of one of such transcription factors, Spi-C, 
into the embryos at least partially mimicked the TSA-induced improvement in
embryonic development by activating gene networks associated with transcriptional
regulation. Thus, the effects of TSA treatment on embryonic gene expression did
not seem to be stochastic, but more specific than expected, targeting genes that 
direct development and trigger zygotic genome activation at the 2-cell stage.

PMCID: PMC4431350
PMID: 25974394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Prev Vet Med. 2015 Jun 15;120(2):241-5. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2015.03.019.
Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Screening for Salmonella in backyard chickens.

Manning J(1), Gole V(1), Chousalkar K(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, The University of Adelaide,
Roseworthy 5371, SA, Australia. (2)School of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, The 
University of Adelaide, Roseworthy 5371, SA, Australia. Electronic address:
kapil.chousalkar@adelaide.edu.au.

Salmonellosis is a significant zoonotic disease which has a considerable economic
impact on the egg layer industry. There is limited information about the
prevalence of Salmonella spp. in backyard chickens. The current study was
conducted to determine the prevalence of Salmonella in backyard chickens, and the
associated virulence of any serovars identified. Hundred and fifteen pooled
samples from 30 backyard flocks in South Australia were screened. Four flocks
tested positive for Salmonella spp. The overall Salmonella isolation rate in the 
current study was 10.4%. The estimated prevalence at individual bird level was
0.02% (95% CI 0.025-0.975). The serovars isolated were Salmonella Agona,
Salmonella subsp 2 ser 21:z10:z6 (Wandsbek) and Salmonella Bovismorbificans. All 
Salmonella isolates tested positive for the prgH, orfL and spiC genes. The
Salmonella subsp 2 ser 21:z10:z6 (Wandsbek) had the most antibiotic resistance,
being resistant to ampicillin and cephalothin and having intermediate resistance 
to florphenicol. All of the Salmonella Agona had intermediate resistance to the
ampicillin, while the Salmonella Bovismorbificans were susceptible to all
antibiotics tested. With the increased interest of keeping backyard chickens, the
current study highlights the zoonotic risk from Salmonella spp. associated with
home flocks.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25899620  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0122540. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122540.
eCollection 2015.

Immune reaction and survivability of salmonella typhimurium and salmonella
infantis after infection of primary avian macrophages.

Braukmann M(1), Methner U(2), Berndt A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathogenesis, 'Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut' (Federal
Research Institute for Animal Health), Jena, Germany. (2)Institute of Bacterial
Infections and Zoonoses, 'Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut' (Federal Research
Institute for Animal Health), Jena, Germany.

Salmonella serovars are differentially able to infect chickens. The underlying
causes are not yet fully understood. Aim of the present study was to elucidate
the importance of Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 1 and 2 (SPI-1 and -2) for the 
virulence of two non-host-specific, but in-vivo differently invasive, Salmonella 
serovars in conjunction with the immune reaction of the host. Primary avian
splenic macrophages were inoculated with Salmonella enterica sub-species enterica
serovar (S.) Typhimurium and S. Infantis. The number and viability of
intracellular bacteria and transcription of SPI-1 and -2 genes by the pathogens, 
as well as transcription of immune-related proteins, surface antigen expression
and nitric oxide production by the macrophages, were compared at different times 
post inoculation. After infection, both of the Salmonella serovars were found
inside the primary macrophages. Invasion-associated SPI-1 genes were
significantly higher transcribed in S. Infantis- than S. Typhimurium-infected
macrophages. The macrophages counteracted the S. Infantis and S. Typhimurium
infection with elevated mRNA expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS), interleukin (IL)-12, IL-18 and lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis 
factor alpha factor (LITAF) as well as with an increased synthesis of nitric
oxide. Despite these host cell attacks, S. Typhimurium was better able than S.
Infantis to survive within the macrophages and transcribed higher rates of the
SPI-2 genes spiC, ssaV, sifA, and sseA. The results showed similar immune
reactions of primary macrophages after infection with both of the Salmonella
strains. The more rapid and stronger transcription of SPI-2-related genes by
intracellular S. Typhimurium compared to S. Infantis might be responsible for its
better survival in avian primary macrophages.

PMCID: PMC4374797
PMID: 25811871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Immunol. 2015 Apr 15;194(8):3798-807. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402432. Epub 2015 
Mar 13.

Identification of a negative regulatory role for spi-C in the murine B cell
lineage.

Li SK(1), Solomon LA(1), Fulkerson PC(2), DeKoter RP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Centre for Human Immunology,
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Collaborative Graduate Program in
Developmental Biology, Western University, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada;
Division of Genetics and Development, Children's Health Research Institute,
Lawson Research Institute, London, Ontario N6C 2V5, Canada; and. (2)Division of
Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Centre for
Human Immunology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Collaborative
Graduate Program in Developmental Biology, Western University, London, Ontario
N6A 5C1, Canada; Division of Genetics and Development, Children's Health Research
Institute, Lawson Research Institute, London, Ontario N6C 2V5, Canada; and
rdekoter@uwo.ca.

Spi-C is an E26 transformation-specific family transcription factor that is
highly related to PU.1 and Spi-B. Spi-C is expressed in developing B cells, but
its function in B cell development and function is not well characterized. To
determine whether Spi-C functions as a negative regulator of Spi-B (encoded by
Spib), mice were generated that were germline knockout for Spib and heterozygous 
for Spic (Spib(-/-)Spic(+/-)). Interestingly, loss of one Spic allele
substantially rescued B cell frequencies and absolute numbers in Spib(-/-) mouse 
spleens. Spib(-/-)Spic(+/-) B cells had restored proliferation compared with
Spib(-/-) B cells in response to anti-IgM or LPS stimulation. Investigation of a 
potential mechanism for the Spib(-/-)Spic(+/-) phenotype revealed that
steady-state levels of Nfkb1, encoding p50, were elevated in Spib(-/-)Spic(+/-) B
cells compared with Spib(-/-) B cells. Spi-B was shown to directly activate the
Nfkb1 gene, whereas Spi-C was shown to repress this gene. These results indicate 
a novel role for Spi-C as a negative regulator of B cell development and
function.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25769919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Feb;31(2):149-52, 158.

[Prokaryotic expression and application of SpiC protein of Salmonella pullorum].

[Article in Chinese]

Geng S(1), Liu H(1), Jiao X(1), Pan Z(1), Qian S(1), Guo R(1), An S(1), Xue Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Zoonoses, Co-innovation Center for
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To express the SpiC protein of Salmonella pullorum and establish an
indirect ELISA method with SpiC protein as antigen.
METHODS: The 384 bp spiC gene of Salmonella pullorum was amplified by PCR from
the genomic DNA and cloned into pET30a vector. The recombinant plasmid
pET30a-spiC was transformed into competent E.coli BL21(DE3) cells and induced by 
IPTG. The expressed product was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting.
Indirect ELISA based on purified SpiC protein was applied to detect 144 clinical 
serum samples.
RESULTS: SDS-PAGE and Western blotting confirmed that a soluble recombinant
His-SpiC protein of 19.2 ku was expressed in BL21(DE3) cells. SPF chicken
antibodies against GST-SpiC could recognize His-SpiC, indicating that His-SpiC
had a good immunogenicity. The indirect ELISA that we established using His-SpiC 
protein as coating antigen for detecting antibodies against SpiC could
differentiate infected from vaccinated animals (DIVA).
CONCLUSION: The recombinant His-SpiC was successfully expressed and the indirect 
ELISA with it as coating antigen could be used as DIVA method for the related
vaccine of pullorum disease.

PMID: 25652851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jul 1;212(1):147-56. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu663. Epub 2014 Dec
9.

Feverlike Temperature is a Virulence Regulatory Cue Controlling the Motility and 
Host Cell Entry of Typhoidal Salmonella.

Elhadad D(1), McClelland M(2), Rahav G(3), Gal-Mor O(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Infectious Diseases Research Laboratory, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer The Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology Sackler
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel. (2)Department of Microbiology
and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine. (3)The Infectious
Diseases Research Laboratory, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer Sackler School
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.

Human infection with typhoidal Salmonella serovars causes a febrile systemic
disease, termed enteric fever. Here we establish that in response to a
temperature equivalent to fever (39 °C-42 °C) Salmonella enterica serovars Typhi,
Paratyphi A, and Sendai significantly attenuate their motility, epithelial cell
invasion, and uptake by macrophages. Under these feverlike conditions, the
residual epithelial cell invasion of S. Paratyphi A occurs in a type III
secretion system (T3SS) 1-independent manner and results in restrained disruption
of epithelium integrity. The impaired motility and invasion are associated with
down-regulation of T3SS-1 genes and class II and III (but not I) of the
flagella-chemotaxis regulon. In contrast, we demonstrate up-regulation of
particular Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 genes (especially spiC) and
increased intraepithelial growth in a T3SS-2-dependent manner. These results
indicate that elevated physiological temperature is a novel cue controlling
virulence phenotypes in typhoidal serovars, which is likely to play a role in the
distinct clinical manifestations elicited by typhoidal and nontyphoidal
salmonellae.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4542590 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25492917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;87(2):162-73. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.094672. Epub 2014 Nov 
14.

The inverse agonist DG172 triggers a PPARß/d-independent myeloid lineage shift
and promotes GM-CSF/IL-4-induced dendritic cell differentiation.

Lieber S(1), Scheer F(1), Finkernagel F(1), Meissner W(1), Giehl G(1), Brendel
C(1), Diederich WE(1), Müller-Brüsselbach S(1), Müller R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (S.L., F.F., 
W.M., S.M.-B., R.M.); Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (F.S.,
W.E.D.); and Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology (G.G., C.B.); Center 
for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (S.L., F.F., 
W.M., S.M.-B., R.M.); Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (F.S.,
W.E.D.); and Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology (G.G., C.B.); Center 
for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany
rmueller@imt.uni-marburg.de.

The stilbene derivative
(Z)-2-(2-bromophenyl)-3-{[4-(1-methylpiperazine)amino]phenyl}acrylonitrile
(DG172) was developed as a highly selective inhibitory peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)ß/d ligand. Here, we describe a novel
PPARß/d-independent, yet highly specific, effect of DG172 on the differentiation 
of bone marrow cells (BMCs). DG172 strongly augmented
granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced differentiation
of primary BMCs from Ppard null mice into two specific populations, characterized
as mature (CD11c(hi)MHCII(hi)) and immature (CD11c(hi)MHCII(lo)) dendritic cells 
(DCs). IL-4 synergized with DG172 to shift the differentiation from MHCII(lo)
cells to mature DCs in vitro. The promotion of DC differentiation occurred at the
expense of differentiation to granulocytic Gr1(+)Ly6B(+) cells. In agreement with
these findings, transcriptome analyses showed a strong DG172-mediated repression 
of genes encoding neutrophilic markers in both differentiating wild-type and
Ppard null cells, while macrophage/DC marker genes were up-regulated. DG172 also 
inhibited the expression of transcription factors driving granulocytic
differentiation (Cebpe, Gfi1, and Klf5), and increased the levels of
transcription factors promoting macrophage/DC differentiation (Irf4, Irf8, Spib, 
and Spic). DG172 exerted these effects only at an early stage of BMC
differentiation induced by GM-CSF, did not affect macrophage-colony-stimulating
factor-triggered differentiation to macrophages and had no detectable
PPARß/d-independent effect on other cell types tested. Structure-function
analyses demonstrated that the 4-methylpiperazine moiety in DG172 is required for
its effect on DC differentiation, but is dispensable for PPARß/d binding. Based
on these data we developed a new compound,
(Z)-2-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-[4-(4-methylpiperazine-1-yl)phenyl]acrylonitrile
(DG228), which enhances DC differentiation in the absence of significant PPARß/d 
binding.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25398837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell. 2014 Mar 13;156(6):1223-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.069.

Heme-mediated SPI-C induction promotes monocyte differentiation into
iron-recycling macrophages.

Haldar M(1), Kohyama M(2), So AY(3), Kc W(1), Wu X(1), Briseño CG(1), Satpathy
AT(1), Kretzer NM(1), Arase H(2), Rajasekaran NS(4), Wang L(5), Egawa T(1),
Igarashi K(6), Baltimore D(3), Murphy TL(1), Murphy KM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis,
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Laboratory of Immunochemistry,
WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan. (3)Department of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. (4)Division of Cardiology and Pulmonary, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, UT 84132,
USA. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. (6)Department of
Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan. (7)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St.
Louis, School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 
63110, USA. Electronic address: kmurphy@wustl.edu.

Splenic red pulp macrophages (RPM) degrade senescent erythrocytes and recycle
heme-associated iron. The transcription factor SPI-C is selectively expressed by 
RPM and is required for their development, but the physiologic stimulus inducing 
Spic is unknown. Here, we report that Spic also regulated the development of
F4/80(+)VCAM1(+) bone marrow macrophages (BMM) and that Spic expression in BMM
and RPM development was induced by heme, a metabolite of erythrocyte degradation.
Pathologic hemolysis induced loss of RPM and BMM due to excess heme but induced
Spic in monocytes to generate new RPM and BMM. Spic expression in monocytes was
constitutively inhibited by the transcriptional repressor BACH1. Heme induced
proteasome-dependent BACH1 degradation and rapid Spic derepression. Furthermore, 
cysteine-proline dipeptide motifs in BACH1 that mediate heme-dependent
degradation were necessary for Spic induction by heme. These findings are the
first example of metabolite-driven differentiation of a tissue-resident
macrophage subset and provide new insights into iron homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4010949
PMID: 24630724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Integr Biol (Camb). 2014 Apr;6(4):438-49. doi: 10.1039/c3ib40177d. Epub 2014 Mar 
6.

A microfluidic-based genetic screen to identify microbial virulence factors that 
inhibit dendritic cell migration.

McLaughlin LM(1), Xu H, Carden SE, Fisher S, Reyes M, Heilshorn SC, Monack DM.

Author information: 
(1)Holy Names University, 3500 Mountain Blvd., Oakland, CA, USA.

Microbial pathogens are able to modulate host cells and evade the immune system
by multiple mechanisms. For example, Salmonella injects effector proteins into
host cells and evades the host immune system in part by inhibiting dendritic cell
(DC) migration. The identification of microbial factors that modulate normal host
functions should lead to the development of new classes of therapeutics that
target these pathways. Current screening methods to identify either host or
pathogen genes involved in modulating migration towards a chemical signal are
limited because they do not employ stable, precisely controlled chemical
gradients. Here, we develop a positive selection microfluidic-based genetic
screen that allows us to identify Salmonella virulence factors that manipulate DC
migration within stable, linear chemokine gradients. Our screen identified 7
Salmonella effectors (SseF, SifA, SspH2, SlrP, PipB2, SpiC and SseI) that inhibit
DC chemotaxis toward CCL19. This method is widely applicable for identifying
novel microbial factors that influence normal host cell chemotaxis as well as
revealing new mammalian genes involved in directed cell migration.

PMCID: PMC4114769
PMID: 24599496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMC Syst Biol. 2013;7 Suppl 2:S14. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-S2-S14. Epub 2013 Dec
17.

SPIC: a novel similarity metric for comparing transcription factor binding site
motifs based on information contents.

Zhang S, Zhou X, Du C, Su Z.

BACKGROUND: Discovering transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) is one of
primary challenges to decipher complex gene regulatory networks encrypted in a
genome. A set of short DNA sequences identified by a transcription factor (TF) is
known as a motif, which can be expressed accurately in matrix form such as a
position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) and a position frequency matrix. Very
frequently, we need to query a motif in a database of motifs by seeking its
similar motifs, merge similar TFBS motifs possibly identified by the same TF,
separate irrelevant motifs, or filter out spurious motifs. Therefore, a novel
metric is required to seize slight differences between irrelevant motifs and
highlight the similarity between motifs of the same group in all these
applications. While there are already several metrics for motif similarity
proposed before, their performance is still far from satisfactory for these
applications.
METHODS: A novel metric has been proposed in this paper with name as SPIC
(Similarity with Position Information Contents) for measuring the similarity
between a column of a motif and a column of another motif. When defining this
similarity score, we consider the likelihood that the column of the first motif's
PFM can be produced by the column of the second motif's PSSM, and multiply the
likelihood by the information content of the column of the second motif's PSSM,
and vise versa. We evaluated the performance of SPIC combined with a local or a
global alignment method having a function for affine gap penalty, for computing
the similarity between two motifs. We also compared SPIC with seven existing
state-of-the-arts metrics for their capability of clustering motifs from the same
group and retrieving motifs from a database on three datasets.
RESULTS: When used jointly with the Smith-Waterman local alignment method with an
affine gap penalty function (gap open penalty is equal to 1, gap extension
penalty is equal to 0.5), SPIC outperforms the seven existing state-of-the-art
motif similarity metrics combined with their best alignments for matching motifs 
in database searches, and clustering the same TF's sub-motifs or distinguishing
relevant ones from a miscellaneous group of motifs.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a novel motif similarity metric that can more
accurately match motifs in database searches, and more effectively cluster
similar motifs and differentiate irrelevant motifs than do the other seven
metrics we are aware of.

PMCID: PMC3866262
PMID: 24564945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Indian J Microbiol. 2013 Dec;53(4):410-7. doi: 10.1007/s12088-013-0407-y. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

Comparative Virulotyping of Salmonella typhi and Salmonella enteritidis.

Elemfareji OI(1), Thong KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Division, Faculty of Science, Institute of Biological Science,
University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia ; Biomedical Science and
Molecular Microbiology Laboratory, Institute of Graduate Studies, University of
Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Members of Salmonella enterica are important foodborne pathogens of significant
public health concern worldwide. This study aimed to determine a range of
virulence genes among typhoidal (S. typhi) and non-typhoidal (S. enteritidis)
strains isolated from different geographical regions and different years. A total
of 87 S. typhi and 94 S. enteritidis strains were tested for presence of 22
virulence genes by employing multiplex PCR and the genetic relatedness of these
strains was further characterized by REP-PCR. In S. typhi, invA, prgH, sifA,
spiC, sopB, iroN, sitC, misL, pipD, cdtB, and orfL were present in all the
strains, while sopE, agfC, agfA, sefC, mgtC, and sefD were present in 98.8, 97.7,
90.8, 87.4, 87.4 and 17.2 %, of the strains, respectively. No lpfA, lpfC, pefA,
spvB, or spvC was detected. Meanwhile, in S. enteritidis, 15 genes, agfA, agfC,
invA, lpfA, lpfC, sefD, prgH, spiC, sopB, sopE, iroN, sitC, misL, pipD, and orfL 
were found in all S. enteritidis strains 100 %, followed by sifA and spvC 98.9 %,
pefA, spvB and mgtC 97.8 %, and sefC 90.4 %. cdtB was absent from all S.
enteritidis strains tested. REP-PCR subtyped S. typhi strains into 18 REP-types
and concurred with the virulotyping results in grouping the strains, while in S. 
enteritidis, REP-PCR subtyped the strains into eight profiles and they were
poorly distinguishable between human and animal origins. The study showed that S.
typhi and S. enteritidis contain a range of virulence factors associated with
pathogenesis. Virulotyping is a rapid screening method to identify and profile
virulence genes in Salmonella strains, and improve an understanding of potential 
risk for human and animal infections.

PMCID: PMC3779286
PMID: 24426144  [PubMed]


19. Vet Microbiol. 2014 Jan 31;168(2-4):388-94. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.11.024.
Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Virulence determinants of Salmonella Gallinarum biovar Pullorum identified by PCR
signature-tagged mutagenesis and the spiC mutant as a candidate live attenuated
vaccine.

Geng S(1), Jiao X(2), Barrow P(3), Pan Z(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China; Ministry of Education Key Lab for
Avian Preventive Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu, China. 
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China; Ministry of Education Key Lab for
Avian Preventive Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu, China. 
Electronic address: jiao@yzu.edu.cn. (3)School of Veterinary Medicine and
Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Sutton Bonington,
Loughborough, Leicestershire, Nottingham LE12 5RD, UK.

Salmonella Gallinarum biovar Pullorum (S. Gallinarum biovar Pullorum) is the
causative agent of pullorum disease (PD) in chickens which results in
considerable economic losses to the poultry industries in developing countries.
PCR-Signature Tagged Mutagenesis was used to identify virulence determinants of
S. Gallinarum biovar Pullorum and novel attenuated live vaccine candidates for
use against this disease. A library of 1800 signature-tagged S. Gallinarum biovar
Pullorum mutants was constructed and screened for virulence-associated genes in
chickens. The attenuation of 10 mutants was confirmed by in vivo and in vitro
competitive index (CI) studies. The transposons were found to be located in SPI-1
(2/10 mutants), SPI-2 (3/10), the virulence plasmid (1/10) and non-SPI genes
(4/10). One highly attenuated spiC mutant persisted in spleen and liver for less 
than 10 days and induced high levels of circulating antibody and protective
immunity against oral challenge in young broiler chickens. The spiC mutant is a
potential new vaccine candidate for use with chickens against this disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24355532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):84-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302282. Epub 2013 Nov 
20.

Etoposide selectively ablates activated T cells to control the immunoregulatory
disorder hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Johnson TS(1), Terrell CE, Millen SH, Katz JD, Hildeman DA, Jordan MB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation and Tolerance Program, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Georgia Regents University Cancer 
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912;

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is an inborn disorder of immune
regulation caused by mutations affecting perforin-dependent cytotoxicity. Defects
in this pathway impair negative feedback between cytotoxic lymphocytes and APCs, 
leading to prolonged and pathologic activation of T cells. Etoposide, a widely
used chemotherapeutic drug that inhibits topoisomerase II, is the mainstay of
treatment for HLH, although its therapeutic mechanism remains unknown. We used a 
murine model of HLH, involving lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection of
perforin-deficient mice, to study the activity and mechanism of etoposide for
treating HLH and found that it substantially alleviated all symptoms of murine
HLH and allowed prolonged survival. This therapeutic effect was relatively unique
among chemotherapeutic agents tested, suggesting distinctive effects on the
immune response. We found that the therapeutic mechanism of etoposide in this
model system involved potent deletion of activated T cells and efficient
suppression of inflammatory cytokine production. This effect was remarkably
selective; etoposide did not exert a direct anti-inflammatory effect on
macrophages or dendritic cells, and it did not cause deletion of quiescent naive 
or memory T cells. Finally, etoposide's immunomodulatory effects were similar in 
wild-type and perforin-deficient animals. Thus, etoposide treats HLH by
selectively eliminating pathologic, activated T cells and may have usefulness as 
a novel immune modulator in a broad array of immunopathologic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4177106
PMID: 24259502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 1;8(8):e71094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071094. Print 2013.

Gene expression profiling of histiocytic sarcomas in a canine model: the
predisposed flatcoated retriever dog.

Boerkamp KM(1), van der Kooij M, van Steenbeek FG, van Wolferen ME, Groot
Koerkamp MJ, van Leenen D, Grinwis GC, Penning LC, Wiemer EA, Rutteman GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Companion Animals, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. K.M.Boerkamp@uu.nl

BACKGROUND: The determination of altered expression of genes in specific tumor
types and their effect upon cellular processes may create insight in
tumorigenesis and help to design better treatments. The Flatcoated retriever is a
dog breed with an exceptionally high incidence of histiocytic sarcomas. The breed
develops two distinct entities of histiocytic neoplasia, a soft tissue form and a
visceral form. Gene expression studies of these tumors have value for comparable 
human diseases such as histiocytic/dendritic cell sarcoma for which knowledge is 
difficult to accrue due to their rare occurrence. In addition, such studies may
help in the search for genetic aberrations underlying the genetic predisposition 
in this dog breed.
METHODS: Microarray analysis and pathway analyses were performed on fresh-frozen 
tissues obtained from Flatcoated retrievers with localized, soft tissue
histiocytic sarcomas (STHS) and disseminated, visceral histiocytic sarcomas (VHS)
and on normal canine spleens from various breeds. Expression differences of nine 
genes were validated with quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) analyses.
RESULTS: QPCR analyses identified the significantly altered expression of nine
genes; PPBP, SpiC, VCAM1, ENPEP, ITGAD (down-regulated), and GTSF1, Col3a1, CD90 
and LUM (up-regulated) in the comparison of both the soft tissue and the visceral
form with healthy spleen. DAVID pathway analyses revealed 24 pathways that were
significantly involved in the development of HS in general, most of which were
involved in the DNA repair and replication process.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified altered expression of nine genes not yet
implicated in histiocytic sarcoma manifestations in the dog nor in comparable
human histiocytic/dendritic sarcomas. Exploration of the downside effect of
canine inbreeding strategies for the study of similar sarcomas in humans might
also lead to the identification of genes related to these rare malignancies in
the human.

PMCID: PMC3731289
PMID: 23936488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Sep;20(9):1268-78. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.88. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

Epigenetic silencing of Bim transcription by Spi-1/PU.1 promotes apoptosis
resistance in leukaemia.

Ridinger-Saison M(1), Evanno E, Gallais I, Rimmelé P, Selimoglu-Buet D,
Sapharikas E, Moreau-Gachelin F, Guillouf C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Deregulation of transcriptional networks contributes to haematopoietic
malignancies. The transcription factor Spi-1/PU.1 is a master regulator of
haematopoiesis and its alteration leads to leukaemia. Spi-1 overexpression
inhibits differentiation and promotes resistance to apoptosis in
erythroleukaemia. Here, we show that Spi-1 inhibits mitochondrial apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo through the transcriptional repression of Bim, a proapoptotic
factor. BIM interacts with MCL-1 that behaves as a major player in the survival
of the preleukaemic cells. The repression of BIM expression reduces the amount of
BIM-MCL-1 complexes, thus increasing the fraction of potentially active
antiapoptotic MCL-1. We then demonstrate that Spi-1 represses Bim transcription
by binding to the Bim promoter and by promoting the trimethylation of histone 3
on lysine 27 (H3K27me3, a repressive histone mark) on the Bim promoter. The PRC2 
repressive complex of Polycomb is directly responsible for the deposit of
H3K27me3 mark at the Bim promoter. SUZ12 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2, 
two PRC2 subunits bind to the Bim promoter at the same location than H3K27me3,
distinct of the Spi-1 DNA binding site. As Spi-1 interacts with SUZ12 and EZH2,
these results indicate that Spi-1 modulates the activity of PRC2 without directly
recruiting the complex to the site of its activity on the chromatin. Our results 
identify a new mechanism whereby Spi-1 represses transcription and provide
mechanistic insights on the antiapoptotic function of a transcription factor
mediated by the epigenetic control of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3741512
PMID: 23852375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Food Microbiol. 2013 Jun 17;164(2-3):161-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.04.002. Epub 2013 Apr 11.

Survey of Enterobacteriaceae contamination of table eggs collected from layer
flocks in Australia.

Gole VC(1), Chousalkar KK, Roberts JR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, The University of Adelaide,
Roseworthy, 5173, Australia.

In the present study, eggs from commercial caged layer flocks at different stages
of lay in Australia were collected. Enterobacteriaceae populations from eggshell 
surface and eggshell pore were enumerated and these populations characterized
using API® Rapid 20E strips. The eggshell surface, eggshell pore and egg internal
content samples were also processed for the isolation of Salmonella and these
isolates were tested for the presence or absence of several virulence genes
(prgH, sopB, spiC, orfL, invA, sifA, sitC, misL). Results indicated that there
was no significant difference in total Enterobacteriaceae count on the eggs of
the flock from early, mid or late lay flocks. Enterobacteriaceae isolates were of
11 different genera which included: Cedecea, Citrobacter, Enterobacter,
Escherichia, Klebsiella, Kluyvera, Leclercia, Pantoea, Salmonella, Serratia and
Yersinia. Out of all 153 identified Enterobacteriaceae isolates, the Escherichia 
genus was reported most frequently (60.78%). Results also indicated that overall 
there were 4.51% (14/310) Salmonella positive pooled samples. In this study, 14
Salmonella strains were isolated, serotyping confirmed that 12 out of them were
Salmonella Infantis and the 2 others were Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica
serovar 4,12:d: Polymerase chain reaction results indicated that all Salmonella
Infantis isolates harboured invA, misL, orfL, prgH, sifA, sitC, sopB and spiC
genes which suggests that Salmonella Infantis strains isolated from eggshell
surface may have the capacity to invade and survive in macrophages.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23680799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2013 Apr;105:76-82. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2013.02.002. Epub
2013 Feb 8.

Neurobiological and pharmacological validity of curcumin in ameliorating memory
performance of senescence-accelerated mice.

Sun CY(1), Qi SS, Zhou P, Cui HR, Chen SX, Dai KY, Tang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Anatomy, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325035, Zhejiang Province, 
China. sunchenyou1972@yahoo.com.cn

The senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8 (SAMP8 mice) is known as a
neurodegenerative model and may show age-related deficits of cognition. Curcumin,
a major active component of spic turmeric, could increase the capacity of
learning and memory in the aged rat. However, it is not known whether curcumin
could improve cognitive deficits in SAMP8 mice. The present study was undertaken 
to evaluate the effect of curcumin on the learning and memory of SAMP8 mice and
its possible mechanisms. Subjects were randomly divided into four groups: SAMR1
mice, SAMP8 mice and two SAMP8 mice groups treated, intragastrically, with
curcumin at the dose of 20 and 50mg/kg per day, respectively. After 25days,
spatial memory, superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity, malondialdehyde (MDA)
content, p-calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (p-CaMKII) and
p-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor subunit 1 (p-NMDAR1) expression in the
hippocampus of mice were examined by using the Morris water maze, biochemical
analysis, immunohistochemistry and Western blot. Compared with SAMR1 mice, SAMP8 
mice had longer escape latency, higher MDA content, lower SOD activity in the
hippocampus, and lower intensity of p-CaMKII in the stratum lucidum of
hippocampal CA3 and p-NMDAR1 expression in the hippocampal membrane fraction.
Both 20 and 50mg/kg curcumin administration significantly shortened the escape
latencies and decreased the hippocampal MDA content in the SAMP8 mice. 50mg/kg
curcumin administration significantly ameliorated the hippocampal SOD activity,
and increased the intensity of p-CaMKII in the stratum lucidum of hippocampal CA3
and p-NMDAR1 expression in the hippocampal membrane fraction of the SAMP8 mice.
The present study demonstrated that curcumin treatment could attenuate cognitive 
deficits of SAMP8 mice in a dose-dependent manner by decreasing the oxidative
stress and improving the expression of p-CaMKII and p-NMDAR1 in the hippocampus. 
Thus treatment with curcumin may have a potential therapeutic agent for
aging-related cognitive dysfunctions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23402943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Zootaxa. 2013 Jan 24;3608:547-60. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.3608.7.2.

Four new species of free-living marine nematodes of the family Comesomatidae
(Nematoda: Araeolaimida) from coast of Vietnam.

Gagarin VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inland Waters Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Borok,
Yaroslavl Province, 152742, Rusia; Email: gagarin@ibiw.yaroslavl.ru.

Specimens of four new nematode species of the family Comesomatidae were isolated 
from the sediments of littoral zone of South China Sea at the coast of Vietnam
and described and illustrated. Sabatieria curvispiculata sp. n. is characterized 
by the long and slender tail, short cephalic setae and strongly curved spicules
in males. Setosabatiera orientalis sp. n. is close to S. australis Riera, Nunez, 
Brito, 2006, but differs from it in the comparatively shorter and more slender
tail, small-er number of amphidial fovea turns, greater number of precloacal
supplements in males and shape and structure of spic-ules. Dorylaimopsis
intermedia sp. n. is morphologically closest to D. mediterranea Grimaldi-de Zio, 
1968 and D. magellanense Chen, Vincx, 1968, but differs from both species in the 
longer outer labial setae and absence of precloacal supplements in males. D.
brevispiculata sp. n. is similar to D. turneri Zhang, 1992 and D. coomansi
Muthumbi, Soetaert, Vincx, 1977, but differs from both species in the shape of
outer labial sensillae and absence of precloacal supplements in males. A
pictorial key for determination of valid species in the genus Setosabatieria
Rouville, 1903 is given.

PMID: 24614487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochemistry. 2012 May 22;51(20):4096-107. doi: 10.1021/bi300331v. Epub 2012 May 
14.

DNA binding regulates the self-association of the ETS domain of PU.1 in a
sequence-dependent manner.

Poon GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
WA 99164-6534, USA. gpoon@wsu.edu

The current paradigm of ETS transcription factors holds that their DNA-binding
(ETS) domain binds to a single sequence-specific site with strict 1:1
stoichiometry. PU.1 (Spi-1) is a lineage-restricted member of the ETS family that
is essential in normal hematopoietic development. Characterization of the binding
properties of the ETS domain of PU.1 by isothermal titration calorimetry revealed
that it binds a single sequence-specific binding site with 1:1 and 2:1
stoichiometry in a discrete, sequential, and negatively cooperative manner. While
both high-affinity- and low-affinity-specific sites exhibit this behavior, the
thermodynamics for each complex are highly differentiated. In the unbound state, 
the PU.1 ETS domain exists as a weak noncovalent homodimer that dissociates and
unfolds cooperatively. Thus, the PU.1 ETS domain exists as a monomeric and
dimeric species in both DNA-bound and free states. Structural characterization of
the protein-DNA interface by quantitative DNA footprinting revealed new minor
groove contacts and changes in the core consensus suggestive of increased DNA
distortion in the 2:1 complex. Together, the structural and thermodynamic data
support a model in which DNA binding dissociates a PU.1 ETS dimer to a 1:1
protein-DNA complex followed by, at higher concentrations, an asymmetric 2:1
complex. The implications of distinct monomeric and dimeric states on the known
structural biology of ETS domains as well as potential ETS-protein interactions
are discussed.

PMID: 22533913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2012 Jun;38(6):509-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2012.03.001. Epub
2012 Apr 3.

Cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy for colorectal peritoneal 
carcinomatosis: prognosis and treatment of recurrences in a cohort study.

Cashin PH(1), Graf W, Nygren P, Mahteme H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Section of Surgery, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. peter.cashin@surgsci.uu.se

Comment in
    Eur J Surg Oncol. 2012 Oct;38(10):1011; author reply 1012.

BACKGROUND: Cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IPC)
treatment of colorectal peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) is gaining acceptance, but
controversy remains. The primary aims were to analyse the outcome and prognostic 
variables of colorectal PC patients treated with CRS and IPC, and to report on
the outcome of additional surgical treatments of subsequent recurrences.
METHODS: Patients referred for treatment of colorectal PC between 1996 and 2010
were included in a cohort. The following data was collected: clinicopathological 
parameters, survival, recurrences, perioperative chemotherapy and type of IPC
(hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, HIPEC; or sequential postoperative
intraperitoneal chemotherapy, SPIC). Multivariable analyses were conducted on
potential prognostic factors for overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: In the 151-patient cohort, the median OS was 34 months (range: 2-77) for
CRS and HIPEC with five-year survival predicted at 40% (five-year disease-free
survival 32%). For CRS and SPIC, the OS was 25 months (range: 2-188) with
five-year survival at 18%. Open-and-close patients survived 6 months (range:
0-14) with no five-year survival (HIPEC vs. SPIC p = 0.047, SPIC vs.
open-and-close p < 0.001). Adjuvant systemic chemotherapy was a noteworthy
independent prognostic factor in the multivariable analysis. OS for patients
undergoing additional surgical treatment of recurrences was 25 months vs. 10
months with best supportive care or palliative chemotherapy (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Substantial long-term survival is possible in patients with
colorectal PC. HIPEC was associated with better OS than SPIC and adjuvant
systemic chemotherapy may improve the outcome in patients. Good OS is achievable 
in selected patients undergoing additional surgical treatment of isolated liver
or peritoneal recurrences after prior complete CRS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22475555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Jan;33(1):209-19. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr224. Epub 2011 Oct 
21.

Identification of the common regulators for hepatocellular carcinoma induced by
hepatitis B virus X antigen in a mouse model.

Lu JW(1), Hsia Y, Yang WY, Lin YI, Li CC, Tsai TF, Chang KW, Shieh GS, Tsai SF,
Wang HD, Yuh CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Taiwan.

Hepatitis B virus X antigen plays an important role in the development of human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The key regulators controlling the temporal
downstream gene expression for HCC progression remains unknown. In this study, we
took advantage of systems biology approach and analyzed the microarray data of
the HBx transgenic mouse as a screening process to identify the differentially
expressed genes and applied the software Pathway Studio to identify potential
pathways and regulators involved in HCC. Using subnetwork enrichment analysis, we
identified five common regulator genes: EDN1, BMP7, BMP4, SPIB and SRC.
Upregulation of the common regulators was validated in the other independent HBx 
transgenic mouse lines. Furthermore, we verified the correlation of their RNA
expression levels by using the human HCC samples, and their protein levels by
using the human liver disease tissue arrays. EDN1, bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) 4 and BMP7 were upregulated in cirrhosis, BMP4, BMP7 and SRC were further
upregulated in hepatocellular or cholangiocellular carcinoma samples. The trend
of increasing expression of the common regulators correlates well with the
progression of human liver cancer. Overexpression of the common regulators
increases the cell viability, promotes migration and invasiveness and enhances
the colony formation ability in Hep3B cells. Our approach allows us to identify
the critical genes in hepatocarcinogenesis in an HBx-induced mouse model. The
validation of the gene expressions in the liver cancer of human patients and
their cellular function assays suggests that the identified common regulators may
serve as useful molecular targets for the early-stage diagnosis or therapy for
HCC.

PMID: 22021908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Ann Oncol. 2012 Mar;23(3):647-52. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdr301. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Intraoperative hyperthermic versus postoperative normothermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy for colonic peritoneal carcinomatosis: a case-control study.

Cashin PH(1), Graf W, Nygren P, Mahteme H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Surgery, Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Sweden. peter.cashin@surgsci.uu.se

BACKGROUND: Cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy has improved
prognosis in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. The main modes of
intraperitoneal chemotherapy treatment are peroperative hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) and normothermic sequential postoperative
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (SPIC). The aim of this study was to compare HIPEC
and SPIC with respect to overall survival, disease-free survival, morbidity, and 
mortality in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis from colon cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A matched case-control study was conducted in patients with
surgical macroscopic complete removal of carcinomatosis; matching was according
to the peritoneal cancer index score. Thirty-two patients were included, 16 in
each group (HIPEC and SPIC). Overall survival, disease-free survival, morbidity, 
mortality, and clinicopathological parameters were compared.
RESULTS: Median overall survival was 36.5 months in the HIPEC group and 23.9
months in the SPIC group (P = 0.01). Median disease-free survival for these
groups was 22.8 (HIPEC) and 13.0 months (SPIC; P = 0.02). Morbidity was not
statistically different, 19% in SPIC and 37% in HIPEC. Postoperative mortality
was observed in one patient in each group.
CONCLUSION: HIPEC was associated with improved overall survival and disease-free 
survival compared with SPIC at similar morbidity and mortality, suggesting that
HIPEC is the treatment of choice in colonic peritoneal carcinomatosis.

PMID: 21685413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Virulence. 2011 May-Jun;2(3):208-16. Epub 2011 May 1.

A comprehensive study of the contribution of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium SPI2 effectors to bacterial colonization, survival, and replication
in typhoid fever, macrophage, and epithelial cell infection models.

Buckner MM(1), Croxen MA, Arena ET, Finlay BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Michael Smith Laboratories,
University of British Columbia, Canada.

Comment in
    Virulence. 2011 May-Jun;2(3):177-80.

Salmonella enterica serovars are Gram-negative bacterial pathogens responsible
for human diseases including gastroenteritis and typhoid fever. After ingestion, 
Salmonella cross the intestinal epithelial barrier, where they are phagocytosed
by macrophages and dendritic cells, which then enables their spread to systemic
sites during cases of typhoid fever. Salmonella use two type 3 secretion systems 
encoded by Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPI) 1 and 2 to inject virulence
proteins into host cells to modify cellular functions. SPI1 is involved in host
cell invasion and inflammation, whereas SPI2 is required for intracellular
survival and replication within phagocytes, and systemic spread. In this study
the contribution of nearly all known SPI2 effectors was examined in an in vivo
model of murine typhoid fever and cell culture models of macrophage and
epithelial cell infection. Unmarked, in-frame deletions of SPI2 effectors were
engineered in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium and the ability of the 16 different
mutants to colonize and replicate was examined. In the typhoid model, we found
that <U+0394>spvB and <U+0394>spiC mutants were attenuated for colonization of intestinal and
systemic sites, while the <U+0394>sseF mutant was attenuated in systemic organs. In
epithelial cells, all mutants replicated to the same extent as the wild-type. In 
macrophages, <U+0394>spiC, <U+0394>steC, <U+0394>spvB, <U+0394>ssseK1/K2/K3, <U+0394>sifA, and <U+0394>sifB strains
replicated poorly in comparison to wild-type Salmonella. This study provides a
thorough screen of the majority of the known SPI2 effectors evaluated under the
same conditions in various models of infection, providing a foundation for
comparative examination of the roles and interactions of these effectors.

PMCID: PMC3149682
PMID: 21540636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Immunol. 2010 Dec 15;185(12):7374-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001413. Epub 2010 
Nov 5.

Regulation of follicular B cell differentiation by the related E26
transformation-specific transcription factors PU.1, Spi-B, and Spi-C.

DeKoter RP(1), Geadah M, Khoosal S, Xu LS, Thillainadesan G, Torchia J, Chin SS, 
Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Centre for Human Immunology,
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario, Canada. rdekoter@schulich.uwo.ca

Splenic B-2 cells can be divided into two major subsets: follicular (FO) and
marginal zone (MZ) B cells. FO and MZ B cells are generated from immature
transitional B cells. Few transcription factors have been identified that
regulate FO B cell differentiation. The highly related proteins PU.1, Spi-B, and 
Spi-C are transcription factors of the E26-transformation-specific family and are
important for B cell differentiation and function. To determine whether these
proteins play a role in the differentiation of FO B cells, we performed a
detailed analysis of splenic B cells in mice with inactivating mutations in the
genes encoding PU.1 (Sfpi1) or Spi-B (Spib). Sfpi1(+/-) Spib(-/-) (PUB) mice had 
a 9-fold reduction in the frequency of CD23(+) FO B cells compared with that of
wild-type mice. In contrast, PUB mice had a 2-fold increase in the frequency of
MZ B cells that was confirmed by immunofluorescence staining. Expression of Spi-C
in Eµ-Spi-C transgenic PUB mice partially rescued frequencies of CD23(+) B cells.
Gene expression analysis, in vitro reporter assays, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that transcription of the Fcer2a gene
encoding CD23 is activated by PU.1, Spi-B, and Spi-C. These results demonstrate
that FO B cell differentiation is regulated by the E26-transformation-specific
transcription factors PU.1, Spi-B, and Spi-C.

PMID: 21057087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2010 Oct 4;4(9):555-9.

Distribution of pathogenicity islands among Colombian isolates of Salmonella.

Sánchez-Jiménez MM(1), Cardona-Castro N, Canu N, Uzzau S, Rubino S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Colombiano de Medicina Tropical- Universidad CES, Sabaneta,
Colombia. msanchez@ces.edu.co

INTRODUCTION: Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPIs) are regions scattered along
the bacterial chromosome, with an acknowledged pivotal role during
gastrointestinal and systemic infection. The distribution of SPIs has been
investigated in reference strains. However, there is a lack of studies on their
presence and/or assortment within the genomes of Salmonella enterica (S.
enterica) serovars that circulate in different geographical regions. Therefore,
in this study, we aimed to determine the presence of genes of the pathogenicity
islands 1 to 5 (SPI-1 to 5), in Salmonella clinical isolates from Colombian
patients with systemic and enteric outcomes.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 125 strains of S. enterica belonging to different
serovars were isolated from various clinical samples. Strains were identified and
screened for the presence of various genes located in pathogenicity islands. The 
genes tested were selected according to the attributed pathogenic function and
detected by PCR for the SPI-1 hilA and invA; for SPI-2 spiC and ttrC; for SPI-3
misL and mgtC; for SPI-4 orfL and SPI-4R; and for SPI-5 pipD and sopB.
RESULTS: Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 to 5 were detected in isolates from
patients with systemic and gastrointestinal infection. All the systemic isolates 
possessed all the genes tested; in contrast, 16 isolates from stool samples
lacked one or more sequences encoded by the SPI-3 and SPI-4 (p < 0.000001).
CONCLUSIONS: These results describe the heterogeneous distribution of
SPIs-encoded sequences within the genomes of Colombian clinical isolates, and
reveal important differences among systemic and stool sample isolates.

PMID: 21045367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Science. 2010 Nov 19;330(6007):1104-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1193004. Epub 2010
Oct 14.

PiggyBac transposon mutagenesis: a tool for cancer gene discovery in mice.

Rad R(1), Rad L, Wang W, Cadinanos J, Vassiliou G, Rice S, Campos LS, Yusa K,
Banerjee R, Li MA, de la Rosa J, Strong A, Lu D, Ellis P, Conte N, Yang FT, Liu
P, Bradley A.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton-Cambridge CB10 1SA,
UK.

Transposons are mobile DNA segments that can disrupt gene function by inserting
in or near genes. Here, we show that insertional mutagenesis by the PiggyBac
transposon can be used for cancer gene discovery in mice. PiggyBac transposition 
in genetically engineered transposon-transposase mice induced cancers whose type 
(hematopoietic versus solid) and latency were dependent on the regulatory
elements introduced into transposons. Analysis of 63 hematopoietic tumors
revealed that PiggyBac is capable of genome-wide mutagenesis. The PiggyBac screen
uncovered many cancer genes not identified in previous retroviral or Sleeping
Beauty transposon screens, including Spic, which encodes a PU.1-related
transcription factor, and Hdac7, a histone deacetylase gene. PiggyBac and
Sleeping Beauty have different integration preferences. To maximize the utility
of the tool, we engineered 21 mouse lines to be compatible with both transposon
systems in constitutive, tissue- or temporal-specific mutagenesis. Mice with
different transposon types, copy numbers, and chromosomal locations support wide 
applicability.

PMCID: PMC3719098
PMID: 20947725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Science. 2010 May 21;328(5981):1040-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1189000. Epub 2010
Apr 15.

pH sensing by intracellular Salmonella induces effector translocation.

Yu XJ(1), McGourty K, Liu M, Unsworth KE, Holden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Centre for Molecular Microbiology and Infection,
Imperial College London, Armstrong Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Comment in
    Science. 2010 May 21;328(5981):981-2.

Salmonella enterica is an important intracellular bacterial pathogen of humans
and animals. It replicates within host-cell vacuoles by delivering virulence
(effector) proteins through a vacuolar membrane pore made by the Salmonella
pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2) type III secretion system (T3SS). T3SS assembly
follows vacuole acidification, but when bacteria are grown at low pH, effector
secretion is negligible. We found that effector secretion was activated at low pH
from mutant strains lacking a complex of SPI-2-encoded proteins SsaM, SpiC, and
SsaL. Exposure of wild-type bacteria to pH 7.2 after growth at pH 5.0 caused
dissociation and degradation of SsaM/SpiC/SsaL complexes and effector secretion. 
In infected cells, loss of the pH 7.2 signal through acidification of host-cell
cytosol prevented complex degradation and effector translocation. Thus,
intravacuolar Salmonella senses host cytosolic pH, resulting in the degradation
of regulatory complex proteins and effector translocation.

PMID: 20395475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Infect Immun. 2009 Nov;77(11):5107-15. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00759-09. Epub 2009 Sep
8.

Codependent and independent effects of nitric oxide-mediated suppression of PhoPQ
and Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 on intracellular Salmonella enterica
serovar typhimurium survival.

Bourret TJ(1), Song M, Vázquez-Torres A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado at Denver School of
Medicine, Mail Stop 8333, P.O. Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Here we show that the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium PhoQ sensor kinase 
lessens the cytotoxicity of reactive nitrogen species (RNS) generated by
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in the innate response of mononuclear
phagocytic cells. This observation is consistent with the expression patterns of 
PhoP-activated genes during moderate nitrosative stress in the innate host
response. In contrast, RNS synthesized during high-NO fluxes of gamma interferon 
(IFN-gamma)-activated macrophages repress PhoP-activated lpxO, pagP, and phoP
gene transcription. Because PhoP-regulated Salmonella pathogenicity island 2
(SPI2) genes are also repressed by high-order RNS (39), we investigated whether
the NO-mediated inhibition of PhoPQ underlies the repression of SPI2. Our studies
indicate that a third of the expression of the SPI2 spiC gene recorded in
nonactivated macrophages depends on PhoQ. Transcription of spiC is repressed in
IFN-gamma-primed macrophages in an iNOS-dependent manner, irrespective of the
phoQ status of the bacteria. Transcription of spiC is restored in
IFN-gamma-treated, iNOS-deficient macrophages to levels sustained by a phoQ
mutant in nonactivated phagocytes, suggesting that most NO-dependent repression
of spiC is due to the inhibition of PhoPQ-independent targets. Comparison of the 
intracellular fitness of spiC, phoQ, and spiC phoQ mutants revealed that PhoPQ
and SPI2 have codependent and independent effects on S. Typhimurium survival
during innate nitrosative stress. However, the intracellular survival of most S. 
Typhimurium bacteria is conferred by the PhoPQ two-component regulator, and the
SPI2 type III secretion system is repressed by high-order RNS of
IFN-gamma-activated macrophages.

PMCID: PMC2772513
PMID: 19737903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):14984-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906554106. Epub 2009 Aug 18.

T cell receptor sharing by cytotoxic T lymphocytes facilitates efficient virus
control.

Chaudhri G(1), Quah BJ, Wang Y, Tan AH, Zhou J, Karupiah G, Parish CR.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity Group, Immunology Program, John Curtin School of
Medical Research, Australian National University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia.

A remarkable feature of the adaptive immune system is the speed at which small
numbers of antigen-specific lymphocytes can mediate a successful immune response.
Rapid expansion of T and B lymphocyte clones that have receptors specific for a
particular antigen is one of the primary means by which a swift response is
generated. Although much of this clonal expansion is caused by the division of
antigen-specific cells, here we demonstrate an additional mechanism by which the 
pool of effector T cells against a viral infection can quickly enlarge. Our data 
show that virus-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) can transfer their T 
cell receptors (TCR) to recipient CTL of an unrelated specificity that, as a
consequence, gain the antigen specificity of the donor T cell. This process
occurs within minutes via membrane exchange and results in the recipient CTL
acquiring the ability to recognize and eliminate cells targeted by the donor TCR,
while still retaining the antigen specificity of its own TCR. Such receptor
sharing allows rapid, proliferation-independent expansion of virus-specific T
cell clones of low frequency and plays a highly significant antiviral role that
can protect the host from an otherwise lethal infection.

PMCID: PMC2736460
PMID: 19706459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Aug 25;9:179. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-179.

Involvement of SPI-2-encoded SpiC in flagellum synthesis in Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium.

Uchiya K(1), Sugita A, Nikai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, Tempaku-ku,
Nagoya, Japan. kuchiya@ccmfs.meijo-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: SpiC encoded within Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 on the
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium chromosome is required for survival
within macrophages and systemic infection in mice. Additionally, SpiC contributes
to Salmonella-induced activation of the signal transduction pathways in
macrophages by affecting the expression of FliC, a component of flagella
filaments. Here, we show the contribution of SpiC in flagellum synthesis.
RESULTS: Quantitative RT-PCR shows that the expression levels of the class 3 fliD
and motA genes that encode for the flagella cap and motor torque proteins,
respectively, were lower for a spiC mutant strain than for the wild-type
Salmonella. Further, this mutant had lower expression levels of the class 2 genes
including the fliA gene encoding the flagellar-specific alternative sigma factor.
We also found differences in flagella assembly between the wild-type strain and
the spiC mutant. Many flagella filaments were observed on the bacterial surface
of the wild-type strain, whereas the spiC mutant had only few flagella. The
absence of spiC led to reduced expression of the FlhD protein, which functions as
the master regulator in flagella gene expression, although no significant
difference at the transcription level of the flhDC operon was observed between
the wild-type strain and the spiC mutant.
CONCLUSION: The data show that SpiC is involved in flagella assembly by affecting
the post-transcription expression of flhDC.

PMCID: PMC2782266
PMID: 19706157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2009 Mar;56(3):880-4. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2008.2008725. Epub
2008 Nov 7.

Breast tumor classification of ultrasound images using a reversible round-off
nonrecursive 1-D discrete periodic wavelet transform.

Lee HW(1), Liu BD, Hung KC, Lei SF, Tsai CF, Wang PC, Yang TL, Lu JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan
701, Taiwan. wei@spic.ee.ncku.edu.tw

The infiltrative nature of lesions is a significant feature of malignant breast
lesion on ultrasound image. Characterizing the infiltrative nature of lesions
with computationally inexpensive and highly efficacious features is crucial for
the realization of a computer-aided diagnosis system. In this study, the
infiltrative nature is regarded as an energy that produces irregularly and
considerably local variances in a 1-D signal. The local variances can be
characterized by a few high octave energies (i.e., the channel energies close to 
low-frequency bands) in a 1-D discrete periodic wavelet transform. For
computational cost reduction, high octave decomposition is performed by a
reversible round-off 1-D nonrecursive discrete periodic wavelet transform. A test
dataset of breast sonograms with the lesion contour delineated by an experienced 
physician and two inexperienced persons is built for feature efficacy evaluation.
High individual performance results imply that the proposed feature is well
correlated with the diagnosis of the experienced physician. Experimental results 
also reveal that with a great performance improvement, the proposed feature is
suitable for the combination with some morphometric parameters.

PMID: 19272877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nature. 2009 Jan 15;457(7227):318-21. doi: 10.1038/nature07472. Epub 2008 Nov 26.

Role for Spi-C in the development of red pulp macrophages and splenic iron
homeostasis.

Kohyama M(1), Ise W, Edelson BT, Wilker PR, Hildner K, Mejia C, Frazier WA,
Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Tissue macrophages comprise a heterogeneous group of cell types differing in
location, surface markers and function. Red pulp macrophages are a distinct
splenic subset involved in removing senescent red blood cells. Transcription
factors such as PU.1 (also known as Sfpi1) and C/EBPalpha (Cebpa) have general
roles in myelomonocytic development, but the transcriptional basis for producing 
tissue macrophage subsets remains unknown. Here we show that Spi-C (encoded by
Spic), a PU.1-related transcription factor, selectively controls the development 
of red pulp macrophages. Spi-C is highly expressed in red pulp macrophages, but
not monocytes, dendritic cells or other tissue macrophages. Spic(-/-) mice have a
cell-autonomous defect in the development of red pulp macrophages that is
corrected by retroviral Spi-C expression in bone marrow cells, but have normal
monocyte and other macrophage subsets. Red pulp macrophages highly express genes 
involved in capturing circulating haemoglobin and in iron regulation. Spic(-/-)
mice show normal trapping of red blood cells in the spleen, but fail to
phagocytose these red blood cells efficiently, and develop an iron overload
localized selectively to splenic red pulp. Thus, Spi-C controls development of
red pulp macrophages required for red blood cell recycling and iron homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2756102
PMID: 19037245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Z Naturforsch C. 2004 May-Jun;59(5-6):405-7.

Complete reduction of 2H-pyran-2-one moiety of coumarin and 6-methyl coumarin by 
Colletotrichum capsici.

Kumari GN(1), Ganesh MR, Anitha R, Sivasubramanian A.

Author information: 
(1)T R Govindachari Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation,
Chennai, India. gnkgroup@yahoo.co.uk

The microbial transformation of coumarin (1) and 6-methyl coumarin (2) using
Colletotrichum capsici gave 2-(3'-hydroxypropyl) phenol (3) and
2-(3'-hydroxypropyl)-4-methyl phenol (4). The phytopathogenic fungi effectively
reduced the 2H-pyran-2-one moiety of both parent coumarins to respective
alcohols.

PMID: 18998410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Microbiology. 2008 Nov;154(Pt 11):3491-502. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/021667-0.

Salmonella virulence factor SpiC is involved in expression of flagellin protein
and mediates activation of the signal transduction pathways in macrophages.

Uchiya K(1), Nikai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, Tempaku-ku,
Nagoya, Japan. kuchiya@ccmfs.meijo-u.ac.jp

SpiC is a virulence factor encoded within Salmonella pathogenicity island 2
(SPI-2). We have previously reported that infection of macrophages with
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium results in the SPI-2-dependent activation
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathways, leading to
the expression of suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS)-3, which is involved
in the inhibition of cytokine signalling. Here, we investigated the mechanism by 
which SpiC mediates the activation of signal transduction pathways in
macrophages. Proteomic analysis showed that the level of FliC protein, a
component of the flagellar filaments, was lower in the culture supernatant of a
spiC mutant than in the supernatant from wild-type Salmonella. Furthermore,
quantitative real-time RT-PCR showed that this mutant had a much lower level of
fliC mRNA, indicating that SpiC regulates the transcription of FliC. We also
found that the level of SOCS-3 in J774 macrophages was lower when they were
infected with the fliC mutant than with wild-type Salmonella. FliC participated
in the activation of MAPK pathways in Salmonella-infected macrophages, leading to
the upregulation of SOCS-3 expression. Collectively, these results indicate that 
SpiC is involved in the expression of FliC, which plays a significant role in the
SPI-2-dependent activation of MAPK pathways in Salmonella-infected macrophages.

PMID: 18957602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2587-99. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838323.

Transgenic expression of Spi-C impairs B-cell development and function by
affecting genes associated with BCR signaling.

Zhu X(1), Schweitzer BL, Romer EJ, Sulentic CE, DeKoter RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0524, USA.

Spi-C is an Ets family transcription factor closely related to PU.1 and Spi-B.
Expression of Spi-C is developmentally regulated in the B-cell lineage, but its
function remains unknown. To determine the function of Spi-C in B-cell
development, we generated mice expressing a B-cell-specific Spi-C transgene under
the control of the IgH intronic enhancer. Spi-C transgenic mice had 50% fewer B
cells than wild-type littermates. Flow cytometric analyses showed that splenic
transitional B cells and bone marrow pre-B or immature B cells from transgenic
mice were dramatically reduced compared with those of wild type. Both nonspecific
and Ag-specific serum IgM levels were significantly increased in transgenic mice,
while serum IgG levels were significantly decreased compared with wild type.
Spi-C transgenic B cells proliferated poorly after stimulation by anti-IgM or
anti-CD40 in vitro, although they responded normally to LPS stimulation. Using
real-time RT-PCR, we found that several BCR signaling-related mediators were
downregulated at pre-B-cell and mature B-cell stages in transgenic mice, while an
inhibitor of BCR signaling was upregulated. Taken together, these data indicate
that ectopic expression of Spi-C can impair B-cell development and function by
affecting genes associated with BCR signaling.

PMCID: PMC4457361
PMID: 18792411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2008 Mar;52(2):194-201. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2007.00364.x. Epub 2008 Jan 31.

Identification of Salmonella SPI-2 secretion system components required for
SpvB-mediated cytotoxicity in macrophages and virulence in mice.

Browne SH(1), Hasegawa P, Okamoto S, Fierer J, Guiney DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine 0640, School of Medicine, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0640, USA. shbrowne@ucsd.edu

The Salmonella SpvB protein possesses ADP-ribosyl transferase activity. SpvB,
acting as an intracellular toxin, covalently modifies monomeric actin, leading to
loss of F-actin filaments in Salmonella-infected human macrophages. Using defined
Salmonella mutants, different functional components of the SPI-2 type three
secretion system (TTSS), ssaV, spiC, sseB, sseC, and sseD, were found to be
required for SpvB-mediated actin depolymerization in human macrophages.
Expression of SpvB protein in Salmonella was not affected by any of the SPI-2
mutants and the effects of these loci were not due to reduced numbers of
intracellular bacteria. Interestingly, the major SPI-2 virulence effector, SifA, 
is not required for SpvB action. Further, caspase-3 activation is an additional
marker of cytotoxicity in Salmonella-infected human macrophages. Caspase-3
activity depended on SpvB and SPI-2 TTSS function, but not on SifA. These human
macrophage cell culture results were corroborated by virulence studies in mice.
Using competitive infection of mice with mixed inocula of single and double
mutants, spvBmut1 mutation did not have an effect independent of ssaJ mutation,
essential for SPI-2 TTSS function. In contrast, competitive infection studies in 
mice confirmed that SpvB and SifA have independent virulence effects, as
predicted by the macrophage studies.

PMID: 18248436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Genome Inform. 2008;21:77-88.

Protein complex prediction based on mutually exclusive interactions in protein
interaction network.

Jung SH(1), Jang WH, Hur HY, Hyun B, Han DS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering, Information and Communications University, Yuseong-gu, 
Daejeon, Korea. jsh@icu.ac.kr

The increasing amount of available Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) data enables
scalable methods for the protein complex prediction. A protein complex is a group
of two or more proteins formed by interactions that are stable over time, and it 
generally corresponds to a dense sub-graph in PPI Network (PPIN). However, dense 
sub-graphs correspond not only to stable protein complexes but also to sets of
proteins including dynamic interactions. As a result, conventional simple PPIN
based graph-theoretic clustering methods have high false positive rates in
protein complex prediction. In this paper, we propose an approach to predict
protein complexes based on the integration of PPI data and mutually exclusive
interaction information drawn from structural interface data of protein domains. 
The extraction of Simultaneous Protein Interaction Cluster (SPIC) is the essence 
of our approach, which excludes interaction conflicts in network clusters by
achieving mutually exclusion among interactions. The concept of SPIC was applied 
to conventional graph-theoretic clustering algorithms, MCODE and LCMA, to
evaluate the density of clusters for protein complex prediction. The comparison
with original graph-theoretic clustering algorithms verified the effectiveness of
our approach; SPIC based methods refined false positives of original methods to
be true positive complexes, without any loss of true positive predictions yielded
by original methods.

PMID: 19425149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Infect Immun. 2007 Nov;75(11):5346-52. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Constitutive acid sphingomyelinase enhances early and late macrophage killing of 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

McCollister BD(1), Myers JT, Jones-Carson J, Voelker DR, Vázquez-Torres A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mail Box 8333, UCHSC School of Medicine at
Fitzsimons, P.O. Box 6511, Room P18-9120, Aurora, CO 80010, USA.

We have identified acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) as an important player in the
early and late anti-Salmonella activity of macrophages. A functional ASM
participated in the killing activity of macrophages against wild-type Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium. The role of ASM in early macrophage killing of
Salmonella appears to be linked to an active NADPH phagocyte oxidase enzymatic
complex, since the flavoprotein inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium not only blocked a 
productive respiratory burst but also abrogated the survival advantage of
Salmonella in macrophages lacking ASM. Lack of ASM activity also increased the
intracellular survival of an isogenic DeltaspiC::FRT Salmonella strain deficient 
in a translocator and effector of the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI2)
type III secretion system, suggesting that the antimicrobial activity associated 
with ASM is manifested regardless of the SPI2 status of the bacteria.
Constitutively expressed ASM is responsible for the role that this
lipid-metabolizing hydrolase plays in the innate host defense of macrophages
against Salmonella. Accordingly, the ASM activity and intracellular concentration
and composition of ceramide, gangliosides, and neutral sphingolipids did not
increase upon Salmonella infection. Salmonella triggered, nonetheless, a
significant increase in the secreted fraction of ASM. Collectively, these
findings have elucidated a novel role for constitutive ASM in the anti-Salmonella
activity of murine macrophages.

PMCID: PMC2168317
PMID: 17698574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ). 2007 May;36(5):261-5.

Tape blisters after hip surgery: can they be eliminated completely?

Koval KJ(1), Egol KA, Hiebert R, Spratt KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, New York University/Hospital for Joint
Diseases, New York, New York 10003, USA. kjkmd@yahoo.com

It was recently reported that use of a perforated, stretchable cloth tape instead
of silk tape reduced the incidenc of postoperative blisters around the hip from
41% to 10%. The present prospective randomized study was conducted to determine
whether use of spica bandage (vs the cloth tape) could further reduce or
eliminate the incidence of these blisters. Patients were randomized to 2 treatmen
groups: perforated, stretchable cloth tape (Hypafix; Smit & Nephew, Memphis,
Tenn) and elastic spica bandage tha was started at the lower thigh and was
extended aroun the hip and abdomen. After surgery, cloth tape or spic bandage was
applied over the postoperative dressing, with care taken not to produce skin
tension. At the first dressing change, presence or absence of blisters was
recorded, along with their number, size, location, and type. All subsequent
dressing changes were done much as they wer at surgery, using the assigned type
of dressing. Presence or absence of blisters was recorded at each subsequent
dressing change. Two hundred ninety-four patients (300 hips) were enrolled.
Twenty-two (7.33%) of the 300 hips developed a blister. Risk for developing a
blister was 10% with the cloth tape versus 4.67% with the elastic spica bandage
(P < .09). Surgery type (arthroplasty vs open reduction and internal fixation
[ORIF], P < .03) and surgery duration (P < .05) had more of an effect on
postoperative blister formation than dressing type.

PMID: 17571831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jun;37(6):1613-20.

B-1a cells are imprinted by the microenvironment in spleen and peritoneum.

Stoermann B(1), Kretschmer K, Düber S, Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology, HZI, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany.

B-1a cells are found mainly in the peritoneal cavity of mice but are also present
in the spleen. Gene expression profiling defined many genes differentially
expressed in B-1a cells from these two sites. To see whether this gene expression
pattern was imprinted by the particular microenvironment, peritoneal or spleen
cells from recombinant L2 mice mainly consisting of B-1a cells were adoptively
transferred into Rag1-/- mice. Re-isolated peritoneal and splenic B-1a cells were
analyzed for expression of three indicator genes--vcam-1, adamdec1 and spi-c. The
expression of these genes was up-regulated in splenic and down-regulated in
peritoneal cells. This particular pattern was observed for peritoneal or splenic 
donor cells transferred either intraperitoneally or intravenously. Similar
results were obtained when levels of surface IgM or frequencies of Mac-1+ B-1
cells were compared after transfer. This suggests that the environment induces
the particular genetic program of B-1a cells and argues against an independent
ontogeny.

PMID: 17492803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Prod Res. 2007 May;21(5):469-72.

Optimization of solvents for effective isolation of colchicines from Gloriosa
superba L. seeds.

Kannan S(1), Wesley SD, Ruba A, Rajalakshmi AR, Kumaragurubaran K.

Author information: 
(1)SPIC Science Foundation, Chemical Technology Division, SPIC Nagar, Thoothukudi
628 005, Tamil Nadu, India.

To meet the strong demand of colchicine an attempt is made to optimize the
solvent system for isolation of colchicine. Gloriosa superba dried seed powder
was extracted by using different solvents. Maximum yield of colchicine was
obtained when extracted with water and alcohol in the ratio of 50 : 50.

PMID: 17487621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 27;104(13):5360-5. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Structure of limonene synthase, a simple model for terpenoid cyclase catalysis.

Hyatt DC(1), Youn B, Zhao Y, Santhamma B, Coates RM, Croteau RB, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washingston State University, Pullman, WA
99164-6340, USA.

The crystal structure of (4S)-limonene synthase from Mentha spic ata, a metal
ion-dependent monoterpene cyclase that catalyzes the coupled isomerization and
cyclization of geranyl diphosphate, is reported at 2.7-A; resolution in two forms
liganded to the substrate and intermediate analogs, 2-fluorogeranyl diphosphate
and 2-fluorolinalyl diphosphate, respectively. The implications of these findings
are described for domain interactions in the homodimer and for changes in
diphosphate-metal ion coordination and substrate binding conformation in the
course of the multistep reaction.

PMCID: PMC1838495
PMID: 17372193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Infect Immun. 2006 Nov;74(11):6438-48.

Virulent Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium evades adaptive immunity by
preventing dendritic cells from activating T cells.

Tobar JA(1), Carreño LJ, Bueno SM, González PA, Mora JE, Quezada SA, Kalergis AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Alameda #340, Santiago,
Chile.

Dendritic cells (DCs) constitute the link between innate and adaptive immunity by
directly recognizing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) in bacteria
and by presenting bacterial antigens to T cells. Recognition of PAMPs renders DCs
as professional antigen-presenting cells able to prime naïve T cells and initiate
adaptive immunity against bacteria. Therefore, interfering with DC function would
promote bacterial survival and dissemination. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms that have evolved in virulent bacteria to evade activation of adaptive
immunity requires the characterization of virulence factors that interfere with
DC function. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, the causative agent of
typhoid-like disease in the mouse, can prevent antigen presentation to T cells by
avoiding lysosomal degradation in DCs. Here, we show that this feature of
virulent Salmonella applies in vivo to prevent activation of adaptive immunity.
In addition, this attribute of virulent Salmonella requires functional expression
of a type three secretion system (TTSS) and effector proteins encoded within the 
Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2). In contrast to wild-type virulent
Salmonella, mutant strains carrying specific deletions of SPI-2 genes encoding
TTSS components or effectors proteins are targeted to lysosomes and are no longer
able to prevent DCs from activating T cells in vitro or in vivo. SPI-2 mutant
strains are attenuated in vivo, showing reduced tissue colonization and enhanced 
T-cell activation, which confers protection against a challenge with wild-type
virulent Salmonella. Our data suggest that impairment of DC function by the
activity of SPI-2 gene products is crucial for Salmonella pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1695529
PMID: 17057096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2006 Nov 15;114(1-2):15-24. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Adjuvant and immunostimulatory effects of beta-glucan administration in
combination with lipopolysaccharide enhances survival and some immune parameters 
in carp challenged with Aeromonas hydrophila.

Selvaraj V(1), Sampath K, Sekar V.

Author information: 
(1)Spic Research and Development, Spic Limited, Tuticorin 628005, Tamil Nadu,
India.

Combined effects of beta-glucan and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on survival and
immune response were studied in Cyprinus carpio that were challenged with the
pathogen Aeromonas hydrophila. beta-Glucan from Saccharomyces cervisiae and LPS
from a virulent strain of A. hydrophila were used in this study. Different
concentrations of beta-glucan+LPS mixture were administered on days 1, 7, and 14 
through different routes (intraperitoneal injection, bathing, and oral
administration). Control and test fish were challenged by intraperitoneal
injection of LD50 concentration of A. hydrophila on day 16 and subsequently,
mortality and relative percent survival (RPS) were recorded. Intraperitoneal
injection elicited 100% RPS even at the lowest concentration (100 microg
beta-glucan+10 microg LPS); whereas, oral administration improved RPS rate of
carps at higher concentration (1% beta-glucan+0.25% LPS). Bathing did not improve
the RPS. Test animals injected with even the minimum dose of the immunomodulators
(100 microg beta-glucan+10 microg LPS/fish) had a significant increase in total
blood leukocyte counts and an increase in the proportion of neutrophils and
monocytes. Superoxide anion production by macrophages was also elevated, which
presumably aided the efficient killing of bacterial pathogen. Lower concentration
of beta-glucan+LPS had an adjuvant effect on antibody production as pretreatment 
by injection of 100 microg beta-glucan+10 microg LPS/fish resulted in higher
antibody titer against A. hydrophila following vaccination. RT-PCR analyses
showed that the expression of interleukin-1beta mRNA did not increase in test
fish when compared with the control. Classical and alternative complement
pathways were not affected by either the dose or the route of administration of
the compounds. It may be concluded that intraperitoneal injection and oral
administration, and not the bathing, of beta-glucan+LPS mixture in carp could
enhance resistance to challenge by A. hydrophila through changes in several
non-specific and specific immune responses.

PMID: 16919782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2006 Jul;24(3):212-5.

Prevalence of dermatophytes and other fungal agents isolated from clinical
samples.

Kannan P(1), Janaki C, Selvi GS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, SPIC Sciences Foundation, Chennai - 600 032,
Tamilnadu, India.

The common cause of skin infections are dermatophytes and opportunistic fungi.
Aim of this study was to isolate and identify the fungal agents from clinical
samples from patients with different mycoses. Clinical samples from 165 patients 
were subjected to potassium hydroxide (KOH) examination and culture isolation;
causative agents were identified macroscopically and microscopically. All the 165
specimens were KOH positive and 110/165 (66.7%) samples were culture positive. Of
these, highest isolation rate was obtained in opportunistic mycoses such as
candidiasis (29/29, 100%). Dermatophytes were isolated in 53/80 (66.3%) specimens
and Trichophyton rubrum was the commonest isolate in skin samples (17/24) among
the patients suffering from dermatophytosis. Phaeoannellomyces wernecki was
isolated in a patient suffering from tinea nigra. The study signifies the
importance of mycological examination in the diagnosis of various mycoses for
their effective management.

PMID: 16912443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 15;177(4):2195-207.

Spi-C has opposing effects to PU.1 on gene expression in progenitor B cells.

Schweitzer BL(1), Huang KJ, Kamath MB, Emelyanov AV, Birshtein BK, DeKoter RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267,
USA.

The Ets transcription factor Spi-C, expressed in B cells and macrophages, is
closely related to PU.1 and has the ability to recognize the same DNA consensus
sequence. However, the function of Spi-C has yet to be determined. The purpose of
this study is to further examine Spi-C activity in B cell development. First,
using retroviral vectors to infect PU.1(-/-) fetal liver progenitors, Spi-C was
found to be inefficient at inducing cytokine-dependent proliferation and
differentiation of progenitor B (pro-B) cells or macrophages relative to PU.1 or 
Spi-B. Next, Spi-C was ectopically expressed in fetal liver-derived,
IL-7-dependent pro-B cell lines. Wild-type (WT) pro-B cells ectopically
expressing Spi-C (WT-Spi-C) have several phenotypic characteristics of pre-B
cells such as increased CD25 and decreased c-Kit surface expression. In addition,
WT-Spi-C pro-B cells express increased levels of IgH sterile transcripts and
reduced levels of expression and transcription of the FcgammaRIIb gene. Gel-shift
analysis suggests that Spi-C, ectopically expressed in pro-B cells, can bind PU.1
consensus sites in the IgH intronic enhancer and FcgammaRIIb promoter. Transient 
transfection analysis demonstrated that PU.1 functions to repress the IgH
intronic enhancer and activate the FcgammaRIIb promoter, while Spi-C opposes
these activities. WT-Spi-C pro-B cells have reduced levels of dimethylation on
lysine 9 of histone H3 within the IgH 3' regulatory region, indicating that Spi-C
can contribute to removal of repressive features in the IgH locus. Overall, these
studies suggest that Spi-C may promote B cell differentiation by modulating the
activity of PU.1-dependent genes.

PMID: 16887979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 14;281(28):19145-55. Epub 2006 May 11.

Spi-1/PU.1 oncoprotein affects splicing decisions in a promoter binding-dependent
manner.

Guillouf C(1), Gallais I, Moreau-Gachelin F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, INSERM U528, Paris 75248, France. guillouf.christel@curie.fr

The expression of the Spi-1/PU.1 transcription factor is tightly regulated as a
function of the hematopoietic lineage. It is required for myeloid and B lymphoid 
differentiation. When overexpressed in mice, Spi-1 is associated with the
emergence of transformed proerythroblasts unable to differentiate. In the course 
of a project undertaken to characterize the oncogenic function of Spi-1, we found
that Spi-1 interacts with proteins of the spliceosome in Spi-1-transformed
proerythroblasts and participates in alternative splice site selection. Because
Spi-1 is a transcription factor, it could be hypothesized that these two
functions are coordinated. Here, we have developed a system allowing the
characterization of transcription and splicing from a single target. It is shown 
that Spi-1 is able to regulate alternative splicing of a pre-mRNA for a gene
whose transcription it regulates. Using a combination of Spi-1 mutants and
Spi-1-dependent promoters, we demonstrate that Spi-1 must bind and transactivate 
a given promoter to favor the use of the proximal 5' alternative site. This
establishes that Spi-1 affects splicing decisions in a promoter binding-dependent
manner. These results provide new insight into how Spi-1 may act in the blockage 
of differentiation by demonstrating that it can deregulate gene expression and
also modify the nature of the products generated from target genes.

PMID: 16698794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 16;344(4):1155-60. Epub 2006 May 2.

SPI-C and STAT6 can cooperate to stimulate IgE germline transcription.

Carlsson R(1), Thorell K, Liberg D, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, Lund University, BMC I:13, 22184 Lund, Sweden.

SPI-C is a novel ETS protein that is expressed in B lymphocytes. No target gene
for SPI-C has so far been defined. We have performed a yeast two-hybrid screen
using SPI-C as bait in order to further analyze the functional role of this
orphan transcription factor. We found that SPI-C interacted specifically with the
C-terminus of STAT6 in yeast. By co-immunoprecipitation in transfected COS7 cells
the physical interaction between SPI-C and STAT6 was confirmed. Furthermore, this
protein-protein interaction is functional since we could demonstrate that SPI-C
and STAT6 stimulated IL4 induced Iepsilon transcription synergistically but only 
when both proteins bound to DNA. Thus, a protein interaction between SPI-C and
STAT6 is the basis for a novel mechanism for regulation of IL4 induced gene
expression.

PMID: 16647686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 2;344(2):675-9. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

The role of ETS transcription factors in transcription and development of mouse
preimplantation embryos.

Kageyama S(1), Liu H, Nagata M, Aoki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8571, Japan.

Embryonic transcription is a crucial process for the creation of new life. To
clarify the mechanism of embryonic transcription, we investigated the expression 
and function of the erythroblast transformation specific (ETS) domain containing 
transcription factors (TFs) during preimplantation development in mice. The
expression levels of several ETS TFs, i.e., etsrp71, elf3, and spic, increased
after fertilization and remained at a high level until the blastocyst stage. To
clarify the function of these TFs, we performed gene suppression using RNA
interference, which revealed that they were involved in regulating development to
the blastocyst stage. Furthermore, we found that suppression of ETS TFs affected 
the transcription of eIF-1A and oct3/4 genes whose expression is regulated by
TATA-less promoters in the embryos. These results suggest that ETS TFs function
in the regulation of transcription with TATA-less promoters in preimplantation
embryos, which is essential in preimplantation development.

PMID: 16630543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Pathol. 2005 Sep;167(3):813-21.

Neutral lipids and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-{gamma} control
pulmonary gene expression and inflammation-triggered pathogenesis in lysosomal
acid lipase knockout mice.

Lian X(1), Yan C, Qin Y, Knox L, Li T, Du H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, or Hong Du, Ph.D., Division of Human Genetics, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

The functional roles of neutral lipids in the lung are poorly understood.
However, blocking cholesteryl ester and triglyceride metabolism in lysosomal acid
lipase gene knockout mice (lal-/-) results in severe pathogenic phenotypes in the
lung, including massive neutrophil infiltration, foamy macrophage accumulation,
unwanted cell growth, and emphysema. To elucidate the mechanism underlining these
pathologies, we performed Affymetrix GeneChip microarray analysis of 1-, 3-, and 
6-month-old mice and identified aberrant gene expression that progressed with
age. Among changed genes, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-12, apoptosis inhibitor 
6 (Api-6), erythroblast transformation-specific domain (Ets) transcription factor
family member Spi-C, and oncogene MafB were increased 100-, 70-, 40-, and
10-fold, respectively, in lal-/- lungs versus the wild-type lungs. The pathogenic
increases of these molecules occurred primarily in alveolar type II epithelial
cells. Transcriptional activities of the MMP-12 and Api-6 promoters were
stimulated by Spi-C or MafB in respiratory epithelial cells. Treatment with
9-hydroxyoctadecanoic acids and ciglitazone significantly rescued lal-/-
pulmonary inflammation and aberrant gene expression. In addition, both compounds 
as well as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma inhibited MMP-12 and 
Api-6 promoter activities. These data suggest that inflammation-triggered cell
growth and emphysema during lysosomal acid lipase deficiency are partially caused
by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma inactivation.

PMCID: PMC1698726
PMID: 16127159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Infect Immun. 2005 Sep;73(9):5587-94.

Salmonella pathogenicity island 2-dependent expression of suppressor of cytokine 
signaling 3 in macrophages.

Uchiya K(1), Nikai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, 150
Yagotoyama, Tempaku-ku, Nagoya 468-8503, Japan. kuchiya@ccmfs.meijo-u.ac.jp

Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2), which is located at centisome 30.7 on 
the chromosome of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, is required for growth
within macrophages and systemic infection in mice. We recently reported that the 
infection of macrophages with Salmonella induces the expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 in a manner dependent on SPI-2. In the present study, gene
expression analysis using a cDNA array further showed the involvement of SPI-2 in
the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS-3), which is involved 
in the inhibition of cytokine signaling via the Janus kinase/signal transducer
and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway. A high level of
SOCS-3 expression was induced in J774 macrophages infected with wild-type
Salmonella compared to that in macrophages infected with a strain carrying a
mutation in the spiC gene within SPI-2. Other members of the SOCS family were not
detected in Salmonella-infected macrophages. The SPI-2-induced up-regulation of
SOCS-3 expression was dependent on activation of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling pathway. Furthermore, the
inhibition of gamma-interferon-induced STAT-1 and interleukin-6-induced STAT-3
tyrosine phosphorylation correlated with the expression of SOCS-3. Taken
together, these results indicate that Salmonella causes SPI-2-dependent
activation of ERK1/2, leading to SOCS-3 expression, which in turn inhibits
cytokine signaling via the JAK/STAT pathway.

PMCID: PMC1231068
PMID: 16113275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Jul;57(1):85-96.

The PhoP/PhoQ system controls the intramacrophage type three secretion system of 
Salmonella enterica.

Bijlsma JJ(1), Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8230, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, 
St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Spi/Ssa is a unique type three secretion system that functions exclusively when
Salmonella enterica is inside eukaryotic cells. Expression of the Spi/Ssa system 
and its secreted effectors is dependent on SsrB/SpiR, a two-component regulatory 
system encoded in the SPI-2 pathogenicity island that also harbours the spi/ssa
genes. Here we determine that the PhoP/PhoQ two-component system controls the
intramacrophage expression of spi/ssa genes by regulating the SsrB/SpiR system.
We establish that PhoP regulates transcription of the response regulator SsrB and
demonstrate binding of the PhoP protein to the ssrB promoter both in vivo using
chromatin immunoprecipitation in Salmonella-infected macrophages, and in vitro
using purified PhoP protein. We show that PhoP controls the SpiR sensor
post-transcriptionally and identify a region in the 5' untranslated region of the
spiR message that is required for this effect. The demonstration that the
PhoP/PhoQ system is directly involved in the regulation of the SPI-2
pathogenicity island highlights PhoP/PhoQ's central role in Salmonella virulence.
We suggest that different regulatory systems convey distinct signals over time to
produce the SsrB/SpiR system, which then modulates expression of the Spi/Ssa
apparatus and secreted effectors.

PMID: 15948951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2005 Oct;19(4):293-306. Epub 2005 Apr 18.

Administration of yeast glucan enhances survival and some non-specific and
specific immune parameters in carp (Cyprinus carpio) infected with Aeromonas
hydrophila.

Selvaraj V(1), Sampath K, Sekar V.

Author information: 
(1)Spic Research and Development, Spic Limited, Tuticorin 628 005, Tamilnadu,
India. sselvarajv@yahoo.co.in

Effects of beta-glucan administration on survival and immune modulations were
studied in Cyprinus carpio against the bacterial pathogen, Aeromonas hydrophila. 
Beta-glucan was extracted from Saccharomyces cervisiae and purified. A virulent
strain of the pathogen A. hydrophila was collected from infected fish. Different 
concentrations of beta-glucan were administered to test animals on day 1, 3 and 5
through different routes (intraperitoneal injection (ip), bathing and oral
administration). Control and test animals were challenged by ip injection of LD50
concentration of A. hydrophila on day 7 and mortality was observed and Relative
Percent Survival (RPS) was calculated. Intraperitoneal injection of 500 microg of
glucan significantly enhanced the RPS; bathing and oral administration of glucan 
did not influence the RPS. On day 7, test animals injected with 100, 500 and 1000
microg of glucan had a significant increase in total blood leucocyte counts and
an increase in the proportion of neutrophils and monocytes. Superoxide anion
production by kidney macrophages was also elevated. RT-PCR and northern blot
analysis of interleukin-1 mRNA showed elevated expression in kidney on day 7 in
fish injected with glucan. Glucan had an adjuvant effect on antibody production
as pretreatment by injection of 100-1000 microg glucan/fish resulted in the
highest antibody titer against A. hydrophila following vaccination. Classical and
alternative complement pathways were not affected by glucan administration by any
of the three routes.

PMID: 15863011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Infect Immun. 2004 Dec;72(12):6860-9.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection induces cyclooxygenase 2
expression in macrophages: involvement of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2.

Uchiya K(1), Nikai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, 150
Yagotoyama, Tenpaku-ku, Nagoya 468-8503, Japan. kuchiya@ccmfs.meijo-u.ac.jp

Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2) is required for intramacrophage
survival and systemic infection in mice. We have recently reported that
Salmonella enterica causes activation of the protein kinase A (PKA) signaling
pathway in a manner dependent on SPI-2, resulting in the upregulation of
interleukin-10 expression in macrophages (K. Uchiya et al., Infect. Immun.
72:1964-1973, 2004). We show in the present study the involvement of SPI-2 in a
signal transduction pathway that induces the expression of cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2), an inducible enzyme involved in the synthesis of prostanoids. High
levels of prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) and prostacyclin (PGI(2)), which are known 
to activate the PKA signaling pathway via their receptors, were induced in J774
macrophages infected with wild-type Salmonella compared to a strain carrying a
mutation in the spiC gene, located within SPI-2. The increased production of both
prostanoids was dependent on COX-2. COX-2 expression was dose dependently blocked
by treatment with a specific inhibitor of the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling pathway, and the phosphorylation level of ERK1/2
was higher in macrophages infected with wild-type Salmonella compared to the spiC
mutant. Taken together, these results indicate that Salmonella causes an
SPI-2-dependent ERK1/2 activation that leads to increased COX-2 expression,
resulting in the upregulation of PGE(2) and PGI(2) production in macrophages. A
COX-2 inhibitor inhibited not only Salmonella-induced activation of the PKA
signaling pathway but also growth of wild-type Salmonella within macrophages,
suggesting that Salmonella utilizes the COX-2 pathway to survive within
macrophages and that the mechanism involves activation of the PKA signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC529151
PMID: 15557607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Nov;54(3):604-19.

SsaM and SpiC interact and regulate secretion of Salmonella pathogenicity island 
2 type III secretion system effectors and translocators.

Yu XJ(1), Liu M, Holden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Centre for Molecular Microbiology and
Infection, Imperial College London, Armstrong Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

The type III secretion system (TTSS) encoded by Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 2
(SPI-2) is required for systemic infection and intracellular replication of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. The SPI-2 TTSS is activated after
internalization of bacteria by host cells, and translocates effector proteins
into and across the vacuolar membrane, where they interfere with several host
cell functions. Here, we investigated the function of SsaM, a small protein
encoded within SPI-2. An ssaM deletion mutant had virulence and intracellular
replication defects comparable to those of a SPI-2 TTSS null mutant. Although the
ssaM mutant was able to secrete the effector protein SseJ in vitro, it failed to 
translocate SseJ into host cells, and to secrete the translocon proteins SseB,
SseC and SseD in vitro. This phenotype is similar to that of a strain carrying a 
mutation in the SPI-2 gene spiC, whose product is reported to be an effector
involved in trafficking of the Salmonella vacuole in macrophages. Both ssaM and
spiC mutants were found to oversecrete the SPI-2 effector proteins SseJ and PipB 
in vitro. Fractionation assays and immunofluorescence microscopy were used to
investigate the localization of SsaM and SpiC in macrophages. No evidence for
translocation of these proteins was obtained. The similar phenotypes of the ssaM 
and spiC mutants suggested that they might be involved in the same function.
Pull-down and co-immune precipitation experiments showed that SpiC and SsaM
interact within the bacterial cell. We propose that a complex involving SsaM and 
SpiC distinguishes between translocators and effector proteins, and controls
their ordered secretion through the SPI-2 TTSS.

PMID: 15491354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Infect Immun. 2004 Apr;72(4):1964-73.

Involvement of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 in the up-regulation of
interleukin-10 expression in macrophages: role of protein kinase A signal
pathway.

Uchiya K(1), Groisman EA, Nikai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, Yagotoyama 
150, Tenpaku-ku, Nagoya 468-8503, Japan. kuchiya@ccmfs.meijo-u.ac.jp

Salmonellae are facultative intracellular bacteria capable of surviving within
macrophages. Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2) is required for growth
within macrophages and for virulence in mice. In this study, we show the
involvement of SPI-2 in a signal transduction pathway that induces cytokine
expression in Salmonella-infected macrophages. High levels of interleukin-10
(IL-10) mRNA were induced in macrophages by infection with wild-type salmonellae 
compared to a strain carrying a mutation in the spiC gene, which is encoded
within SPI-2. The two strains had the same effect on the expression of
proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 alpha, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor
alpha. IL-10 expression was dose dependently blocked by treatment of infected
macrophages with the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H-89, while IL-10
expression was increased by the PKA activator dibutyryl cyclic AMP. Cyclic
AMP-dependent PKA activity was higher in macrophages infected with wild-type
salmonellae compared to the spiC mutant, and Ser(132) phosphorylation of cyclic
AMP response element-binding protein (CREB), which is an important mediator of
PKA activation, correlated with the levels of PKA activity. Taken together, these
results indicate that salmonellae cause an SPI-2-dependent increase in PKA
activity that leads to CREB phosphorylation, resulting in up-regulation of IL-10 
expression in Salmonella-infected macrophages. Suppression of IL-10 expression by
an antisense oligonucleotide did not affect the growth of wild-type salmonellae
within macrophages, whereas growth was dose dependently inhibited by H-89,
suggesting that the PKA signaling pathway plays a significant role in
intramacrophage Salmonella survival.

PMCID: PMC375175
PMID: 15039316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Agric Food Chem. 2003 Dec 17;51(26):7596-9.

Antifungal activity of some essential oils.

Sridhar SR(1), Rajagopal RV, Rajavel R, Masilamani S, Narasimhan S.

Author information: 
(1)T. R. Govindachari Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation 88,
Mount Road, Guindy, Chennai 600 032, India.

Thirteen essential oils recovered by steam distillation from Indian herbs were
analyzed for their chemical compositions using GC and GCMS. The antifungal
activity against plant and Food mold rot were examined in vitro using poison food
technique. The essential oil from cymbopogan exhibited control over all the plant
and food mold rot tested. The bioactive compound in the oil and its minimum
inhibitory concentration were determined using TLC bioautography.

PMID: 14664513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Phytochemistry. 2003 Nov;64(6):1119-23.

Antifeedant neo-clerodanes from Teucrium tomentosum Heyne. (Labiatae).

Krishna Kumari GN(1), Aravind S, Balachandran J, Ganesh MR, Soundarya Devi S,
Rajan SS, Malathi R, Ravikumar K.

Author information: 
(1)T. R. Govindachari Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 88,
Mount Road, Chennai-600 032, India. gnkrishna@hotmail.com

From the acetone extract of Teucrium tomentosum, a new antifeedant neo-clerodane 
diterpenoid teuctosin (1) was isolated along with teuflin (2), teucrin-H(2) (3), 
6beta-hydroxyteuscordin (4), 6beta-acetylteuscordin (5) and montanin-D (6). The
structure of the new compound was elucidated comprehensively using 1D and 2D NMR 
methods and confirmed by X-ray crystallography. All the compounds showed
effective antifeedancy against Plutella xylostella and Spodoptera litura at 10
mug/cm(2) of leaf area.

PMID: 14568078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Microbiol. 2003 Sep;49(6):1565-76.

The Salmonella SpiC protein targets the mammalian Hook3 protein function to alter
cellular trafficking.

Shotland Y(1), Krämer H, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8230, 660 S. Euclid. Ave.,
St Louis, Missouri 63110-1093, USA.

The Salmonella SpiC protein is secreted into the cytosol of macrophages via a
unique type III secretion system that functions intracellularly to translocate
proteins across the phagosomal membrane. The SpiC protein is required for
survival within macrophages and inhibition of phagosome-lysosome fusion in vivo, 
and it is sufficient to inhibit endosome-endosome fusion in vitro. Here, we
establish that SpiC targets the function of Hook3, a mammalian protein implicated
in cellular trafficking. Purified GST-SpiC pulled down Hook3 from murine
macrophages, and anti-Hook3 antibodies precipitated SpiC from the cytosol of
Salmonella-infected macrophages. Expression of the spiC gene disrupted Golgi
morphology in Vero cells and altered the distribution of lysosomes in
macrophages, mimicking the phenotype of cells expressing a hook3
dominant-negative mutant. By inactivating Hook3 function, the SpiC protein may
alter the lysosome network and prevent phagosome-lysosome fusion.

PMID: 12950921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Infect Immun. 2003 Aug;71(8):4664-73.

Construction, characterization, and immunogenicity of an attenuated Salmonella
enterica serovar typhimurium pgtE vaccine expressing fimbriae with integrated
viral epitopes from the spiC promoter.

Chen H(1), Schifferli DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) is a porcine coronavirus that causes
diarrhea, leading to near 100% mortality in neonatal piglets with corresponding
devastating economic consequences. For the protection of neonatal and older
animals, oral live vaccines present the attractive property of inducing desired
mucosal immune responses, including colostral antibodies in sows--an effective
means to passively protect suckling piglets. Newly attenuated Salmonella vaccine 
constructs expressing TGEV S protein epitopes were studied and evaluated for
improved humoral immune response to TGEV. The macrophage-inducible Salmonella
ssaH and spiC/ssaB promoters were compared for their ability to express the TGEV 
C and A epitopes in the context of the heterologous 987P fimbriae on Salmonella
vaccines. Compared to the ssaH promoter, the Salmonella cya crp vector elicited
significantly higher levels of mucosal and systemic antibodies in orally
immunized mice when the chimeric fimbriae were expressed from the spiC promoter. 
The Salmonella spiC promoter construct induced the highest level of chimeric
fimbriae after being taken up by the J774A.1 macrophagelike cells. The Salmonella
cya crp vaccine vector was shown to incorporate into 987P partially degraded
chimeric subunits lacking the TGEV epitopes. In contrast, its isogenic pgtE
mutant produced fimbriae consisting exclusively of intact chimeric subunits. Mice
immunized orally with the Salmonella pgtE vaccine expressing chimeric fimbriae
from the spiC promoter elicited significantly higher systemic and mucosal
antibody titers against the TGEV epitopes compared to the parental vaccine. This 
study indicates that the Salmonella cya crp pgtE vector and the spiC promoter can
be used successfully to improve immune responses toward heterologous antigens.

PMCID: PMC165986
PMID: 12874347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cell Microbiol. 2003 Aug;5(8):501-11.

Functions and effectors of the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III
secretion system.

Waterman SR(1), Holden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide,
Australia.

Salmonella enterica uses two functionally distinct type III secretion systems
encoded on the pathogenicity islands SPI-1 and SPI-2 to transfer effector
proteins into host cells. A major function of the SPI-1 secretion system is to
enable bacterial invasion of epithelial cells and the principal role of SPI-2 is 
to facilitate the replication of intracellular bacteria within membrane-bound
Salmonella-containing vacuoles (SCVs). Studies of mutant bacteria defective for
SPI-2-dependent secretion have revealed a variety of functions that can be
attributed to this secretion system. These include an inhibition of various
aspects of endocytic trafficking, an avoidance of NADPH oxidase-dependent
killing, the induction of a delayed apoptosis-like host cell death, the control
of SCV membrane dynamics, the assembly of a meshwork of F-actin around the SCV,
an accumulation of cholesterol around the SCV and interference with the
localization of inducible nitric oxide synthase to the SCV. Several effector
proteins that are translocated across the vacuolar membrane in a SPI-2-dependent 
manner have now been identified. These are encoded both within and outside SPI-2.
The characteristics of these effectors, and their relationship to the
physiological functions listed above, are the subject of this review. The
emerging picture is of a multifunctional system, whose activities are explained
in part by effectors that control interactions between the SCV and intracellular 
membrane compartments.

PMID: 12864810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Fitoterapia. 2003 Jul;74(5):479-82.

Zaluzanin D: a fungistatic sesquiterpene from Vernonia arborea.

Krishna Kumari GN(1), Masilamani S, Ganesh MR, Aravind S, Sridhar SR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, SPIC House, 88 Mount
Road, Chennai 600 032, India. gnkrishna@hotmail.com

Zaluzanin D, a sesquiterpene lactone has been isolated from the aerial parts of
Vernonia arborea as a major constituent (0.04%). Antifungal activity of zaluzanin
D has been studied against six plant-pathogenic fungi.

PMID: 12837366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Microbiol. 2003 May;48(4):1131-43.

Dual regulation by phospho-OmpR of ssrA/B gene expression in Salmonella
pathogenicity island 2.

Feng X(1), Oropeza R, Kenney LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, L-220, Oregon Health and 
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA.

Expression of genes located on Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2) is
required for systemic infection in mice. This region encodes a type III secretion
system, secreted effectors and the two-component regulatory system SsrA/B (also
referred to as SpiR), as well as additional uncharacterized genes. In the present
work, we demonstrate that phospho-OmpR (OmpR-P) functions as an activator at the 
spiC-ssrA/B locus. There are two promoters at spiR; one is upstream of ssrA and
the other upstream of ssrB. Our results indicate that, in contrast to many
two-component regulatory systems, regulation of the sensor kinase SsrA appears to
be uncoupled and distinct from regulation of the response regulator SsrB. OmpR
regulation of ssrA/B is one of only a few examples known in which a two-component
response regulator directly regulates the expression of another two-component
regulatory system.

PMID: 12753201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Immunol. 2003 Jun;39(16):1035-43.

SPI-C, a PU-box binding ETS protein expressed temporarily during B-cell
development and in macrophages, contains an acidic transactivation domain located
to the N-terminus.

Carlsson R(1), Persson C, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Immunology, CMB, Lund University, BMC I:13, 22184, Lund, Sweden.
robert.carlsson@immuno.lu.se

Mice deficient for SPI-group ETS transcription factors PU.1 or SPI-B fail to
generate lymphocytes or do not mount normal antibody mediated immune responses,
respectively. PU.1 expression is restricted to B-, T-lymphocytes and macrophages,
while SPI-B is expressed in B- and T-lymphocytes. SPI-C is an ETS transcription
factor closely related to PU.1 and SPI-B, and expressed temporarily during B-cell
development and in macrophages. By deletion and mutation analysis we show that
the SPI-C protein has a transactivation domain located to the N-terminus, and
that the transactivation activity is reduced to that of the DNA binding domain
(DBD) alone when four aspartic acid residues are mutated to alanines. PU.1 and
SPI-B regulate transcription from acidic domains located to the N-terminus and by
recruiting the co-activator PIP to adjacent sites in a sequence specific manner. 
In contrast to PU.1 and PIP, SPI-C and PIP were unable to form a distinct ternary
complex on the Ig lambda light chain lambda(2-4) enhancer element, suggesting
that SPI-C could act both as a positive and negative transcriptional regulator
during B-lymphocyte differentiation.

PMID: 12749910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Agric Food Chem. 2003 Mar 12;51(6):1555-9.

Antifeedant and growth inhibitory effects of some neo-clerodane diterpenoids
isolated from Clerodendron species (Verbenaceae) on Earias vitella and Spodoptera
litura.

Krishna Kumari GN(1), Balachandran J, Aravind S, Ganesh MR.

Author information: 
(1)T. R. Govindachari Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 88
Mount Road, Chennai 600 032, India. gnkrishna@hotmail.com

Antifeedant and growth inhibitory effects of various neo-clerodane diterpenoids
having a furofuran moiety, isolated from Clerodendron spp., were studied using
Earias vitella and Spodoptera litura. The compounds clerodendrin B,
3-epicaryoptin, 15-hydroxyepicaryoptin, and clerodin were effective antifeedants 
at 10 microg/cm(3) (30 microg/g) of diet against E. vitella and at 10
microg/cm(2) of leaf against S. litura. All of the tested compounds, namely,
clerodendrin B, 3-epicaryoptin, clerodendrin C, 15-hydroxyepicaryoptin,
clerodendrin B acetate, and clerodin, showed good insect growth inhibitory
activity even at lower concentrations.

PMID: 12617583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Phytochemistry. 2003 Apr;62(7):1101-4.

Microbial transformation of zaluzanin-D.

Kumari GN(1), Masilamani S, Ganesh MR, Aravind S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 111 Mount Road, Chennai 
600 032, India. gnkrishna@hotmail.com

Microbial transformation of zaluzanin-D using different fungi gave
11,13-dihydrozaluzanin-C, zaluzanin-C, 4,16,11,13 - tetrahydro zaluzanin-C,
estafiatone, dihydroestafiatol and dihydroestafiatone.

PMID: 12591263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gene. 2002 Oct 16;299(1-2):271-8.

Genomic structure of mouse SPI-C and genomic structure and expression pattern of 
human SPI-C.

Carlsson R(1), Hjalmarsson A, Liberg D, Persson C, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Immunology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, BMC I:13,
Lund University, 22184 Lund, Sweden. robert.carlsson@immuno.lu.se

Erythroblast transformation-specific domain (ETS) transcription factors regulate 
some of the critical molecular mechanisms controlling the differentiation of
multipotent haematopoietic progenitor cells into effector B-lymphocytes. The
SPI-group ETS-protein transcription factors PU.1 and SPI-B play essential and,
although coexpressed and binding to similar DNA sequences, unique roles in B-cell
differentiation in mice. Mouse SPI-C is an SPI-group ETS protein expressed
temporarily during B-cell development and in macrophages. Here we present the
genomic organization of the mouse SPI-C gene, and show by rapid amplification of 
cDNA ends (5'-RACE) analysis that transcription of the mouse SPI-C mRNA starts at
a single site producing a single processed transcript. We have also isolated a
cDNA clone encoding the human SPI-C homologue, which displays 65% amino acid
identity to the murine protein. In addition, we show that the genomic structure
of the human and mouse genes are similar, containing a 5' non-coding exon
followed by five coding exons. Human SPI-C mRNA is preferentially detected in
foetal and adult spleen, lymph nodes and at lower levels in bone marrow and
foetal liver. Finally a phylogenetic prediction analysis of SPI-group protein
sequences suggest that the SPI-C proteins form a distinct subgroup, with human
SPI-C being closest related to the mouse SPI-C protein.

PMID: 12459275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Microbiol. 2002 Nov;4(11):739-50.

Identification of a NIPSNAP homologue as host cell target for Salmonella
virulence protein SpiC.

Lee AH(1), Zareei MP, Daefler S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard,
Dallas, TX 75390-9113, USA.

Salmonella enterica uses a type III secretion system encoded by SPI-2 to target
specific virulence factors into the host cytosol of macrophages to inhibit the
phagosomal-lysosomal maturation pathway. This ensures survival of Salmonella
inside its intracellular niche, the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV). One such
virulence factor is SpiC, which was previously shown to interfere with
intracellular vesicular trafficking. In this study we have used a yeast
two-hybrid assay to identify a NIPSNAP homologue as host cell target for SpiC
that we have termed TassC. In vitro and in vivo co-purification of SpiC and TassC
confirm the specificity of this interaction. Suppression of TassC production
compensates a SpiC production deficit and allows spiC-Salmonella to survive
within macrophages at levels comparable to wild-type Salmonella. We hypothesize
that TassC is a host cell factor that determines vesicular trafficking in
macrophages and is inactivated by Salmonella SpiC.

PMID: 12427096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biopolymers. 2002;67(6):428-39.

Vibrational, 1H-NMR spectroscopic, and thermal characterization of gladiolus root
exudates in relation to Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. gladioli resistance.

Taddei P(1), Tugnoli V, Bottura G, Dallavalle E, Zechini D'Aulerio A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica G. Moruzzi, Sezione di Chimica e Propedeutica
Biochimica, Centro di Studio sulla Spettroscopia Raman, Università degli Studi di
Bologna, Via Belmeloro 8/2, 40126 Bologna, Italy.

Fourier transform Raman (FT Raman) and IR (FTIR) and (1)H-NMR spectroscopies
coupled with differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were applied to the
characterization of root exudates from two cultivars of gladiolus (Spic Span and 
White Prosperity) with different degrees of resistance and susceptibility to
Fusarium oxysporum gladioli, the main pathogen of gladiolus. This work was aimed 
at correlating the composition of root exudates with the varietal resistance to
the pathogen. Spectroscopic analysis showed that White Prosperity root exudate
differs from Spic Span root exudate by a higher relative amount of the
aromatic-phenolic and sugarlike components and a lower relative amount of
carbonylic and aliphatic compounds. DSC analysis confirmed the spectroscopic
results and showed that White Prosperity root exudate is characterized by an
aromatic component that is present in a higher amount than in the Spic Span root 
exudate. The results are discussed in relation to the spore germination tests
showing that White Prosperity, which is characterized by a remarkable resistance 
toward F. oxysporum gladioli, exudes substances having a negative influence on
microconidial germination of the pathogen; root exudates from Spic Span, one of
the most susceptible cultivars to F. oxysporum gladioli, proved to have no
effect. White Prosperity's ability to inhibit conidial germination of F.
oxysporum gladioli can be mainly related to the presence of a higher relative
amount of aromatic-phenolic compounds.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12209451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Bacteriol. 2002 Sep;184(18):4971-80.

SpiC is required for translocation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 effectors
and secretion of translocon proteins SseB and SseC.

Freeman JA(1), Rappl C, Kuhle V, Hensel M, Miller SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

The Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI2) type III secretion system (TTSS)
promotes Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium virulence for mice and increased
survival and replication within eukaryotic cells. After phagocytosis, Salmonella 
serovar Typhimurium assembles the SPI2 TTSS to translocate over a dozen effector 
proteins across the phagosome membrane. SpiC has been previously shown to be a
translocated effector with a large contribution to virulence (K. Uchiya, M. A.
Barbieri, K. Funato, A. H. Shah, P. D. Stahl, and E. A. Groisman, EMBO J.
18:3924-3933, 1999). This report demonstrates by competitive index that the
virulence phenotype of a spiC mutant is equivalent to that of a secretion
component mutant. In addition, translocation of SPI2 effector proteins was shown 
to require SpiC. Thus, the severe virulence phenotype resulting from deletion of 
spiC is likely due to the inability to translocate all SPI2 effectors. SpiC was
also required to secrete translocon proteins SseB and SseC but not translocated
effector SseJ, indicating that lack of assembly of the translocon explains the
spiC mutant phenotype.

PMCID: PMC135306
PMID: 12193612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cell Microbiol. 2002 Aug;4(8):531-40.

SpiC is required for secretion of Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 2 type III
secretion system proteins.

Yu XJ(1), Ruiz-Albert J, Unsworth KE, Garvis S, Liu M, Holden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Centre for Molecular Microbiology and
Infection, Imperial College School of Medicine, Armstrong Road, London SW7 2AZ,
UK.

Replication of Salmonella typhimurium in host cells depends in part on the action
of the Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 2 (SPI-2) type III secretion system
(TTSS), which translocates bacterial effector proteins across the membrane of the
Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV). We have shown previously that one activity
of the SPI-2 TTSS is the assembly of a coat of F-actin in the vicinity of
bacterial microcolonies. To identify proteins involved in SPI-2 dependent actin
polymerization, we tested strains carrying mutations in each of several genes
whose products are proposed to be secreted through the SPI-2 TTSS, for their
ability to assemble F-actin around intracellular bacteria. We found that strains 
carrying mutations in either sseB, sseC, sseD or spiC were deficient in actin
assembly. The phenotypes of the sseB-, sseC- and sseD- mutants can be attributed 
to their requirement for translocation of SPI-2 effectors. SpiC was investigated 
further in view of its proposed role as an effector. Transient expression of a
myc::SpiC fusion protein in Hela cells did not induce any significant alterations
to the host cell cytoskeleton, and failed to restore actin polymerization around 
intracellular spiC- mutant bacteria. However, the same protein did complement the
mutant phenotype when expressed from a plasmid within bacteria. Furthermore, spiC
was found to be required for SPI-2 mediated secretion of SseB, SseC and SseD in
vitro. An antibody against SpiC detected the protein on immunoblots from total
cell lysates of S. typhimurium expressing SpiC from a plasmid, but it was not
detected in secreted fractions after exposure of cells to conditions that result 
in secretion of other SPI-2 effector proteins. Investigation of the trafficking
of SCVs containing a spiC- mutant in macrophages revealed only a low level of
association with the lysosomal marker cathepsin D, similar to that of wild-type
bacteria. Together, these results show that SpiC is involved in the process of
SPI-2 secretion and indicate that phenotypes associated with a spiC- mutant are
caused by the inability of this strain to translocate effector proteins, thus
calling for further investigation into the function(s) of this protein.

PMID: 12174087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Agric Food Chem. 2002 Jul 31;50(16):4484-90.

Insect antifeedant activity of tetranortriterpenoids from the Rutales. A perusal 
of structural relations.

Suresh G(1), Gopalakrishnan G, Wesley SD, Pradeep Singh ND, Malathi R, Rajan SS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 64, Mount Road, Guindy, 
Chennai 600 032, India. sureshgovind55@hotmail.com

Structure-related insect antifeedant relationship of 56 limonoids (both natural
and modified) from the plants belonging to the order Rutales was attempted
considering substitution patterns, oxidation states, and hydrophobicity, as well 
as distant geometry derived through conformational analysis on molecular
modeling. Orientation of the furan and hydroxylation at specific carbon sites
have been shown to influence the antifeedancy against the fall armyworm,
Spodoptera litura.

PMID: 12137465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Traffic. 2002 Mar;3(3):161-9.

Trafficking of the Salmonella vacuole in macrophages.

Holden DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Centre for Molecular Microbiology and
Infection, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, The Flowers
Building, Armstrong Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK. d.holden@ic.ac.uk

Salmonella enterica is a facultative intracellular pathogen which can replicate
in macrophages. Intracellular Salmonella exist in a membrane-bound compartment
called the Salmonella-containing vacuole. Most studies on Salmonella trafficking 
in relation to the endocytic pathway have concluded that the majority of
Salmonella-containing vacuoles do not interact extensively with late endosomes
and lysosomes. Numerous bacterial genes have been identified which are required
for survival and replication in macrophages. These include the spv operon,
located on the large virulence plasmid, the phoP-phoQ regulon, and those
connected with the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III secretion system.
The functions of some of these genes are beginning to be understood. In this
review, I discuss their roles in relation to our broader understanding of
Salmonella trafficking in macrophages.

PMID: 11886586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Org Lett. 2002 Mar 7;4(5):781-2.

Microwave-assisted ketone-ketone rearrangement: an improved synthesis of
3-(4-alkoxyphenyl)-3- methylbutan-2-ones.

Gopalakrishnan G(1), Kasinath V, Pradeep Singh ND.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 64, Mount Road, Guindy, 
Chennai 600 032, India. geethagopal@hotmail.com

[reaction: see text] A novel procedure for the preparation of
3-(4-alkoxyphenyl)-3-methylbutan-2-one in excellent yield is described via
polymer-supported AlCl3-catalyzed rearrangement of
1-(4-ethoxyphenyl)-2,2-dimehtylpropan-1-one, followed by O-alkylation under
microwave irradiation condition.

PMID: 11869126  [PubMed]


82. Fitoterapia. 2001 Aug;72(6):671-5.

Antifeedant activity of quinones from Ventilago madaraspatana.

Krishnakumari GN(1), Bhuvaneswari B, Raja Swapna I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 111, Mount Road, Chennai
6000 32, India. gmkrishna@hotmail.com

The insect antifeedant activity of the quinones isolated from Ventilago
madaraspatana was investigated by circular leaf disc dual choice bioassay.
Amongst the quinones tested, Ventiloquinone A was the most effective antifeedant 
against Henosepilachna vigintioctopunctata and Spodoptera litura.

PMID: 11543967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Fitoterapia. 2000 Sep;71(5):607-9.

Two novel xanthones from Garcinia mangostana.

Gopalakrishnan G(1), Balaganesan B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products SPIC Science Foundation 111, Mount Road, Chennai
600 032, India. geethagopal@hotmail.com

The isolation of two novel xanthones isolated from the fruit hulls of Garcinia
mangostana is reported. The structures were elucidated by means of spectroscopic 
analysis.

PMID: 11449524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Fitoterapia. 2001 Jun;72(5):568-71.

Insect antifeedant and growth regulating activities of quassinoids from Samadera 
indica.

Govindachari TR(1), Krishna Kumari GN, Gopalakrishnan G, Suresh G, Wesley SD,
Sreelatha T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural Products, SPIC Science Foundation, 111, Mount Road, Madras 
600 032, India. tuticoringovinda@hotmail.com

Four quassinoids, indaquassin C (1), samaderins C (2), B (3) and A (4), isolated 
from the seeds and bark of Samadera indica, were tested for insect antifeedant
and growth regulatory activities against the tobacco cutworm, Spodoptera litura. 
Indaquassin C was the most effective antifeedant. Samaderin C increased pupal
duration and induced pupal mortality.

PMID: 11429258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Plant Sci. 2001 May;160(6):1095-1106.

Salicylic acid response in rice: influence of salicylic acid on H(2)O(2)
accumulation and oxidative stress.

Ganesan V(1), Thomas G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, SPIC Science Foundation, 111 Mount Road, -32,
Chennai, India

We have studied the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide in rice leaves in response 
to salicylic acid (SA) treatment. H(2)O(2) accumulation was localized in the
veins. While the activity of the H(2)O(2) degrading enzyme peroxidase was
inhibited in response to SA, superoxide dismutase activity, which generates
H(2)O(2), did not show any change. An increase in the activity of glutathione
reductase, a peroxide degrading enzyme, was observed upon SA treatment, similar
to the response reported by accumulation of active oxygen species. In rice leaves
transformed with CaMV-GUS fusions, we found that SA treatment induced
transcriptional activation through as-1 element. As-1 has been implicated in
protective mechanisms that operate during some types of oxidative stress and the 
hypersensitive response (HR). Expression of rice pathogenesis-related protein 5
(PR5), one of the PR genes associated with systemic acquired resistance, was
induced by SA. This induction seems to be independent of the H(2)O(2)
accumulation induced by SA. Inoculation of rice leaves with the rice blast
fungus, Magneporthe grisea, also led to the accumulation of H(2)O(2) in the
veins, suggesting the presence of common signals between SA and pathogen
responses. Thus SA application seems to induce oxidative stress in rice through
H(2)O(2); a signal molecule implicated in biotic and abiotic stress responses.

PMID: 11337066  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


86. Ital Heart J. 2001 Feb;2(2):130-8.

Metoprolol-induced functional benefit in dilated cardiomyopathy is sustained over
four years and favorably influences outcome.

De Maria R(1), Di Lenarda A, Gavazzi A, Porcu M, Sinagra G, Parolini M; SPIC
(Italian Multicenter Cardiomyopathy Study) Group.

Author information: 
(1)CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Milan, Italy. ifcnig@tin.it

BACKGROUND: Beta-blockers improve survival and ventricular function in patients
with heart failure. We evaluated the long-term persistence of metoprolol-induced 
improvement and its impact on prognosis in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
METHODS: Two hundred and four of 586 patients enrolled in a registry on the
natural history of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy survived 4 years without
transplantation; 98 of them were on standard heart failure treatment, whereas 106
took metoprolol in addition. We analyzed the effects of treatment using
beta-blockers in terms of changes in left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF),
NYHA functional class and left ventricular end-diastolic diameter index (LVEDDI) 
after 1, 2 and 4 follow-up years in order to elaborate an improvement score that 
was related to the subsequent outcome over 60 months after the 4-year follow-up
visit.
RESULTS: Greater LVEF increases and NYHA functional class and LVEDDI decreases
were observed in patients submitted to metoprolol vs standard treatment at all
stages of follow-up. Changes (delta vs baseline) for LVEF (p = 0.02), NYHA
functional class (p = 0.0001) and LVEDDI (p = 0.004) were maximal during the
first year (10 +/- 11 vs 6 +/- 12 units, -0.72 +/- 0.77 vs -0.23 +/- 0.81, -3.5
+/- 5 vs -1.6 +/- 3.5 mm), persisted at 2 (12 +/- 12 vs 8 +/- 12 units, -0.80 +/-
0.70 vs -0.37 +/- 0.87, -4.2 +/- 5 vs -2.3 +/- 4 mm) but showed a trend to
decline at 4 years (11 +/- 12 vs 8 +/- 13 units, -0.54 +/- 0.90 vs -0.24 +/-
0.91, -4.3 +/- 5 vs -2.3 +/- 5 mm) of follow-up. Improvement at 4 years was
associated with a better transplant-free survival (81 vs 52%, p = 0.0005, odds
ratio 0.36, 95% confidence interval 0.18 to 0.74).
CONCLUSIONS: In idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, the more significant
improvement in symptoms and left ventricular function and size, that is observed 
following treatment using metoprolol, translates into a better outcome. These
benefits peak within the first 2 years of start of treatment but may begin to
fade thereafter.

PMID: 11256541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Microbiol. 2000 Oct;2(5):365-77.

Subversion of a young phagosome: the survival strategies of intracellular
pathogens.

Duclos S(1), Desjardins M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de pathologie et biologie cellulaire, Université de Montréal, QC, 
Canada.

PMID: 11207592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 16;98(2):553-8. Epub 2001 Jan 9.

Evolution of hematopoiesis: Three members of the PU.1 transcription factor family
in a cartilaginous fish, Raja eglanteria.

Anderson MK(1), Sun X, Miracle AL, Litman GW, Rothenberg EV.

Collaborators: Rothenberg EV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes are present in jawed vertebrates, including
cartilaginous fishes, but not in jawless vertebrates or invertebrates. The
origins of these lineages may be understood in terms of evolutionary changes in
the structure and regulation of transcription factors that control lymphocyte
development, such as PU.1. The identification and characterization of three
members of the PU.1 family of transcription factors in a cartilaginous fish, Raja
eglanteria, are described here. Two of these genes are orthologs of mammalian
PU.1 and Spi-C, respectively, whereas the third gene, Spi-D, is a different
family member. In addition, a PU.1-like gene has been identified in a jawless
vertebrate, Petromyzon marinus (sea lamprey). Both DNA-binding and
transactivation domains are highly conserved between mammalian and skate PU.1, in
marked contrast to lamprey Spi, in which similarity is evident only in the
DNA-binding domain. Phylogenetic analysis of sequence data suggests that the
appearance of Spi-C may predate the divergence of the jawed and jawless
vertebrates and that Spi-D arose before the divergence of the cartilaginous fish 
from the lineage leading to the mammals. The tissue-specific expression patterns 
of skate PU.1 and Spi-C suggest that these genes share regulatory as well as
structural properties with their mammalian orthologs.

PMCID: PMC14625
PMID: 11149949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Photochem Photobiol. 2000 Oct;72(4):464-6.

Photooxidation of cedrelone, a tetranortriterpenoid from Toona ciliata.

Gopalakrishnan G(1), Pradeep Singh ND, Kasinath V, Malathi R, Rajan SS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Natural products, SPIC Science Foundation, Guindy, Chennai, India. 
geethagopal@hotmail.com

Cedrelone, a tetranortriterpenoid on photolysis by UV light yields a true
photooxidation product 3 [14 beta,15beta,22beta,23beta-diepoxy-6-hydroxy-1,5,
20(22)-meliatriene-2,7,21-trione] whose structure is well established by NMR
studies and confirmed by X-ray crystallography, along with product 4 [14
beta,15beta-epoxy-6,23-dihydroxy-1,5,20(22)-meliatriene-2,7, 21-trione]. Addition
of rose bengal increases the rate of photooxidation whereas DABCO decreases rate 
of photolysis proving the involvement of singlet oxygen in the photooxygenation. 
Both the photoproducts exhibited antifeedant activity.

PMID: 11045715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mycoses. 2000 Sep;43(7-8):299-301.

Anti-Cryptococcus activity of combination of extracts of Cassia alata and Ocimum 
sanctum.

Ranganathan S(1), Balajee SA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, SPIC Science Foundation, Guindy, Madras, India.

The paper reports the anti-Cryptococcus activity of combination of ethanolic
extracts of leaves of Cassia alata and Ocimum sanctum. The activity of
combination of the extracts was heat-stable and worked at acidic pH.

PMID: 11036400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Microbiol. 2000 Sep;37(6):1417-35.

Aggregation of host endosomes by Salmonella requires SPI2 translocation of SseFG 
and involves SpvR and the fms-aroE intragenic region.

Guy RL(1), Gonias LA, Stein MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT 05405-0068, USA.

Salmonella-induced aggregation of host endosomal compartments into tubules,
termed lgp-tubules, requires sifA and ompR. Lgp-tubules result from
Salmonella-directed alteration of the endocytic system and typify the unique
intracellular locale where Salmonella replicate. A high-throughput method devised
to screen 11 520 MudJ mutants for loss of lgp-tubule formation identified one
auxotrophic and nine prototrophic mutants. Molecular characterization identified 
four new loci required to alter epithelial endocytic structure. Salmonella
pathogenicity island 2 (SPI2) is the locus central to the phenotype. A subset of 
SPI2 effectors is essential: SpiC and SseFG are required, but not SseE. A subset 
of apparatus proteins is also implicated: SsaJ, L, M, V and P are required. SPI2 
was implicated further, as SifA shows similarity with known SPI2 translocation
targets, and OmpR regulates SPI2. Another locus lies within the smf-aroE
intragenic region. Lgp-tubule formation also involves a locus on the virulence
plasmid pSLT. The pSLT-encoded SpvR negatively regulates an unknown repressor of 
the phenotype located on pSLT. Finally, disruption of carB leads to multiple
auxotrophy that prevents lgp-tubule formation. This study demonstrates that
lgp-tubule formation is a virulence mechanism that underlies the selective
disruption of host endocytic trafficking and is associated with the formation of 
a replication-permissive locale.

PMID: 10998173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. EMBO J. 2000 Jul 3;19(13):3235-49.

Salmonella maintains the integrity of its intracellular vacuole through the
action of SifA.

Beuzón CR(1), Méresse S, Unsworth KE, Ruíz-Albert J, Garvis S, Waterman SR, Ryder
TA, Boucrot E, Holden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College School of Medicine, Du
Cane Road, London W12 0NN, Electron Microscopy Unit, Queen Charlotte's and
Chelsea Hospital, Goldhawk Road, London W6 0XG, UK and Centre d'Immunologie
INSERM-CNRS de Ma.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 2000 Aug 1;19(15):4191.

A method based on the Competitive Index was used to identify Salmonella
typhimurium virulence gene interactions during systemic infections of mice.
Analysis of mixed infections involving single and double mutant strains showed
that OmpR, the type III secretion system of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2
(SPI-2) and SifA [required for the formation in epithelial cells of lysosomal
glycoprotein (lgp)-containing structures, termed Sifs] are all involved in the
same virulence function. sifA gene expression was induced after Salmonella entry 
into host cells and was dependent on the SPI-2 regulator ssrA. A sifA(-) mutant
strain had a replication defect in macrophages, similar to that of SPI-2 and
ompR(-) mutant strains. Whereas wild-type and SPI-2 mutant strains reside in
vacuoles that progressively acquire lgps and the vacuolar ATPase, the majority of
sifA(-) bacteria lost their vacuolar membrane and were released into the host
cell cytosol. We propose that the wild-type strain, through the action of SPI-2
effectors (including SpiC), diverts the Salmonella-containing vacuole from the
endocytic pathway, and subsequent recruitment and maintenance of vacuolar
ATPase/lgp-containing membranes that enclose replicating bacteria is mediated by 
translocation of SifA.

PMCID: PMC313946
PMID: 10880437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Fitoterapia. 2000 Jun;71(3):317-20.

Antifungal activity of some tetranortriterpenoids.

Govindachari TR(1), Suresh G, Gopalakrishnan G, Masilamani S, Banumathi B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Agrochemical Research, SPIC Science Foundation, 111, Mount Road,
600 032, Madras, India. tuticorigovinda@hotmail.com

Natural tetranortriterpenoids such as cedrelone from Toona ciliata, azadiradione 
from Azadirachta indica, limonin, limonol and nomilinic acid from Citrus medica, 
along with some cedrelone derivatives were tested for their antifungal activity
against Puccinia arachidis, a groundnut rust pathogen. Results show that
cedrelone was the most effective in reducing rust pustule emergence. Replacement 
of functional groups or modification of the A or the B ring in cedrelone reduced 
the effectiveness indicating the importance of specific structural features for
activity.

PMID: 10844171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Trends Microbiol. 1999 Dec;7(12):467-9.

Pathogenic interference with host vacuolar trafficking.

García-Del Portillo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biolog a Molecular 'Severo Ochoa', Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
28049 Madrid, Spain. fgportillo@cbm.uam.es

PMID: 10603476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Science. 1999 Jul 16;285(5426):307-8.

Anti-immune trick unveiled in Salmonella.

Strauss E.

PMID: 10438287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. EMBO J. 1999 Jul 15;18(14):3924-33.

A Salmonella virulence protein that inhibits cellular trafficking.

Uchiya K(1), Barbieri MA, Funato K, Shah AH, Stahl PD, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Microbiology,
Washington University School of Medicine, 600 South Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO
63110-1093, USA.

Salmonella enterica requires a type III secretion system, designated Spi/Ssa, to 
survive and proliferate within macrophages. The Spi/Ssa system is encoded within 
the SPI-2 pathogenicity island and appears to function intracellularly. Here, we 
establish that the SPI-2-encoded SpiC protein is exported by the Spi/Ssa type III
secretion system into the host cell cytosol where it interferes with
intracellular trafficking. In J774 macrophages, wild-type Salmonella inhibited
fusion of Salmonella-containing phagosomes with lysosomes and endosomes, and
interfered with trafficking of vesicles devoid of the microorganism. These
inhibitory activities required living Salmonella and a functional spiC gene.
Purified SpiC protein inhibited endosome-endosome fusion in vitro. A Sindbis
virus expressing the SpiC protein interfered with normal trafficking of the
transferrin receptor in vivo. A spiC mutant was attenuated for virulence,
suggesting that the ability to interfere with intracellular trafficking is
essential for Salmonella pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1171468
PMID: 10406797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris). 1998 Sep;27(5):536-43.

[SPIC: a training simulator for coelioscopic interventions with gynecologic
purpose].

[Article in French]

Jambon AC(1), Dubecq-Princeteau F, Dubois P, Karpf S, Chaillou C, Meseure P,
Querleu D.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Jeanne-de-Flandre, Lille.

There is much demand for laparoscopy training. We have developed a training
simulator for initial training in gynecological laparoscopy. The simulator
includes a mannequin with 3 located trocars, a PC and software for managing the
graphical part of the training protocol. The objective is to learn how to achieve
spatial localization and handle tools within the abdominal cavity. A series of
exercises are proposed with increasing degree of difficulty. The simulator can be
customized to simulate many different scenarios. The trainer must be present to
provide an ultimate assessment of the trainee's experience. This new training
tool cannot replace traditional surgical training but can help make it more
efficient. The simulator is now being used by residents. Further technical
developments are in progress to add further indispensable mechanical interactions
(force feed back) to visualize the organ deformations and organ dissections
within the abdominal cavity.

PMID: 9791583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Heart. 1998 Apr;79(4):337-44.

Long-term survival effect of metoprolol in dilated cardiomyopathy. The SPIC
(Italian Multicentre Cardiomyopathy Study) Group.

Di Lenarda A(1), De Maria R, Gavazzi A, Gregori D, Parolini M, Sinagra G,
Salvatore L, Longaro F, Bernobich E, Camerini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ospedale Maggiore and University, Trieste, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the additive effect of metoprolol treatment on long-term
incidence of fatal and non-fatal cardiac events in idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy.
DESIGN: 586 patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy were prospectively
enrolled in a multicentre registry and followed up for a mean (SD) of 52 (32)
months. Metoprolol, carefully titrated to the maximum tolerated dose, was added
to conventional heart failure treatment in 175 patients.
RESULTS: Survival and transplant-free survival at seven years were significantly 
higher in the 175 metoprolol treated patients than in the remaining 411 on
standard treatment (81% v 60%, p < 0.001, and 69% v 49%, p < 0.001,
respectively). By multivariate analysis, metoprolol independently predicted
survival and transplant-free survival (relative risk reduction values for all
cause mortality and combined mortality or transplantation 51% (95% confidence
interval 21% to 69%), p = 0.002, and 34% (5% to 53%), p = 0.01, respectively).
New York Heart Association class, left ventricular end diastolic diameter, and
pulmonary wedge pressure were also predictive. Seven year survival (80% v 62%, p 
= 0.004) and transplant-free survival (68% v 51%, p = 0.005) were significantly
higher in 127 metoprolol treated cases than in 127 controls selected from the
entire control cohort and appropriately matched. Metoprolol was associated with a
30% reduction in all cause mortality (7% to 48%, p = 0.015) and a 26% reduction
in mortality or transplantation (7% to 41%, p = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of metoprolol to standard heart failure treatment,
including angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, was effective in the
long-term, reducing both all cause mortality and transplantation in patients with
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.

PMCID: PMC1728660
PMID: 9616339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Nat Prod. 1997 May;60(5):519-24.

Evaluation of the antifungal activity of natural xanthones from Garcinia
mangostana and their synthetic derivatives.

Gopalakrishnan G(1), Banumathi B, Suresh G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Agrochemical Research, SPIC Science Foundations, Madras, India.

The antifungal activity of several xanthones isolated from the fruit hulls of
Garcinia mangostana and some derivatives of mangostin against three
phytopathogenic fungi, Fusarium oxysporum vasinfectum, Alternaria tenuis, and
Dreschlera oryzae, has been evaluated. The natural xanthones showed good
inhibitory activity against the three fungi. Substitution in the A and C rings
has been shown to modify the bioactivities of the compounds.

PMID: 9213587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 1996 Nov;12(6):657-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00327735.

Technical communication: A simple and economically viable medium for the growth
of Agrobacterium radiobacter for the production of D-amino acid.

George S(1), Sadhukhan AK.

Author information: 
(1)SPIC Pharmaceutical R & D, Maraimalai Nagar, Tamil Nadu, 603 209, India.

A simple and cost effective medium for the growth and D-amino acid production by 
Agrobacterium radiobacter from hydantoin is reported. The effectiveness of this
medium is compared with other synthetic media.

PMID: 24415435  [PubMed]


101. J Chem Ecol. 1996 Aug;22(8):1453-61. doi: 10.1007/BF02027724.

Insect antifeedant and growth-regulating activities of Salannin and other c-seco 
limonoids from neem oil in relation to Azadirachtin.

Govindachari TR(1), Narasimhan NS, Suresh G, Partho PD, Gopalakrishnan G.

Author information: 
(1)SPIC Science Foundation, Centre for Agrochemical Research, 110, Mount Road,
600 032, Madras, India.

The antifeedant and insect growth-regulating activities of salannin, nimbin, and 
6-deacetylnimbin, in comparison with azadirachtin-A, have been studied
againstSpodoptera litura, Pericallia ricini, andOxya fuscovittata. Salannin
deterred feeding, delayed molt by increasing larval duration, caused larval and
pupal mortalities, and decreased pupal weights in the two lepidopterans. Salannin
also caused molt delays and nymphal mortalities inOxya fuscovittata. The role of 
salannin and other compounds in conferring bioactivity, along with
azadirachtin-A, to neem oil/neem seed extracts is emphasized.

PMID: 24226248  [PubMed]


102. Nucl Med Commun. 1996 Feb;17(2):132-9.

Imaging inflammation with 99Tcm-labeled chemotactic peptides: analogues with
reduced neutropenia.

Pollak A(1), Goodbody AE, Ballinger JR, Duncan GS, Tran LL, Dunn-Dufault R,
Meghji K, Lau F, Andrey TW, Boxen I, Sumner-Smith M.

Author information: 
(1)Resolution Pharmaceuticals Inc., Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.

Two 99Tcm-labelled analogues of the chemotactic peptide ForMLF were evaluated as 
potential agents for imaging inflammation and infection, in the hope that they
would be simple to use and would give diagnostically useful images shortly after 
injection. The peptides differed in the chelation site for 99Tcm and the presence
of a hydrophilic spacer. The sequences of RP050 and RP056 were
ForNleLFNleYK(G)G-C(Acm)-GPic and ForNleLFNleYKK(DG)GC(Acm)SPic respectively,
where Pic is picolinic acid. In in vitro tests of binding to the ForMLF receptor 
on polymorphonuclear neutrophils and potency for release of myeloperoxidase,
RP056 was similar in potency to ForMLF, whereas RP050 was 10 times more potent.
When administered in 5-nmol doses to rats, RP050 produced less extensive
neutropenia than ForMLF, whereas RP056 produced very little neutropenia.
Following labelling by ligand exchange from tartrate or glucoheptonate at 100
degrees C and purification using a C-18 solid-phase extraction cartridge, 4-MBq
doses were administered to rats bearing infectious (Escherichia coli) or sterile 
(zymosan) inflammation sites in the thigh. The inflammation-to-normal muscle
ratios at 30 min after injection were 3.9 +/- 0.4 for RP050 and 4.7 +/- 0.3 for
RP056 (mean +/- S.E.M., n = 4), and the ratios were maintained for up to 3 h.
These peptides are promising agents for imaging inflammation and infection.

PMID: 8778637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Chem Ecol. 1995 Oct;21(10):1585-600. doi: 10.1007/BF02035154.

Structure-related insect antifeedant and growth regulating activities of some
limonoids.

Govindachari TR(1), Narasimhan NS, Suresh G, Partho PD, Gopalakrishnan G, Krishna
Kumari GN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Agrochemical Research, SPIC Science Foundation, 110, Mount Road,
600 032, Madras, India.

Insect antifeedant and growth-regulating activities of 22 limonoids (both natural
and their derivatives) againstSpodoptera litura were studied to understand the
structure-related bioactivities of the limonoids. The C-seco limonoids
(azadirachtins A, B, D, H, and I) were the most effective compounds as a group,
while the intact limonoids (cedrelone and its derivatives) were the least
effective. The cyclohexenone A ring and thea-hydroxy enone group in the B ring
appear to be important for antifeedant activity. The presence of a cyclohexenone 
or 1,2-epoxide in the A ring coupled with ana-hydroxy enone in the B ring
correlated well with growth regulatory activity. An acetoxy at C-7 instead
ofa-hydroxy enone and perhaps the carbonyl at C-16 increase growth regulatory
activity. Absence of 14-15 epoxide may not drastically reduce antifeedant
activity and growth regulatory activity.

PMID: 24233685  [PubMed]


104. G Ital Cardiol. 1995 Sep;25(9):1109-25.

[Dilated cardiomyopathy: a new natural history? The experience of the Italian
Multicenter Cardiomyopathy Study (SPIC)].

[Article in Italian]

Gavazzi A(1), De Maria R, Porcu M, Beretta L, Casazza F, Castelli G, Luvini M,
Parodi O, Recalcati F, Renosto G, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Fisiologia Clinica del CNR, Dipartimento di Cardiologia De
Gasperis, Ospedale Niguarda, Milano.

BACKGROUND: The natural history of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC), once 
a disease with a dire prognosis, is thought to be changing. Aim of this study was
to describe the clinical characteristics, long term course and prognostic factors
of IDC patients followed up prospectively since the late eighties.
METHODS: Patients with a diagnosis of IDC confirmed by normal coronary
angiography, non specific endomyocardial biopsy findings and a left ventricular
ejection fraction below 50% were consecutively enrolled in a multicenter registry
and followed up at 6-months intervals.
RESULTS: From January 1986 till January 1994, 441 IDC patients with a mean age of
43 +/- 13 years (range 8-68) entered the registry. Thirty per cent of patients
were women and 8% had familial dilated cardiomyopathy. NYHA class was I-II in 77%
and 35% of patients were asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. Treatment
included digitalis in 235 patients (53%), diuretics in 239 (54%), angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors in 269 (61%), betablockers in 108 (24%). Chronic
atrial fibrillation was detected in 10% of patients and left bundle branch block 
in 24%. Mean cardiothoracic ratio was 0.54 +/- 0.06. Mean left ventricular end
diastolic dimension was 38 +/- 6 mm/m2; 48% of patients had minimal or mild left 
ventricular dilatation. Mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 30 +/- 10%.
At Holter monitoring 67% of cases had complex ventricular arrhythmias, 37% had
ventricular tachycardia and 4% had advanced atrioventricular block. Mean exercise
stress test duration was 9 +/- 4 minutes. After a mean follow up of 31 +/- 24
months, 337 patients were alive without transplantation and 5 were lost to follow
up; 60 patients (14%) had died of cardiac causes, namely heart failure (6%),
sudden death (7%) and pulmonary embolism (< 1%) and 30 had been transplanted
(7%), while 4 had died of unclear causes. Survival and transplant-free survival
were 94% and 90% at 2 years and 82 and 76% at 5 years, respectively. At
multivariate analysis pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (p = 0.0001, odds ratio,
for values > 15 mm Hg, 2.05) and betablocker treatment (p = 0.002, odds ratio
0.26) were independent predictors of survival.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large, multicenter prospective study, prognosis of IDC in
the eighties appears to be improved. Early diagnosis, together with improved
medical treatment, probably bears a causal relation to these changes.

PMID: 8529848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Theor Appl Genet. 1995 Jun;90(7-8):1087-93. doi: 10.1007/BF00222926.

Organization of the mitochondrial Cob 2 pseudogene in different lines of rice.

Narayanan KK(1), Senthilkumar P, Sridhar VV, Thomas G, Thomas J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, SPIC Science Foundation, 110 Mount Road, 600 032,
Madras, India.

In the fertile rice line IR 36 there are two copies of the apocytochrome b (cob) 
gene: a functional copy, cob 1, and a pseudogene, cob 2 (Kaleikau et al. 1992).
In a survey of diverse rice lines, we found that cob 2 was absent in the wild
abortive(WA)-type cytoplasmic male-sterile cytoplasm, but was present in the
fertile lines. While cob 1 was conserved among all the lines, fertile and
sterile, the cob 2 region was different in the fertile lines tested. The 5'
regions of most cob 2 loci were similar to cob 1 (about 4 kb of the flanking
region and most of the coding region), but the 3' region varied among different
fertile lines. The point of divergence, the break-point, from the cob 1 sequence 
was conserved in all the cob 2 regions tested. In all the cob 2 regions, this
break-point seems to be linked to the variable region of cob 2 through a
conserved 192-bp segment, which is not a part of cob 1. It is proposed that the
cob 2 regions could have been produced by recombination or insertion events
involving cob 1 and the 192-bp segment which is present at different locations in
the mitochondrial genomes of the various rice lines.

PMID: 24173067  [PubMed]


106. Am J Cardiol. 1993 Sep 1;72(7):580-5.

Comparison of clinical findings in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in women
versus men. The Italian Multicenter Cardiomyopathy Study Group (SPIC)

De Maria R(1), Gavazzi A, Recalcati F, Baroldi G, De Vita C, Camerini F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Cardiologia A. De Gasperis, Ospedale Niguarda Ca' Granda,
Milano, Italy.

Comment in
    Am J Cardiol. 1994 May 1;73(12):932.

Clinical and laboratory findings were compared in 65 women and 238 men with
invasively documented idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Women had more severe
symptoms (New York Heart Association class > or = III in 48 vs 39%; p < 0.05),
presented more frequently with heart failure signs (63 vs 41%; p < 0.01), and had
a higher cardiothoracic ratio (0.56 +/- 0.06 vs 0.53 +/- 0.06; p < 0.05) and
higher frequency of left bundle branch block (41 vs 29%; p < 0.05).
Echocardiographic measurements in women showed significantly greater left
ventricular (LV) end-diastolic (42 +/- 7 vs 39 +/- 6 mm/m2; p < 0.0001) and
end-systolic (36 +/- 7 vs 33 +/- 6 mm/m2; p < 0.001) diameters, and mean
myocardial thickness (11 +/- 2 vs 10 +/- 2 mm; p < 0.05). Exercise duration was
shorter in women than in men (7 +/- 3 vs 10 +/- 4 minutes; p < 0.001). After 18
+/- 16 months, 9 women and 27 men died, and 7 and 17, respectively, received
transplants. Transplant-free survival was not significantly different according
to gender. By Cox multivariate analysis, LV ejection fraction was a significant
independent predictor of cardiac death or heart transplantation in both sexes (p 
< 0.05 in men, and p < 0.005 in women), together with left atrial diameter index 
(p < 0.01) in women, and mean pulmonary artery pressure (p < 0.001) in men. In
conclusion, women with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy present a more advanced 
phase of the disease with greater LV dilation, but do not have a different
prognosis.

PMID: 8362774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am Heart J. 1993 Feb;125(2 Pt 1):410-22.

The spectrum of left ventricular size in dilated cardiomyopathy: clinical
correlates and prognostic implications. SPIC (Italian Multicenter Cardiomyopathy 
Study) Group.

Gavazzi A(1), De Maria R, Renosto G, Moro A, Borgia M, Caroli A, Castelli G,
Ciaccheri M, Pavan D, De Vita C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Cardiologia, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

To address the issues of variability and prognostic role of left ventricular
dimensions in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 144 patients with DCM were studied.
They were arbitrarily assigned to two groups according to an echocardiographic
left ventricular end-diastolic diameter index < or = 15% (45 patients with mildly
dilated cardiomyopathy) and above 15% (99 patients with typically dilated
cardiomyopathy) of the upper normality range. Among the patients with mildly
dilated cardiomyopathy, there were more men (89% vs 66%; p < 0.01). This group of
patients also had a greater prevalence of atrial fibrillation (22% vs 3%; p <
0.001) higher left ventricular fractional shortening (15 +/- 6% vs 13 +/- 5%; p <
0.05), higher ejection fraction (28 +/- 8% vs 24 +/- 8%; p < 0.01), and a lower
exercise tolerance (5 +/- 2 MET vs 6 +/- 2 MET; p < 0.05). At the time of
follow-up examination (30 +/- 15 months), event-free survival was not
significantly different between patients with mildly dilated cardiomyopathy and
those with typically dilated cardiomyopathy. Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
(p < 0.001) and left atrial dimension index (p < 0.01) were significant
predictors of prognosis as determined by Cox multivariate analysis. Minimal or
mild ventricular dilatation is not uncommon in DCM, and it identifies a
heterogenous group of patients--some who are in the early stages of disease and
others with severe pump dysfunction and persistently small hearts. Ventricular
dilatation is not an independent predictor of prognosis.

PMID: 8427135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Cardiol. 1992 Jun 1;69(17):1451-7.

Ventricular arrhythmias in dilated cardiomyopathy as an independent prognostic
hallmark. Italian Multicenter Cardiomyopathy Study (SPIC) Group.

De Maria R(1), Gavazzi A, Caroli A, Ometto R, Biagini A, Camerini F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Fisiologica Clinica del C.N.R. di Pisa, Dipartimento di
Cardiologia A. De Gasperis, Ospedale Niguarda Cà Granda, Milano, Italy.

Prevalence and characteristics of ventricular arrhythmias (VA) on Holter
monitoring were evaluated in 218 patients with invasively documented idiopathic
dilated cardiomyopathy to clarify their relation to pump dysfunction, and their
prognostic role. VA were observed in 205 patients (94%) and were high grade
(ventricular pairs or tachycardia) in 130 (60%). No simple or multiform
ventricular premature complexes were present in 88 patients (group 1; 41%),
ventricular pairs in 63 (group 2; 32%), and ventricular tachycardia in 67 (group 
3; 27%). Only echocardiographic right ventricular dimensions (p less than 0.05)
and prevalence of VA during effort (8% in group 1, 15% in group 2, and 14% in
group 3; p = 0.0005) differed significantly between groups. VA severity, and
number of ventricular premature beats and tachycardia episodes were not
correlated to right/left ventricular dimensions and pump function indexes. During
a mean follow-up of 29 +/- 16 months, 27 patients died from cardiac events, and
16 received transplants. Three-year survival probability was lower in groups 2
(0.82) and 3 (0.81) than in group 1 (0.94). By Cox multivariate analysis, VA
severity (p less than 0.01) was a major independent predictor of prognosis after 
markers of ventricular dysfunction such as left ventricular ejection fraction (p 
less than 0.001) and stroke work index (p less than 0.001).

PMID: 1590236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Chromosoma. 1989 Dec;98(6):428-32.

Identification of the spI products of Balbiani ring genes in Chironomus thummi.

Cortés E(1), Botella LM, Barettino D, Díez JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (C.S.I.C.), Madrid, Spain.

The spI fraction of high molecular weight secretory proteins was analysed in
Chironomus thummi. These proteins are encoded by giant Balbiani ring (BR) genes
which develop specifically in salivary gland cells. Each component of the spI
fraction was studied electrophoretically from early and middle 4th instar larvae 
and prepupae, as well from galactose-treated larvae where changes in the relative
puffing pattern of BR1 and BR2 are known to occur. The spI fraction consists of
at least two bands with electrophoretic mobilities slower than those of the spI
components of Camptochironomus. The slow migrating component remains throughout
the 4th larval instar, while the amount of the faster component changes, being
abundant in early 4th instar and prepupae, but not present (or very weak) in
middle 4th instar. The correlated shifts in BR puffing pattern during these
developmental stages suggest that the slow and fast components are encoded by BR2
and BR1. The spI fraction is modified by galactose treatment, the fast component 
being induced in parallel with a decrease in the slow component. These changes
are correlated with changes in the steady-state levels of RNA: an increase in BR1
RNA and a decrease in BR2 RNA, and of proteins. These proteins could correspond
to the spIb and spIa fractions allocated to BR2 and BR1, respectively, in
Camptochironomus. After galactose treatment a new faster band sometimes appears, 
that could correspond to the spIc fraction of Camptochironomus. A possible spId
equivalent was also identified. In conclusion the main features of the spI family
in C. thummi are similar to those of spI in Camptochironomus.

PMID: 2627801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


