
1. Cornea. 2015 Sep;34(9):1144-8. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000000489.

Preservation of Biological Activity of Plasma and Platelet-Derived Eye Drops
After Their Different Time and Temperature Conditions of Storage.

Anitua E(1), de la Fuente M, Riestra A, Merayo-Lloves J, Muruzábal F, Orive G.

Author information: 
(1)*Fundación Eduardo Anitua, Vitoria, Spain; †BTI Biotechnology Institute,
Vitoria, Spain; and ‡Fundación de Investigación Oftalmológica, Instituto
Oftalmológico Fernández-Vega, Oviedo, Spain.

PURPOSE: To analyze whether plasma rich in growth factors (PRGF) eye drops
preserve their biological characteristics and activity after storage for 3 and 6 
months at -20°C, at 4°C, and at room temperature for 72 hours, compared with
fresh samples (t0).
METHODS: Blood from 6 healthy donors was harvested and centrifuged to obtain PRGF
free of leukocytes. Resulting PRGF eye drops were stored for 3 and 6 months at
-20°C. At each time, 2 aliquots were maintained at room temperature or at 4°C for
72 hours. Platelet-derived growth factor-AB, transforming growth factor-ß1,
vascular endothelial growth factor, epidermal growth factor, insulin-like growth 
factor-1, angiopoietin-1, and thrombospondin-1 were quantified at each time and
temperature of storage. Also, the effect of PRGF eye drops on proliferation of
primary human keratocytes was evaluated.
RESULTS: All the analyzed growth factor levels remained constant at each time and
storage condition. No differences were observed in the proliferative activity of 
keratocytes after treatment with PRGF eye drops at any studied time or
temperature. Finally, there was no microbial contamination in any of the PRGF eye
drops.
CONCLUSIONS: The preservation of the PRGF eye drops at -20°C for up to 3 and 6
months does not mean reduction of the main growth factors and proteins implicated
in ocular surface wound healing. Eye drop characteristics and in vitro biological
activity were not affected by their usage and conservation for 72 hours at 4°C or
at room temperature.

PMID: 26165790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 5;10(6):e0129123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129123.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Reprogrammed Myeloid Cell Transcriptomes in NSCLC.

Durrans A(1), Gao D(1), Gupta R(2), Fischer KR(3), Choi H(3), El Rayes T(3), Ryu 
S(1), Nasar A(4), Spinelli CF(4), Andrews W(4), Elemento O(5), Nolan D(6), Stiles
B(7), Rafii S(6), Narula N(8), Davuluri R(2), Altorki NK(7), Mittal V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America;
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College of
Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of 
America; Neuberger Berman Lung Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College of
Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of 
America. (2)Molecular and Cellular Oncogenesis Program, The Wistar Institute,
3601 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America. (3)Department
of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America; Department 
of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America;
Neuberger Berman Lung Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America;
Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Weill Cornell Medical College 
of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States 
of America. (4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical
College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United
States of America. (5)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America. (6)HHMI,
Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America.
(7)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America;
Neuberger Berman Lung Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America.
(8)Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University, 
1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, United States of America.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related mortality worldwide, with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as the most prevalent form. Despite advances
in treatment options including minimally invasive surgery, CT-guided radiation,
novel chemotherapeutic regimens, and targeted therapeutics, prognosis remains
dismal. Therefore, further molecular analysis of NSCLC is necessary to identify
novel molecular targets that impact prognosis and the design of new-targeted
therapies. In recent years, tumor "activated/reprogrammed" stromal cells that
promote carcinogenesis have emerged as potential therapeutic targets. However,
the contribution of stromal cells to NSCLC is poorly understood. Here, we show
increased numbers of bone marrow (BM)-derived hematopoietic cells in the tumor
parenchyma of NSCLC patients compared with matched adjacent non-neoplastic lung
tissue. By sorting specific cellular fractions from lung cancer patients, we
compared the transcriptomes of intratumoral myeloid compartments within the tumor
bed with their counterparts within adjacent non-neoplastic tissue from NSCLC
patients. The RNA sequencing of specific myeloid compartments (immature monocytic
myeloid cells and polymorphonuclear neutrophils) identified differentially
regulated genes and mRNA isoforms, which were inconspicuous in whole tumor
analysis. Genes encoding secreted factors, including osteopontin (OPN), chemokine
(C-C motif) ligand 7 (CCL7) and thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) were identified, which
enhanced tumorigenic properties of lung cancer cells indicative of their
potential as targets for therapy. This study demonstrates that analysis of
homogeneous stromal populations isolated directly from fresh clinical specimens
can detect important stromal genes of therapeutic value.

PMCID: PMC4457876
PMID: 26046767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 30;5(22):11413-27.

Chemopreventive apigenin controls UVB-induced cutaneous proliferation and
angiogenesis through HuR and thrombospondin-1.

Tong X(1), Mirzoeva S(2), Veliceasa D(3), Bridgeman BB(4), Fitchev P(5), Cornwell
ML(5), Crawford SE(5), Pelling JC(1), Volpert OV(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA. Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Department of
Radiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (3)Department of Urology, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA. (6)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

Plant flavonoid apigenin prevents and inhibits UVB-induced carcinogenesis in the 
skin and has strong anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenic properties. Here we
identify mechanisms, by which apigenin controls these oncogenic events. We show
that apigenin acts, at least in part, via endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor,
thrombospondin-1 (TSP1). TSP1 expression by the epidermal keratinocytes is
potently inhibited by UVB. It inhibits cutaneous angiogenesis and UVB-induced
carcinogenesis. We show that apigenin restores TSP1 in epidermal keratinocytes
subjected to UVB and normalizes proliferation and angiogenesis in UVB-exposed
skin. Importantly, reconstituting TSP1 anti-angiogenic function in UVB-irradiated
skin with a short bioactive peptide mimetic representing exclusively its
anti-angiogenic domain reproduced the anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenic
effects of apigenin. Cox-2 and HIF-1a are important mediators of angiogenesis.
Both apigenin and TSP1 peptide mimetic attenuated their induction by UVB. Finally
we identified the molecular mechanism, whereby apigenin did not affect TSP1 mRNA,
but increased de novo protein synthesis. Knockdown studies implicated the
RNA-binding protein HuR, which controls mRNA stability and translation. Apigenin 
increased HuR cytoplasmic localization and physical association with TSP1 mRNA
causing de novo TSP1 synthesis. HuR cytoplasmic localization was, in turn,
dependent on CHK2 kinase. Together, our data provide a new mechanism, by which
apigenin controls UVB-induced carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4294383
PMID: 25526033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015 Feb 1;22(4):308-24. doi: 10.1089/ars.2013.5743. Epub 
2014 Dec 2.

Oxidized high-density lipoprotein impairs endothelial progenitor cells' function 
by activation of CD36-MAPK-TSP-1 pathways.

Wu J(1), He Z, Gao X, Wu F, Ding R, Ren Y, Jiang Q, Fan M, Liang C, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second Military
Medical University , Shanghai, People's Republic of China .

AIMS: High-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels inversely correlate with
cardiovascular events due to the protective effects on vascular wall and stem
cells, which are susceptible to oxidative modifications and then lead to
potential pro-atherosclerotic effects. We proposed that oxidized HDL (ox-HDL)
might lead to endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) dysfunction and investigated
underlying mechanisms.
RESULTS: ox-HDL was shown to increase apoptosis and intracellular reactive oxygen
species levels, but to reduce migration, angiogenesis, and cholesterol efflux of 
EPCs in a dose-dependent manner. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and 
NF-<U+03BA>B were activated after ox-HDL stimulation, which also upregulated
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) expression without affecting vascular endothelial growth
factor. Effects caused by ox-HDL could be significantly attenuated by
pretreatment with short hairpin RNA-mediated CD36 knockdown or probucol. Data of 
in vivo experiments and the inverse correlation of ox-HDL and circulating EPC
numbers among patients with coronary artery diseases (CAD) or CAD and type 2
diabetes also supported it. Meanwhile, HDL separated from such patients could
significantly increase cultured EPC's caspase 3 activity, further supporting our 
proposal.
INNOVATION: This is the most complete study to date of how ox-HDL would impair
EPCs function, which was involved with activation of CD36-p38 MAPK-TSP-1 pathways
and proved by not only the inverse relationship between ox-HDL and circulating
EPCs in clinic but also pro-apoptotic effects of HDL separated from patients'
serum.
CONCLUSION: Activation of CD36-p38 MAPK-TSP-1 pathways contributes to the
pathological effects of ox-HDL on EPCs' dysfunction, which might be one of the
potential etiological factors responsible for the disturbed neovascularization in
chronic ischemic disease.

PMCID: PMC4298149
PMID: 25313537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2014 Oct;92(10):879-85. doi: 10.1139/cjpp-2014-0117.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid suppresses inflammation-induced
neovascularization.

Zhou H(1), Jiang S, Chen J, Su SB.

Author information: 
(1)a The State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Sun Yat-sen University, 54 S Xianlie Road, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate gene transcription by modifying the
acetylation of histone and nonhistone proteins. Deregulated expression of HDACs
has been implicated in tumorigenesis and angiogenesis. In this study, we examined
the effect of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a potent inhibitor of
HDACs, on inflammatory corneal angiogenesis. In a mouse model of alkali-induced
corneal neovascularization (CNV), topical application of SAHA to the injured
corneas attenuated CNV. In addition, in vivo treatment with SAHA downregulated
the expression of the pro-angiogenic factors vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), transforming growth factor beta 1 
(TGFß1), and epidermal growth factor (EGF), but upregulated the expression of the
anti-angiogenic factors thrombospondin (TSP)-1, TSP-2, and ADAMTS-1 in the
injured corneas. Furthermore, SAHA inhibited the expression of pro-angiogenic
factors, migration, proliferation, and tube formation by human microvascular
endothelial cells (HEMC-1) in vitro. These data indicate that SAHA has
therapeutic potential for CNV.

PMID: 25272091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 23;14:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-14-79.

Biomarkers can predict potential clinical responders to DIMS0150 a toll-like
receptor 9 agonist in ulcerative colitis patients.

Kuznetsov NV, Zargari A, Gielen AW, von Stein OD, Musch E, Befrits R, Lofberg R, 
von Stein P(1).

Author information: 
(1)InDex Pharmaceuticals, Tomtebodavägen 23a, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
petra.stein@indexpharma.com.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids (GCS) remain one of the mainstay treatments in the
management of ulcerative colitis (UC) but up to a third of patients will
ultimately fail to respond and progress to a more severe and difficult to manage 
disease state. Previous clinical studies suggest that the Toll-Like Receptor 9
(TLR9) agonist DIMS0150 not only induces production of key anti-inflammatory
cytokines as IL-10 but interestingly also enhances steroid sensitivity in steroid
refractory UC patients. We investigated, in the context of a clinical study,
whether a pre-selection of steroid response genes could identify steroid
refractory UC subjects most likely to respond to DIMS0150 treatment.
METHODS: In a non-interventional pilot study, blood from steroid refractory UC
patients and healthy volunteers was taken and thirty-four previously described
steroid response genes were analysed by real time PCR analysis. To establish
clinical utility of the identified biomarkers, a placebo controlled, randomized, 
double blinded study in active steroid dependent and steroid resistant UC
patients on concomitant steroid therapies was used (EudraCT number:
2006-001846-15).
RESULTS: We identified three potential biomarkers CD163, TSP-1 and IL-1RII whose 
response to steroids was significantly enhanced when DIMS0150 was applied.
Thirty-four subjects were randomized to receive a single rectal administration of
placebo or 30 mg of DIMS0150. Blood derived PBMCs were obtained prior to dosing
and assayed for evidence of a steroid enhancing effect following steroid
incubation in the presence of DIMS0150. Comparison to established steroid
sensitivity marker IL-6 confirmed that clinical responders are steroid refractory
UC patients. Upon study completion and un-blinding, the biomarker assay correctly
predicted a clinical response in over 90% of the patients.
CONCLUSION: Using specific steroid response biomarkers, GCS refractory UC
patients most likely to benefit from DIMS0150 treatment could be identified and
illustrates the usefulness of a personalized treatment approach.

PMCID: PMC4005617
PMID: 24758565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Jun;25(6):1171-86. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013040433. Epub 2014 
Feb 7.

Thrombospondin-1 activation of signal-regulatory protein-a stimulates reactive
oxygen species production and promotes renal ischemia reperfusion injury.

Yao M(1), Rogers NM(2), Csányi G(3), Rodriguez AI(3), Ross MA(4), St Croix C(4), 
Knupp H(1), Novelli EM(1), Thomson AW(5), Pagano PJ(3), Isenberg JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine Institute. (2)Vascular Medicine Institute, Starzl
Transplantation Institute. (3)Vascular Medicine Institute, Department of
Pharmacology and Chemical Biology. (4)Center for Biologic Imaging, and. (5)Starzl
Transplantation Institute. (6)Vascular Medicine Institute, Starzl Transplantation
Institute, Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Division of
Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania jsi5@pitt.edu.

Erratum in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Aug;25(8):1884.

Ischemia reperfusion injury (IRI) causes tissue and organ injury, in part,
through alterations in tissue blood flow and the production of reactive oxygen
species. The cell surface receptor signal-regulatory protein-a (SIRP-a) is
expressed on inflammatory cells and suppresses phagocytosis, but the function of 
SIRP-a in IRI has not been determined. We reported previously that the
matricellular protein thrombospondin-1 is upregulated in IRI. Here, we report a
novel interaction between thrombospondin-1 and SIRP-a on nonphagocytic cells. In 
cell-free experiments, thrombospondin-1 bound SIRP-a. In vascular smooth muscle
cells and renal tubular epithelial cells, treatment with thrombospondin-1 led to 
phosphorylation of SIRP-a and downstream activation of Src homology domain
2-containing phosphatase-1. Thrombospondin-1 also stimulated phosphorylation of
p47(phox) (an organizer subunit for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH) oxidase 1/2) and increased production of superoxide, both of which were
abrogated by knockdown or antibody blockade of SIRP-a. In rodent aortic rings,
treatment with thrombospondin-1 increased the production of superoxide and
inhibited nitric oxide-mediated vasodilation in a SIRP-a-dependent manner. Renal 
IRI upregulated the thrombospondin-1-SIRP-a signaling axis and was associated
with increased superoxide production and cell death. A SIRP-a antibody that
blocks thrombospondin-1 activation of SIRP-a mitigated the effects of renal IRI, 
increasing blood flow, suppressing production of reactive oxygen species, and
preserving cellular architecture. A role for CD47 in SIRP-a activation in these
pathways is also described. Overall, these results suggest that thrombospondin-1 
binding to SIRP-a on nonphagocytic cells activates NADPH oxidase, limits
vasodilation, and promotes renal IRI.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4033366
PMID: 24511121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Med Oncol. 2014 Feb;31(2):807. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0807-1. Epub 2013 Dec 21.

Txr1: an important factor in oxaliplatin resistance in gastric cancer.

Bi J(1), Bai Z, Ma X, Song J, Guo Y, Zhao J, Yi X, Han S, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Jishuitan Hospital, The Fourth Medical 
College of Peking University, Beijing, China, frankbjt@126.com.

Oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy is the main treatment regimen for gastric cancer
(GC), but can fail because of drug resistance. We investigated the role of a
recently identified drug-resistance gene, taxol-resistant gene 1 (Txr1), in
oxaliplatin resistance. A retrospective study based on banked tissue was carried 
out. We collected clinical data from 95 patients with stage II-III GC who were
treated with radical D2 surgery and standardized first-line chemotherapy with
oxaliplatin; paraffin blocks of their tumor specimens were prepared for a tissue 
microarray in which Txr1 expression was analyzed immunohistochemically and
compared with their clinical data and their 3-year disease-free survival (DFS)
rate. The human GC cell line, SGC7901, was developed into the
oxaliplatin-resistant cell line, SGC7901/L-OHP, using slowly increased
oxaliplatin concentrations over 6 months. The relationship between Txr1
expression and drug-resistance of oxaliplatin in GC was studied with drug
intervention, gene silencing technology, real-time PCR and Western blot analysis.
Of the 95 patients with GC, those with TXR1(-) GC had longer postoperative 3-year
DFS (77.8 %) than those with TXR1(+) GC (52.9 %). In oxaliplatin-resistant
SGC7901/L-OHP cells, the main expression location of Txr1 shifted from the
nucleus to cytoplasm, and both the mRNA and protein expression of Txr1 were
higher than that of the parental cells, whereas expression of thrombospondin-1
(TSP1) decreased. When the Txr1 gene was silenced, TSP1 expression increased and 
the oxaliplatin resistance was significantly reduced in SGC7901/L-OHP cells.
Changed Txr1 expression in GC affects the efficacy of oxaliplatin-based
chemotherapy. Increased Txr1 expression decreases TSP1 expression and inhibits
apoptosis. Txr1 could be a target in reversing oxaliplatin resistance in GC.

PMID: 24362794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Nov 7;13(5):577-89. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.08.010.

Ossifying fibroma tumor stem cells are maintained by epigenetic regulation of a
TSP1/TGF-ß/SMAD3 autocrine loop.

Qin H(1), Qu C, Yamaza T, Yang R, Lin X, Duan XY, Akiyama K, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Chen
C, Chen Y, Qi HH, Feng XH, Le AD, Shi S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Retraction in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 May 7;16(5):569.

Abnormal stem cell function makes a known contribution to many malignant tumors, 
but the role of stem cells in benign tumors is not well understood. Here, we show
that ossifying fibroma (OF) contains a stem cell population that resembles
mesenchymal stem cells (OFMSCs) and is capable of generating OF-like tumor
xenografts. Mechanistically, OFMSCs show enhanced TGF-ß signaling that induces
aberrant proliferation and deficient osteogenesis via Notch and BMP signaling
pathways, respectively. The elevated TGF-ß activity is tightly regulated by
JHDM1D-mediated epigenetic regulation of thrombospondin-1 (TSP1), forming a
JHDM1D/TSP1/TGF-ß/SMAD3 autocrine loop. Inhibition of TGF-ß signaling in OFMSCs
can rescue their abnormal osteogenic differentiation and elevated proliferation
rate. Furthermore, chronic activation of TGF-ß can convert normal MSCs into
OF-like MSCs via establishment of this JHDM1D/TSP1/TGF-ß/SMAD3 autocrine loop.
These results reveal that epigenetic regulation of TGF-ß signaling in MSCs
governs the benign tumor phenotype in OF and highlight TGF-ß signaling as a
candidate therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3861239
PMID: 24209761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Feb;35(2):324-32. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt332. Epub 2013 Oct 
1.

Mechanisms of platelet-stimulated colon cancer invasion: role of clusterin and
thrombospondin 1 in regulation of the P38MAPK-MMP-9 pathway.

Radziwon-Balicka A(1), Santos-Martinez MJ, Corbalan JJ, O'Sullivan S, Treumann A,
Gilmer JF, Radomski MW, Medina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.

Platelets have been implicated in colon cancer metastasis and prognosis but the
underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. We evaluated the role of the
different mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in platelet-stimulated
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) generation and colon cancer invasion. In
addition, proteins released during platelet-tumour cell interactions were
studied. For this purpose, interactions of Caco-2 and HT29 cells with platelets
were studied using scanning electron microscopy, aggregometry, flow cytometry and
cell invasion chambers. Quantitative PCR and zymography were used to study MMP-9 
gene expression and activity, respectively, whereas western blot was used to
study p38MAPK. Finally, the origin of proteins during platelet-cancer cell
interactions was investigated using stable isotope labelling by amino acids in
cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics. We found that platelets promoted p38MAPK
phosphorylation and MMP-9 up-regulation in both cell lines, with the subsequent
cell-invasion-promoting effects. Pharmacological inhibition of p38MAPK led to a
significant down-regulation of MMP-9 and colon cancer cell invasiveness. Also,
p38MAPK-small interfering RNA abolished the induction of platelet-stimulated
MMP-9. SILAC experiments demonstrated that thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) was released
mainly from platelets and clusterin by both platelets and cancer cells. Finally, 
inhibition of TSP1 and clusterin abolished p38MAPK phosphorylation, MMP-9
activity and platelet-stimulated colon cancer invasion. Our results indicate that
platelet-secreted TSP1 and clusterin promote the signal regulation of MMP-9 in
platelet-induced colonic cancer invasion via a P38MAPK-regulated pathway. These
findings are relevant to the development of therapeutic approaches to preventing 
and reducing tumour cell metastasis induced by colon adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 24085798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Nov 15;305(10):C1021-32. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00203.2013. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Antidicer RNAse activity of monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein-1 is
critical for inducing angiogenesis.

Roy A(1), Zhang M, Saad Y, Kolattukudy PE.

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Florida.

Inflammatory angiogenesis involves the induction of a novel gene ZC3H12A encoding
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)-induced protein-1 (MCPIP1) that has
deubiquitinase and antidicer RNAse activities. If and how these enzymatic
activities of MCPIP1 mediate the biological functions of MCPIP1 are unknown.
Present studies with human umbilical vein endothelial cells suggest that
MCPIP-induced angiogenesis is mediated via hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1a),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and silent information regulator
(SIRT-1) induction that results in the inhibition of angiogenesis inhibitor
thrombospondin-1. MCPIP1 expression inhibited the production of the
antiangiogenic microRNA (miR)-20b and -34a that repress the translation of HIF-1a
and SIRT-1, respectively. The RNase-dead MCPIP mutant D141N not only did not
induce angiogenesis but also failed to inhibit the production of miR-20b and -34a
suggesting that the antidicer RNase activity of MCPIP1 is involved in
MCPIP-mediated angiogenesis. Mimetics of miR-20b and -34a inhibited
MCPIP1-induced angiogenesis confirming that MCPIP1 suppresses the biogenesis of
miR-20b and -34a. Furthermore, our results indicate that MCPIP expression induces
nuclear translocation of HIF-1a. We show that under hypoxia angiogenesis is
mediated via induction of MCPIP1 and under normoxia, in vitro, MCPIP
deubiquitinates ubiquitinated HIF-1a and the stabilized HIF-1a enters the nucleus
to promote the transcription of its target genes, cyclooxygenase-2 and VEGF,
suggesting that the deubiquitinase activity of MCPIP may also promote
angiogenesis. The present results show for the first time that the antidicer
RNase activity of MCPIP1 is critical in mediating a biological function of MCPIP,
namely angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3840202
PMID: 24048733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Lett. 2014 Feb 1;343(1):14-23. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.09.010. Epub
2013 Sep 14.

Non-small cell lung cancer is susceptible to induction of DNA damage responses
and inhibition of angiogenesis by telomere overhang oligonucleotides.

Puri N(1), Pitman RT(2), Mulnix RE(2), Erickson T(2), Iness AN(2), Vitali C(3),
Zhao Y(4), Salgia R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Rockford, IL, United States. Electronic address: neelupur@uic.edu. (2)Department 
of Biomedical Sciences, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Rockford, IL,
United States. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois College of
Medicine, Rockford, IL, United States. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of
Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States. (5)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.

Exposure of the telomere overhang acts as a DNA damage signal, and exogenous
administration of an 11-base oligonucleotide homologous to the 3'-telomere
overhang sequence (T-oligo) mimics the effects of overhang exposure by inducing
senescence and cell death in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, but not in
normal bronchial epithelial cells. T-oligo-induced decrease in cellular
proliferation in NSCLC is likely directed through both p53 and its homolog, p73, 
with subsequent induction of senescence and expression of senescence-associated
proteins, p21, p33(ING), and p27(Kip1) both in vivo and in vitro. Additionally,
T-oligo decreases tumor size and inhibits angiogenesis through decreased VEGF
signaling and increased TSP-1 expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24041868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 17;33(29):3803-11. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.358. Epub 2013 Sep 9.

BMP4/Thrombospondin-1 loop paracrinically inhibits tumor angiogenesis and
suppresses the growth of solid tumors.

Tsuchida R(1), Osawa T(2), Wang F(3), Nishii R(1), Das B(4), Tsuchida S(5),
Muramatsu M(6), Takahashi T(7), Inoue T(8), Wada Y(8), Minami T(8), Yuasa Y(9),
Shibuya M(10).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan [2] Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Tokyo, Japan. (2)1] Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan [2] Laboratory for System Biology and
Medicine, RCAST, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (3)1] Department of Molecular
Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan [2] Department of
Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Division of Oncology, Departments of Medicine and Pathology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. (5)1] Department of Molecular
Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan [2] Department of
Pediatrics, University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (6)1] Department of
Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan [2]
Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(7)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Neurological Diseases and
Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(8)Laboratory for System Biology and Medicine, RCAST, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (9)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan. (10)1] Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan [2] Institute of Physiology and Medicine, Jobu
University, 270-1 Shin-machi, Takasaki, Gunma, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) has potential as an anticancer agent. Recent 
studies have suggested that BMP4 inhibits the survival of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) of neural and colon cancers. Here, we showed that BMP4 paracrinically
inhibited tumor angiogenesis via the induction of Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1), and
consequently suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Although HeLa (human cervical
cancer), HCI-H460-LNM35 (highly metastatic human lung cancer) and B16 (murine
melanoma) cells did not respond to the BMP4 treatment in vitro, the growth of
xeno- and allografts of these cells was suppressed via reductions in tumor
angiogenesis after intraperitoneal treatment with BMP4. When we assessed the mRNA
expression of major angiogenesis-related factors in grafted tumors, we found that
the expression of TSP1 was significantly upregulated by BMP4 administration. We
then confirmed that BMP4 was less effective in suppressing the tumor growth of
TSP1-knockdown cancer cells. Furthermore, we found that BMP4 reduced vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in vivo in a TSP1-dependent manner,
which indicates that BMP4 interfered with the stabilization of tumor
angiogenesis. In conclusion, the BMP4/TSP1 loop paracrinically suppressed tumor
angiogenesis in the tumor microenvironment, which subsequently reduced the growth
of tumors. BMP4 may become an antitumor agent and open a new field of
antiangiogenic therapy.

PMID: 24013228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Br J Cancer. 2013 Oct 1;109(7):1805-12. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.486. Epub 2013 Aug 
22.

Reduced expression of bone morphogenetic protein receptor IA in pancreatic cancer
is associated with a poor prognosis.

Voorneveld PW(1), Stache V, Jacobs RJ, Smolders E, Sitters AI, Liesker A, Korkmaz
KS, Lam SM, De Miranda NF, Morreau H, Kodach LL, Hardwick JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The expression of SMAD4, the central component of the transforming
growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signalling pathways,
is lost in 50% of pancreatic cancers and is associated with a poor survival.
Although the TGF-ß pathway has been extensively studied and characterised in
pancreatic cancer, there is very limited data on BMP signalling, a well-known
tumour-suppressor pathway. BMP signalling can be lost not only at the level of
SMAD4 but also at the level of BMP receptors (BMPRs), as has been described in
colorectal cancer.
METHODS: We performed immunohistochemical analysis of the expression levels of
BMP signalling components in pancreatic cancer and correlated these with
survival. We also manipulated the activity of BMP signalling in vitro.
RESULTS: Reduced expression of BMPRIA is associated with a significantly worse
survival, primarily in a subset of SMAD4-positive cancers. In vitro inactivation 
of SMAD4-dependent BMP signalling increases proliferation and invasion of
pancreatic cancer cells, whereas inactivation of BMP signalling in SMAD4-negative
cells does not change the proliferation and invasion or leads to an opposite
effect.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that BMPRIA expression is a good prognostic marker
and that the BMP pathway is a potential target for future therapeutic
interventions in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3790157
PMID: 23969729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Genome Announc. 2013 Jul 25;1(4). pii: e00511-13. doi: 10.1128/genomeA.00511-13.

Genome Sequence of Bacillus subtilis SPZ1, an Evolved Strain for Higher Uptake
Rate of Tributyrin.

Song P(1), Xu X, Jiang L, Zhang R, Wang J, Xu Q, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of
Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing University of Technology,
Nanjing, China.

The lipase-producing strain Bacillus subtilis SPZ1 is isolated from the medium by
tributyrin as the sole carbon source. Here, we present a 4.13-Mb assembly of its 
genome sequence, which may provide various kinds of useful information related to
Bacillus spp., such as mechanisms and control of the substrate uptake and protein
secretion pathways.

PMCID: PMC3735065
PMID: 23887917  [PubMed]


16. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Feb;27(3):233-8. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2013.807237. Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Altered angiogenesis in low birth weight individuals: a role for anti-angiogenic 
circulating factors.

Ligi I(1), Simoncini S, Tellier E, Grandvuillemin I, Marcelli M, Bikfalvi A,
Buffat C, Dignat-George F, Anfosso F, Simeoni U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, La Conception Hospital , Marseille , France .

OBJECTIVE: Low birth weight (LBW) is a risk factor for hypertension at adulthood.
Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) dysfunction has been characterized in LBW
neonates. We hypothesized that changes in soluble, plasma pro- or anti-angiogenic
factors are associated with EPCs dysfunction and impaired angiogenesis in LBW
neonates.
METHOD: Venous umbilical cord blood was collected from 42 normal, term neonates
and 75 LBW neonates. Cord blood endothelial colony forming cells (ECFC) from
control patients were cultured in the presence of 10% of serum obtained from both
groups.
RESULTS: The proliferation and the migration of ECFC were significantly reduced
when cultured with 10% of serum of LBW neonates compared to serum of control
neonates. Matrigel invasion assay was not significantly altered. Umbilical vein
plasma VEGF concentration was significantly reduced in LBW neonates while that of
sVEGFR and PF4 were significantly higher. Addition of VEGF corrected the
inhibitory effect of LBW serum on normal ECFC proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum obtained from LBW babies contains factors that exhibit an
antiangiogenic effect on ECFC proliferation and migration. VEGF/sVEGF/PF4 pathway
seems to be involved in the EPCs dysfunction in LBW neonates.

PMID: 23701307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Clin Transl Oncol. 2013 Nov;15(11):897-902. doi: 10.1007/s12094-013-1020-6. Epub 
2013 Mar 5.

VEGF and TSP1 levels correlate with prognosis in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer.

Fleitas T(1), Martínez-Sales V, Vila V, Reganon E, Mesado D, Martín M,
Gómez-Codina J, Montalar J, Reynés G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia,
Avda Blasco Ibañez 17, 46010, Valencia, Spain, tfleitask@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: There is a need for biomarkers that may help in selecting the most
effective anticancer treatments for each patient. We have investigated the
prognostic value of a set of angiogenesis, inflammation and coagulation markers
in patients treated for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 60 patients
before first line platinum-based chemotherapy ± bevacizumab, and after the third 
cycle of treatment. Blood samples from 60 healthy volunteers were also obtained
as controls. Angiogenesis, inflammation and coagulation markers vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), their soluble receptors 1 (VEGFR1) and 2
(VEGFR2), thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), interleukin-6 (IL6), sialic acid (SA) and
tissue factor (TF) were quantified by ELISA.
RESULTS: Except for TSP-1, pre- and post-treatment levels of all markers were
higher in patients than in controls (p < 0.05). There was a positive and
significant correlation between VEGF and VEGFR2 before treatment. VEGF also
correlated with inflammatory markers IL-6 and SA. Moreover, there was a positive 
and significant correlation between levels of VEGFR1 and TF. Decreased levels of 
TSP-1 and increased levels of VEGF were associated with shorter survival.
Bevacizumab significantly modified angiogenesis parameters and caused a decrease 
of VEGF and an increase of TSP-1.
CONCLUSION: Angiogenesis, inflammation and coagulation markers were increased in 
NSCLC patients. Increased levels of VEGF and low levels of TSP-1 correlated with 
a poor prognosis.

PMID: 23463593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056367. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Activation of TGF-ß1 promoter by hepatitis C virus-induced AP-1 and Sp1: role of 
TGF-ß1 in hepatic stellate cell activation and invasion.

Presser LD(1), McRae S, Waris G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, H.M. Bligh Cancer Research
Laboratories, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, Chicago
Medical School, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Our previous studies have shown the induction and maturation of transforming
growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-ß1) in HCV-infected human hepatoma cells. In this
study, we have investigated the molecular mechanism of TGF-ß1 gene expression in 
response to HCV infection. We demonstrate that HCV-induced transcription factors 
AP-1, Sp1, NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT-3 are involved in TGF-ß1 gene expression. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we further show that AP-1 and Sp1
interact with TGF-b1 promoter in vivo in HCV-infected cells. In addition, we
demonstrate that HCV-induced TGF-ß1 gene expression is mediated by the activation
of cellular kinases such as p38 MAPK, Src, JNK, and MEK1/2. Next, we determined
the role of secreted bioactive TGF-ß1 in human hepatic stellate cells (HSCs)
activation and invasion. Using siRNA approach, we show that HCV-induced bioactive
TGF-ß1 is critical for the induction of alpha smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and
type 1 collagen, the markers of HSCs activation and proliferation. We further
demonstrate the potential role of HCV-induced bioactive TGF-ß1 in HSCs
invasion/cell migration using a transwell Boyden chamber. Our results also
suggest the role of HCV-induced TGF-ß1 in HCV replication and release.
Collectively, these observations provide insight into the mechanism of TGF-ß1
promoter activation, as well as HSCs activation and invasion, which likely
manifests in liver fibrosis associated with HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC3578869
PMID: 23437118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Ann Plast Surg. 2013 Oct;71(4):415-20. doi: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e31824ca62b.

Anthocyanins from black soybean seed coat enhance wound healing.

Xu L(1), Choi TH, Kim S, Kim SH, Chang HW, Choe M, Kwon SY, Hur JA, Shin SC,
Chung JI, Kang D, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Departments of
†Internal Medicine, ‡Diagnostic Radiology, and §Pathology, Keimyung University
Dongsan Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea; <U+2225>Department of Internal
Medicine, School of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu, Republic of Korea;
Departments of ¶Chemisty, and #Agronomy, Research Institute of Life Science,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea; **Department of
Physiology, Institute of Health Sciences, College of Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea; and ††Department of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Jilin University, Changchun, China.

Anthocyanins are known to have antioxidant and antiinflammatory effects. We
hypothesized that anthocyanins would enhance wound healing in Sprague-Dawley
rats. The purpose of this study was to evaluate our hypothesis and investigate
the mechanism of wound healing enhancement. The cytoprotective effect of an
immortalized epidermal keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT) and human neonatal dermal
fibroblasts in response to various concentrations of anthocyanins was determined.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) of HaCaT
were measured by Western blot analysis. Anthocyanins were applied to the wounds
in rats, and the healing ratio was calculated. Tissue VEGF, TSP1, CD31, nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B, and phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>Ba were measured. The viability of the HaCaT 
cell line and human neonatal dermal fibroblasts increased under cytotoxicity by
H2O2 in the anthocyanin-treated groups. The VEGF in the anthocyanin-treated
groups increased, whereas TSP1 decreased. Wounds in the experimental groups
healed faster, and VEGF and CD31 increased in the experimental groups, whereas
TSP1 decreased. Anthocyanins inhibited the translocation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(p65) from cytosol to nucleus and also prevented the phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>Ba.
Anthocyanins enhance wound healing through a cytoprotective effect, enhancement
of angiogenesis, and an antiinflammatory effect.

PMID: 23407247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. FEBS J. 2013 May;280(10):2353-68. doi: 10.1111/febs.12148. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Decorin induces rapid secretion of thrombospondin-1 in basal breast carcinoma
cells via inhibition of Ras homolog gene family, member A/Rho-associated
coiled-coil containing protein kinase 1.

Neill T(1), Jones HR, Crane-Smith Z, Owens RT, Schaefer L, Iozzo RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy, and Cell Biology, and the Cancer Cell
Biology and Signaling Program, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Pathological neovascularization relies on an imbalance between potent
proangiogenic agents and equally effective antiangiogenic cues. Collectively,
these factors contribute to an angiogenic niche within the tumor
microenvironment. Oncogenic events and hypoxia contribute to augmented levels of 
angiokines, and thereby activate the so-called angiogenic switch to promote
aggressive tumorigenic and metastatic growth. Soluble decorin functions as a
paracrine pan-inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases, such as Met and epidermal
growth factor receptor, and thus is capable of suppressing angiogenesis under
normoxia. This leads to noncanonical repression of hypoxia-inducible factor
1-alpha and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), and concurrent
induction of thrombospondin-1. The substantial induction of endogenous tumor
cell-derived thrombospondin-1, a potent antiangiogenic effector, led us to the
discovery of an unexpected secretory phenotype occurring very rapidly (within
5 min) after decorin treatment of the triple-negative basal breast carcinoma cell
line MDA-MB-231. Surprisingly, the effect was not mediated by Met receptor
antagonism, as initially hypothesized, but required epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling to achieve swift and robust thrombospondin-1 release.
Furthermore, this effect was ultimately dependent on the prompt degradation of
Ras homolog gene family member A, via the 26S proteasome, leading to direct
inactivation of Rho-associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase 1. The
latter led to derepression of thrombospondin-1 secretion. Collectively, these
data provide a novel mechanistic role for Rho-associated coiled-coil containing
protein kinase 1, in addition to providing the first conclusive evidence of
decorin exclusively targeting a receptor tyrosine kinase to achieve a specific
effect. The overall effects of soluble decorin on the tumor microenvironment
would cause an immediately-early as well as a sustained antiangiogenic response
in vivo.

© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.

PMCID: PMC3648593
PMID: 23350987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Matrix Biol. 2013 Mar 11;32(2):123-32. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2012.11.010. Epub
2012 Nov 30.

Thrombospondin-1 expression in melanoma is blocked by methylation and targeted
reversal by 5-Aza-deoxycytidine suppresses angiogenesis.

Lindner DJ(1), Wu Y, Haney R, Jacobs BS, Fruehauf JP, Tuthill R, Borden EC.

Author information: 
(1)Taussig Cancer Institute, Translational Hematology & Oncology Research,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. lindned@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: Reversibility of aberrant methylation via pharmacological means is an
attractive target for therapies through epigenetic reprogramming. To establish
that pharmacologic reversal of methylation could result in functional inhibition 
of angiogenesis, we undertook in vitro and in vivo studies of thrombospondin-1
(TSP1), a known inhibitor of angiogenesis. TSP1 is methylated in several
malignancies, and can inhibit angiogenesis in melanoma xenografts. We analyzed
effects of 5-Aza-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) on melanoma cells in vitro to confirm
reversal of promoter hypermethylation and restoration of TSP1 expression. We then
investigated the effects of TSP1 expression on new blood vessel formation and
tumor growth in vivo. Finally, to determine potential for clinical translation,
the methylation status of TSP1 promoter regions of nevi and melanoma tissues was 
investigated.
RESULTS: 5-Aza-dC reduced DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) protein,
reversed promoter hypermethylation, and restored TSP1 expression in five melanoma
cell lines, while having no effect on TSP1 protein levels in normal human
melanocytes. In in vivo neovascularization studies, mice were implanted with
melanoma cells (A375) either untreated or treated with 5Aza-dC. Vessels at tumor 
sites were counted by an observer blinded to treatments and the number of tumor
vessels was significantly decreased at pretreated tumor sites. This difference
occurred before a significant difference in tumor volumes was seen, yet in
further studies the average tumor volume in mice treated in vivo with 5-Aza-dC
was decreased by 55% compared to untreated controls. Knockdown of TSP1 expression
with shRNA enhanced tumor-induced angiogenesis by 68%. Analyses of promoter
methylation status of TSP1 in tumors derived from untreated and treated mice
identified 67% of tumors from untreated and 17% of tumors from treated mice with 
partial methylation consistent with the methylation specific PCR analysis of A375
cells. Examination of methylation patterns in the promoter of TSP1 and comparison
of aberrantly methylated TSP1 in melanoma with non-malignant nevi identified a
significantly higher frequency of promoter methylation in tumor samples from
melanoma patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacological reversal of methylation silenced TSP1 had functional
biological consequences in enhancing angiogenesis inhibition and inducing
antitumor effects to decrease murine melanoma growth. Angiogenesis inhibition is 
an additional mechanism by which epigenetic modulators can have antitumor
effects.

Copyright © 2012 International Society of Matrix Biology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3615071
PMID: 23202046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Apr;93(4):471-8. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0712324. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Kidney transplantation: analysis of the expression and T cell-mediated activation
of latent TGF-ß.

Willet JD(1), Pichitsiri W, Jenkinson SE, Brain JG, Wood K, Alhasan AA,
Spielhofer J, Robertson H, Ali S, Kirby JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, The Medical School, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Apr;93(4):459-62.

Activated T cells infiltrate a renal allograft during rejection and can respond
to TGF-ß within the tubules, causing local differentiation and expression of the 
aE(CD103)ß7 integrin. This study was performed to examine the expression of
latent TGF-ß within renal allograft tissues and to define a mechanism by which T 
cells can activate and respond to this latent factor. Rejecting renal allograft
biopsy tissues showed increased expression of the latent TGF-ß complex, which was
localized around the tubules by a mechanism that might involve interaction with
heparan sulfate in the basement membrane. A cultured renal TEC line also
expressed the latent complex, but these cells did not respond to this form of
TGF-ß by pSmad 3. However, coculture of these cells with activated T cells
induced the expression of CD103, suggesting that T cells can activate and respond
to the latent TGF-ß associated with TEC. Although activated T cells expressed
little cell-surface TSP-1, this was increased by culture with fibronectin or
fibronectin-expressing renal TEC. Blockade of TSP-1 using LSKL peptides reduced
the potential of activated T cells to differentiate in response to latent TGF-ß. 
This study suggests that penetration of renal tubules by activated T cells leads 
to increased expression of T cell-surface TSP-1, allowing activation of latent
TGF-ß sequestered on heparan sulfate within the microenvironment. This mechanism 
may be important for localized phenotypic maturation of T cells that have
infiltrated the kidney during allograft rejection.

PMCID: PMC3928105
PMID: 23192429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dig Dis Sci. 2013 Feb;58(2):405-13. doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2379-x. Epub 2012 Sep
22.

Expression of ADAMTS1 and its correlation with angiogenesis in primary gastric
cancer and lymph node metastasis.

Chen J(1), Zhi Y, Chang X, Zhang S, Dai D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Chongshan East Road 4, Shenyang, 110032, Liaoning, China.
chenjing9788@163.com

BACKGROUND: A disintegrin and metallopeptidase with thrombospondin motif type 1
(ADAMTS1) is a recently discovered metalloproteinase with antiangiogenic
activity. The function of ADAMTS1 in gastric cancer remains unknown. Therefore,
we were interested in examining ADAMTS1 expression in human gastric cancer, as
well as its possible correlation with angiogenesis.
METHODS: The mRNA and protein expression of ADAMTS1, thrombospondin type I
(TSP1), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was evaluated by RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 56 paired tumor and normal tissue samples,
and corresponding metastatic lymph nodes (n = 42). Microvessel density (MVD) was 
also evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: ADAMTS1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly lower in primary
tumors than in corresponding normal tissues, and were significantly higher in
metastatic lymph nodes compared to their matched primary tumors. High ADAMTS1
mRNA and protein expression was found to be significantly associated with lymph
node metastasis in primary tumors. There was a negative correlation between
ADAMTS1 and VEGF mRNA and protein expression in primary gastric tumors and normal
tissues. A negative correlation was also found between ADAMTS1 protein expression
and MVD in primary gastric tumors. In contrast, no correlation was detected
between ADAMTS1 and TSP1 mRNA and protein expression in primary gastric tumors,
normal tissues, and metastatic lymph nodes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that ADAMTS1 expression is altered in primary
gastric cancer and paired lymph node metastasis. In addition, ADAMTS1 has
angioinhibitory effects in primary gastric cancer due to its low expression and
negative correlation with VEGF and MVD. However, it appears to lose its
anti-angiogenic activity in metastatic lymph nodes in gastric cancer.

PMID: 23001403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc. 2013 Jan 1;54(1):59-73. doi: 10.3233/CH-2012-1565.

Decreased TSP-1 following percutaneous coronary intervention is associated with
major adverse cardiac events in ST-elevation myocardial infarction.

Kaiser R(1), Grotemeyer K, Kälsch T, Gräber S, Wilkens H, Elmas E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Saarland University, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
ralfkaiser@gmx.net

BACKGROUND: TSP-1 is a vasoconstrictive protein, which is released from both
endothelium and cardiomyocytes during ischemia and promotes platelet aggregation 
and adhesion to subendothelial layers in atherosclerotic lesions. During
myocardial ischemia and reperfusion, TSP-1 disturbs local microcirculation by
disrupting both NO-signaling as well as VEGF-pathways by activation of CD47 and
CD36. Furthermore, activation of TGF-ß might induce excessive fibrosis after
infarction. It was assumed that TSP-1 is washed out after successful coronary
reperfusion. In this study, we examined circulating TSP-1 post emergency PCI as a
risk factor for major adverse cardiac events after STEMI with and without
ventricular fibrillation.
METHODS: TSP-1 levels in platelet poor plasma were measured in 54 patients after 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Major adverse cardiac events were monitored
for 426 days.
RESULTS: Patients with decreased TSP levels after coronary stenting showed a
significantly higher risk for MACE than patient with higher TSP levels
(TSP-1[d0]: n = 46, no MACE = 16.38 ± 1.98 ug/mL vs. MACE 7.11 ± 1.54 ug/mL; p = 
0.003). Kaplan-Meyer-analysis for MACE showed a better outcome above 10 ug/mL (p 
= 0.02). For MACE later than 3 months post-STEMI, the corresponding
Kaplan-Meier-analysis yielded a p-value of 0.01. The number needed to diagnose
for late MACE was 2.158.
CONCLUSION: Low plasma levels of TSP1 after PCI are associated with MACE. Due to 
its procoagulant effects and dysregulation of microvascular tone, adequately
powered prospective studies are warranted to test the impact of TSP-1 on cardiac 
microcirculation, endothelial function and remodeling. TSP-1 might serve as a new
diagnostic and therapeutic approach in cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 22750995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2012 Nov;66(2):177-90. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2012.00998.x. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Identification of key proteins of cultured human intestinal cells involved in
interaction with enteroaggregative Escherichia coli.

Konar M(1), Sachin O, Priya A, Ghosh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine & Biotechnology, Post Graduate Institute
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, India.

Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC) adherence to human intestinal tissue is
known to be mediated by aggregative adherence fimbriae (AAF). However, the host
cell molecules involved in EAEC adherence remain uncharacterized. In the present 
study, four key membrane glycoproteins of cultured human intestinal epithelial
cells (INT-407) were found to be involved in the interaction with the T8 strain
of EAEC. Nine membrane proteins of INT-407 cells were found to interact with
EAEC-T8, of which four were identified as fibronectin, epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) and glucose-regulated protein (GRP-94). 
Our findings were validated by Western blot using antibody against each
identified protein. The adherence of EAEC-T8 to INT-407 cells was reduced to c.
26, 29, 37 and 76% in the presence of the antibody against GRP-94, EGFR,
fibronectin and TSP-1, respectively. These findings were further substantiated by
flow cytometry, where the final mean fluorescence intensity value of the INT-407 
cells (c. 1075) resulting from adherent-labelled bacteria was found to be reduced
to c. 26, 132, 228 and 597 in the presence of antibody against GRP-94, EGFR,
fibronectin and TSP-1. We propose that GRP-94, EGFR, fibronectin and TSP-1 are
involved in the aggregative adherence of EAEC-T8 to INT-407 cells.

© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22672426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2012 Jan;37(1):48-52. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2012.01.009.

[Differential expression of taxol resistance and taxol resistance reversal
related genes in nasopharyngeal carcinoma by cDNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Peng X(1), Tan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the difference in gene expression profiles between parental
cell line and drug resistant cell line (CNE-1 and CNE-1/taxol) pre-treated or
treated by drugs, and search for genes related to taxol resistance and reversal
of taxol resistance phenotype.
METHODS: cDNA microarray was used to detect the difference in gene expression
profiles between 6 groups of cells. Combination of multiple filtering genes and
detailed analysis of documented resistance genes were used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: Through multiple filtering, 297 differentially expressed genes were
screened. The expression of 17 genes was increased or decreased more than 5 folds
in CNE-1/taxol compared with CNE-1.Through analyzing documented drug-resistant
genes, MDR1 expression was not detected in each group. CYP1A1, one of P450 family
members, was not expressed in CNE-1, but significantly increased expressions was 
found in CNE-1/taxol and these increased expressions were restored by cisplatin. 
The expression level of some members of tumor necrosis factor family was
decreased in CNE-1/taxol and restored by cisplatin, including TNFAIP1, 3 and
TNFRSF12A, 21. The differentially expressed members in the caspase family were
caspase-4 and caspase-6. The expression of ß-tubulin II was down-regulated in
CNE-1/taxol. TSP1 was obviously down-regulated in CNE- 1/taxol compared with
CNE-1, and a more significant down-regulation of TSP1 was found when treated by
taxol. However, it was greatly up-regulated after cisplatin treatment in
CNE-1/taxol.
CONCLUSION: Some genes are probably related to taxol resistance and reversal of
taxol resistance in NPC cells: 297 differentially expressed genes detected by
multiple filing, CYP1A1, some members of TNF family and another 17 genes whose
differential expression is more than 5 folds between parental cell line and drug 
resistant cell line. Combination of multiple filtering genes and detailed
analysis of documented resistance genes is a good method to study drug resistance
and reversal of drug resistance in carcinoma cells.

PMID: 22349379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Prostate. 2012 Jun 1;72(8):913-24. doi: 10.1002/pros.21495. Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Inhibition of metastasis in a castration resistant prostate cancer model by the
quinoline-3-carboxamide tasquinimod (ABR-215050).

Jennbacken K(1), Welén K, Olsson A, Axelsson B, Törngren M, Damber JE, Leanderson
T.

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Department of Urology, Institute of Clinical
Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Box 425, 40530
Göteborg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Tasquinimod (ABR-215050) is an orally active quinoline-3-carboxamide 
analog that has completed phase II clinical trial in patients with castration
resistant prostate cancer, showing promising inhibiting effects on the occurrence
of metastasis and delayed disease progression. Its mechanism of action is not
fully elucidated, but previous studies show anti-angiogenic effects and strong
interaction with the S100A9 protein.
METHODS: This study was performed to evaluate if tasquinimod inhibits prostate
cancer metastasis, by using both orthotopic and intratibial xenograft models.
Animals were treated with tasquinimod, and tumor growth characteristics as well
as molecular markers for metastasis and angiogenesis were analyzed.
RESULTS: The results show that formation of lung and lymph node metastases from
orthotopic castration resistant prostate tumors was inhibited by tasquinimod
treatment. Importantly, establishment of tumors in the bone after intratibial
implantation was suppressed by tasquinimod. In addition, establishment and growth
of subcutaneous tumors were affected. Both in primary tumors and serum from
treated mice an upregulation of thrombospondin 1 was observed. Further,
downregulation of the hypoxia driven genes VEGF, CXCR4, and LOX was detected in
the primary tasquinimod-treated tumors and decreased expression of chemotactic
ligand SDF-1 was demonstrated in the lungs. Thus, these molecular changes could
contribute to the anti-angiogenic and anti-metastatic effects of tasquinimod.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study and clinical data show that tasquinimod
interferes with the metastatic process, presumably by inhibition of tumor
establishment. Therefore, tasquinimod is an interesting treatment option for
patients with prostate cancer prone to metastasis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22287276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Mar 15;302(6):L541-54. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00282.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Loss-of-function thrombospondin-1 mutations in familial pulmonary hypertension.

Maloney JP(1), Stearman RS, Bull TM, Calabrese DW, Tripp-Addison ML, Wick MJ,
Broeckel U, Robbins IM, Wheeler LA, Cogan JD, Loyd JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Colorado,
Aurora, 80045, USA. james.maloney@ucdenver.edu

Most patients with familial pulmonary arterial hypertension (FPAH) carry
mutations in the bone morphogenic protein receptor 2 gene (BMPR2). Yet carriers
have only a 20% risk of disease, suggesting that other factors influence
penetrance. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) regulates activation of TGF-ß and inhibits
endothelial and smooth muscle cell proliferation, pathways coincidentally altered
in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). To determine whether a subset of FPAH
patients also have mutations in the TSP1 gene (THBS1) we resequenced the type I
repeats of THBS1 encoding the TGF-ß regulation and cell growth inhibition domains
in 60 FPAH probands, 70 nonfamilial PAH subjects, and in large control groups. We
identified THBS1 mutations in three families: a novel missense mutation in two
(Asp362Asn), and an intronic mutation in a third (IVS8+255 G/A). Neither mutation
was detected in population controls. Mutant 362Asn TSP1 had less than half of the
ability of wild-type TSP1 to activate TGF-ß. Mutant 362Asn TSP1 also lost the
ability to inhibit growth of pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells and was over 
threefold less effective at inhibiting endothelial cell growth. The IVS8+255 G/A 
mutation decreased and/or eliminated local binding of the transcription factors
SP1 and MAZ but did not affect RNA splicing. These novel mutations implicate
THBS1 as a modifier gene in FPAH. These THBS1 mutations have implications in the 
genetic evaluation of FPAH patients. However, since FPAH is rare, these data are 
most relevant as evidence for the importance of TSP1 in pulmonary vascular
homeostasis. Further examination of THBS1 in the pathogenesis of PAH is
warranted.

PMCID: PMC3311532
PMID: 22198906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dis Markers. 2011;31(2):55-65. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0798.

Platelet-stored angiogenesis factors: clinical monitoring is prone to artifacts.

Starlinger P(1), Alidzanovic L, Schauer D, Brugger P, Sommerfeldt S, Kuehrer I,
Schoppmann SF, Gnant M, Brostjan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, General Hospital, Medical University of Vienna,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: The analysis of angiogenesis factors in the blood of tumor patients
has given diverse results on their prognostic or predictive value. Since
mediators of angiogenesis are stored in platelets, their measurement in plasma is
sensitive to inadvertent platelet activation during blood processing.
METHODS: Variants of blood withdrawal and plasma preparation were evaluated by
ELISA for the detection of TSP-1, PF-4, VEGF and PD-ECGF. A total of 22
pancreatic cancer patients and 29 healthy volunteers were evaluated.
RESULTS: Plasma preparation with the anticoagulant mix of citrate, theophylline, 
adenosine, dipyridamole (CTAD) and immediate blood processing at 4°C was required
for reproducible measurements of TSP-1, PF-4 and VEGF. Blood collection by
venflon or inadvertent hemolysis during blood withdrawal caused significantly
elevated TSP-1 and PF-4 values. When optimized plasma preparation was applied, a 
significant increase of TSP-1 and VEGF in cancer patients was detected (P=0.006; 
P< 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The reliable plasma analysis of circulating platelet-stored
angiogenesis factors requires preparation with CTAD at 4°C and blood collection
by butterfly needle. Suboptimal procedures of plasma preparation are commonly
applied in clinical monitoring of angiogenesis parameters which may account for
the differences in reported plasma values and may have masked their predictive or
prognostic marker potential.

PMCID: PMC3826483
PMID: 21896999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Thromb Res. 2012 Jun;129(6):801-6. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2011.08.009. Epub 2011
Sep 1.

Assembly of the prothrombinase complex on the surface of human foreskin
fibroblasts: Implications for connective tissue growth factor.

Rico MC(1), Rough JJ, Manns JM, Del Carpio-Cano F, Safadi FF, Kunapuli SP, DeLa
Cadena RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
PA 19140, United States. marior@temple.edu

Activated factor X (FXa) and thrombin can up-regulate gene expression of
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2) on fibroblasts. Since tissue factor
(TF) is expressed on these cells, we hypothesized that they may assemble the
prothrombinase complex leading to CTGF/CCN2 upregulation. In addition, the effect
of thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) on this reaction was evaluated. Human foreskin
fibroblasts were incubated with purified factor VII (FVII), factor X (FX), factor
V (FV), prothrombin and calcium in the presence and absence of TSP1. Generation
of FXa and of thrombin were assessed using chromogenic substrates. SMAD pathway
phosphorylation was detected via Western-blot analysis. Pre-incubation of
fibroblasts with FVII led to its auto-activation by cell-surface expressed TF,
which in turn in the presence of FX, FVa, prothrombin and calcium led to FXa
(9.7±0.8nM) and thrombin (7.9±0.04 U/mL×10-3) generation. Addition of TSP1
significantly enhanced thrombin (23.3±0.7 U/mL×10-3) but not FXa (8.5±0.6nM)
generation. FXa and thrombin generation leads to upregulation of CTGF/CCN2. TSP1 
alone upregulated CTGF/CCN2, an effect mediated via activation of transforming
growth factor beta (TGFß) as shown by phosphorylation of the SMAD pathway, an
event blunted by using a TGFß receptor I inhibitor (TGFßRI). FXa- and
thrombin-induced upregulation of CTGF/CCN2 was not blocked by TGFßRI. In summary,
assembly of the prothrombinase complex occurs on fibroblast's surface leading to 
serine proteases generation, an event enhanced by TSP1 and associated with
CTGF/CCN2 upregulation. These mechanisms may play an important role in human
diseases associated with fibrosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3243815
PMID: 21889790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011 Aug;50(8):1494-504. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keq448.
Epub 2011 Mar 30.

Enhanced expression of ephrins and thrombospondins in the dermis of patients with
early diffuse systemic sclerosis: potential contribution to perturbed
angiogenesis and fibrosis.

Avouac J(1), Clemessy M, Distler JH, Gasc JM, Ruiz B, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Wipff J, 
Kahan A, Boileau C, Corvol P, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology A Department, Paris Descartes University, Cochin Hospital, AP-HP,
France.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the skin and fibroblast expression of ephrins (EphB4 and 
EphrinB2) and thrombospondins (TSPs: TSP1 and TSP2) in patients with SSc.
METHODS: All experiments were performed in skin sections and dermal fibroblasts
issued from control and clinically involved/non-involved SSc skin biopsies.
Dermal fibroblasts were stimulated with hypoxia or TGF-ß, or treated with
TGF-ß-neutralizing antibodies. Ephrin and TSP mRNA levels were assessed in skin
tissue and dermal fibroblasts by in situ hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR,
respectively, and protein levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry and
western blots, respectively.
RESULTS: Enhanced ephrin and TSP mRNA and protein levels were observed in
clinically involved SSc skin. EphrinB2, TSP1 and TSP2 mRNA and protein levels
were also up-regulated in non-involved SSc skin. Similar mRNA and protein levels 
of ephrinB2 and EphB4 were detected in unstimulated and stimulated control and
SSc dermal fibroblasts. TSP1 and TSP2 mRNA and protein levels were significantly 
increased in fibroblasts issued from involved and non-involved SSc skin. This
up-regulation was not modified by hypoxic exposure, but was markedly reduced by
the addition of TGF-ß-neutralizing antibodies. Stimulation of healthy fibroblasts
with TGF-ß significantly increased TSP1 and TSP2 mRNA and protein levels.
CONCLUSION: EphB4 and EphrinB2 are up-regulated in clinically involved skin of
SSc patients, suggesting their participation in SSc-perturbed angiogenesis. TSP1 
and TSP2 are up-regulated in both clinically involved and non-involved SSc skin
and are constitutively overexpressed in a TGF-ß-dependent and hypoxia-independent
manner in SSc dermal fibroblasts, suggesting their potential early contribution
in SSc pathogenesis.

PMID: 21454305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Radiat Res. 2011 May;175(5):535-46. doi: 10.1667/RR2200.1. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

HUVEC respond to radiation by inducing the expression of pro-angiogenic
microRNAs.

Vincenti S(1), Brillante N, Lanza V, Bozzoni I, Presutti C, Chiani F, Etna MP,
Negri R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie C. Darwin, Laboratorio di Genomica
Funzionale e Proteomica dei Sistemi Modello, University "La Sapienza", Rome,
Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent a class of small non-coding RNAs that control gene
expression by targeting mRNAs and triggering either repression of translation or 
RNA degradation. They have been shown to be involved in a variety of biological
processes such as development, differentiation and cell cycle control, but little
is known about their involvement in the response to irradiation. We showed here
that in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) some miRNAs previously
shown to have a crucial role in vascular biology are transiently modulated in
response to a clinically relevant dose of ionizing radiation. In particular we
identified an early transcriptional induction of several members of the microRNA 
cluster 17-92 and other microRNAs already known to be related to angiogenesis. At
the same time we observed a peculiar behavior of the miR-221/222 cluster,
suggesting an important role of these microRNAs in HUVEC homeostasis. We observed
an increased efficiency in the formation of capillary-like structures in
irradiated HUVEC. These results could lead to a new interpretation of the effect 
of ionizing radiation on endothelial cells and on the response of tumor
endothelial bed cells to radiotherapy.

PMID: 21361781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Br J Cancer. 2011 Jan 18;104(2):316-23. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6606027. Epub 2010
Dec 14.

Correlation of BRCA1, TXR1 and TSP1 mRNA expression with treatment outcome to
docetaxel-based first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced/metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Papadaki C(1), Tsaroucha E, Kaklamanis L, Lagoudaki E, Trypaki M, Tryfonidis K,
Mavroudis D, Stathopoulos E, Georgoulias V, Souglakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

BACKGROUND: We explored the predictive significance of BRCA1, TXR1 and TSP1
expression in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with docetaxel 
in association with cisplatin or gemcitabine.
METHODS: To analyse BRCA1, TXR1 and TSP1 mRNA expression from microdissected
primary tumours of 131 patients with stage IIIB (wet) and IV NSCLC, RT-qPCR was
used.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of TXR1/TSP1 were inversely correlated (Spearman's test:
-0.37; P=0.001). Low TXR1 mRNA levels were associated with higher response rate
(RR; P=0.018), longer median progression-free survival (PFS; P=0.029) and median 
overall survival (mOS P=0.003), whereas high TSP1 expression was correlated with 
higher RR (P=0.035), longer PFS (P<0.001) and mOS (P<0.001). Higher BRCA1 mRNA
expression was associated with higher RR (P=0.028) and increased PFS (P=0.021),
but not mOS (P=0.4). Multivariate analysis demonstrated that low TXR1/high TSP1
expression was an independent factor for increased PFS (HR 0.49; 95% CI
0.32-0.76; P<0.001) and mOS (HR 0.37; 95% CI 0.2-0.58; P<0.001), whereas high
BRCA1 expression was correlated with increased PFS (HR 0.53; 95% CI 0.37-0.78;
P=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that TXR1/TSP1 and BRCA1 expression could be
used for the prediction of taxanes' resistance in the treatment of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3031890
PMID: 21157449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 15;9(16):3337-46. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.16.12711. Epub 2010 Aug 
17.

Overexpression of the RNA binding protein HuR impairs tumor growth in triple
negative breast cancer associated with deficient angiogenesis.

Gubin MM(1), Calaluce R, Davis JW, Magee JD, Strouse CS, Shaw DP, Ma L, Brown A, 
Hoffman T, Rold TL, Atasoy U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

Interactions between RNA binding proteins (RBPs) and genes are not well
understood, especially in regulation of angiogenesis. The RBP HuR binds to the
AU-rich (ARE) regions of labile mRNAs, facilitating their translation into
protein and has been hypothesized to be a tumor-maintenance gene. Elevated levels
of cytoplasmic HuR directly correlate with increased invasiveness and poor
prognosis for many cancers, including those of the breast. HuR controls the
expression of multiple genes involved in angiogenesis including VEGFa, HIF1a and 
thrombospondin 1 (TSP1). We investigated the role of HuR in estrogen receptor
negative (ER(-)) breast cancer. MDA-MB-231 cells with higher levels of HuR have
alterations in cell cycle kinetics and faster growth. Unexpectedly, HuR
overexpression significantly interfered with tumor growth in orthotopic mouse
models. The putative mechanism seems to be an anti-angiogenetic effect by
increasing expression of TSP1 but also surprisingly, downregulating VEGF, a
target which HuR normally increases. Our findings reveal that HuR may be
regulating a cluster of genes involved in blood vessel formation which controls
tumor angiogenesis. An approach of modulating HuR levels may overcome limitations
associated with monotherapies targeting tumor vessel formation.

PMCID: PMC3041167
PMID: 20724828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 2;107(5):2177-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909797107. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Stromal genes discriminate preinvasive from invasive disease, predict outcome,
and highlight inflammatory pathways in digestive cancers.

Saadi A(1), Shannon NB, Lao-Sirieix P, O'Donovan M, Walker E, Clemons NJ,
Hardwick JS, Zhang C, Das M, Save V, Novelli M, Balkwill F, Fitzgerald RC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison Medical Research Council 
Research Centre, Cambridge CB22 0XZ, United Kingdom.

The stromal compartment is increasingly recognized to play a role in cancer.
However, its role in the transition from preinvasive to invasive disease is
unknown. Most gastrointestinal tumors have clearly defined premalignant stages,
and Barrett's esophagus (BE) is an ideal research model. Supervised clustering of
gene expression profiles from microdissected stroma identified a gene signature
that could distinguish between BE metaplasia, dysplasia, and esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). EAC patients overexpressing any of the five genes (TMEPAI, 
JMY, TSP1, FAPalpha, and BCL6) identified from this stromal signature had a
significantly poorer outcome. Gene ontology analysis identified a strong
inflammatory component in BE disease progression, and key pathways included
cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions and TGF-beta. Increased protein levels of
inflammatory-related genes significantly up-regulated in EAC compared with
preinvasive stages were confirmed in the stroma of independent samples, and in
vitro assays confirmed functional relevance of these genes. Gene set enrichment
analysis of external datasets demonstrated that the stromal signature was also
relevant in the preinvasive to invasive transition of the stomach, colon, and
pancreas. These data implicate inflammatory pathways in the genesis of
gastrointestinal tract cancers, which can affect prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2836667
PMID: 20080664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nat Neurosci. 2010 Jan;13(1):22-4. doi: 10.1038/nn.2459. Epub 2009 Nov 15.

Thrombospondin 1 accelerates synaptogenesis in hippocampal neurons through
neuroligin 1.

Xu J(1), Xiao N, Xia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

In cultured rat hippocampal neurons, we found that thrombospondin 1 (TSP1)
increased the speed of synapse formation in young neurons, but not the final
density of synapses in mature neurons. TSP1 interacted with neuroligin 1 (NL1)
and application of the NL1 extracellular domain blocked TSP1-induced
synaptogenesis. Furthermore, knocking down endogenous NL1 inhibited TSP1's
effect. Our results indicate that TSP1 accelerates the speed of synaptogenesis
through NL1 in hippocampal neurons.

PMID: 19915562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Evol Biol. 2009 Oct 6;9:243. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-9-243.

The genome sequence of the protostome Daphnia pulex encodes respective
orthologues of a neurotrophin, a Trk and a p75NTR: evolution of neurotrophin
signaling components and related proteins in the bilateria.

Wilson KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Gothenburg, The Sven Lovén Centre for Marine Sciences -
Kristineberg, S-450 34 Fiskebäckskil, Sweden. karen.wilson@gu.se

BACKGROUND: Neurotrophins and their Trk and p75NTR receptors play an important
role in the nervous system. To date, neurotrophins, Trk and p75NTR have only been
found concomitantly in deuterostomes. In protostomes, homologues to either
neurotrophin, Trk or p75NTR are reported but their phylogenetic relationship to
deuterostome neurotrophin signaling components is unclear. Drosophila has
neurotrophin homologues called Spätzles (Spz), some of which were recently
renamed neurotrophins, but direct proof that these are deuterostome neurotrophin 
orthologues is lacking. Trks belong to the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family 
and among RTKs, Trks and RORs are closest related. Flies lack Trks but have ROR
and ROR-related proteins called NRKs playing a neurotrophic role. Mollusks have
so far the most similar proteins to Trks (Lymnaea Trk and Aplysia Trkl) but the
exact phylogenetic relationship of mollusk Trks to each other and to vertebrate
Trks is unknown. p75NTR belongs to the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)
superfamily. The divergence of the TNFR families in vertebrates has been
suggested to parallel the emergence of the adaptive immune system. Only one TNFR 
representative, the Drosophila Wengen, has been found in protostomes. To clarify 
the evolution of neurotrophin signaling components in bilateria, this work
analyzes the genome of the crustacean Daphnia pulex as well as new genetic data
from protostomes.
RESULTS: The Daphnia genome encodes a neurotrophin, p75NTR and Trk orthologue
together with Trkl, ROR, and NRK-RTKs. Drosophila Spz1, 2, 3, 5, 6 orthologues as
well as two new groups of Spz proteins (Spz7 and 8) are also found in the Daphnia
genome. Searching genbank and the genomes of Capitella, Helobdella and Lottia
reveals neurotrophin signaling components in other protostomes.
CONCLUSION: It appears that a neurotrophin, Trk and p75NTR existed at the
protostome/deuterostome split. In protostomes, a "neurotrophin superfamily"
includes Spzs and neurotrophins which respectively form two paralogous families. 
Trks and Trkl proteins also form closely related paralogous families within the
protostomian RTKs, whereby Trkls are absent in deuterostomes. The finding of
p75NTR in several protostomes suggests that death domain TNFR superfamily
proteins appeared early in evolution.

PMCID: PMC2772990
PMID: 19807921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;15(11):3827-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-3027.
Epub 2009 May 12.

Tumoral expression of TXR1 and TSP1 predicts overall survival of patients with
lung adenocarcinoma treated with first-line docetaxel-gemcitabine regimen.

Papadaki C(1), Mavroudis D, Trypaki M, Koutsopoulos A, Stathopoulos E, Hatzidaki 
D, Tsakalaki E, Georgoulias V, Souglakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Crete,
Crete, Greece.

PURPOSE: In vitro data suggest that down-regulation of thrombospondin 1 (TSP1)
expression from TXR1 is associated with resistance to taxane-based chemotherapy. 
The prognostic and predictive value of tumoral expression of both genes was
evaluated in patients with lung adenocarcinoma treated with first-line docetaxel 
and gemcitabine.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tumor samples from 96 patients, with stage IIIB (with
pleural effusion) or IV lung adenocarcinomas, were analyzed for TXR1 and TSP1
mRNA levels by quantitative real-time PCR, from microdissected cells derived from
patients' primary tumors.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of the two genes were inversely correlated (Spearman's
test = -0.49; P < 0.0001). Patients with low TXR1 mRNA levels experienced a
longer median time to tumor progression (TTP; P < 0.0001) and median overall
survival (mOS; P = 0.001) when compared with patients with high TXR1 expression. 
Patients with high TSP1 expression presented longer TTP (P = 0.002) and mOS (P < 
0.0001) when compared with patients with low TSP1 expression. Moreover, patients 
with high TSP1 and low TXR1 expression (n = 36) presented higher prolonged TTP (P
= 0.009) and mOS (P < 0.0001) compared with patients with high TXR1 and low TSP1 
expression. Multivariate analysis showed that high TXR1/low TSP1 expression was
an independent prognostic factor for decreased TTP (hazard ratio, 1.7; 95%
confidence interval, 1.1-3.27; P = 0.016) and mOS (hazard ratio, 2.55; 95%
confidence interval, 1.57-4.15; P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: These data confirm the in vitro model of TSP1 and TXR1 effect on
taxane resistance in lung adenocarcinomas and merit further evaluation.

PMID: 19435835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neurochem Res. 2009 Aug;34(8):1380-92. doi: 10.1007/s11064-009-9918-7. Epub 2009 
Feb 4.

Lentiviral transfection of ependymal primary cultures facilitates the
characterisation of kinocilia-specific promoters.

Kowtharapu BS(1), Vincent FC, Bubis A, Verleysdonk S.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute for Biochemistry, University of Tuebingen,
Hoppe-Seyler-Str. 4, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

Ependymal primary cultures (EPCs) are an established model for studying ependymal
cell biochemistry and the biology of kinocilia-bearing cells. However, the
difficulty in causing them to express transgenes at high efficiency has been an
important drawback of the system. Indeed plasmid-based transfection attempts
remain at an efficiency below 1% and fail to elicit reporter gene expression,
namely green fluorescent protein (GFP) synthesis, in any of the kinocilia-bearing
cells of the cultures. Human immunodeficiency virus pseudotyped with the
vesicular stomatitis virus envelope glycoprotein (HIV/VSV-G) and encoding GFP
under the control of the ubiquitously recognised promoter of elongation factor 1 
alpha (EF1alpha) also does not cause transgene expression in the
kinocilia-bearing cells of an EPC when applied at multiplicities of infection
(MOIs) of up to 40 and destroys the culture when the MOI is increased further. In
contrast, HIV/VSV-G encoding GFP under the control of a promoter specifically
active in kinocilia-bearing cells leads to transgene expression in up to 79% of
the kinociliated cells of an EPC when applied at an MOI of 20. This has permitted
the initial characterisation of the promoter for the gene specifically
transcribed in kinocilia-bearing cells, wdr16. The results have identified two
regions of 100 nucleotides length each, which are critical for promoter activity 
and contain putative binding sites for the transcription factors Foxd1, Sox17 and
Spz1. It appears that wdr16 is controlled by a bidirectional promoter also
responsible for regulating the syntaxin 8 gene.

PMID: 19191024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):1887-94. Epub 2007 May 31.

The cooperative activity between the carboxyl-terminal TSP1 repeats and the CUB
domains of ADAMTS13 is crucial for recognition of von Willebrand factor under
flow.

Zhang P(1), Pan W, Rux AH, Sachais BS, Zheng XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

ADAMTS13 cleaves von Willebrand factor (VWF) between Tyr(1605) and Met(1606)
residues at the central A2 subunit. The amino-terminus of ADAMTS13 protease
appears to be sufficient to bind and cleave VWF under static and denatured
condition. However, the role of the carboxyl-terminus of ADAMTS13 in substrate
recognition remains controversial. Present study demonstrates that ADAMTS13
cleaves VWF in a rotation speed- and protease concentration-dependent manner on a
mini vortexer. Removal of the CUB domains (delCUB) or truncation after the spacer
domain (MDTCS) significantly impairs its ability to cleave VWF under the same
condition. ADAMTS13 and delCUB (but not MDTCS) bind VWF under flow with
dissociation constants (K(D)) of about 50 nM and about 274 nM, respectively. The 
isolated CUB domains are neither sufficient to bind VWF detectably nor capable of
inhibiting proteolytic cleavage of VWF by ADAMTS13 under flow. Addition of the
TSP1 5-8 (T5-8CUB) or TSP1 2-8 repeats (T2-8CUB) to the CUB domains restores the 
binding affinity toward VWF and the inhibitory effect on cleavage of VWF by
ADAMTS13 under flow. These data demonstrate directly and quantitatively that the 
cooperative activity between the middle carboxyl-terminal TSP1 repeats and the
distal carboxyl-terminal CUB domains may be crucial for recognition and cleavage 
of VWF under flow.

PMCID: PMC1976376
PMID: 17540842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Cancer. 2007 Sep 1;121(5):999-1008.

Androgen receptor targets NFkappaB and TSP1 to suppress prostate tumor growth in 
vivo.

Nelius T(1), Filleur S, Yemelyanov A, Budunova I, Shroff E, Mirochnik Y, Aurora
A, Veliceasa D, Xiao W, Wang Z, Volpert OV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock, TX.

The androgen role in the maintenance of prostate epithelium is subject to
conflicting opinions. While androgen ablation drives the regression of normal and
cancerous prostate, testosterone may cause both proliferation and apoptosis.
Several investigators note decreased proliferation and stronger response to
chemotherapy of the prostate cancer cells stably expressing androgen receptor
(AR), however no mechanistic explanation was offered. In this paper we
demonstrate in vivo anti-tumor effect of the AR on prostate cancer growth and
identify its molecular mediators. We analyzed the effect of AR on the
tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells. Unexpectedly, the AR-expressing cells
formed tumors in male mice at a much lower rate than the AR-negative controls.
Moreover, the AR-expressing tumors showed decreased vascularity and massive
apoptosis. AR expression lowered the angiogenic potential of cancer cells, by
increasing secretion of an anti-angiogenic protein, thrombospondin-1. AR
activation caused a decrease in RelA, a subunit of the pro-survival transcription
factor NFkappaB, reduced its nuclear localization and transcriptional activity.
This, in turn, diminished the expression of its anti-apoptotic targets, Bcl-2 and
IL-6. Increased apoptosis within AR-expressing tumors was likely due to the
NFkappaB suppression, since it was restricted to the cells lacking nuclear
(active) NFkappaB. Thus we for the first time identified combined decrease of
NFkappaB and increased TSP1 as molecular events underlying the AR anti-tumor
activity in vivo. Our data indicate that intermittent androgen ablation is
preferable to continuous withdrawal, a standard treatment for early-stage
prostate cancer. (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2810747
PMID: 17487836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cloning Stem Cells. 2006 Winter;8(4):295-304.

Zygotically activated genes are suppressed in mouse nuclear transferred embryos.

Suzuki T(1), Minami N, Kono T, Imai H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Mammalian oocytes have the ability to confer totipotency to terminally
differentiated somatic cell nuclei. Viable cloned animals have been produced by
somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT) into oocytes in many mammalian species
including mouse. However, the success rates of the production were quite low in
all species. Many studies have measured differences in gene expression between NT
and fertilized embryos in relatively advanced stages of development such as pre- 
and post-natal stages or the blastocyst stage. In the present study, we compared 
gene expression patterns using differential display RT-PCR (DDRT-PCR) between the
NT and IVF embryos at the 2-cell stage to detect some abnormalities affecting
later development of NT embryos. Aberrant gene expression was detected in NT
embryos compared with IVF embryos, and MuERV-L and Dnaja2 genes were
down-regulated and Inpp5b and Chst12 genes were up-regulated in the NT embryos.
Further analysis showed that the expression of zygotically activated genes such
as Interferon-gamma, Dub-1, Spz1, DD2106 (unknown gene), and DD2111 (unknown
gene) were suppressed in NT embryos, suggesting that the cellular process
involved in the nuclear reprogramming of somatic nucleus is not appropriately
regulated.

PMID: 17196094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Jun;45(6):482-4.

[A clinical study of congenital thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu F(1), Dong NZ, Jin J, Hendrik FB, Bai X, Ruan CG.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study on the first Chinese congenital thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP) patient with respect to peripheral blood platelet count and
ADAMTS13 activity, ADAMTS13 antigen, anti-endothelial cell antibody (ACEA), and
thrombospondin1 (TSP1) etc. to compared it with idiopathic TTP and to explore
something special and meaningful in the pathogenesis of congenital TTP.
METHODS: A total of 30 volunteers served as controls. The congenital TTP patient 
and 10 carriers in her pedigree as well as 7 idiopathic TTP patients were
included in this study. Residue collagen binding assay and a newly developed
sandwich ELISA were used for determination of ADAMTS13 activity and antigen
respectively. An ELISA for ACEA and a commercial kit for TSP1 were use in the
study.
RESULTS: After a "3-4 weeks regular relapse" of the congenital TTP, which is
similar to that in other reports, the Chinese patient moved into a new relapse
cycle. The average of the antigen levels of this patient before plasma exchange
(PE) and at the interval between relapses was (22.79 +/- 14.61) U/L (P < 0.01),
while that of Chinese normal control (NC) turned out to be (600.93 +/- 145.36)
U/L. TSP1 detected at the same time (4.67 +/- 1.62) mg/L in the congenital TTP
patient was much lower than that in NC (18.34 +/- 7.24) mg/L (P < 0.01). A value 
in ACEA assay was 0.58 +/- 0.06 (P < 0.01) for congenital TTP, which was a little
higher than that in NC (0.40 +/- 0.13).
CONCLUSIONS: Congenital TTP may have changeable relapse cycles during episodes.
ADAMTS13 antigen and TSP1 and ACEA in congenital TTP showed significant
difference as compared with those in NC. ADAMTS13 and ACEA in congenital TTP were
also markedly lower than those in idiopathic TTP.

PMID: 16831327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Exp Eye Res. 2006 Oct;83(4):741-6. Epub 2006 May 23.

Different expression of angiogenesis-related factors between human cultivated
corneal and oral epithelial sheets.

Sekiyama E(1), Nakamura T, Kawasaki S, Sogabe H, Kinoshita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kawaramachi Hirokoji, Kyoto 602-0841, Japan.
esekiyam@ophth.kpu-m.ac.jp

We developed a cultivated oral mucosal epithelial sheet (COE) transplantation
system to address severe human ocular surface disorders. Unlike the cultivated
corneal epithelial sheet (CCE), the COE induces mild superficial peripheral
neovascularization although central clarity is maintained. To evaluate the
characteristic differences between CCE and COE regarding to angiogenesis, we
examined the expression of angiogenesis-related factors in CCE and COE. Using
samples of CCE and COE, we immunohistochemically determined protein expression of
the angiogenesis related factors: Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), pigment epithelium
derived factor (PEDF), endostatin, angiostatin, vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), Fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (Flt-1), kinase insert domain receptor 
(KDR), and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). We used Western blot analysis
to confirm the factors that were immunohistochemically different in CCE and COE. 
The immunohistochemical staining intensity of TSP-1 was higher in CCE than COE
and by Western blot analysis the expression of TSP-1 was significantly higher in 
CCE than COE (P<0.05). PEDF and endostatin stained moderately stronger in CCE
than COE. Immunohistochemically there was no obvious difference between CCE and
COE with respect to angiostatin, VEGF, Flt-1, KDR, and bFGF. In comparison with
CCE, COE showed decreased expression of anti-angiogenic factors particularly
TSP-1. This different expression may relate to the superficial peripheral
neovascularization encountered after COE transplantation.

PMID: 16720021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Nov 30;85(45):3190-3.

[A study on the significance of plasma thrombospondin1 in thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura and the relationship between thrombospondin1 and von
Willebrand factor cleaving protease (ADAMTS13)].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu F(1), Lu GY, Dong NZ, Bai X, Su J, Ruan CG.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, Suzhou 215006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To measure plasma thrombospondin1 (TSP1) in thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and other diseases such as idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), myocardial
infarction, brain infarction, and malignant tumor et al. and 8 patients after
bone marrow transplantation (BMT) were also investigated. Then to study on the
relationship between TSP1 and von Willebrand factor cleaving protease (ADAMTS13);
and to identify the significance of plasma TSP1 in TTP.
METHODS: TSP1 was measured by a commercial kit and the activity of ADAMTS13 was
evaluated by residue collagen binding assay.
RESULTS: TSP1 in TTP plasma before plasma exchange or plasma infusion was 6.49
mg/L, and stepping up to 13.02 mg/L after therapy, but still significantly lower 
than 18.34 mg/L in normal control. While the decrease in different degree of
ADAMTS13 activity was observed from 0%-52%, and there were 8 samples whose
activity of ADAMTS13 were no more than 10%; the different extent of increase in
those patients after therapy was demonstrated to be 2.9%-93.4%, only one
patient's ADAMTS13 activity was below 10%. The activity of ADAMTS13 in some ITP
and SLE patients were mildly decreased (63% +/- 16% and 70% +/- 14%
respectively), TSP1 were also decreased (16 mg/L +/- 8 mg/L). TSP1 in patients of
myocardial infarction and brain infarction were increased (24.0 mg/L +/- 2.9
mg/L), while ADAMTS13 activity had no significant change (72% +/- 16%). Same
things happened in BMT patients.
CONCLUSION: There was some concordance between the decrease of ADAMTS13 activity 
and TSP1 in plasma of TTP patients. And the change of TSP1 was restricted to TTP.
TSP1 may contribute to the episode of TTP in a still unclear fashions.

PMID: 16405838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cancer Res. 2005 May 15;65(10):4041-50.

bHLH-zip transcription factor Spz1 mediates mitogen-activated protein kinase cell
proliferation, transformation, and tumorigenesis.

Hsu SH(1), Hsieh-Li HM, Huang HY, Huang PH, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica.

BHLH-zip proteins usually play important regulatory roles in cell growth and
differentiation. In this study, we show that Spz1, a bHLH-zip transcription
factor, acts downstream of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK, extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase 1/2) to up-regulate cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.
In addition, through an interaction with proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) promoter, Spz1 induced cell proliferation concomitant with an increase in 
PCNA gene expression. Spz1-transfected cells formed colony foci on soft agar and 
developed fibrosarcoma tumors in nude mice. MAPK directly interacted and
phosphorylated Spz1 protein, which increased PCNA transcription and cell
tumorigenic activities. Reduction of endogenous Spz1 expression via RNA
interference decreased cell proliferation in p19 embryonic carcinoma cells. High 
levels of Spz1 expression were detected in murine tumor cell lines and tumor
samples of both human and Spz1 transgenic mice. Thus, Spz1 may act as a
proto-oncogene, participating in the MAPK signal pathway, and be a potential
therapeutic target in the treatment of Ras-induced tumors.

PMID: 15899793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Apr;11(4):307-17.

Patterns of expression of sperm flagellar genes: early expression of genes
encoding axonemal proteins during the spermatogenic cycle and shared features of 
promoters of genes encoding central apparatus proteins.

Horowitz E(1), Zhang Z, Jones BH, Moss SB, Ho C, Wood JR, Wang X, Sammel MD,
Strauss JF 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Jul;11(7):535.

Sperm are motile cells. Thus, a significant component of the spermatogenic cycle 
is devoted to the formation of flagellum, a process that must be coordinated to
insure proper construction. To document the temporal pattern of flagellar gene
expression, we employed real-time PCR to assess changes in accumulation of a
cohort of genes encoding axoneme, outer dense fibre (ODF) and fibrous sheath (FS)
proteins during the first wave of spermatogenesis in the mouse. Axoneme genes
were expressed first at the pachytene spermatocyte stage, followed by expression 
of transcripts encoding ODF and FS components. However, there were differences
among these families with respect to the time of initial expression and the rate 
of mRNA accumulation. To gain understanding of factors that determine these
patterns of expression, we cloned the promoters of three axoneme central
apparatus genes (Pf6, Spag6 and Pf20). These promoters shared common features
including the absence of a TATA box, and putative binding sites for several
factors implicated in spermatogenesis (CREB/CREM, SOX17 and SPZ1) as well as
ciliogenesis (FOXJ1). Collectively, our findings demonstrate a sequential pattern
of expression of flagellar component genes, differential times of expression or
rates of transcript accumulation within each class and shared promoter features
within a class.

PMID: 15829580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 15;10(24):8493-500.

Association of epigenetic inactivation of RASSF1A with poor outcome in human
neuroblastoma.

Yang Q(1), Zage P, Kagan D, Tian Y, Seshadri R, Salwen HR, Liu S, Chlenski A,
Cohn SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the prevalence and potential clinical significance of
epigenetic aberrations in neuroblastoma (NB).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The methylation status of 11 genes that are frequently
epigenetically inactivated in adult cancers was assayed in 13 NB cell lines. The 
prevalence of RASSF1A and TSP-1 methylation was also analyzed in 56 NBs and 5
ganglioneuromas by methylation-specific PCR. Associations between the methylation
status of RASSF1A and TSP-1 and patient age, tumor stage, tumor MYCN status, and 
patient survival were evaluated.
RESULTS: Epigenetic changes were detected in all 13 NB cell lines, although the
pattern of gene methylation varied. The putative tumor suppressor gene RASSF1A
was methylated in all 13 cell lines, and TSP-1 and CASP8 were methylated in 11 of
13 cell lines. Epigenetic changes of DAPK and FAS were detected in only small
numbers of cell lines, whereas none of the cell lines had methylation of p16,
p21, p73, RAR-beta2, SPARC, or TIMP-3. RASSF1A was also methylated in 70% of the 
primary NB tumors tested, and TSP-1 methylation was detected in 55% of the
tumors. RASSF1A methylation was significantly associated with age >1 year (P <
0.01), high-risk disease (P < 0.016), and poor survival (P < 0.001). In contrast,
no association between TSP-1 methylation and prognostic factors or survival was
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that epigenetic inactivation of RASSF1A may
contribute to the clinically aggressive phenotype of high-risk NB.

PMID: 15623630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):37079-86. Epub 2004 Jun 28.

Identification of the spermatogenic zip protein Spz1 as a putative protein
phosphatase-1 (PP1) regulatory protein that specifically binds the PP1cgamma2
splice variant in mouse testis.

Hrabchak C(1), Varmuza S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 3G5, Canada.

The spermatogenic zip protein (Spz1) was originally isolated from a mouse testis 
library and identified as a novel member of the basic helix-loop-helix family of 
transcription factors. Here we identify Spz1 as a specific binding partner of the
gamma2 catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase-1. Male mice homozygous for a
null mutation in the protein phosphatase-1cgamma (PP1cgamma) gene are infertile
and display a distinct impairment in spermiogenesis despite the continued
presence of closely related PP1c isoforms. Yeast two-hybrid screening using the
PP1cgamma2 splice variant has identified Spz1 as an interacting protein and
possible mediator of the sterile PP1cgamma mutant phenotype. Spz1 was shown to
interact specifically with PP1cgamma2 but did not show an interaction with
PP1calpha or with a truncated version of PP1cgamma2 lacking 18 amino acids from
the C terminus. Interaction between full-length Spz1 and PP1cgamma2 was verified 
by co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization experiments in COS-1 cells as well 
as gel-shift and sedimentation assays using whole testis lysates.
Immunohistochemistry on wild type testis sections reveals a stage-specific
expression pattern for Spz1 during spermatogenesis that appeared grossly abnormal
in the testes of PP1cgamma mutant mice. Phosphatase assays using recombinant PP1c
indicate that increasing concentrations of Spz1 are able to inhibit PP1cgamma2
activity while having little effect on the activity of PP1calpha. Furthermore, an
interaction between PP1cgamma2 and Spz1 was shown to prevent binding of the
latter to the consensus E-box promoter sequence. We propose that the interaction 
between Spz1 and PP1cgamma2 may be required for proper regulation of
spermatogenesis and fertility in males.

PMID: 15226296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. In Silico Biol. 2004;4(2):109-25.

Content analysis of the core promoter region of human genes.

Bajic VB(1), Choudhary V, Hock CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infocomm Research, 21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Singapore.
bajicv@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

We analyzed an extended core promoter regions covering [-70,+60] segment relative
to the transcription start site of human promoters contained in the Eukaryotic
Promoter Database. The analysis was made by using the Match program ver. 1.9 with
an optimized setting and the TRANSFAC Professional database ver. 7.2. This
analysis revealed that the most common transcription factor binding site in the
examined collection of core promoters appears to be initiator (characterized by
GEN_INI), which is expected. The other less obvious sites found were Spz1, E2F-1,
ZF5, and C/EBP. The 'cap' site was also in this most common group.
Over-representation of these sites relative to the non-promoter background data
ranged from 0.3167 to 32.1645. These sites were characterized by being present in
more than 60% of promoter sequences. Interestingly, the TATA-box has been found
in only 11.63% of all examined promoters. The study is complemented by separate
analyses of promoter groups having different GC content. These additional
analyses revealed that the most common promoter elements found also include AP-2,
CdxA, Pax-2, SRY, STAT1 and STAT5A. It was also observed that a number of
promoter elements show strong preference either for the GC-rich or the GC-poor
core promoters.

PMID: 15089758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Mar 10;294(1):185-98.

Dysfunctional spermatogenesis in transgenic mice overexpressing bHLH-Zip
transcription factor, Spz1.

Hsu SH(1), Hsieh-Li HM, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, ROC.

Spz1, a previously identified basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-Zip)
transcription factor, is expressed specifically in the testis and epididymis of
adult mice. However, Spz1's in vivo function is unclear. To study the function of
Spz1 in vivo, we established Spz1 transgenic mice. Using this model, we were able
to demonstrate that overexpression of Spz1 in the testis destroys tissue
homeostasis at an early stage of spermatogenesis, which in turn induces apoptosis
in germ cells and thus reduces male fertility. We identified that Spz1 is
ectopically expressed in multiple tissues of transgenic male mice by Western blot
analysis. In the testes of transgenic mice, Spz1 proteins were found to be
overexpressed in both germ and somatic cells as determined by immunofluorescence 
staining. This upregulated cell proliferation was confirmed by in vivo BrdU
incorporation in multinucleated gonocytes of 1-week-old transgenic mice. However,
histological and immunohistochemical analyses indicated that these multinucleated
germ cells in seminiferous tubules subsequently underwent apoptosis at 2 and 4
weeks of age through Fas/FasL- and ER stress-signaling pathways. Furthermore,
germ cells surviving two cycles of meiosis suffered aberrant spermiogenesis,
generating a large pool of abnormal spermatozoa. The transgenic male mice with
reduced populations of normal spermatozoa produced offsprings of smaller litter
sizes and became infertile at 6 months of age. These results suggest that cell
proliferation in early spermatogenesis is critically regulated by multisignal
pathways and unregulated cell proliferation at this stage, as induced by Spz1,
leads to germ cell apoptosis. These results imply that Spz1 plays an important
regulatory role during spermatogenesis.

PMID: 14980513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Asian J Androl. 2003 Jun;5(2):83-8.

Expression of a novel bHLH-Zip gene in human testis.

Sha JH(1), Zhou ZM, Li JM, Lin M, Zhu H, Zhu H, Zhou YD, Wang LL, Wang YQ, Zhou
KY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Resources, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210029,
China.

AIM: To identify specifically expressed genes in the adult and fetal testes.
METHODS: A human testis cDNA microarray was established. Then the mRNA of adult
and fetal testis was purified and probes were prepared by a reverse transcription
reaction with the testis mRNA as template. The microarray was hybridized with
probes of adult and fetal testes. The nucleic sequences of differentially
expressed genes were determined and homologies were searched in the databases of 
the GenBank.
RESULTS: When hybridized with adult or fetal testis probes, the positive clones
were 96.8 % and 95.4 %, respectively. Among these genes, one was a new
testis-specific gene, which was named TSP1. TSP1 was highly expressed in human
adult testis. The cDNA of TSP1 was 1,484 bp in length. The cDNA sequence of this 
clone was deposited in the Genbank (AF333098). TSP1 was also determined as
Interim Gen Symbol (Unigene, No. Hs.98266). Protein analysis showed that TSP1
contained two functional domains: an N-terminal basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and
a C-terminal leucine zipper (Zip). Homologous analysis showed that the 430 amino 
acid sequences deduced from the 1293 bp open reading frame (ORF) had a homology
with the human gene FLJ2509 (AK098575). TSP1 had also a sequence homology with
Spz 1 protein of mouse. Expression profiles showed that TSP1 was specifically and
strongly expressed in the testis.
CONCLUSION: TSP1 is a gene highly expressed in adult testis. It may play an
important role in spermatogenesis in the humans.

PMID: 12778315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mech Dev. 2001 Feb;100(2):177-87.

Spz1, a novel bHLH-Zip protein, is specifically expressed in testis.

Hsu SH(1), Shyu HW, Hsieh-Li HM, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, 11529, Taipei, Taiwan.

We isolated a novel bHLH-Zip gene designated Spz1 from a mouse testis cDNA
library. Spz1 is expressed specifically in the testis and epididymis.
Immunofluorescence staining detected Spz1 protein in the nuclei of LFG6 Leydig
cells. The ability of Spz1 protein to bind to the bHLH consensus-binding site,
the E-box, was confirmed by EMSA, and a 9-bp asymmetric target site was
identified by random selection and PCR amplification. Hormonal regulation of Spz1
was investigated and downregulation of Spz1 expression by testosterone and
retinoic acid was found. This nuclear transcription factor may play a crucial
role in spermatogenesis by regulating cell proliferation or differentiation
through binding to specific DNA sequences like other bHLH-Zip molecules.

PMID: 11165476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


