
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2016 Mar 16;88:36-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.03.029.
[Epub ahead of print]

Crystal structure and dynamics of Spt16N-domain of FACT complex from Cicer
arietinum.

Are VN(1), Ghosh B(2), Kumar A(2), Gadre R(3), Makde RD(4).

Author information: 
(1)High Pressure and Synchrotron Radiation Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre, Mumbai, India; School of Biochemistry, Devi Ahilya University,
Indore, India. (2)High Pressure and Synchrotron Radiation Physics Division,
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India. (3)School of Biochemistry, Devi
Ahilya University, Indore, India. (4)High Pressure and Synchrotron Radiation
Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India. Electronic
address: ravimakde@rrcat.gov.in.

The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex, a heterodimer of SSRP1
and Spt16 proteins, is an essential histone chaperone that transiently
reorganizes nucleosomes during transcription, replication and repair. N-terminal 
domain of Spt16 subunit (Spt16N) is strictly conserved in all the known Spt16
orthologs. Genetic studies in yeast have revealed a partially redundant role of
Spt16N for the FACT functionality. Here, we report the crystal structure of
Spt16N from a plant origin (Spt16Nca, Cicer arietinum) and its comparisons with
the known Spt16N structures from yeasts and human. The inter-domain angle in
Spt16Nca is significantly different from that of the yeast and human Spt16N
structures. Normal mode analysis and classical molecular dynamics simulations
reveal inter-domain movement in Spt16Nca and later also shows conformational
flexibility of the critical loops. Spt16Nca binds to histone H3/H4 complex,
similar to its orthologs from yeast and human origins. Further, conservation of
electrostatic surface potentials in Spt16N structures from evolutionary distinct 
domains of eukaryotes (plant, human and fungi) have provided the potential sites 
on Spt16N for histone interactions. The structural comparisons with M24
peptidases show that the hydrophobic pocket shielded by a flexible loop of
C-terminal domain of Spt16N that may be functionally important.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26995613  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2016 Feb 1;72(Pt 2):121-8. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X15024565. Epub 2016 Jan 22.

Structure of the human histone chaperone FACT Spt16 N-terminal domain.

Marcianò G(1), Huang DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road,
Glasgow G61 1BD, Scotland.

The histone chaperone FACT plays an important role in facilitating nucleosome
assembly and disassembly during transcription. FACT is a heterodimeric complex
consisting of Spt16 and SSRP1. The N-terminal domain of Spt16 resembles an
inactive aminopeptidase. How this domain contributes to the histone chaperone
activity of FACT remains elusive. Here, the crystal structure of the N-terminal
domain (NTD) of human Spt16 is reported at a resolution of 1.84 Å. The structure 
adopts an aminopeptidase-like fold similar to those of the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe Spt16 NTDs. Isothermal titration
calorimetry analyses show that human Spt16 NTD binds histones H3/H4 with
low-micromolar affinity, suggesting that Spt16 NTD may contribute to histone
binding in the FACT complex. Surface-residue conservation and electrostatic
analysis reveal a conserved acidic patch that may be involved in histone binding.

PMCID: PMC4741192
PMID: 26841762  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Ther. 2016 Jan 12. doi: 10.1038/mt.2016.9. [Epub ahead of print]

SSRP1 Contributes to the Malignancy of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Is Negatively
Regulated by miR-497.

Ding Q(1,)(2), He K(1), Luo T(3), Deng Y(2), Wang H(1), Liu H(4), Zhang J(1),
Chen K(1), Xiao J(1), Duan X(1), Huang R(1), Xia Z(1), Zhou W(1), He J(1), Yu
H(2), Jiao X(5), Xiang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second People's Hospital of Guangdong
Province, The 3rd Clinical Medicine School, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Institute for
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China. (3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Vascular Surgery,
Southern Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (5)Organ
Transplant Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.

The aim of this study is to clarify the clinical implication and functional role 
of structure specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) and explore the underlying mechanism of aberrant high expression of SSRP1
in cancers. In the present investigation, we validated that SSRP1 was upregulated
in HCC samples. We also demonstrated that its upregulation was associated with
several clinicopathologic features such as higher serum AFP level, larger tumor
size, and higher T stage of HCC patients; and its high expression indicated
shorter overall survival and faster recurrence. To investigate the role of SSRP1 
in HCC progression, both loss- and gain-function models were established. We
demonstrated that SSPR1 modulated both proliferation and metastasis of HCC cells 
in vitro and vivo. Furthermore, we demonstrated that SSRP1-modulated apoptosis
process and its knockdown increased the sensitivity of HCC cells to doxorubicin, 
5-Fluorouracil, and cisplatin. We also identified microRNA-497 (miR-497) as a
posttranscriptional regulator of SSRP1. Ectopic expression of miR-497 inhibited
3'-untranslated-region-coupled luciferase activity and suppressed endogenous
SSRP1 expression at both messenger RNA and protein levels. For the first time, we
proved that SSRP1 upregulation contributed to HCC development and the
tumor-suppressive miR-497 served as its negative regulator.Molecular Therapy
(2016); doi:10.1038/mt.2016.9.

PMID: 26755331  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 21;5:18688. doi: 10.1038/srep18688.

Crystal Structure of Human SSRP1 Middle Domain Reveals a Role in DNA Binding.

Zhang W(1,)(2), Zeng F(1,)(2), Liu Y(1,)(2), Shao C(1,)(2), Li S(1,)(2), Lv
H(1,)(2), Shi Y(1,)(2), Niu L(1,)(2), Teng M(1,)(2), Li X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Innovation
Center for Cell Signaling Network, School of Life Science, 96 Jinzhai Road,
Hefei, Anhui, 230026, People's Republic of China. (2)Key Laboratory of Structural
Biology, Hefei Science Center of CAS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 96 Jinzhai
Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, People's Republic of China.

SSRP1 is a subunit of the FACT complex, an important histone chaperone required
for transcriptional regulation, DNA replication and damage repair. SSRP1 also
plays important roles in transcriptional regulation independent of Spt16 and
interacts with other proteins. Here, we report the crystal structure of the
middle domain of SSRP1. It consists of tandem pleckstrin homology (PH) domains.
These domains differ from the typical PH domain in that PH1 domain has an extra
conserved ßaß topology. SSRP1 contains the well-characterized DNA-binding HMG-1
domain. Our studies revealed that SSRP1-M can also participate in DNA binding,
and that this binding involves one positively charged patch on the surface of the
structure. In addition, SSRP1-M did not bind to histones, which was assessed
through pull-down assays. This aspect makes the protein different from other
related proteins adopting the double PH domain structure. Our studies facilitate 
the understanding of SSRP1 and provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of 
interaction with DNA and histones of the FACT complex.

PMCID: PMC4685450
PMID: 26687053  [PubMed - in process]


5. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Dec 18;10(12):2753-63. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00493. Epub 
2015 Oct 5.

In Vivo Mapping of FACT-Histone Interactions Identifies a Role of Pob3 C-terminus
in H2A-H2B Binding.

Hoffmann C(1), Neumann H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Free Floater (Junior) Research Group "Applied Synthetic Biology", Georg-August
University Göttingen , Institute for Microbiology and Genetics, Justus-von-Liebig
Weg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Histone chaperones assist nucleosomal rearrangements to facilitate the passage of
DNA and RNA polymerases through chromatin. The FACT (facilitates chromatin
transcription) complex is a conserved histone chaperone involved in
transcription, replication, and repair. The complex consists of two major
subunits, Spt16 and SSRP1/Pob3 in mammals and yeast, which engage histones and
DNA by multiple contacts. However, the precise mechanism of FACT function is
largely unclear. Here, we used the genetically installed UV-activatable
cross-linker amino acid p-benzoylphenylalanine (pBPA) to map the interaction
network of FACT in living yeast. Unexpectedly, we found the acidic C-terminus of 
Pob3 forming cross-links to histone H2A and H2B most efficiently. This
observation was independent of the performed cross-linking chemistry since
similar histone cross-links were obtained using p-azidophenylalanine (pAzF).
Further analyses identified a C-terminal nuclear localization sequence in Pob3.
Its interaction with Importin-a interfered with H2A-H2B binding, which suggests a
possible regulatory role in FACT recruitment to chromatin. Deletion of acidic
residues from the Pob3 C-terminus creates a hydroxyurea-sensitive phenotype in
budding yeast, suggesting a potential role for this domain in DNA replication.

PMID: 26414936  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 6;290(45):27297-310. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.652339. Epub
2015 Sep 16.

FACT Proteins, SUPT16H and SSRP1, Are Transcriptional Suppressors of HIV-1 and
HTLV-1 That Facilitate Viral Latency.

Huang H(1), Santoso N(1), Power D(1), Simpson S(2), Dieringer M(2), Miao H(3),
Gurova K(4), Giam CZ(5), Elledge SJ(6), Zhu J(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Microbiology and Immunology. (2)the School of Arts and
Sciences, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627. (3)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, New York 14642. (4)the Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 14263. (5)the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda,
Maryland 20814. (6)the Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and the Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115. (7)From the
Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Biochemistry and Biophysics, and
Jian_Zhu@urmc.rochester.edu.

Our functional genomic RNAi screens have identified the protein components of the
FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) complex, SUPT16H and SSRP1, as top
host factors that negatively regulate HIV-1 replication. FACT interacts
specifically with histones H2A/H2B to affect assembly and disassembly of
nucleosomes, as well as transcription elongation. We further investigated the
suppressive role of FACT proteins in HIV-1 transcription. First, depletion of
SUPT16H or SSRP1 protein enhances Tat-mediated HIV-1 LTR (long terminal repeat)
promoter activity. Second, HIV-1 Tat interacts with SUPT16H but not SSRP1
protein. However, both SUPT16H and SSRP1 are recruited to LTR promoter. Third,
the presence of SUPT16H interferes with the association of Cyclin T1 (CCNT1), a
subunit of P-TEFb, with the Tat-LTR axis. Removing inhibitory mechanisms to
permit HIV-1 transcription is an initial and key regulatory step to reverse
post-integrated latent HIV-1 proviruses for purging of reservoir cells. We
therefore evaluated the role of FACT proteins in HIV-1 latency and reactivation. 
Depletion of SUPT16H or SSRP1 protein affects both HIV-1 transcriptional
initiation and elongation and spontaneously reverses latent HIV-1 in U1/HIV and
J-LAT cells. Similar effects were observed with a primary CD4+ T cell model of
HIV-1 latency. FACT proteins also interfere with HTLV-1 Tax-LTR-mediated
transcription and viral latency, indicating that they may act as general
transcriptional suppressors for retroviruses. We conclude that FACT proteins
SUPT16H and SSRP1 play a key role in suppressing HIV-1 transcription and
promoting viral latency, which may serve as promising gene targets for developing
novel HIV-1 latency-reversing agents.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646377 [Available on 2016-11-06]
PMID: 26378236  [PubMed - in process]


7. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;17(8):1014-23. doi: 10.1038/ncb3187. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Reconstitution of mitotic chromatids with a minimum set of purified factors.

Shintomi K(1), Takahashi TS(2), Hirano T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chromosome Dynamics Laboratory, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;17(8):964-5.

The assembly of mitotic chromosomes, each composed of a pair of rod-shaped
chromatids, is an essential prerequisite for accurate transmission of the genome 
during cell division. It remains poorly understood, however, how this fundamental
process might be achieved and regulated in the cell. Here we report an in vitro
system in which mitotic chromatids can be reconstituted by mixing a simple
substrate with only six purified factors: core histones, three histone chaperones
(nucleoplasmin, Nap1 and FACT), topoisomerase II (topo II) and condensin I. We
find that octameric nucleosomes containing the embryonic variant H2A.X-F are
highly susceptible to FACT and function as the most productive substrate for
subsequent actions of topo II and condensin I. Cdk1 phosphorylation of condensin 
I is the sole mitosis-specific modification required for chromatid
reconstitution. This experimental system will enhance our understanding of the
mechanisms of action of individual factors and their cooperation during this
process.

PMID: 26075356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1276:315-26. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2392-2_19.

Experimental analysis of hFACT action during Pol II transcription in vitro.

Hsieh FK(1), Kulaeva OI, Studitsky VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA.

FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) is a histone chaperone that
facilitates transcription through chromatin and promotes histone recovery during 
transcription. Here, we describe a highly purified experimental system that
recapitulates many important properties of transcribed chromatin and the key
aspects of hFACT action during this process in vitro. We present the protocols
describing how to prepare different forms of nucleosomes, including intact
nucleosome, covalently conjugated nucleosome, nucleosome missing one of the two
H2A/2B dimers (hexasome) and tetrasome (a nucleosome missing both H2A/2B dimers).
These complexes allow analysis of various aspects of FACT's function. These
approaches and other methods described below can also be applied to the study of 
other chromatin remodelers and chromatin-targeted factors.

PMID: 25665573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biomed Environ Sci. 2014 Nov;27(11):883-93. doi: 10.3967/bes2014.130.

Protein Phosphatase 2C of Toxoplasma Gondii Interacts with Human SSRP1 and
Negatively Regulates Cell Apoptosis.

Gao XJ(1), Feng JX(1), Zhu S(1), Liu XH(1), Tardieux I(2), Liu LX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education
Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632, Guangdong, China. (2)Institut Cochin, Université Descartes, Team FRM
'Barriers and Pathogens', 22 Rue Méchain, Paris 75014, France.

OBJECTIVE: The protozoan Toxoplasma gondii expresses large amounts of a 37 kDa
Type 2C serine-threonine phosphatase, the so-called TgPP2C which has been
suggested to contribute to parasite growth regulation. Ectopic expression in
mammalian cells also indicated that the enzyme could regulate growth and
survival. In this study, we aimed to investigate the interaction of TgPP2C with
human SSRP1 (structure-specific recognition protein 1) and the effects of TgPP2C 
on cell viability.
METHODS: The yeast two hybrid system, His-tag pull-down and
co-immunoprecipitation assays were used to confirm the interaction of TgPP2C with
SSRP1 and determine the binding domain on SSRP1. The evaluation of cell apoptosis
was performed using cleaved caspase-3 antibody and Annexin-V/PI kit combined with
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: We identified human SSRP1 as an interacting partner of TgPP2C. The
C-terminal region of SSRP1 including the amino acids 471 to 538 was specifically 
mapped as the region responsible for interaction with TgPP2C. The overexpression 
of TgPP2C down-regulated cell apoptosis and negatively regulated apoptosis
induced by DRB, casein kinase II (CKII) inhibitor, through enhanced interaction
with SSRP1.
CONCLUSION: TgPP2C may be a parasitic factor capable of promoting cell survival
through interaction with the host protein SSRP1, thereby creating a favorable
environment for parasite growth.

Copyright © 2014 The Editorial Board of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences.
Published by China CDC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25374021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Front Neurosci. 2014 Aug 21;8:257. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00257. eCollection
2014.

A multi-resource data integration approach: identification of candidate genes
regulating cell proliferation during neocortical development.

Vied CM(1), Freudenberg F(2), Wang Y(3), Raposo AA(4), Feng D(5), Nowakowski
RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University Tallahassee, FL, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Frankfurt Frankfurt, Germany. (3)NUS
Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of 
Singapore Singapore, Singapore. (4)Molecular Neurobiology, Instituto Gulbenkian
de Ciência Oeiras, Portugal. (5)Allen Institute for Brain Science Seattle, WA,
USA.

Neurons of the mammalian neocortex are produced by proliferating cells located in
the ventricular zone (VZ) lining the lateral ventricles. This is a complex and
sequential process, requiring precise control of cell cycle progression, fate
commitment and differentiation. We have analyzed publicly available databases
from mouse and human to identify candidate genes that are potentially involved in
regulating early neocortical development and neurogenesis. We used a mouse in
situ hybridization dataset (The Allen Institute for Brain Science) to identify 13
genes (Cdon, Celsr1, Dbi, E2f5, Eomes, Hmgn2, Neurog2, Notch1, Pcnt, Sox3, Ssrp1,
Tead2, Tgif2) with high correlation of expression in the proliferating cells of
the VZ of the neocortex at early stages of development (E15.5). We generated a
similar human brain network using microarray and RNA-seq data (BrainSpan Atlas)
and identified 407 genes with high expression in the developing human VZ and
subventricular zone (SVZ) at 8-9 post-conception weeks. Seven of the human genes 
were also present in the mouse VZ network. The human and mouse networks were
extended using available genetic and proteomic datasets through GeneMANIA. A gene
ontology search of the mouse and human networks indicated that many of the genes 
are involved in the cell cycle, DNA replication, mitosis and transcriptional
regulation. The reported involvement of Cdon, Celsr1, Dbi, Eomes, Neurog2,
Notch1, Pcnt, Sox3, Tead2, and Tgif2 in neural development or diseases resulting 
from the disruption of neurogenesis validates these candidate genes. Taken
together, our knowledge-based discovery method has validated the involvement of
many genes already known to be involved in neocortical development and extended
the potential number of genes by 100's, many of which are involved in functions
related to cell proliferation but others of which are potential candidates for
involvement in the regulation of neocortical development.

PMCID: PMC4139594
PMID: 25191221  [PubMed]


11. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Sep;13(9):2203-14. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0013. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

Quinacrine overcomes resistance to erlotinib by inhibiting FACT, NF-<U+03BA>B, and
cell-cycle progression in non-small cell lung cancer.

Dermawan JK(1), Gurova K(2), Pink J(3), Dowlati A(4), De S(1), Narla G(5), Sharma
N(6), Stark GR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland, Ohio. (2)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, New York. (3)Division of General Medical Sciences-Oncology,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cleveland, Ohio. (4)Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Department of Medicine, Institute for
Transformative Molecular Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio. (6)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer
Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. starkg@ccf.org
Neelesh.Sharma@UHhospitals.org. (7)Department of Molecular Genetics, Cleveland
Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio. starkg@ccf.org
Neelesh.Sharma@UHhospitals.org.

Erlotinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of patients
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In these patients, erlotinib
prolongs survival but its benefit remains modest because many tumors express
wild-type (wt) EGFR or develop a second-site EGFR mutation. To test drug
combinations that could improve the efficacy of erlotinib, we combined erlotinib 
with quinacrine, which inhibits the FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription)
complex that is required for NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity. In A549 (wtEGFR),
H1975 (EGFR-L858R/T790M), and H1993 (MET amplification) NSCLC cells, this drug
combination was highly synergistic, as quantified by Chou-Talalay combination
indices, and slowed xenograft tumor growth. At a sub-IC50 but more clinically
attainable concentration of erlotinib, quinacrine, alone or in combination with
erlotinib, significantly inhibited colony formation and induced cell-cycle arrest
and apoptosis. Quinacrine decreased the level of active FACT subunit SSRP1 and
suppressed NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent luciferase activity. Knockdown of SSRP1 decreased cell
growth and sensitized cells to erlotinib. Moreover, transcriptomic profiling
showed that quinacrine or combination treatment significantly affected
cell-cycle-related genes that contain binding sites for transcription factors
that regulate SSRP1 target genes. As potential biomarkers of drug combination
efficacy, we identified genes that were more strongly suppressed by the
combination than by single treatment, and whose increased expression predicted
poorer survival in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. This preclinical study
shows that quinacrine overcomes erlotinib resistance by inhibiting FACT and
cell-cycle progression, and supports a clinical trial testing erlotinib alone
versus this combination in advanced NSCLC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4156551
PMID: 25028470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;28(9):1571-84. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1101. Epub 2014 Jul 
7.

Use of phage display to identify novel mineralocorticoid receptor-interacting
proteins.

Yang J(1), Fuller PJ, Morgan J, Shibata H, McDonnell DP, Clyne CD, Young MJ.

Author information: 
(1)MIMR-PHI Medical Research Institute (J.Y., P.J.F., J.M., C.D.C., M.J.Y.),
Department of Medicine (J.Y., P.J.F., M.J.Y.), Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria 3168, Australia; Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Rheumatology, 
and Nephrology (H.S.), Oita University, Yufu 879-5593, Japan; and Department of
Pharmacology and Cancer Biology (D.P.M.), Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710.

The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) plays a central role in salt and water
homeostasis via the kidney; however, inappropriate activation of the MR in the
heart can lead to heart failure. A selective MR modulator that antagonizes MR
signaling in the heart but not the kidney would provide the cardiovascular
protection of current MR antagonists but allow for normal electrolyte balance.
The development of such a pharmaceutical requires an understanding of
coregulators and their tissue-selective interactions with the MR, which is
currently limited by the small repertoire of MR coregulators described in the
literature. To identify potential novel MR coregulators, we used T7 phage display
to screen tissue-selective cDNA libraries for MR-interacting proteins. Thirty MR 
binding peptides were identified, from which three were chosen for further
characterization based on their nuclear localization and their interaction with
other MR-interacting proteins or, in the case of x-ray repair cross-complementing
protein 6, its known status as an androgen receptor coregulator. Eukaryotic
elongation factor 1A1, structure-specific recognition protein 1, and x-ray repair
cross-complementing protein 6 modulated MR-mediated transcription in a ligand-,
cell- and/or promoter-specific manner and colocalized with the MR upon agonist
treatment when imaged using immunofluorescence microscopy. These results
highlight the utility of phage display for rapid and sensitive screening of MR
binding proteins and suggest that eukaryotic elongation factor 1A1,
structure-specific recognition protein 1, and x-ray repair cross-complementing
protein 6 may be potential MR coactivators whose activity is dependent on the
ligand, cellular context, and target gene promoter.

PMID: 25000480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Dev. 2014 Apr 1;28(7):735-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.234070.113. Epub 2014 Mar
17.

The yeast and human FACT chromatin-reorganizing complexes solve R-loop-mediated
transcription-replication conflicts.

Herrera-Moyano E(1), Mergui X, García-Rubio ML, Barroso S, Aguilera A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa CABIMER,
Universidad de Sevilla, 41092 Seville, Spain.

FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) is a chromatin-reorganizing complex
that swaps nucleosomes around the RNA polymerase during transcription elongation 
and has a role in replication that is not fully understood yet. Here we show that
recombination factors are required for the survival of yeast FACT mutants,
consistent with an accumulation of DNA breaks that we detected by Rad52 foci and 
transcription-dependent hyperrecombination. Breaks also accumulate in
FACT-depleted human cells, as shown by <U+03B3>H2AX foci and single-cell
electrophoresis. Furthermore, FACT-deficient yeast and human cells show
replication impairment, which in yeast we demonstrate by ChIP-chip (chromatin
immunoprecipitation [ChIP] coupled with microarray analysis) of Rrm3 to occur
genome-wide but preferentially at highly transcribed regions. Strikingly, in
yeast FACT mutants, high levels of Rad52 foci are suppressed by RNH1
overexpression; R loops accumulate at high levels, and replication becomes normal
when global RNA synthesis is inhibited in FACT-depleted human cells. The results 
demonstrate a key function of FACT in the resolution of R-loop-mediated
transcription-replication conflicts, likely associated with a specific chromatin 
organization.

PMCID: PMC4015491
PMID: 24636987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar-Apr;1819(3-4):247-55.

The role of FACT in making and breaking nucleosomes.

Formosa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA. tim@biochem.utah.edu

FACT is a roughly 180 kDa heterodimeric protein complex important for managing
the properties of chromatin in eukaryotic cells. Chromatin is a repressive
barrier that plays an important role in protecting genomic DNA and regulating
access to it. This barrier must be temporarily removed during transcription,
replication, and repair, but it also must be rapidly restored to the original
state afterwards. Further, the properties of chromatin are dynamic and must be
adjusted as conditions dictate. FACT was identified as a factor that destabilizes
nucleosomes in vitro, but it has now also been implicated as a central factor in 
the deposition of histones to form nucleosomes, as an exchange factor that swaps 
the histones within existing nucleosomes for variant forms, and as a tether that 
prevents histones from being displaced by the passage of RNA polymerases during
transcription. FACT therefore plays central roles in building, maintaining,
adjusting. and overcoming the chromatin barrier. This review summarizes recent
results that have begun to reveal how FACT can promote what appear to be
contradictory goals, using a simple set of binding activities to both enhance and
diminish the stability of nucleosomes. This article is part of a Special Issue
entitled: Histone chaperones and Chromatin assembly.

PMID: 24459727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Cell Sci. 2014 Feb 15;127(Pt 4):763-72. doi: 10.1242/jcs.135855. Epub 2013 Dec 
19.

Histone chaperone FACT regulates homologous recombination by chromatin remodeling
through interaction with RNF20.

Oliveira DV(1), Kato A, Nakamura K, Ikura T, Okada M, Kobayashi J, Yanagihara H, 
Saito Y, Tauchi H, Komatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Repair Dynamics, Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-konoecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF20 regulates chromatin structure through
ubiquitylation of histone H2B, so that early homologous recombination repair
(HRR) proteins can access the DNA in eukaryotes during repair. However, it
remains unresolved how RNF20 itself approaches the DNA in the presence of
chromatin structure. Here, we identified the histone chaperone FACT as a key
protein in the early steps of HRR. Depletion of SUPT16H, a component of FACT,
caused pronounced defects in accumulations of repair proteins and, consequently, 
decreased HRR activity. This led to enhanced sensitivity to ionizing radiation
(IR) and mitomycin-C in a fashion similar to RNF20-deficient cells, indicating
that SUPT16H is essential for RNF20-mediated pathway. Indeed, SUPT16H directly
bound to RNF20 in vivo, and mutation at the RING-finger domain in RNF20 abolished
its interaction and accumulation, as well as that of RAD51 and BRCA1, at sites of
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), whereas the localization of SUPT16H remained
intact. Interestingly, PAF1, which has been implicated in transcription as a
mediator of FACT and RNF20 association, was dispensable for DNA-damage-induced
interaction of RNF20 with SUPT16H. Furthermore, depletion of SUPT16H caused
pronounced defects in RNF20-mediated H2B ubiquitylation and thereby, impaired
accumulation of the chromatin remodeling factor SNF2h. Consistent with this
observation, the defective phenotypes of SUPT16H were effectively counteracted by
enforced nucleosome relaxation. Taken together, our results indicate a primary
role of FACT in RNF20 recruitment and the resulting chromatin remodeling for
initiation of HRR.

PMID: 24357716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Annu Rev Genet. 2013;47:483-508. doi: 10.1146/annurev-genet-110711-155440. Epub
2013 Sep 11.

Control of transcriptional elongation.

Kwak H(1), Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853-2703; email: hk572@cornell.edu , jtl10@cornell.edu.

Elongation is becoming increasingly recognized as a critical step in eukaryotic
transcriptional regulation. Although traditional genetic and biochemical studies 
have identified major players of transcriptional elongation, our understanding of
the importance and roles of these factors is evolving rapidly through the recent 
advances in genome-wide and single-molecule technologies. Here, we focus on how
elongation can modulate the transcriptional outcome through the rate-liming step 
of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) pausing near promoters and how the participating
factors were identified. Among the factors we describe are the pausing
factors--NELF (negative elongation factor) and DSIF (DRB sensitivity-inducing
factor)--and P-TEFb (positive elongation factor b), which is the key player in
pause release. We also describe the high-resolution view of Pol II pausing and
propose nonexclusive models for how pausing is achieved. We then discuss Pol II
elongation through the bodies of genes and the roles of FACT and SPT6, factors
that allow Pol II to move through nucleosomes.

PMCID: PMC3974797
PMID: 24050178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2013 Sep-Oct;47(5):754-66.

[Molecular mechanisms of transcription through a nuclesome by RNA polymerase II].

[Article in Russian]

Kulaeva OI, Maliuchenko NV, Nikitin DV, Demidenko AV, Chertkov OV, Efimova NS,
Kirpichnikov MP, Studitskii VM.

The Pol II-type mechanism is conserved from yeast to human. After initiation of
transcription, Pol II can be paused within the early transcribed region of a
gene. Then Pol II overcomes the initial nucleosomal barrier, and efficiently
proceeds through chromatin. At low- to moderate-level transcription progression
of Pol II is characterized by displacement/exchange of only H2A/H2B dimer(s) and 
hexasome survival, likely mediated through formation of small intranucleosomal
DNA loops. This mechanism helps to preserve the "histone" code during
transcription. As the transcription rate is increased, the distance between
transcribing Pol II complexes becomes shorter, and trailing Pol II complexes may 
encounter the hexasome formed after previous transcription round, before the
H2A/H2B dimer re-binds to the hexasome. In this case an unstable intermediate
with a smaller number of DNA-histone contacts is formed, resulting in eviction of
the histone hexamer from DNA in vitro; therefore here all core histones are
evicted/exchanged in vivo. Various protein factors and histone chaperones are
involved in chromatin transcription by Pol II in vivo.

PMID: 25509347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Cell. 2013 Aug 22;51(4):469-79. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.08.007.

Enhanced chromatin dynamics by FACT promotes transcriptional restart after
UV-induced DNA damage.

Dinant C(1), Ampatziadis-Michailidis G, Lans H, Tresini M, Lagarou A, Grosbart M,
Theil AF, van Cappellen WA, Kimura H, Bartek J, Fousteri M, Houtsmuller AB,
Vermeulen W, Marteijn JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam 3015 GE, The
Netherlands.

Chromatin remodeling is tightly linked to all DNA-transacting activities. To
study chromatin remodeling during DNA repair, we established quantitative
fluorescence imaging methods to measure the exchange of histones in chromatin in 
living cells. We show that particularly H2A and H2B are evicted and replaced at
an accelerated pace at sites of UV-induced DNA damage. This accelerated exchange 
of H2A/H2B is facilitated by SPT16, one of the two subunits of the histone
chaperone FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) but largely independent of
its partner SSRP1. Interestingly, SPT16 is targeted to sites of UV light-induced 
DNA damage-arrested transcription and is required for efficient restart of RNA
synthesis upon damage removal. Together, our data uncover an important role for
chromatin dynamics at the crossroads of transcription and the UV-induced DNA
damage response.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23973375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 1;12(15):2347. doi: 10.4161/cc.25661. Epub 2013 Jul 11.

"Naked" FACT is unstable.

Komar AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease; Department of Biological,
Geological and Environmental Sciences; Cleveland State University; Cleveland, OH 
USA.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 1;12(15):2423-34.

PMCID: PMC3841312
PMID: 23856583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 1;12(15):2423-34. doi: 10.4161/cc.25452. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Complex mutual regulation of facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) subunits 
on both mRNA and protein levels in human cells.

Safina A(1), Garcia H, Commane M, Guryanova O, Degan S, Kolesnikova K, Gurova KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology; Roswell Park Cancer Institute; Buffalo, NY 
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 1;12(15):2347.

Facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) is a chromatin remodeling complex with
two subunits: SSRP1 and SPT16. Mechanisms controlling FACT levels are of
interest, since the complex is not expressed in most differentiated cells, but is
frequently upregulated in cancer, particularly in poorly differentiated,
aggressive tumors. Moreover, inhibition of FACT expression or function in tumor
cells interferes with their survival. Here we demonstrate that SSRP1 and SPT16
protein levels decline upon induction of cellular differentiation or senescence
in vitro and that similar declines in protein levels for both SSRP1 and SPT16
occur upon RNAi-mediated knockdown of either SSRP1 or SPT16. The interdependence 
of SSRP1 and SPT16 protein levels was found to be due to their association with
SSRP1 and SPT16 mRNAs, which stabilizes the proteins. In particular, presence of 
SSRP1 mRNA is critical for SPT16 protein stability. In addition, binding of SSRP1
and SPT16 mRNAs to the FACT complex increases the stability and efficiency of
translation of the mRNAs. These data support a model in which the FACT complex is
stable when SSRP1 mRNA is present, but quickly degrades when SSRP1 mRNA levels
drop. In the absence of FACT complex, SSRP1 and SPT16 mRNAs are unstable and
inefficiently translated, making reactivation of FACT function unlikely in normal
cells. Thus, we have described a complex and unusual mode of regulation
controlling cellular FACT levels that results in amplified and stringent control 
of FACT activity. The FACT dependence of tumor cells suggests that mechanisms
controlling FACT levels could be targeted for anticancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3841321
PMID: 23839038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Rep. 2013 Jul 11;4(1):159-73. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.013. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Facilitates chromatin transcription complex is an "accelerator" of tumor
transformation and potential marker and target of aggressive cancers.

Garcia H(1), Miecznikowski JC, Safina A, Commane M, Ruusulehto A, Kilpinen S,
Leach RW, Attwood K, Li Y, Degan S, Omilian AR, Guryanova O, Papantonopoulou O,
Wang J, Buck M, Liu S, Morrison C, Gurova KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and
Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex is involved in chromatin
remodeling during transcription, replication, and DNA repair. FACT was previously
considered to be ubiquitously expressed and not associated with any disease.
However, we discovered that FACT is the target of a class of anticancer compounds
and is not expressed in normal cells of adult mammalian tissues, except for
undifferentiated and stem-like cells. Here, we show that FACT expression is
strongly associated with poorly differentiated aggressive cancers with low
overall survival. In addition, FACT was found to be upregulated during in vitro
transformation and to be necessary, but not sufficient, for driving
transformation. FACT also promoted survival and growth of established tumor
cells. Genome-wide mapping of chromatin-bound FACT indicated that FACT's role in 
cancer most likely involves selective chromatin remodeling of genes that
stimulate proliferation, inhibit cell death and differentiation, and regulate
cellular stress responses.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7784-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305859110. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Accumulation of the FACT complex, as well as histone H3.3, serves as a target
marker for somatic hypermutation.

Aida M(1), Hamad N, Stanlie A, Begum NA, Honjo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Yoshida Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 15;12(18):2923-4.

Somatic hypermutation (SHM) requires not only the expression of
activation-induced cytidine deaminase, but also transcription in the target
regions. However, how transcription guides activation-induced cytidine deaminase 
in targeting SHM to the Ig genes is not fully understood. Here, we found that the
"facilitates chromatin transcription" (FACT) complex promotes SHM by RNAi
screening of transcription elongation factors. Furthermore, FACT and histone
H3.3, a hallmark of transcription-coupled histone turnover, are enriched at the
V(D)J region, 5' flanking sequence of the Sµ switch region and the light chain J<U+03BA>
5 segment region in the Ig loci. The regions with the most abundant deposition of
FACT and H3.3 were also the most efficient targets of SHM. These results
demonstrate the importance of histone-exchanging dynamics at the chromatin of SHM
targets, especially in Ig genes.

PMCID: PMC3651492
PMID: 23610419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7654-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222198110. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Histone chaperone FACT action during transcription through chromatin by RNA
polymerase II.

Hsieh FK(1), Kulaeva OI, Patel SS, Dyer PN, Luger K, Reinberg D, Studitsky VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) is a histone chaperone that promotes
chromatin recovery during transcription, with additional roles in cell
differentiation. Although several models of the action of FACT during
transcription have been proposed, they remain to be experimentally evaluated.
Here we show that human FACT (hFACT) facilitates transcription through chromatin 
and promotes nucleosome recovery in vitro. FACT action depends on the presence of
histone H2A/H2B dimers in the nucleosome. Kinetic analysis suggests that hFACT
decreases the lifetime of nonproductive RNA polymerase II (Pol II)-nucleosome
complexes and facilitates the formation of productive complexes containing
nucleosomal DNA partially uncoiled from the octamer. Taken together, our data
suggest that hFACT interacts with DNA-binding surfaces of H2A/H2B dimers,
facilitating uncoiling of DNA from the histone octamer. Thus, hFACT-H2A/H2B
interactions play a key role in overcoming the nucleosomal barrier by Pol II and 
promoting nucleosome survival during transcription.

PMCID: PMC3651417
PMID: 23610384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 15;288(11):7676-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.426718. Epub 2013
Jan 30.

Myogenin recruits the histone chaperone facilitates chromatin transcription
(FACT) to promote nucleosome disassembly at muscle-specific genes.

Lolis AA(1), Londhe P, Beggs BC, Byrum SD, Tackett AJ, Davie JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Simmons Cancer Institute,
Southern Illinois University, School of Medicine, Carbondale, Illinois 62901,
USA.

Facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) functions to reorganize nucleosomes by
acting as a histone chaperone that destabilizes and restores nucleosomal
structure. The FACT complex is composed of two subunits: SSRP1 and SPT16. We have
discovered that myogenin interacts with the FACT complex. Transfection of FACT
subunits with myogenin is highly stimulatory for endogenous muscle gene
expression in 10T1/2 cells. We have also found that FACT subunits do not
associate with differentiation-specific genes while C2C12 cells are proliferating
but are recruited to muscle-specific genes as differentiation initiates and then 
dissociate as differentiation proceeds. The recruitment is dependent on myogenin,
as knockdowns of myogenin show no recruitment of the FACT complex. These data
suggest that FACT is involved in the early steps of gene activation through its
histone chaperone activities that serve to open the chromatin structure and
facilitate transcription. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that
nucleosomes are depleted at muscle-specific promoters upon differentiation and
that this activity is dependent on the presence of FACT. Our results show that
the FACT complex promotes myogenin-dependent transcription and suggest that FACT 
plays an important role in the establishment of the appropriate transcription
profile in a differentiated muscle cell.

PMCID: PMC3597808
PMID: 23364797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):2881-93. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1472. Epub 2013 
Jan 15.

Histone methyltransferase SETD2 coordinates FACT recruitment with nucleosome
dynamics during transcription.

Carvalho S(1), Raposo AC, Martins FB, Grosso AR, Sridhara SC, Rino J,
Carmo-Fonseca M, de Almeida SF.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.

Histone H3 of nucleosomes positioned on active genes is trimethylated at Lys36
(H3K36me3) by the SETD2 (also termed KMT3A/SET2 or HYPB) methyltransferase.
Previous studies in yeast indicated that H3K36me3 prevents spurious intragenic
transcription initiation through recruitment of a histone deacetylase complex, a 
mechanism that is not conserved in mammals. Here, we report that downregulation
of SETD2 in human cells leads to intragenic transcription initiation in at least 
11% of active genes. Reduction of SETD2 prevents normal loading of the FACT
(FAcilitates Chromatin Transcription) complex subunits SPT16 and SSRP1, and
decreases nucleosome occupancy in active genes. Moreover, co-immunoprecipitation 
experiments suggest that SPT16 is recruited to active chromatin templates, which 
contain H3K36me3-modified nucleosomes. Our results further show that within
minutes after transcriptional activation, there is a SETD2-dependent reduction in
gene body occupancy of histone H2B, but not of histone H3, suggesting that SETD2 
coordinates FACT-mediated exchange of histone H2B during transcription-coupled
nucleosome displacement. After inhibition of transcription, we observe a
SETD2-dependent recruitment of FACT and increased histone H2B occupancy. These
data suggest that SETD2 activity modulates FACT recruitment and nucleosome
dynamics, thereby repressing cryptic transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC3597667
PMID: 23325844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Exp Med. 2013 Jan 14;210(1):85-98. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121044. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 regulates nuclear reprogramming and promotes iPSC
generation without c-Myc.

Chiou SH(1), Jiang BH, Yu YL, Chou SJ, Tsai PH, Chang WC, Chen LK, Chen LH, Chien
Y, Chiou GY.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Center & Cancer Center, Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. shchiou@vghtpe.gov.tw

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (Parp1) catalyzes poly(ADP-ribosylation)
(PARylation) and induces replication networks involved in multiple nuclear
events. Using mass spectrometry and Western blotting, Parp1 and PARylation
activity were intensively detected in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and 
embryonic stem cells, but they were lower in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
and differentiated cells. We show that knockdown of Parp1 and pharmacological
inhibition of PARylation both reduced the efficiency of iPSC generation induced
by Oct4/Sox2/Klf4/c-Myc. Furthermore, Parp1 is able to replace Klf4 or c-Myc to
enhance the efficiency of iPSC generation. In addition, mouse iPSCs generated
from Oct4/Sox2/Parp1-overexpressing MEFs formed chimeric offspring. Notably, the 
endogenous Parp1 and PARylation activity was enhanced by overexpression of c-Myc 
and repressed by c-Myc knockdown. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed 
a direct interaction of c-Myc with the Parp1 promoter. PAR-resin pulldown,
followed by proteomic analysis, demonstrated high levels of PARylated Chd1L, DNA 
ligase III, SSrp1, Xrcc-6/Ku70, and Parp2 in pluripotent cells, which decreased
during the differentiation process. These data show that the activation of Parp1,
partly regulated by endogenous c-Myc, effectively promotes iPSC production and
helps to maintain a pluripotent state by posttranslationally modulating protein
PARylation.

PMCID: PMC3549716
PMID: 23277454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mar Genomics. 2012 Dec;8:49-58. doi: 10.1016/j.margen.2012.02.003. Epub 2012 Apr 
4.

Tracking the elusive monophyly of nototheniid fishes (Teleostei) with multiple
mitochondrial and nuclear markers.

Dettai A(1), Berkani M, Lautredou AC, Couloux A, Lecointre G, Ozouf-Costaz C,
Gallut C.

Author information: 
(1)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle-MNHN, Département Systématique et
Évolution, UMR 7138, CP 26, 43 Rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.
adettai@mnhn.fr

Since the first molecular study of the suborder Notothenioidei in 1994, many
phylogenetic studies have been published. Among these, those with a sufficient
number of taxa have all suggested that the Nototheniidae, as currently defined,
is monophyletic only with the inclusion of the Channichthyidae, Artedidraconidae,
Bathydraconidae and Harpagiferidae. This is corroborated by more recent studies
including more taxa, but in these studies either the number of nuclear markers or
the number of taxa included remained low. We obtained sequences for a large
sampling covering most nototheniid genera for five markers described previously
for other samplings (COI, Rhodopsin retrogene, Pkd1, HECW2, and SSRP1) and one
nuclear marker never used before in phylogenetic inference (PPM1d). The topology 
for the combined analysis of the nuclear coding genes, as well as the topology
for SSRP1 (non-coding) and the combined analysis for all markers all support the 
paraphyly of Nototheniidae, the genus Notothenia (including Paranotothenia) is
the sister group of the clade Channichthyidae, Artedidraconidae, Bathydraconidae 
and Harpagiferidae, and genus Gobionotothen is a sister group to both. As in
previous studies, Trematomus, Lepidonotothen and Patagonotothen form a clade that
also includes Indonotothenia cyanobrancha. The position of Pleuragramma
antarctica, Dissostichus species and Aethotaxis mitopteryx remains unstable and
dependant on markers and analyses. We therefore propose the inclusion of the four
families of the High Antarctic clade in the Nototheniidae, and their
transformation into subfamilies. We transfer Paranotothenia magellanica to the
genus Notothenia, as Notothenia magellanica.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23199880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Exp Med. 2012 Oct 22;209(11):2099-111. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112145. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

A role for the RNA pol II-associated PAF complex in AID-induced immune
diversification.

Willmann KL(1), Milosevic S, Pauklin S, Schmitz KM, Rangam G, Simon MT, Maslen S,
Skehel M, Robert I, Heyer V, Schiavo E, Reina-San-Martin B, Petersen-Mahrt SK.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Editing Laboratory, London Research Institute, South Mimms EN6 3LD,
England, UK.

Antibody diversification requires the DNA deaminase AID to induce DNA instability
at immunoglobulin (Ig) loci upon B cell stimulation. For efficient cytosine
deamination, AID requires single-stranded DNA and needs to gain access to Ig
loci, with RNA pol II transcription possibly providing both aspects. To
understand these mechanisms, we isolated and characterized endogenous
AID-containing protein complexes from the chromatin of diversifying B cells. The 
majority of proteins associated with AID belonged to RNA polymerase II elongation
and chromatin modification complexes. Besides the two core polymerase subunits,
members of the PAF complex, SUPT5H, SUPT6H, and FACT complex associated with AID.
We show that AID associates with RNA polymerase-associated factor 1 (PAF1)
through its N-terminal domain, that depletion of PAF complex members inhibits
AID-induced immune diversification, and that the PAF complex can serve as a
binding platform for AID on chromatin. A model is emerging of how RNA polymerase 
II elongation and pausing induce and resolve AID lesions.

PMCID: PMC3478926
PMID: 23008333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell. 2012 Oct 26;48(2):182-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.07.026. Epub 2012 
Aug 30.

RPA assists HSF1 access to nucleosomal DNA by recruiting histone chaperone FACT.

Fujimoto M(1), Takaki E, Takii R, Tan K, Prakasam R, Hayashida N, Iemura S,
Natsume T, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Transcription factor access to regulatory elements is prevented by the
nucleosome. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a winged helix transcription factor
that plays roles in control and stressed conditions by gaining access to target
elements, but mechanisms of HSF1 access are not well known in mammalian cells.
Here, we show the physical interaction between the wing motif of human HSF1 and
replication protein A (RPA), which is involved in DNA metabolism. Depletion of
RPA1 abolishes HSF1 access to the promoter of HSP70 in unstressed condition and
delays its rapid activation in response to heat shock. The HSF1-RPA complex leads
to preloading of RNA polymerase II and opens the chromatin structure by
recruiting a histone chaperone, FACT. Furthermore, this interaction is required
for melanoma cell proliferation. These results provide a mechanism of
constitutive HSF1 access to nucleosomal DNA, which is important for both basal
and inducible gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22940245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Aug;5(8):1025-35. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0529. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Targeting FACT complex suppresses mammary tumorigenesis in Her2/neu transgenic
mice.

Koman IE(1), Commane M, Paszkiewicz G, Hoonjan B, Pal S, Safina A, Toshkov I,
Purmal AA, Wang D, Liu S, Morrison C, Gudkov AV, Gurova KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and
Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA.

Development of safe and effective tumor-preventive treatments for high-risk
patient populations and therapies for early-stage cancer remains a critical need 
in oncology. We have recently discovered compound with anticancer activity,
Curaxin-137, which modulates several important signaling pathways involved in
even the very early stages of cancer. In tumor cells, Curaxin-137 inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B-
and HSF1-dependent transcription (prosurvival pathways) and activates p53 (a
proapoptotic pathway) without inducing DNA damage. These effects result from
chromatin trapping and inhibition of activity of the FACT (facilitates chromatin 
transcription) complex by Curaxin-137. FACT has not been previously implicated in
cancer, but we found that its subunits are overexpressed in breast cancer. On the
basis of this background, we tested whether Curaxin-137 could suppress
tumorigenesis in MMTV-neu transgenic mice, which spontaneously develop mammary
carcinoma due to steroid receptor-regulated expression of the Her2
proto-oncogene. We found that chronic administration of Curaxin-137 in a
preventive regimen to MMTV-neu mice did not cause any detectable changes in
normal organs and tissues, yet inhibited tumor onset, delayed tumor progression, 
and prolonged survival of mice in a dose-dependent manner. Curaxin-137 induced
changes in FACT, altered NF-<U+03BA>B localization, and activated p53 in tumor cells as 
expected from its defined mechanism of action. These results support further
investigation of Curaxin-137 as a potential preventive and/or early-stage
therapeutic agent for breast cancer.

PMID: 22689915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncotarget. 2011 Nov;2(11):830-2.

FACT in Cell Differentiation and Carcinogenesis.

Hsieh FK, Kulaeva OI, Orlovsky IV, Studitsky VM.

PMCID: PMC3259993
PMID: 22095465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. ChemMedChem. 2011 Dec 9;6(12):2133-6. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201100476. Epub 2011 Oct 
28.

Curaxins: a new family of non-genotoxic multitargeted anticancer agents.

Di Bussolo V(1), Minutolo F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università di Pisa, Via Bonanno 6-56126
Pisa, Italy.

PMID: 22038935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 15;10(20):3495-504. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.20.17769. Epub 2011
Oct 15.

The H2B ubiquitin ligase RNF40 cooperates with SUPT16H to induce dynamic changes 
in chromatin structure during DNA double-strand break repair.

Kari V(1), Shchebet A, Neumann H, Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, 
University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Many anticancer therapies function largely by inducing DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs) or altering the ability of cancer cells to repair them. Proper and timely 
DNA repair requires dynamic changes in chromatin assembly and disassembly
characterized by histone H3 lysine 56 acetylation (H3K56ac) and phosphorylation
of the variant histone H2AX (<U+03B3>H2AX). Similarly, histone H2B monoubiquitination
(H2Bub1) functions in DNA repair, but its role in controlling dynamic changes in 
chromatin structure following DSBs and the histone chaperone complexes involved
remain unknown. Therefore, we investigated the role of the H2B ubiquitin ligase
RNF40 in the DSB response. We show that RNF40 depletion results in sustained H2AX
phosphorylation and a decrease in rapid cell cycle checkpoint activation.
Furthermore, RNF40 knockdown resulted in decreased H3K56ac and decreased
recruitment of the facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex to
chromatin following DSB. Knockdown of the FACT component suppressor of Ty
homolog-16 (SUPT16H) phenocopied the effects of RNF40 knockdown on both <U+03B3>H2AX and
H3K56ac following DSB induction. Consistently, both RNF40 and SUPT16H were
required for proper DNA end resection and timely DNA repair, suggesting that
H2Bub1 and FACT cooperate to increase chromatin dynamics, which facilitates
proper checkpoint activation and timely DNA repair. These results provide
important mechanistic insights into the tumor suppressor function of H2Bub1 and
provide a rational basis for pursuing H2Bub1-based therapies in conjunction with 
traditional chemo- and radiotherapy.

PMID: 22031019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Oncotarget. 2011 Oct;2(10):783-96.

Expression of FACT in mammalian tissues suggests its role in maintaining of
undifferentiated state of cells.

Garcia H(1), Fleyshman D, Kolesnikova K, Safina A, Commane M, Paszkiewicz G,
Omelian A, Morrison C, Gurova K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and
Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

The Facilitates Chromatin Transcription (FACT) chromatin remodeling complex,
comprised of two subunits, SSRP1 and SPT16, is involved in transcription,
replication and DNA repair. We recently showed that curaxins, small molecules
with anti-cancer activity, target FACT and kill tumor cells in a FACT-dependent
manner. We also found that FACT is overexpressed in human and mouse tumors and
that tumor cells are sensitive to FACT downregulation. To clarify the clinical
potential of FACT inhibition, we were interested in physiological role(s) of FACT
in multicellular organisms. We analyzed SSRP1 and SPT16 expression in different
cells, tissues and conditions using Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of mouse
and human tissues and analysis of publically available high-content gene
expression datasets. Both approaches demonstrated coordinated expression of the
two FACT subunits, which was primarily associated with the stage of cellular
differentiation. Most cells of adult tissues do not have detectable protein level
of FACT. High FACT expression was associated with stem or less-differentiated
cells, while low FACT levels were seen in more differentiated cells. Experimental
manipulation of cell differentiation and proliferation in vitro, as well as
tissue staining for the Ki67 proliferation marker, showed that FACT expression is
related more to differentiation than to proliferation. Thus, FACT may be part of 
a stem cell-like gene expression signature and play a role in maintaining cells
in an undifferentiated state, which is consistent with its potential role as an
anti-cancer target.

PMCID: PMC3248156
PMID: 21998152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41883-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301465. Epub 2011
Oct 3.

Histone chaperone FACT coordinates nucleosome interaction through multiple
synergistic binding events.

Winkler DD(1), Muthurajan UM, Hieb AR, Luger K.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1870, 
USA.

In eukaryotic cells, DNA maintenance requires ordered disassembly and re-assembly
of chromatin templates. These processes are highly regulated and require
extrinsic factors such as chromatin remodelers and histone chaperones. The
histone chaperone FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) is a large
heterodimeric complex with roles in transcription, replication, and repair. FACT 
promotes and subsequently restricts access to DNA as a result of dynamic
nucleosome reorganization. However, until now, there lacked a truly quantitative 
assessment of the critical contacts mediating FACT function. Here, we demonstrate
that FACT binds histones, DNA, and intact nucleosomes at nanomolar
concentrations. We also determine roles for the histone tails in free histone and
nucleosome binding by FACT. Furthermore, we propose that the conserved acidic
C-terminal domain of the FACT subunit Spt16 actively displaces nucleosomal DNA to
provide access to the histone octamer. Experiments with tri-nucleosome arrays
indicate a possible mode for FACT binding within chromatin. Together, the data
reveal that specific FACT subunits synchronize interactions with various target
sites on individual nucleosomes to generate a high affinity binding event and
promote reorganization.

PMCID: PMC3308894
PMID: 21969370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):589-96. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.013.

HMG domain containing SSRP1 is required for DNA demethylation and genomic
imprinting in Arabidopsis.

Ikeda Y(1), Kinoshita Y, Susaki D, Ikeda Y, Iwano M, Takayama S, Higashiyama T,
Kakutani T, Kinoshita T.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Reproductive Genetics, GCOE Research Group, Graduate School of
Biological Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara
630-0192, Japan.

In Arabidopsis, DEMETER (DME) DNA demethylase contributes to reprogramming of the
epigenetic state of the genome in the central cell. However, other aspects of the
active DNA demethylation processes remain elusive. Here we show that Arabidopsis 
SSRP1, known as an HMG domain-containing component of FACT histone chaperone, is 
required for DNA demethylation and for activation and repression of many
parentally imprinted genes in the central cell. Although loss of DNA methylation 
releases silencing of the imprinted FWA-GFP, double ssrp1-3;met1-3 mutants
surprisingly showed limited activation of maternal FWA-GFP in the central cell,
and only became fully active after several nuclear divisions in the endosperm.
This behavior was in contrast to the dme-1;met1 double mutant in which
hypomethylation of FWA-GFP by met1 suppressed the DNA demethylation defect of
dme-1. We propose that active DNA demethylation by DME requires SSRP1 function
through a distinctly different process from direct DNA methylation control.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21920319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Dec;13(12):1956-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01683.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Experimentally controlled downregulation of the histone chaperone FACT in
Plasmodium berghei reveals that it is critical to male gamete fertility.

Laurentino EC(1), Taylor S, Mair GR, Lasonder E, Bartfai R, Stunnenberg HG,
Kroeze H, Ramesar J, Franke-Fayard B, Khan SM, Janse CJ, Waters AP.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, the Netherlands.

Human FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) consists of the proteins SPT16
and SSRP1 and acts as a histone chaperone in the (dis)assembly of nucleosome (and
thereby chromatin) structure during transcription and DNA replication. We
identified a Plasmodium berghei protein, termed FACT-L, with homology to the
SPT16 subunit of FACT. Epitope tagging of FACT-L showed nuclear localization with
high expression in the nuclei of (activated) male gametocytes. The gene encoding 
FACT-L could not be deleted indicating an essential role during blood-stage
development. Using a 'promoter-swap' approach whereby the fact-l promoter was
replaced by an 'asexual blood stage-specific' promoter that is silent in
gametocytes, transcription of fact-l in promoter-swap mutant gametocytes was
downregulated compared with wild-type gametocytes. These mutant male gametocytes 
showed delayed DNA replication and gamete formation. Male gamete fertility was
strongly reduced while female gamete fertility was unaffected; residual ookinetes
generated oocysts that arrested early in development and failed to enter
sporogony. Therefore FACT is critically involved in the formation of fertile male
gametes and parasite transmission. 'Promoter swapping' is a powerful approach for
the functional analysis of proteins in gametocytes (and beyond) that are
essential during asexual blood-stage development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3429858
PMID: 21899698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 10;3(95):95ra74. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002530.

Curaxins: anticancer compounds that simultaneously suppress NF-<U+03BA>B and activate
p53 by targeting FACT.

Gasparian AV(1), Burkhart CA, Purmal AA, Brodsky L, Pal M, Saranadasa M, Bosykh
DA, Commane M, Guryanova OA, Pal S, Safina A, Sviridov S, Koman IE, Veith J,
Komar AA, Gudkov AV, Gurova KV.

Author information: 
(1)Cleveland BioLabs Inc., Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 10;3(95):95ps34.

Effective eradication of cancer requires treatment directed against multiple
targets. The p53 and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathways are dysregulated in
nearly all tumors, making them attractive targets for therapeutic activation and 
inhibition, respectively. We have isolated and structurally optimized small
molecules, curaxins, that simultaneously activate p53 and inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B without
causing detectable genotoxicity. Curaxins demonstrated anticancer activity
against all tested human tumor xenografts grown in mice. We report here that the 
effects of curaxins on p53 and NF-<U+03BA>B, as well as their toxicity to cancer cells, 
result from "chromatin trapping" of the FACT (facilitates chromatin
transcription) complex. This FACT inaccessibility leads to phosphorylation of the
p53 Ser(392) by casein kinase 2 and inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent transcription, 
which requires FACT activity at the elongation stage. These results identify FACT
as a prospective anticancer target enabling simultaneous modulation of several
pathways frequently dysregulated in cancer without induction of DNA damage.
Curaxins have the potential to be developed into effective and safe anticancer
drugs.

PMID: 21832239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 10;3(95):95ps34. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002822.

Cancer drug discovery faces the FACT.

Draetta GF(1), Depinho RA.

Author information: 
(1)Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment on
    Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 10;3(95):95ra74.

In this issue of Science Translational Medicine, Gasparian et al. use a clever
cell-based screen to identify a family of DNA-binding small
molecules-curaxins-that inhibit tumor cell growth and division. The curaxins'
mechanism of action pinpoints a new chromatin-remodeling factor as a therapeutic 
target for cancer.

PMID: 21832237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 2;286(35):30504-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.264721. Epub 2011
Jul 7.

The histone chaperone facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) protein
maintains normal replication fork rates.

Abe T(1), Sugimura K, Hosono Y, Takami Y, Akita M, Yoshimura A, Tada S, Nakayama 
T, Murofushi H, Okumura K, Takeda S, Horikoshi M, Seki M, Enomoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Laboratory, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Tohoku University, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan.

Ordered nucleosome disassembly and reassembly are required for eukaryotic DNA
replication. The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex, a histone
chaperone comprising Spt16 and SSRP1, is involved in DNA replication as well as
transcription. FACT associates with the MCM helicase, which is involved in DNA
replication initiation and elongation. Although the FACT-MCM complex is reported 
to regulate DNA replication initiation, its functional role in DNA replication
elongation remains elusive. To elucidate the functional role of FACT in
replication fork progression during DNA elongation in the cells, we generated and
analyzed conditional SSRP1 gene knock-out chicken (Gallus gallus) DT40 cells.
SSRP1-depleted cells ceased to grow and exhibited a delay in S-phase cell cycle
progression, although SSRP1 depletion did not affect the level of chromatin-bound
DNA polymerase a or nucleosome reassembly on daughter strands. The tracking
length of newly synthesized DNA, but not origin firing, was reduced in
SSRP1-depleted cells, suggesting that the S-phase cell cycle delay is mainly due 
to the inhibition of replication fork progression rather than to defects in the
initiation of DNA replication in these cells. We discuss the mechanisms of how
FACT promotes replication fork progression in the cells.

PMCID: PMC3162410
PMID: 21757688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cancer. 2011 Jun 16;10:74. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-74.

Concordant and opposite roles of DNA-PK and the "facilitator of chromatin
transcription" (FACT) in DNA repair, apoptosis and necrosis after cisplatin.

Sand-Dejmek J(1), Adelmant G, Sobhian B, Calkins AS, Marto J, Iglehart DJ, Lazaro
JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND: Platinum-containing chemotherapy produces specific DNA damage and is 
used to treat several human solid tumors. Tumors initially sensitive to
platinum-based drugs frequently become resistant. Inhibition of DNA repair is a
potential strategy to enhance cisplatin effectiveness. After cisplatin treatment,
a balance between repair and apoptosis determines whether cancer cells
proliferate or die. DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) binds to DNA double
strand breaks (DSBs) through its Ku subunits and initiates non-homologous end
joining. Inhibition of DNA-PK sensitizes cancer cells to cisplatin killing. The
goal of this study is to elucidate the mechanism underlying the effects of DNA-PK
on cisplatin sensitivity.
RESULTS: Silencing the expression of the catalytic subunit of DNA-PK (DNA-PKcs)
increased sensitivity to cisplatin and decreased the appearance of <U+03B3>H2AX after
cisplatin treatment. We purified DNA-PK by its Ku86 subunit and identified
interactors by tandem mass spectrometry before and after cisplatin treatment. The
structure specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1), Spt16 and <U+03B3>H2AX appeared in the
Ku86 complex 5 hours after cisplatin treatment. SSRP1 and Spt16 form the
facilitator of chromatin transcription (FACT). The cisplatin-induced association 
of FACT with Ku86 and <U+03B3>H2AX was abrogated by DNase treatment. In living cells,
SSRP1 and Ku86 were recruited at sites of DSBs induced by laser beams. Silencing 
SSRP1 expression increased sensitivity to cisplatin and decreased <U+03B3>H2AX
appearance. However, while silencing SSRP1 in cisplatin-treated cells increased
both apoptosis and necrosis, DNA-PKcs silencing, in contrast, favored necrosis
over apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA-PK and FACT both play roles in DNA repair. Therefore both are
putative targets for therapeutic inhibition. Since DNA-PK regulates apoptosis,
silencing DNA-PKcs redirects cells treated with cisplatin toward necrosis.
Silencing FACT however, allows both apoptosis and necrosis. Targeting DNA repair 
in cancer patients may have different therapeutic effects depending upon the
roles played by factors targeted.

PMCID: PMC3135565
PMID: 21679440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Plant Signal Behav. 2011 Jun;6(6):878-80. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Unexpected mobility of plant chromatin-associated HMGB proteins.

Merkle T(1), Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology & Institute for Genome Research and Systems Biology,
Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany. tmerkle@cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de

High mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family containing a highly
conserved HMG box are chromatin-associated proteins that interact with DNA and
nucleosomes and catalyze changes in DNA topology, thereby facilitating important 
DNA-dependent processes. The genome of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes 15 different 
HMG-box proteins that are further subdivided into four groups: HMGB-type
proteins, ARID-HMG proteins, 3xHMG proteins that contain three HMG boxes and the 
structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1). Typically, HMGB proteins are
localized exclusively to the nucleus, like Arabidopsis HMGB1 and B5. However,
these Arabidopsis HMGB proteins showed a very high mobility within the nuclear
compartment. Recent studies revealed that Arabidopsis HMGB2/3 and B4 proteins are
predominantly nuclear but also exist in the cytoplasm, suggesting an as yet
unknown cytoplasmic function of these chromosomal HMG proteins.

PMCID: PMC3218493
PMID: 21543902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):18369-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R110.180778. Epub
2011 Mar 24.

The histone chaperone FACT: structural insights and mechanisms for nucleosome
reorganization.

Winkler DD(1), Luger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1870, USA.

Changes in chromatin architecture induced by epigenetic mechanisms are essential 
for normal cellular processes such as gene expression, DNA repair, and cellular
division. Compact chromatin presents a barrier to these processes and is highly
regulated by epigenetic markers binding to components of the nucleosome. Histone 
modifications directly influence chromatin dynamics and facilitate recruitment of
additional factors such as chromatin remodelers and histone chaperones. One
member of this last class of factors, FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription),
is categorized as a histone chaperone critical for nucleosome reorganization
during replication, transcription, and DNA repair. Significant discoveries
regarding the role of histone chaperones and specifically FACT have come over the
past dozen years from a number of independent laboratories. Here, we review the
structural and biophysical basis for FACT-mediated nucleosome reorganization and 
discuss up-to-date models for FACT function.

PMCID: PMC3099653
PMID: 21454601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jun;1813(6):1129-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.01.002. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

Biphasic chromatin binding of histone chaperone FACT during eukaryotic chromatin 
DNA replication.

Kundu LR(1), Seki M, Watanabe N, Murofushi H, Furukohri A, Waga S, Score AJ, Blow
JJ, Horikoshi M, Enomoto T, Tada S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex affects nuclear DNA
transactions in a chromatin context. Though the involvement of FACT in eukaryotic
DNA replication has been revealed, a clear understanding of its biochemical
behavior during DNA replication still remains elusive. Here, we analyzed the
chromatin-binding dynamics of FACT using Xenopus egg extract cell-free system. We
found that FACT has at least two distinct chromatin-binding phases: (1) a rapid
chromatin-binding phase at the onset of DNA replication that did not involve
origin licensing and (2) a second phase of chromatin binding that initiated after
origin licensing. Intriguingly, early-binding FACT dissociated from chromatin
when DNA replication was blocked by the addition of Cdc6 in the licensed state
before origin firing. Cdc6-induced removal of FACT was blocked by the inhibition 
of origin licensing with geminin, but not by suppressing the activity of DNA
polymerases, CDK, or Cdc7. Furthermore, chromatin transfer experiments revealed
that impairing the later binding of FACT severely compromises DNA replication
activity. Taken together, we propose that even though FACT has rapid
chromatin-binding activity, the binding pattern of FACT on chromatin changes
after origin licensing, which may contribute to the establishment of its
functional link to the DNA replication machinery.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3428913
PMID: 21232560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 21;107(51):22190-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016923108. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Histone3 lysine4 trimethylation regulated by the facilitates chromatin
transcription complex is critical for DNA cleavage in class switch recombination.

Stanlie A(1), Aida M, Muramatsu M, Honjo T, Begum NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Ig class switch recombination (CSR) requires expression of activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AID) and transcription through target switch (S) regions.
Here we show that knockdown of the histone chaperone facilitates chromatin
transcription (FACT) completely inhibited S region cleavage and CSR in
IgA-switch-inducible CH12F3-2A B cells. FACT knockdown did not reduce AID or S
region transcripts but did decrease histone3 lysine4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) at 
both the Sµ and Sa regions. Because knockdown of FACT or H3K4 methyltransferase
cofactors inhibited DNA cleavage in H3K4me3-depleted S regions, H3K4me3 may serve
as a mark for recruiting CSR recombinase. These findings revealed an unexpected
evolutionary conservation between CSR and meiotic recombination.

PMCID: PMC3009800
PMID: 21139053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Dev. 2010 Oct 1;24(19):2133-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.1959110.

Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) connects the FACT histone chaperone complex to
the phosphorylated CTD of RNA polymerase II.

Kwon SH(1), Florens L, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, Abmayr SM, Workman JL.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 1;25(3):287.

Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) is well known as a silencing protein found at
pericentric heterochromatin. Most eukaryotes have at least three isoforms of HP1 
that play differential roles in heterochromatin and euchromatin. In addition to
its role in heterochromatin, HP1 proteins have been shown to function in
transcription elongation. To gain insights into the transcription functions of
HP1, we sought to identify novel HP1-interacting proteins. Biochemical and
proteomic approaches revealed that HP1 interacts with the histone chaperone
complex FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription). HP1c interacts with the SSRP1
(structure-specific recognition protein 1) subunit and the intact FACT complex.
Moreover, HP1c guides the recruitment of FACT to active genes and links FACT to
active forms of RNA polymerase II. The absence of HP1c partially impairs the
recruitment of FACT into heat-shock loci and causes a defect in heat-shock gene
expression. Thus, HP1c functions to recruit the FACT complex to RNA polymerase
II.

PMCID: PMC2947766
PMID: 20889714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Jun;5(6):715-7. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

The role of the transcript elongation factors FACT and HUB1 in leaf growth and
the induction of flowering.

Van Lijsebettens M(1), Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology,
VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

Comment on
    Plant J. 2010 Feb;61(4):686-97.

In the cell nucleus, the packaging of the DNA into chromatin represses
transcription by restricting the access of transcriptional regulators to their
binding sites and inhibiting the progression of RNA polymerases during transcript
elongation. To efficiently transcribe genes in the context of chromatin,
eukaryotes have a variety of transcript elongation factors promoting
transcription in vivo. The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex
consisting of the SSRP1 and SPT16 proteins, is a histone chaperone that assists
transcription by destabilising nucleosomes in the path of RNA polymerases. In a
recent study, we report that Arabidopsis FACT is critically involved in different
aspects of development including leaf growth and the transition to flowering.
Moreover, FACT was found to interact genetically with HUB1 that
mono-ubiquitinates histone H2B. Depending on the underlying process that is
regulated by the two complexes, there appear to be different levels of
interaction.

PMCID: PMC3001568
PMID: 20404555  [PubMed]


48. J Biomed Sci. 2010 Feb 16;17:11. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-11.

Functional cooperation between FACT and MCM is coordinated with cell cycle and
differential complex formation.

Tan BC(1), Liu H, Lin CL, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung Univeristy,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. btan@mail.cgu.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Functional cooperation between FACT and the MCM helicase complex
constitutes an integral step during DNA replication initiation. However, mode of 
regulation that underlies the proper functional interaction of FACT and MCM is
poorly understood.
METHODS & RESULTS: Here we present evidence indicating that such interaction is
coordinated with cell cycle progression and differential complex formation. We
first demonstrate the existence of two distinct FACT-MCM subassemblies,
FACT-MCM2/4/6/7 and FACT-MCM2/3/4/5. Both complexes possess DNA unwinding
activity and are subject to cell cycle-dependent enzymatic regulation.
Interestingly, analysis of functional attributes further suggests that they act
at distinct, and possibly sequential, steps during origin establishment and
replication initiation. Moreover, we show that the phosphorylation profile of the
FACT-associated MCM4 undergoes a cell cycle-dependent change, which is directly
correlated with the catalytic activity of the FACT-MCM helicase complexes.
Finally, at the quaternary structure level, physical interaction between FACT and
MCM complexes is generally dependent on persistent cell cycle and further
stabilized upon S phase entry. Cessation of mitotic cycle destabilizes the
complex formation and likely leads to compromised coordination and activities.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results correlate FACT-MCM functionally and temporally
with S phase and DNA replication. They further demonstrate that enzymatic
activities intrinsically important for DNA replication are tightly controlled at 
various levels, thereby ensuring proper progression of, as well as exit from, the
cell cycle and ultimately euploid gene balance.

PMCID: PMC2848000
PMID: 20156367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;30(4):935-47. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01379-09. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Structure-specific recognition protein 1 facilitates microtubule growth and
bundling required for mitosis.

Zeng SX(1), Li Y, Jin Y, Zhang Q, Keller DM, McQuaw CM, Barklis E, Stone S,
Hoatlin M, Zhao Y, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, MS-0051, 635 Barnhill Drive, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Tight regulation of microtubule (MT) dynamics is essential for proper chromosome 
movement during mitosis. Here we show, using mammalian cells, that
structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) is a novel regulator of MT
dynamics. SSRP1 colocalizes with the spindle and midbody MTs, and associates with
MTs both in vitro and in vivo. Purified SSRP1 facilitates tubulin polymerization 
and MT bundling in vitro. Knockdown of SSRP1 inhibits the growth of MTs and leads
to disorganized spindle structures, reduction of K-fibers and midbody fibers,
disrupted chromosome movement, and attenuated cytokinesis in vivo. These results 
demonstrate that SSRP1 is crucial for MT growth and spindle assembly during
mitosis.

PMCID: PMC2815565
PMID: 19995907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Vet Med Sci. 2009 Nov;71(11):1499-508.

Porcine aortic endothelial cell genes responsive to selected inflammatory
stimulators.

YEOM HJ(1), SHIN KJ, KIM JS, KIM SJ, LEE S, PAUL S, HAN JW, AHN C, SEONG JK,
CHUNG J, HWANG SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hanyang University & GenoCheck Co. Ltd, Ansan,
Gyeonggi, South Korea.

Use of porcine tissues has been suggested as a promising solution for severe
shortage of transplantable human organs. The immediate hurdle for
xenotransplantation is acute immune/inflammatory vascular rejection of the
transplant. Because endothelial cells play a key role in the initiation and the
amplification of inflammation, alteration of gene expression in human endothelial
cells, by various inflammatory stimulators has been studied extensively. However,
transcriptional changes induced by human and other inflammatory stimulators in
porcine endothelial cells have thus far not been studied. In this study, we
treated porcine endothelial cells with human tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha,
porcine interferon (IFN)-gamma, H(2)O(2) and lypopolysaccharide (LPS) and
profiled transcriptional change at 1 hr, 6 hr and 24 hr, using pig
oligonucleotide 13K microarray. We found that mRNA species such as chemokine
(C-X-C motif) ligand 6 (CXCL6) and Cathepsin S were significantly induced in
porcine endothelial cells, as was previously reported with human endothelial
cell. We also found that mRNA species including secreted frizzled-related protein
2 (SFRP2), radical S-adenosyl methionine domain containing 2 (RSAD2), structure
specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) also were highly overexpressed in porcine 
endothelial cells. This result shows clues to understand underlying mechanisms of
xenotransplantation rejection and the highly responsive porcine genes may serve
as novel targets to be regulated for improving the function of grafted porcine
donor organs.

PMID: 19959902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Plant J. 2010 Feb;61(4):686-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04096.x. Epub 2009 
Nov 27.

The transcript elongation factor FACT affects Arabidopsis vegetative and
reproductive development and genetically interacts with HUB1/2.

Lolas IB(1), Himanen K, Grønlund JT, Lynggaard C, Houben A, Melzer M, Van
Lijsebettens M, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49,
DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

Comment in
    Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Jun;5(6):715-7.

The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) complex, consisting of the SSRP1
and SPT16 proteins, is a histone chaperone that assists the progression of
transcribing RNA polymerase on chromatin templates by destabilizing nucleosomes. 
Here, we examined plants that harbour mutations in the genes encoding the
subunits of Arabidopsis FACT. These experiments revealed that (i) SSRP1 is
critical for plant viability, and (ii) plants with reduced amounts of SSRP1 and
SPT16 display various defects in vegetative and reproductive development. Thus,
mutant plants display an increased number of leaves and inflorescences, show
early bolting, have abnormal flower and leaf architecture, and their seed
production is severely affected. The early flowering of the mutant plants is
associated with reduced expression of the floral repressor FLC in ssrp1 and spt16
plants. Compared to control plants, reduced amounts of FACT in mutant plants are 
detected at the FLC locus as well as at the locations of housekeeping genes
(whose expression is not affected in the mutants), suggesting that expression of 
FLC is particularly sensitive to reduced FACT activity. Analysis of double
mutants that are affected in the expression of both FACT subunits and factors
catalysing the mono-ubiquitination of histone H2B (HUB1/2) demonstrates that they
genetically interact to regulate various developmental processes (i.e. branching,
leaf venation pattern, silique development) but independently regulate the growth
of leaves and the induction of flowering.

PMID: 19947984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Curr Biol. 2009 Dec 1;19(22):1918-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.09.041.

UIF, a New mRNA export adaptor that works together with REF/ALY, requires FACT
for recruitment to mRNA.

Hautbergue GM(1), Hung ML, Walsh MJ, Snijders AP, Chang CT, Jones R, Ponting CP, 
Dickman MJ, Wilson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, UK.

Messenger RNA (mRNA) export adaptors play an important role in the transport of
mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. They couple early mRNA processing events 
such as 5' capping and 3' end formation with loading of the TAP/NXF1 export
receptor onto mRNA. The canonical adaptor REF/ALY/Yra1 is recruited to mRNA via
UAP56 and subsequently delivers the mRNA to NXF1 [1]. Knockdown of UAP56 [2, 3]
and NXF1 [4-7] in higher eukaryotes efficiently blocks mRNA export, whereas
knockdown of REF only causes a modest reduction, suggesting the existence of
additional adaptors [8-10]. Here we identify a new UAP56-interacting factor, UIF,
which functions as an export adaptor, binding NXF1 and delivering mRNA to the
nuclear pore. REF and UIF are simultaneously found on the same mRNA molecules,
and both proteins are required for efficient export of mRNA. We show that the
histone chaperone FACT specifically binds UIF, but not REF, via the SSRP1
subunit, and this interaction is required for recruitment of UIF to mRNA.
Together the results indicate that REF and UIF represent key human adaptors for
the export of cellular mRNAs via the UAP56-NXF1 pathway.

PMCID: PMC2828547
PMID: 19836239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(21):11051-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00907-09. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Involvement of SSRP1 in latent replication of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus.

Hu J(1), Liu E, Renne R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and UF Shands Cancer Center,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0232, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (also named human herpesvirus 8) is a
gamma-herpesvirus that undergoes both lytic and latent infection. During latent
infection, two viral elements are required: latency-associated nuclear antigen
(LANA), which functions as an origin binding protein, and the latent origin,
which resides within the terminal repeats (TRs) of the viral genome. Previously, 
we identified two cis-elements within the TRs which are required for latent DNA
replication: two LANA binding sites (LBS1 and LBS2 [LBS1/2]) and a GC-rich
replication element (RE) upstream of LBS1/2. To further characterize the RE, we
constructed a 71-bp minimal replicon (MR) and performed a detailed mutational
analysis. Our data indicate that the first 8 nucleotides within the RE are
critical for replication. Moreover, both the position and the distance between
the RE and LBS1/2 can affect origin replication activity, suggesting that the RE 
may function as a loading pad for cellular proteins involved in replication.
Using biotinylated DNA fragments of wild-type or mutant MRs as probes, we
identified 30 proteins that preferentially bind to the origin. Among these
proteins, structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1), a subunit of the FACT
complex, and telomeric repeat binding factor 2 (TRF2) formed complexes with LANA 
at the MR region. Furthermore, the small interfering RNA-based knockdown of
SSRP1, but not the dominant-negative-based knockdown of TRF2, significantly
decreased the efficiency of LANA-dependent DNA replication. These results
indicate that SSRP1 is a novel cellular protein involved in LANA-dependent DNA
replication.

PMCID: PMC2772803
PMID: 19710137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Oct 1;108(2):508-18. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22280.

A role for SSRP1 in recombination-mediated DNA damage response.

Kumari A(1), Mazina OM, Shinde U, Mazin AV, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon
Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

A possible role for structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) in
replication-associated repair processes has previously been suggested based on
its interaction with several DNA repair factors and the replication defects
observed in SSRP1 mutants. In this study, we investigated the potential role of
SSRP1 in association with DNA repair mediated by homologous recombination (HR),
one of the pathways involved in repairing replication-associated DNA damage, in
mammalian cells. Surprisingly, over-expression of SSRP1 reduced the number of
hprt(+) recombinants generated via HR both spontaneously and upon hydroxyurea
(HU) treatment, whereas knockdown of SSRP1 resulted in an increase of HR events
in response to DNA double-strand break formation. In correlation, we found that
the depletion of SSRP1 in HU-treated human cells elevated the number of Rad51 and
H2AX foci, while over-expression of the wild-type SSRP1 markedly reduced
HU-induced Rad51 foci formation. We also found that SSRP1 physically interacts
with a key HR repair protein, Rad54 both in vitro and in vivo. Further, branch
migration studies demonstrated that SSRP1 inhibits Rad54-promoted branch
migration of Holliday junctions in vitro. Taken together, our data suggest a
functional role for SSRP1 in spontaneous and replication-associated DNA damage
response by suppressing avoidable HR repair events.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19639603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Sep;20(18):3986-95. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-01-0065. Epub 2009
Jul 22.

CENP-H-containing complex facilitates centromere deposition of CENP-A in
cooperation with FACT and CHD1.

Okada M(1), Okawa K, Isobe T, Fukagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)*Center for Priority Areas, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Hachioji, Tokyo
192-0397, Japan; Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Sciences and
Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan;
Innovative Drug Research Laboratories, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Takasaki,
Gumma, 370-1295, Japan.

Centromere identity is thought to be determined by epigenetic mechanisms. The
centromere-specific histone H3 variant CENP-A plays a central role in specifying 
the locus where the centromere is constructed. However, the precise mechanisms
that target CENP-A to centromeric chromatin are poorly understood. Here, we show 
that facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) localizes to centromeres in a
CENP-H-containing complex-dependent manner. In conditional mutant cell lines for 
SSRP1, a subunit of FACT, centromere targeting of newly synthesized CENP-A is
severely inhibited. The chromatin remodeling factor CHD1 binds to SSRP1 both in
vivo and in vitro and associates with centromeres. The centromeric localization
of CHD1 is lost in SSRP1-depleted cells. RNA interference knockdown of CHD1 leads
to a decrease in the amount of centromere localized CENP-A. These findings
indicate that the CENP-H-containing complex facilitates deposition of newly
synthesized CENP-A into centromeric chromatin in cooperation with FACT and CHD1.

PMCID: PMC2743618
PMID: 19625449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 4;284(36):24610-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.001958. Epub 2009
Jul 15.

Phosphorylated intrinsically disordered region of FACT masks its nucleosomal DNA 
binding elements.

Tsunaka Y(1), Toga J, Yamaguchi H, Tate S, Hirose S, Morikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Takara-Bio Endowed Laboratory, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

FACT is a heterodimer of SPT16 and SSRP1, which each contain several conserved
regions in the primary structure. The interaction of FACT with nucleosomes
induces chromatin remodeling through the combinatorial action of its distinct
functional protein regions. However, there is little mechanistic insight into how
these regions cooperatively contribute to FACT functions, particularly regarding 
the recognition of nucleosomal DNA. Here, we report the identification of novel
phosphorylation sites of Drosophila melanogaster FACT (dFACT) expressed in Sf9
cells. These sites are densely concentrated in the acidic intrinsically
disordered (ID) region of the SSRP1 subunit and control nucleosomal DNA binding
by dFACT. This region and the adjacent segment of the HMG domain form weak
electrostatic intramolecular interactions, which is reinforced by the
phosphorylation, thereby blocking DNA binding competitively. Importantly, this
control mechanism appears to support rapid chromatin transactions during early
embryogenesis through the dephosphorylation of some sites in the maternally
transmitted dSSRP1.

PMCID: PMC2782050
PMID: 19605348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell. 2009 May 14;34(4):397-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.004.

Keys to open chromatin for transcription activation: FACT and Asf1.

Krebs A(1), Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Department, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7104, INSERM U 964, Université de Strasbourg,
ILLKIRCH, France.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2009 May 14;34(4):405-15.

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Takahata et al. (2009) dissect the mechanisms
preceding transcription initiation, revealing a wave of nucleosome eviction,
which spreads from distant cis-regulatory elements to promoters and which
requires the activity of histone chaperones, FACT and Asf1.

PMID: 19481517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):4002-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00189-09. Epub 2009 May 
18.

Chromatin structure is implicated in "late" elongation checkpoints on the U2
snRNA and beta-actin genes.

Egloff S(1), Al-Rawaf H, O'Reilly D, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom.

The negative elongation factor NELF is a key component of an early elongation
checkpoint generally located within 100 bp of the transcription start site of
protein-coding genes. Negotiation of this checkpoint and conversion to productive
elongation require phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II (pol II), NELF, and DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) by
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). P-TEFb is dispensable for
transcription of the noncoding U2 snRNA genes, suggesting that a NELF-dependent
checkpoint is absent. However, we find that NELF at the end of the 800-bp U2 gene
transcription unit and RNA interference-mediated knockdown of NELF causes a
termination defect. NELF is also associated 800 bp downstream of the
transcription start site of the beta-actin gene, where a "late" P-TEFb-dependent 
checkpoint occurs. Interestingly, both genes have an extended nucleosome-depleted
region up to the NELF-dependent control point. In both cases, transcription
through this region is P-TEFb independent, implicating chromatin in the formation
of the terminator/checkpoint. Furthermore, CTCF colocalizes with NELF on the U2
and beta-actin genes, raising the possibility that it helps the positioning
and/or function of the NELF-dependent control point on these genes.

PMCID: PMC2704739
PMID: 19451231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Int J Biol Sci. 2009;5(4):331-7. Epub 2009 May 1.

Identification of candidate genes for congenital splay leg in piglets by
alternative analysis of DNA microarray data.

Maak S(1), Boettcher D, Tetens J, Wensch-Dorendorf M, Nürnberg G, Wimmers K,
Swalve HH, Thaller G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for the Biology of Farm Animals (FBN) Dummerstorf, D-18196 
Dummerstorf, Germany. maak@fbn-dummerstorf

The congenital splay leg syndrome in piglets is characterized by a temporarily
impaired functionality of the hind leg muscles immediately after birth. Etiology 
and pathogenetic mechanisms for the disease are still not well understood. We
compared genome wide gene expression of three hind leg muscles (M. adductores, M.
gracilis and M. sartorius) between affected piglets and their healthy littermates
with the GeneChip Porcine Genome Array (Affymetrix) in order to identify
candidate genes for the disease. Data analysis with standard algorithms revealed 
no significant differences between both groups. By application of an alternative 
approach, we identified 63 transcripts with differences in two muscles and 5
genes differing between the groups in three muscles. The expression of six
selected genes (SQSTM1, SSRP1, DDIT4, ENAH, MAF, and PDK4) was investigated with 
SYBRGreen RT-Real time PCR. The differences obtained with the microarray analysis
could be confirmed and demonstrate the validity of the alternative approach to
microarray data analysis. Four genes with different expression levels in at least
two muscles (SQSTM1, SSRP1, DDIT4, and MAF) are assigned to transcriptional
cascades related to cell death and may thus indicate pathways for further
investigations on congenital splay leg in piglets.

PMCID: PMC2677734
PMID: 19421343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Apr;7(4):581-91. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0049.

DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK)-dependent cisplatin-induced loss of
nucleolar facilitator of chromatin transcription (FACT) and regulation of
cisplatin sensitivity by DNA-PK and FACT.

Dejmek J(1), Iglehart JD, Lazaro JB.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Both the Ku subunit of the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) and the
facilitator of chromatin transcription (FACT) complex reportedly bind
cisplatin-DNA adducts. For this study, we developed an immunocytochemical assay
based on detergent extraction allowing unveiling nucleolar subpopulations of
proteins present in both the nucleoplasm and the nucleolus. Immunofluorescence
analysis in various human cancer cell lines and immunoblotting of isolated
nucleoli show that DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), Ku86, the Werner syndrome
protein (WRN), and the structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) subunit
of FACT colocalize in the nucleolus and exit the nucleolus after cisplatin
treatment. Nucleolar localization of Ku is also lost after gamma or UV
irradiation and exposure to DNA-damaging drugs, such as actinomycin D, mitomycin 
C, hydroxyurea, and doxorubicin. Ku86 and WRN leave the nucleolus after exposure 
to low (>1 microg/mL) doses of cisplatin. In contrast, the SSRP1 association with
the nucleolus was disrupted only by high (50-100 microg/mL) doses of cisplatin.
Both cisplatin-induced loss of nucleolar SSRP1 and DNA-PK activation are
suppressed by pretreatment of the cells with wortmannin or the DNA-PK inhibitor
NU7026 but not by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002. In the
same conditions, kinase inhibitors did not alter the exit of DNA-PKcs and WRN,
suggesting that different mechanisms regulate the exit of DNA-PK/WRN and FACT
from the nucleolus. Furthermore, RNA silencing of DNA-PKcs blocked the
cisplatin-induced exit of nucleolar SSRP1. Finally, silencing of DNA-PKcs or
SSRP1 by short hairpin RNA significantly increased the sensitivity of cancer
cells to cisplatin.

PMID: 19372586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. EMBO J. 2009 Apr 8;28(7):854-65. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.33. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

FACT facilitates chromatin transcription by RNA polymerases I and III.

Birch JL(1), Tan BC, Panov KI, Panova TB, Andersen JS, Owen-Hughes TA, Russell J,
Lee SC, Zomerdijk JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.

Efficient transcription elongation from a chromatin template requires RNA
polymerases (Pols) to negotiate nucleosomes. Our biochemical analyses demonstrate
that RNA Pol I can transcribe through nucleosome templates and that this requires
structural rearrangement of the nucleosomal core particle. The subunits of the
histone chaperone FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription), SSRP1 and Spt16,
co-purify and co-immunoprecipitate with mammalian Pol I complexes. In cells,
SSRP1 is detectable at the rRNA gene repeats. Crucially, siRNA-mediated
repression of FACT subunit expression in cells results in a significant reduction
in 47S pre-rRNA levels, whereas synthesis of the first 40 nt of the rRNA is not
affected, implying that FACT is important for Pol I transcription elongation
through chromatin. FACT also associates with RNA Pol III complexes, is present at
the chromatin of genes transcribed by Pol III and facilitates their transcription
in cells. Our findings indicate that, beyond the established role in Pol II
transcription, FACT has physiological functions in chromatin transcription by all
three nuclear RNA Pols. Our data also imply that local chromatin dynamics
influence transcription of the active rRNA genes by Pol I and of Pol
III-transcribed genes.

PMCID: PMC2647773
PMID: 19214185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell. 2008 Apr 11;30(1):86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.02.029.

FACT-mediated exchange of histone variant H2AX regulated by phosphorylation of
H2AX and ADP-ribosylation of Spt16.

Heo K(1), Kim H, Choi SH, Choi J, Kim K, Gu J, Lieber MR, Yang AS, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

The phosphorylation of histone variant H2AX at DNA double-strand breaks is
believed to be critical for recognition and repair of DNA damage. However, little
is known about the molecular mechanism regulating the exchange of variant H2AX
with conventional H2A in the context of the nucleosome. Here, we isolate the
H2AX-associated factors, which include FACT (Spt16/SSRP1), DNA-PK, and PARP1 from
a human cell line. Our analyses demonstrate that the H2AX-associated factors
efficiently promote both integration and dissociation of H2AX and this exchange
reaction is mainly catalyzed by FACT among the purified factors. The
phosphorylation of H2AX by DNA-PK facilitates the exchange of nucleosomal H2AX by
inducing conformational changes of the nucleosome. In contrast,
poly-ADP-ribosylation of Spt16 by PARP1 significantly inhibits FACT activities
for H2AX exchange. Thus, these data establish FACT as the major regulator
involved in H2AX exchange process that is modulated by H2AX phosphorylation and
Spt16 ADP-ribosylation.

PMID: 18406329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell. 2008 Jan 18;29(1):69-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.11.002.

Histone H2A monoubiquitination represses transcription by inhibiting RNA
polymerase II transcriptional elongation.

Zhou W(1), Zhu P, Wang J, Pascual G, Ohgi KA, Lozach J, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Solving the biological roles of covalent histone modifications, including
monoubiquitination of histone H2A, and the molecular mechanisms by which these
modifications regulate specific transcriptional programs remains a central
question for all eukaryotes. Here we report that the N-CoR/HDAC1/3 complex
specifically recruits a specific histone H2A ubiquitin ligase, 2A-HUB/hRUL138, to
a subset of regulated gene promoters. 2A-HUB catalyzes monoubiquitination of H2A 
at lysine 119, functioning as a combinatoric component of the repression
machinery required for specific gene regulation programs. Thus, 2A-HUB mediates a
selective repression of a specific set of chemokine genes in macrophages,
critically modulating migratory responses to TLR activation. H2A
monoubiquitination acts to prevent FACT recruitment at the transcriptional
promoter region, blocking RNA polymerase II release at the early stage of
elongation. We suggest that distinct H2A ubiquitinases, each recruited based on
interactions with different corepressor complexes, contribute to distinct
transcriptional repression programs.

PMCID: PMC2327256
PMID: 18206970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Feb 1;314(3):629-37. Epub 2007 Oct 13.

Modulation of SRF-dependent gene expression by association of SPT16 with MKL1.

Kihara T(1), Kano F, Murata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.
tkihara@will.dpc.u-tokyo.ac.jp <tkihara@will.dpc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>

MKL1 (MRTF-A/MAL) is a member of the myocardin-related transcription factor
family that plays a key role in the development and differentiation of smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) via activation of serum response factor (SRF)-dependent SMC
gene expression. MKL1 associates with SRF and stimulates its transcriptional
activity. Here, by performing matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of
flight mass spectrometric analysis combined with in vitro glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assay, we identified 4 candidate proteins that associate 
with MKL1 through the N-terminus region of MKL1. SPT16, ATP citrate lyase,
nucleolin and radixin were identified, and the physical and functional
interactions between MKL1 and SPT16 were examined. SPT16 is a component of the
FACT (facilitating chromatin transcription) complex that allows RNA polymerase II
to traverse the nucleosomes. SPT16 associates with MKL1 in vitro and in vivo;
moreover, SSRP1, another component of the FACT complex, associates with the
N-terminus region of MKL1 in vitro. SPT16 synergistically activates the
transcriptional activity of MKL1. These results show that the expression of
nucleosomal SRF-dependent genes, including the SMC gene, is activated by MKL1 via
activation of SRF and recruitment of the FACT complex.

PMID: 18036521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 30;104(44):17494-9. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Identification of differentially expressed proteins in ovarian cancer using
high-density protein microarrays.

Hudson ME(1), Pozdnyakova I, Haines K, Mor G, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
210 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8103, USA.

Ovarian cancer is a leading cause of deaths, yet many aspects of the biology of
the disease and a routine means of its detection are lacking. We have used
protein microarrays and autoantibodies from cancer patients to identify proteins 
that are aberrantly expressed in ovarian tissue. Sera from 30 cancer patients and
30 healthy individuals were used to probe microarrays containing 5,005 human
proteins. Ninety-four antigens were identified that exhibited enhanced reactivity
from sera in cancer patients relative to control sera. The differential
reactivity of four antigens was tested by using immunoblot analysis and tissue
microarrays. Lamin A/C, SSRP1, and RALBP1 were found to exhibit increased
expression in the cancer tissue relative to controls. The combined signals from
multiple antigens proved to be a robust test to identify cancerous ovarian
tissue. These antigens were also reactive with tissue from other types of cancer 
and thus are not specific to ovarian cancer. Overall our studies identified
candidate tissue marker proteins for ovarian cancer and demonstrate that protein 
microarrays provide a powerful approach to identify proteins aberrantly expressed
in disease states.

PMCID: PMC2077284
PMID: 17954908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):6936-45. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

Human SSRP1 has Spt16-dependent and -independent roles in gene transcription.

Li Y(1), Zeng SX, Landais I, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

The facilitating chromatin transcription (FACT) complex, a heterodimer of SSRP1
and Spt16, has been shown to regulate transcription elongation through a
chromatin template in vitro and on specific genes in cells. However, its global
role in transcription regulation in human cells remains largely elusive. We
conducted spotted microarray analyses using arrays harboring 8308 human genes to 
assess the gene expression profile after knocking down SSRP1 or Spt16 levels in
human non-small cell lung carcinoma (H1299) cells. Although the changes of these 
transcripts were surprisingly subtle, there were approximately 170 genes whose
transcript levels were either reduced or induced >1.5-fold. Approximately 106
genes with >1.2-fold change at the level of transcripts were the common targets
of both SSRP1 and Spt16 ( approximately 1.3%). A subset of genes was regulated by
SSRP1 independent of Spt16. Further analyses of some of these genes not only
verified this observation but also identified the serum-responsive gene, egr1, as
a novel target for both SSRP1 and Spt16. We further showed that SSRP1 and Spt16
are important for the progression of elongation RNA pol II on the egr1 gene.
These results suggest that SSRP1 has Spt16-dependent and -independent roles in
regulating gene transcription in human cells.

PMID: 17209051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Trends Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;17(2):80-6. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Nucleolin: a multiFACeTed protein.

Mongelard F(1), Bouvet P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Joliot-Curie, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 Allée d'Italie,
69007 Lyon, France.

Nucleolin is an abundant, ubiquitously expressed protein that is found in various
cell compartments, especially in the nucleolus, of which it is a major component.
This multifunctional protein has been described as being a part of many pathways,
from interactions with viruses at the cellular membrane to essential processing
of the ribosomal RNA in the nucleolus. However, most of the molecular details of 
these different functions are not understood. Here, we focus on the role of
nucleolin in transcription, especially some recent findings describing the
protein as a histone chaperone [with functional similarity to the facilitates
chromatin transcription (FACT) complex] and a chromatin co-remodeler. These new
properties could help reconcile discrepancies in the literature regarding the
role of nucleolin in transcription.

PMID: 17157503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(3):937-48. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Nucleolin is required for RNA polymerase I transcription in vivo.

Rickards B(1), Flint SJ, Cole MD, LeRoy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Eukaryotic genomes are packaged with histones and accessory proteins in the form 
of chromatin. RNA polymerases and their accessory proteins are sufficient for
transcription of naked DNA, but not of chromatin, templates in vitro. In this
study, we purified and identified nucleolin as a protein that allows RNA
polymerase II to transcribe nucleosomal templates in vitro. As immunofluorescence
confirmed that nucleolin localizes primarily to nucleoli with RNA polymerase I,
we demonstrated that nucleolin allows RNA polymerase I transcription of chromatin
templates in vitro. The results of chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
established that nucleolin is associated with chromatin containing rRNA genes
transcribed by RNA polymerase I but not with genes transcribed by RNA polymerase 
II or III. Knockdown of nucleolin by RNA interference resulted in specific
inhibition of RNA polymerase I transcription. We therefore propose that an
important function of nucleolin is to permit RNA polymerase I to transcribe
nucleolar chromatin.

PMCID: PMC1800701
PMID: 17130237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):8710-21. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

A gene-specific requirement for FACT during transcription is related to the
chromatin organization of the transcribed region.

Jimeno-González S(1), Gómez-Herreros F, Alepuz PM, Chávez S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Avda. Reina Mercedes 6,
41012-Seville, Spain.

The FACT complex stimulates transcription elongation on nucleosomal templates. In
vivo experiments also involve FACT in the reassembly of nucleosomes traversed by 
RNA polymerase II. Since several features of chromatin organization vary
throughout the genome, we wondered whether FACT is equally required for all
genes. We show in this study that the in vivo depletion of Spt16, one of the
subunits of Saccharomyces cerevisiae FACT, strongly affects transcription of
three genes, GAL1, PHO5, and Kluyveromyces lactis LAC4, which exhibit positioned 
nucleosomes at their transcribed regions. In contrast, showing a random
nucleosome structure, YAT1 and Escherichia coli lacZ are only mildly influenced
by Spt16 depletion. We also show that the effect of Spt16 depletion on GAL1
expression is suppressed by a histone mutation and that the insertion of a GAL1
fragment, which allows the positioning of two nucleosomes, at the 5' end of YAT1 
makes the resulting transcription unit sensitive to Spt16 depletion. These
results indicate that FACT requirement for transcription depends on the chromatin
organization of the 5' end of the transcribed region.

PMCID: PMC1636840
PMID: 17000768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. EMBO J. 2006 Sep 6;25(17):3975-85. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Functional cooperation between FACT and MCM helicase facilitates initiation of
chromatin DNA replication.

Tan BC(1), Chien CT, Hirose S, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Chromatin is suppressive in nature to cellular enzymes that metabolize DNA,
mainly due to the inherent inaccessibility of the DNA template. Despite extensive
understanding of the involvement of chromatin-modifying factors in transcription,
roles of related activities in DNA replication remain largely elusive. Here, we
show that the heterodimeric transcriptional elongation factor FACT (facilitates
chromatin transcription) is functionally linked to DNA synthesis. Its involvement
in DNA replication is partly mediated by the stable association with the
replicative helicase complex, MCM, and further by the coexistence with MCM on
replication origin. Furthermore, relying on its nucleosome-reorganizing activity,
FACT can facilitate chromatin unwinding by the MCM complex, which is otherwise
inert on the nucleosomal template. As a consequence, the physical and functional 
interaction between FACT and MCM is an important determinant in the proper
initiation of DNA replication and S phase in vivo. Together, our findings
identify FACT as an integral and conserved component of the endogenous
replication machinery, and support a model in which the concerted action of
helicase and chromatin-modifying activities promotes chromosome replication.

PMCID: PMC1560368
PMID: 16902406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 18;281(33):23297-301. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

de FACTo nucleosome dynamics.

Reinberg D(1), Sims RJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA. reinbedf@umdnj.edu

The factors required for the delivery of RNA polymerase II to class II promoters 
using naked DNA were all identified by 1998, yet their exact mechanisms of action
were not fully understood in all cases, and in some instances, their precise
function still remains unknown. Nonetheless, a complete understanding of the
complexity of the RNA polymerase II transcription cycle necessitated the
development of assays that include chromatinized DNA templates. At this time, the
field was actively searching for factors that allow transcription initiation on
chromatinized templates. We began studies using chromatin templates in an attempt
to identify factor(s) that permit RNA polymerase II to traverse nucleosomes, i.e.
that allow elongation on chromatinized DNA templates. The challenge herein was to
develop an assay that directly measured the ability of transcriptionally engaged 
RNA polymerase II to traverse nucleosomes. This approach resulted in the
isolation of FACT, a heterodimer in humans comprised of Spt16 and SSRP1. Defined 
functional biochemical assays corroborated genetic studies in yeast that allowed 
the elucidation of FACT function in vivo. Collectively, these approaches
demonstrate that FACT is a factor that allows RNA polymerase II to traverse
nucleosomes in vitro and in vivo by removing one H2A/H2B dimer. More recent
studies using a fully defined chromatin reconstitution/transcription assay
revealed that FACT activity is greatly stimulated by post-translational
modification of the histone polypeptides, specifically by monoubiquitination of
lysine 120 of human histone H2B.

PMID: 16766522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell. 2006 May 19;125(4):703-17.

Histone H2B monoubiquitination functions cooperatively with FACT to regulate
elongation by RNA polymerase II.

Pavri R(1), Zhu B, Li G, Trojer P, Mandal S, Shilatifard A, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Division of
Nucleic Acids Enzymology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 683 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Over the past years, a large number of histone posttranslational modifications
have been described, some of which function to attain a repressed chromatin
structure, while others facilitate activation by allowing access of regulators to
DNA. Histone H2B monoubiquitination is a mark associated with transcriptional
activity. Using a highly reconstituted chromatin-transcription system
incorporating the inducible RARbeta2 promoter, we find that the establishment of 
H2B monoubiquitination by RNF20/40 and UbcH6 is dependent on the transcription
elongation regulator complex PAF, the histone chaperone FACT, and transcription. 
H2B monoubiquitination facilitates FACT function, thereby stimulating transcript 
elongation and the generation of longer transcripts. These in vitro analyses and 
corroborating in vivo experiments demonstrate that elongation by RNA polymerase
II through the nucleosomal barrier is minimally dependent upon (1) FACT and (2)
the recruitment of PAF and the H2B monoubiquitination machinery.

PMID: 16713563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 May 8;34(8):2398-407. Print 2006.

Modulation of nucleosome-binding activity of FACT by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.

Huang JY(1), Chen WH, Chang YL, Wang HT, Chuang WT, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Chromatin-modifying factors play key roles in transcription, DNA replication and 
DNA repair. Post-translational modification of these proteins is largely
responsible for regulating their activity. The FACT (facilitates chromatin
transcription) complex, a heterodimer of hSpt16 and SSRP1, is a chromatin
structure modulator whose involvement in transcription and DNA replication has
been reported. Here we show that nucleosome binding activity of FACT complex is
regulated by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. hSpt16, the large subunit of FACT, is
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) resulting from
physical interaction between these two proteins. The level of hSpt16
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is elevated after genotoxic treatment and coincides with
the activation of PARP-1. The enhanced hSpt16 poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation level
correlates with the dissociation of FACT from chromatin in response to DNA
damage. Our findings suggest that poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of hSpt16 by PARP-1 play
regulatory roles for FACT-mediated chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC1458519
PMID: 16682447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. EMBO J. 2006 Apr 19;25(8):1669-79. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Nucleolin is a histone chaperone with FACT-like activity and assists remodeling
of nucleosomes.

Angelov D(1), Bondarenko VA, Almagro S, Menoni H, Mongélard F, Hans F, Mietton F,
Studitsky VM, Hamiche A, Dimitrov S, Bouvet P.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, CNRS-UMR 5161/INRA 1237/IFR128 Biosciences, 
Lyon-Gerland, France.

Remodeling machines play an essential role in the control of gene expression, but
how their activity is regulated is not known. Here we report that the nuclear
protein nucleolin possesses a histone chaperone activity and that this factor
greatly enhances the activity of the chromatin remodeling machineries SWI/SNF and
ACF. Interestingly, nucleolin is able to induce the remodeling by SWI/SNF of
macroH2A, but not of H2ABbd nucleosomes, which are otherwise resistant to
remodeling. This new histone chaperone promotes the destabilization of the
histone octamer, helping the dissociation of a H2A-H2B dimer, and stimulates the 
SWI/SNF-mediated transfer of H2A-H2B dimers. Furthermore, nucleolin facilitates
transcription through the nucleosome, which is reminiscent of the activity of the
FACT complex. This work defines new functions for histone chaperones in chromatin
remodeling and regulation of transcription and explains how nucleolin could act
on transcription.

PMCID: PMC1440837
PMID: 16601700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 1;20(5):601-12.

Gene-specific requirement for P-TEFb activity and RNA polymerase II
phosphorylation within the p53 transcriptional program.

Gomes NP(1), Bjerke G, Llorente B, Szostek SA, Emerson BM, Espinosa JM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 15;20(6):643-7.

Activation of the p53 pathway mediates cellular responses to diverse forms of
stress. Here we report that the p53 target gene p21(CIP1) is regulated by stress 
at post-initiation steps through conversion of paused RNA polymerase II (RNAP II)
into an elongating form. High-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
(ChIP) demonstrate that p53-dependent activation of p21(CIP1) transcription after
DNA damage occurs concomitantly with changes in RNAP II phosphorylation status
and recruitment of the elongation factors DSIF (DRB Sensitivity-Inducing Factor),
P-TEFb (Positive Transcription Elongation Factor b), TFIIH, TFIIF, and FACT
(Facilitates Chromatin Transcription) to distinct regions of the p21(CIP1) locus.
Paradoxically, pharmacological inhibition of P-TEFb leads to global inhibition of
mRNA synthesis but activation of the p53 pathway through p53 accumulation,
expression of specific p53 target genes, and p53-dependent apoptosis. ChIP
analyses of p21(CIP1) activation in the absence of functional P-TEFb reveals the 
existence of two distinct kinases that phosphorylate Ser5 of the RNAP II
C-terminal domain (CTD). Importantly, CTD phosphorylation at Ser2 is not required
for p21(CIP1) transcription, mRNA cleavage, or polyadenylation. Furthermore,
recruitment of FACT requires CTD kinases, yet FACT is dispensable for p21(CIP1)
expression. Thus, select genes within the p53 pathway bypass the requirement for 
P-TEFb and RNAP II phosphorylation to trigger a cellular response to inhibition
of global mRNA synthesis.

PMCID: PMC1410802
PMID: 16510875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Nov;13(11):1866-78. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Coupling caspase cleavage and ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent degradation of SSRP1
during apoptosis.

Landais I(1), Lee H, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Structure-specific recognition protein (SSRP1) is an 87 kDa protein that
heterodimerizes with Spt16 to form FACT, a complex initially shown to facilitate 
chromatin transcription. Despite its crucial roles in transcription and
replication, little is known about the dynamics of FACT turnover in vivo. Here,
we show that SSRP1 is cleaved during apoptosis by caspase 3 and/or 7 at the
DQHD(450) site. Analysis of the resulting fragments suggests that cleavage of
SSRP1 generates a truncated, chromatin-associated form of FACT. Furthermore, the 
N-terminal product is stabilized by proteasome inhibitors and ubiquitylated in
cells, suggesting degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. These
results demonstrate that SSRP1 degradation during apoptosis is a two-step process
coupling caspase cleavage and ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis.

PMID: 16498457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biomol NMR. 2005 May;32(1):83-8.

Solution structure of the HMG-box domain in the SSRP1 subunit of FACT.

Kasai N(1), Tsunaka Y, Ohki I, Hirose S, Morikawa K, Tate S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Biomolecular Engineering Research Institute,
6-2-3 Furuedai, 565-0874 Suita, Osaka, Japan.

PMID: 16041486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11869-75. Epub 2005 Jan 18.

CK2 phosphorylates SSRP1 and inhibits its DNA-binding activity.

Li Y(1), Keller DM, Scott JD, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

We have previously shown that CK2 associates with the human high-mobility group
protein SSRP1 and that this association increases in response to UV irradiation. 
CK2 also phosphorylates SSRP1 in vitro. Here we extend this work by investigating
CK2 regulation of SSRP1 function through phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of
SSRP1 by CK2 inhibited the nonspecific DNA-binding activity of SSRP1 and FACT
(facilitating chromatin-mediated transcription) complex in vitro. Using a
serine/threonine-scanning Auto-spot peptide array coupled with a filter-based
kinase assay with synthetic peptides as substrates, we identified serines 510,
657, and 688 as phosphorylation targets of CK2 in vitro. Mutagenesis of the three
serines revealed that serine 510 was more important for the regulation of SSRP1
DNA-binding activity. Furthermore, we found that SSRP1 was phosphorylated in
cells in response to UV (but not gamma) irradiation. These results suggest that
CK2 regulates the DNA-binding ability of SSRP1 and that this regulation may be
responsive to specific cell stresses.

PMCID: PMC3923407
PMID: 15659405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Plant J. 2004 Dec;40(5):660-71.

The chromatin remodelling complex FACT associates with actively transcribed
regions of the Arabidopsis genome.

Duroux M(1), Houben A, Ruzicka K, Friml J, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49,
DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

The packaging of the genomic DNA into chromatin in the cell nucleus requires
machineries that facilitate DNA-dependent processes such as transcription in the 
presence of repressive chromatin structures. Using co-immunoprecipitation we have
identified in Arabidopsis thaliana cells the FAcilitates Chromatin Transcription 
(FACT) complex, consisting of the 120-kDa Spt16 and the 71-kDa SSRP1 proteins.
Indirect immunofluorescence analyses revealed that both FACT subunits co-localize
to nuclei of the majority of cell types in embryos, shoots and roots, whereas
FACT is not present in terminally differentiated cells such as mature
trichoblasts or cells of the root cap. In the nucleus, Spt16 and SSRP1 are found 
in the cytologically defined euchromatin of interphase cells independent of the
status of DNA replication, but the proteins are not associated with
heterochromatic chromocentres and condensed mitotic chromosomes. FACT can be
detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation over the entire transcribed region
(5'-UTR, coding sequence, 3'-UTR) of actively transcribed genes, whereas it does 
not occur at transcriptionally inactive heterochromatic regions and intergenic
regions. FACT localizes to inducible genes only after induction of transcription,
and the association of the complex with the genes correlates with the level of
transcription. Collectively, these results indicate that FACT assists
transcription elongation through plant chromatin.

PMID: 15546350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Nov 1;32(19):5894-906. Print 2004.

Domain organization of the yeast histone chaperone FACT: the conserved N-terminal
domain of FACT subunit Spt16 mediates recovery from replication stress.

O'Donnell AF(1), Brewster NK, Kurniawan J, Minard LV, Johnston GC, Singer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 1X5.

The abundant nuclear complex termed FACT affects several DNA transactions in a
chromatin context, including transcription, replication, and repair. Earlier
studies of yeast FACT, which indicated the apparent dispensability of conserved
sequences at the N terminus of the FACT subunit Cdc68/Spt16, prompted genetic and
biochemical studies reported here that suggest the domain organization for Spt16 
and the other FACT subunit Pob3, the yeast homolog of the metazoan SSRP1 protein.
Our findings suggest that each FACT subunit is a multidomain protein, and that
FACT integrity depends on Pob3 interactions with the Spt16 Mid domain. The
conserved Spt16 N-terminal domain (NTD) is shown to be without essential function
during normal growth, but becomes important under conditions of replication
stress. Genetic interactions suggest that some functions carried out by the Spt16
NTD may be partially redundant within FACT.

PMCID: PMC528806
PMID: 15520471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Lupus. 2004;13(6):463-8.

Prevalence of autoantibodies against structure specific recognition protein 1 in 
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Fineschi S(1), Borghi MO, Riboldi P, Gariglio M, Buzio C, Landolfo S, Cebecauer
L, Tuchynova A, Rovensky J, Meroni PL.

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.

Antibodies (Abs) against the structure specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1)
were reported in a small systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) series but not in
other systemic autoimmune diseases. The aim of the study was to confirm the
selective presence of anti-SSRP1 Abs in a larger SLE series and to evaluate their
relationship with disease activity and other immune markers. Anti-SSRP1 Abs were 
investigated by a 'home made' ELISA in: 120 SLE, 65 rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 51
systemic sclerosis (SSc), 23 Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) and 40 idiopathic
autoimmune urticaria (IAU) patients and 190 healthy controls. Sera from MRL
lpr/lpr and Balb-c mice were also tested. Anti-SSRP1 Abs were detected in 43 SLE 
(35.8%), nine SSc (17.6%), eight RA (12.3%), six IAU (15%), three CSS (13%)
patients and five healthy controls (2.6%). Antibody prevalence and titers were
significantly higher in SLE patients than in sera from both normal and disease
controls. Anti-SSRP1 Ab activity was also detected in sera from MRL lpr/lpr but
not Balb-c mice. The antibodies did not correlate with the disease activity
evaluated as the ECLAM index score and were more prevalent in patients without
renal involvement. No correlation was found with other serum autoantibodies. Our 
results confirm that anti-SSRP1 Abs are associated with but not specific for the 
lupus disease.

PMID: 15303574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;82(4):419-27.

The FACT chromatin modulator: genetic and structure/function relationships.

Singer RA(1), Johnston GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada. richard.singer@dal.ca

The chromatin configuration of DNA inhibits access by enzymes such as RNA
polymerase II. This inhibition is alleviated by FACT, a conserved transcription
elongation factor that has been found to reconfigure nucleosomes to allow transit
along the DNA by RNA polymerase II, thus facilitating transcription. FACT also
reorganizes nucleosomes after the passage of RNA polymerase II, as indicated by
the effects of certain FACT mutations. The larger of the two subunits of FACT is 
Spt16/Cdc68, while the smaller is termed SSRP1 (vertebrates) or Pob3 (budding
yeast). The HMG-box domain at the C terminus of SSRP1 is absent from Pob3; the
function of this domain for yeast FACT is supplied by the small HMG-box protein
Nhp6. In yeast, this "detachable" HMG domain is a general chromatin component,
unlike FACT, which is found only in transcribed regions and associated with RNA
polymerase II. The several domains of the larger FACT subunit are also likely to 
have different functions. Genetic studies suggest that FACT mediates nucleosome
reorganization along several pathways, and reinforce the notion that protein
unfolding and (or) refolding is involved in FACT activity for transcription.

PMID: 15284894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Cell Sci. 2004 Aug 1;117(Pt 17):3807-20. Epub 2004 Jul 13.

Heterochromatin and ND10 are cell-cycle regulated and phosphorylation-dependent
alternate nuclear sites of the transcription repressor Daxx and SWI/SNF protein
ATRX.

Ishov AM(1), Vladimirova OV, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Placing regulatory proteins into different multiprotein complexes should modify
key cellular processes. Here, we show that the transcription repressor Daxx and
the SWI/SNF protein ATRX are both associated with two intranuclear domains:
ND10/PML bodies and heterochromatin. The accumulation of ATRX at nuclear domain
10 (ND10) was mediated by its interaction with the N-terminus of Daxx. Binding of
this complex to ND10 was facilitated by the interaction of the Daxx C-terminus
with SUMOylated promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML). Although ATRX was present
at heterochromatin during the entire cell cycle, Daxx was actively recruited to
this domain at the end of S-phase. The FACT-complex member structure-specific
recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) accumulated at heterochromatin simultaneously with 
Daxx and accumulation of both proteins depended on ATRX phosphorylation. Both
Daxx and SSRP1 were released from heterochromatin early in G(2) phase and Daxx
was recruited back to ND10, indicating that both proteins localize to
heterochromatin during a very short temporal window of the cell cycle. ATRX seems
to assemble a repression multiprotein complex including Daxx and SSRP1 at
heterochromatin during a specific stage of the cell cycle, whereas Daxx functions
as an adapter for ATRX accumulation at ND10. A potential functional consequence
of Daxx accumulation at heterochromatin was found in the S- to G(2)-phase
transition. In Daxx(-/-) cells, S-phase was accelerated and the propensity to
form double nuclei was increased, functional changes that could be rescued by
Daxx reconstitution and that might be the basis for the developmental problems
observed in Daxx knockout animals.

PMID: 15252119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2004 Apr;14(2):139-46.

Facts about FACT and transcript elongation through chromatin.

Belotserkovskaya R(1), Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

The regulation of transcription elongation within the context of chromatin is a
topic of great interest. Even though chromatin presents a barrier to
transcription by the PolII machinery in vitro, this process is rather efficient
in vivo. Importantly, the chromatin structure of the actively transcribed genes
is altered as part of this process. A large number of factors implicated in the
control of transcript elongation have been identified through genetics,
biochemistry and targeted proteomics approaches. However the precise roles and
mechanisms of action of these factors remain obscure. A significant advance came 
about this past year with the elucidation of the roles of FACT and Spt6 in
transcription elongation. These factors facilitate PolII passage through
chromatin by destabilizing the nucleosome structure as well as reassemble
nucleosomes traversed by PolII.

PMID: 15196460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(9):3907-17.

Structural features of nucleosomes reorganized by yeast FACT and its HMG box
component, Nhp6.

Rhoades AR(1), Ruone S, Formosa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84132, USA.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spt16/Cdc68, Pob3, and Nhp6 proteins (SPN or yFACT) 
bind to and alter nucleosomes in vitro, providing a potential explanation for
their importance in both transcription and replication in vivo. We show that
nucleosomes bound by either Nhp6 alone or the yFACT complex remain largely intact
and immobile but are significantly reorganized, as indicated by changes in the
pattern of sensitivity to DNase I and enhanced digestion by some restriction
endonucleases. In contrast, yFACT enhanced access to exonuclease III only at very
high levels of enzyme, suggesting that the DNA near the entry and exit sites of
nucleosomes is largely unperturbed and that the position of the histone octamers 
relative to the DNA is not altered during reorganization. DNase I sensitivity was
enhanced at sites clustered near the center of the nucleosomal DNA, away from the
entry and exit points, and the pattern of nuclease sensitivity was only mildly
affected by the configuration of linker extensions, further indicating that
linkers play only a minor role in the reorganization of nucleosomes by yFACT. The
DNA in contact with H2A-H2B dimers is therefore the region whose nuclease
sensitivity was the least affected by yFACT reorganization. The most dramatic
changes in nucleosome structure occurred when Spt16-Pob3 and the HMG box protein 
Nhp6 were both present, but Nhp6 alone altered DNase I sensitivity at some
specific sites, supporting an independent role for this class of proteins in the 
general management of chromatin properties. yFACT activity does not require ATP
hydrolysis and does not alter the position of nucleosomes, indicating that it
acts through a mechanism distinct from chromatin remodeling. The results
presented here suggest instead that yFACT promotes polymerase progression by
reorganizing nucleosome cores into a less inhibitory conformation in which the
properties of DNA sequences near the center of the nucleosomes are altered.

PMCID: PMC387760
PMID: 15082784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell Cycle. 2004 May;3(5):638-47. Epub 2004 May 4.

Identification of toposome, a novel multisubunit complex containing topoisomerase
IIalpha.

Lee CG(1), Hague LK, Li H, Donnelly R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark
07013, USA. leecg@umdnj.edu

Topoisomerase IIalpha plays essential roles in chromosome segregation. However,
it is not well understood how topoisomerase IIalpha exerts its function during
mitosis. In this report, we find that topoisomerase IIalpha forms a multisubunit 
complex, named toposome, containing two ATPase/helicase proteins (RNA helicase A 
and RHII/Gu), one serine/threonine protein kinase (SRPK1), one HMG protein
(SSRP1), and two pre-mRNA splicing factors (PRP8 and hnRNP C). Toposome separates
entangled circular chromatin DNA about fourfold more efficiently than
topoisomerase IIalpha. Interestingly, this decatenation reaction yields knotted
circles, which are not seen in reactions provided with monomeric circular DNA.
Our results also show that interaction among toposome-associated proteins is
highest in G2/M phase but drastically diminishes in G1/S phase. These results
suggest that toposome is a dynamic complex whose assembly or activation is
subject to cell cycle regulation.

PMID: 15034300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Genes Cells. 2004 Feb;9(2):105-20.

Proteomics analysis of the centromere complex from HeLa interphase cells:
UV-damaged DNA binding protein 1 (DDB-1) is a component of the CEN-complex, while
BMI-1 is transiently co-localized with the centromeric region in interphase.

Obuse C(1), Yang H, Nozaki N, Goto S, Okazaki T, Yoda K.

Author information: 
(1)Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara
630-0101, Japan.

CENP-A, a centromere-specific histone H3, is conserved throughout eukaryotes, and
formation of CENP-A chromatin defines the active centromere region. Here, we
report the isolation of CENP-A chromatin from HeLa interphase nuclei by chromatin
immunoprecipitation using anti-CENP-A monoclonal antibody, and systematic
identification of its components by mass spectrometric analyses. The isolated
chromatin contained CENP-B, CENP-C, CENP-H, CENP-I/hMis 6 and hMis 12 as well as 
CENP-A, suggesting that the isolated chromatin may represent the centromere
complex (CEN-complex). Mass spectrometric analyses of the CEN-complex identified 
approximately 40 proteins, including the previously reported centromere proteins 
and the proteins of unknown function. In addition, we unexpectedly identified a
series of proteins previously reported to be related to functions other than
chromosome segregation, such as uvDDB-1, XAP8, hSNF2H, FACTp180, FACTp80/SSRP1,
polycomb group proteins (BMI-1, RING1, RNF2, HPC3 and PHP2), KNL5 and racGAP. We 
found that uvDDB-1 was actually localized to the centromeric region throughout
cell cycle, while BMI-1 was transiently co-localized with the centromeres in
interphase. These results give us new insights into the architecture, dynamics
and function of centromeric chromatin in interphase nuclei, which might reflect
regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 15009096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9321-30. Epub 2003 Dec 2.

Nek9, a novel FACT-associated protein, modulates interphase progression.

Tan BC(1), Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The heterodimeric Spt16-Pob3/DUF/FACT complex is a class of chromatin structure
modulators with important roles in replication and transcription. Although
regarded as a transcription elongator for chromatin template, little is known
about the mode of action and involvement in other molecular processes of the
mammalian FACT. Here we report the identification of a novel interacting and
functional partner of FACT, Nek9. Nek9 forms a stable, approximately 600-kDa
complex with FACT in the interphase nuclei. Its active form is characterized by
phosphorylation-dependent electrophoretic mobility shift and phosphorylation at a
conserved residue within the activation loop (Thr(210)). When complexed with
FACT, Nek9 exhibits markedly elevated phosphorylation on Thr(210). Cell cycle
analysis on the Nek9(dsRNAi) cells directly implicated Nek9 in maintaining proper
G(1) and S progression, a role temporally correlated to the formation of a
phospho-Nek9-FACT complex. Collectively, these observations provide evidence that
Nek9, potentially as an active enzymatic partner of FACT, mediates certain
FACT-associated cellular processes, which are ultimately essential for interphase
progression.

PMID: 14660563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Science. 2003 Aug 22;301(5636):1090-3.

FACT facilitates transcription-dependent nucleosome alteration.

Belotserkovskaya R(1), Oh S, Bondarenko VA, Orphanides G, Studitsky VM, Reinberg 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Division of
Nucleic Acids Enzymology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Aug 22;301(5636):1053-5.

The FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) complex is required for transcript
elongation through nucleosomes by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in vitro. Here, we
show that FACT facilitates Pol II-driven transcription by destabilizing
nucleosomal structure so that one histone H2A-H2B dimer is removed during enzyme 
passage. We also demonstrate that FACT possesses intrinsic histone chaperone
activity and can deposit core histones onto DNA. Importantly, FACT activity
requires both of its constituent subunits and is dependent on the highly acidic C
terminus of its larger subunit, Spt16. These findings define the mechanism by
which Pol II can transcribe through chromatin without disrupting its epigenetic
status.

PMID: 12934006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Science. 2003 Aug 22;301(5636):1053-5.

Transcription. Histones face the FACT.

Svejstrup JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research, London Research Institute, Clare Hall Laboratories,
Hertfordshire, UK. j.svejstrup@cancer.org.uk

Comment on
    Science. 2003 Aug 22;301(5636):1090-3.
    Science. 2003 Aug 22;301(5636):1094-6.
    Science. 2003 Aug 22;301(5636):1096-9.

PMID: 12933997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5301-7.

The high-mobility-group box protein SSRP1/T160 is essential for cell viability in
day 3.5 mouse embryos.

Cao S(1), Bendall H, Hicks GG, Nashabi A, Sakano H, Shinkai Y, Gariglio M, Oltz
EM, Ruley HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, 1161 21st Avenue South, AA 4210 MCN, Nashville, TN 37232-2363, USA.

The high-mobility-group (HMG) SSRP1 protein is a member of a conserved
chromatin-remodeling complex (FACT/DUF/CP) implicated in DNA replication, basal
and regulated transcription, and DNA repair. To assist in the functional analysis
of SSRP1, the Ssrp1 gene was targeted in murine embryonic stem cells, and the
mutation was introduced into the germ line. Embryos homozygous for the targeted
allele die soon after implantation, and preimplantation blastocysts are defective
for cell outgrowth and/or survival in vitro. The Ssrp1 mutation was also crossed 
into a p53 null background without affecting growth and/or survival defects
caused by loss of Ssrp1 function. Thus, Ssrp1 appears to encode nonredundant and 
p53-independent functions that are essential for cell viability.

PMCID: PMC165710
PMID: 12861016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 11;278(15):12710-5. Epub 2003 Feb 4.

Protein kinase CK2 phosphorylates the high mobility group domain protein SSRP1,
inducing the recognition of UV-damaged DNA.

Krohn NM(1), Stemmer C, Fojan P, Grimm R, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

The structure-specific recognition protein SSRP1 plays a role in transcription
and replication in the chromatin context. Mediated by its C-terminal high
mobility group (HMG) box domain, SSRP1 binds DNA non-sequence specifically but
recognizes certain DNA structures. Using acetic acid urea polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, we have examined the phosphorylation of
maize SSRP1 by protein kinase CK2 alpha. The kinase phosphorylated several amino 
acid residues in the C-terminal part of the SSRP1 protein. Two phosphorylation
sites were mapped in the very C-terminal region next to the HMG box domain, and
about seven sites are localized within the acidic domain. Circular dichroism
showed that the phosphorylation of the two C-terminal sites by CK2 alpha resulted
in a structural change in the region of HMG box domain, because the negative peak
of the CD spectrum at 222 nm was decreased by approximately 10%. In parallel, the
phosphorylation induced the recognition of UV-damaged DNA, whereas the
non-phosphorylated protein does not discriminate between UV-damaged DNA and
control DNA. The affinity of CK2 alpha-phosphorylated SSRP1 for the DNA
correlates with the degree of UV-induced DNA damage. Moreover, maize SSRP1 can
restore the increased UV-sensitivity of a yeast strain lacking the NHP6A/B HMG
domain proteins to levels of the control strain. Collectively, these findings
indicate a role for SSRP1 in the UV response of eukaryotic cells.

PMID: 12571244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 20;277(51):50206-13. Epub 2002 Oct 21.

p53 serine 392 phosphorylation increases after UV through induction of the
assembly of the CK2.hSPT16.SSRP1 complex.

Keller DM(1), Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Previously, we purified a UV-responsive p53 serine 392 kinase from F9 and HeLa
cells and found that its activity is attributed to a high molecular weight
protein complex containing the protein kinase CK2, along with the
chromatin-associated factors hSPT16 and SSRP1. Here we determine that these
proteins interact in vitro and in cells via non-overlapping domains and provide
evidence consistent with the idea that hSPT16 and SSRP1 change the conformation
of CK2 upon binding such that it specifically targets p53 over other substrates. 
Also, UV irradiation apparently induces the association of the complex, thereby
increasing the specificity of CK2 for p53 at the expense of other cellular CK2
substrates and leading to an overall increase in p53 serine 392 phosphorylation.

PMID: 12393879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 15;21(20):5487-97.

SSRP1 functions as a co-activator of the transcriptional activator p63.

Zeng SX(1), Dai MS, Keller DM, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2004 Apr 7;23(7):1679.

The p53 homolog p63 is a transcriptional activator. Here, we describe the
identification of an HMG1-like protein SSRP1 as a co-activator of p63. Over
expression of wild-type, but not deletion mutant, SSRP1 remarkably enhanced
p63gamma-dependent luciferase activity, G1 arrest, apoptosis and expression of
endogenous PIG3, p21(Waf1/cip1) and MDM2 in human p53-deficient lung carcinoma
H1299 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Also, SSRP1 interacted to p63gamma
in vitro and in cells, and resided with p63gamma at the p53-responsive DNA
element sites of the cellular endogenous MDM2 and p21(Waf1/cip1) promoters.
Moreover, N-terminus-deleted p63 (DeltaN-p63) bound to neither SSRP1 nor its
central domain in vitro. Accordingly, SSRP1 was unable to stimulate
DeltaN-p63-mediated residual luciferase activity and apoptosis in cells. Finally,
the ectopic expression of the central p63-binding domain of SSRP1 inhibited
p63-dependent transcription in cells. Thus, these results suggest that SSRP1
stimulates p63 activity by associating with this activator at the promoter.

PMCID: PMC129072
PMID: 12374749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Sep 1;30(17):3643-52.

Novel domains and orthologues of eukaryotic transcription elongation factors.

Ponting CP(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics,
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.
chris.ponting@anat.ox.ac.uk

The passage of RNA polymerase II across eukaryotic genes is impeded by the
nucleosome, an octamer of histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 dimers. More than a dozen 
factors in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are known to facilitate
transcription elongation through chromatin. In order to better understand the
evolution and function of these factors, their sequences have been compared with 
known protein, EST and DNA sequences. Elongator subcomplex components Elp4p and
Elp6p are shown to be homologues of ATPases, yet with substitutions of amino
acids critical for ATP hydrolysis, and novel orthologues of Elp5p are detectable 
in human, and other animal, sequences. The yeast CP complex is shown to contain a
likely inactive homologue of M24 family metalloproteases in Spt16p/Cdc68p and a
2-fold repeat in Pob3p, the orthologue of mammalian SSRP1. Archaeal DNA-directed 
RNA polymerase subunit E" is shown to be the orthologue of eukaryotic Spt4p, and 
Spt5p and prokaryotic NusG are shown to contain a novel 'NGN' domain. Spt6p is
found to contain a domain homologous to the YqgF family of RNases, although this 
domain may also lack catalytic activity. These findings imply that much of the
transcription elongation machinery of eukaryotes has been acquired subsequent to 
their divergence from prokaryotes.

PMCID: PMC137420
PMID: 12202748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2002 Apr;12(2):156-61.

Chromatin elongation factors.

Svejstrup JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, Clare Hall Laboratories, South 
Mimms, Hertfordshire EN6 3LD, UK. j.svejstrup@cancer.org.uk

As RNA polymerase II leaves a gene promoter to transcribe the coding region, it
faces a major obstacle - nucleosomes tightly wrapped into chromatin. Mechanisms
to deal with this obstacle clearly exist in cells, as transcription through
chromatin is very efficient in vivo, whereas nucleosomal templates pose a
considerable problem for polymerase progression in reconstituted in vitro
systems. Advances in our understanding of transcriptional elongation through
chromatin have been made possible recently by the identification of several
accessory factors that assist polymerase in the process. Insights into the
function of these factors have been gained by a combination of yeast genetics and
biochemical studies in mammalian systems.

PMID: 11893488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Rheumatol. 2002 Jan;29(1):90-3.

High prevalence of autoantibodies against the nuclear high mobility group (HMG)
protein SSRP1 in sera from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, but not
other rheumatic diseases.

Santoro P(1), De Andrea M, Migliaretti G, Trapani C, Landolfo S, Gariglio M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Immunogenetics and Experimental Oncology Center, CNR, University of
Turin, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the presence of autoantibodies to the high mobility group 
(HMG) structure specific recognition protein I (SSRP1) in sera from patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or other rheumatic diseases.
METHODS: Antibodies to SSRP1(anti-SSRP1) were measured in sera from patients with
SLE, Sjogren's syndrome (SS), ulcerative colitis (UC), systemic sclerosis (SSc), 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and sera from healthy individuals by both an
enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) and Western blotting (WB) using the recombinant
SSRP1 N-terminus as antigen.
RESULTS: We found 28.8% of the sera from patients with SLE contained anti-SSRPI
by both ELISA and WB assay, compared to 8.3% of the sera from healthy
individuals. When the 40 sera from patients with other autoimmune diseases were
tested, only 2 sera (5%) from individuals with SS showed a moderate reactivity to
SSRPI in both ELISA and WB assays.
CONCLUSION: The results show that anti-SSRPI can be identified in sera from
patients with SLE, but not with other rheumatic diseases and may thus help the
diagnosis of SLE in the presence of appropriate clinical findings.

PMID: 11824977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2589-96. Epub 2001 Nov 14.

PITSLRE p110 protein kinases associate with transcription complexes and affect
their activity.

Trembley JH(1), Hu D, Hsu LC, Yeung CY, Slaughter C, Lahti JM, Kidd VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology and the Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics
and Biotechnology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee
38105, USA.

Although the PITSLRE protein kinases are members of the cyclin-dependent kinase
superfamily, their cellular function is unclear. Previously we demonstrated that 
the general RNA splicing factor RNPS1 is a specific PITSLRE p110 kinase
interactor in vivo. This suggests that the PITSLRE family of protein kinases is
involved in some aspect of RNA processing or transcription. Here we identify
multiple transcriptional elongation factors, including ELL2, TFIIF(1), TFIIS, and
FACT, as PITSLRE kinase-associated proteins. We demonstrate that PITSLRE p110
protein kinases co-immunoprecipitate and/or co-purify with these elongation
factors as well as with RNA polymerase II. Antibody-mediated inhibition of
PITSLRE kinase specifically suppressed RNA polymerase II-dependent in vitro
transcription initiated at a GC-rich (adenosine deaminase) or TATA box-dependent 
(Ad2ML) promoter, and this suppression was rescued by readdition of purified
PITSLRE p110 kinase. Together, these data strongly suggest that PITSLRE protein
kinases participate in a signaling pathway that potentially regulates or links
transcription and RNA processing events.

PMID: 11709559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. EMBO J. 2001 Jul 2;20(13):3506-17.

Spt16-Pob3 and the HMG protein Nhp6 combine to form the nucleosome-binding factor
SPN.

Formosa T(1), Eriksson P, Wittmeyer J, Ginn J, Yu Y, Stillman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, 50 N.
Medical Drive Rm 211, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. Tim.Formosa@hsc.utah.edu

Yeast Spt16/Cdc68 and Pob3 form a heterodimer that acts in both DNA replication
and transcription. This is supported by studies of new alleles of SPT16 described
here. We show that Spt16-Pob3 enhances HO transcription through a mechanism that 
is affected by chromatin modification, since some of the defects caused by
mutations can be suppressed by deleting the histone deacetylase Rpd3. While
otherwise conserved among many eukaryotes, Pob3 lacks the HMG1 DNA-binding motif 
found in similar proteins such as the SSRP1 subunit of human FACT. SPT16 and POB3
display strong genetic interactions with NHP6A/B, which encodes an HMG1 motif,
suggesting that these gene products function coordinately in vivo. While
Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 do not appear to form stable heterotrimers, Nhp6 binds to
nucleosomes and these Nhp6-nucleosomes can recruit Spt16-Pob3 to form
SPN-nucleosomes. These complexes have altered electrophoretic mobility and a
distinct pattern of enhanced sensitivity to DNase I. These results suggest that
Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 cooperate to function as a novel nucleosome reorganizing
factor.

PMCID: PMC125512
PMID: 11432837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochemistry. 2001 Jul 3;40(26):7860-7.

Differential chromatin association and nucleosome binding of the maize HMGA,
HMGB, and SSRP1 proteins.

Lichota J(1), Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

In plants, chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins have been identified in
the HMGA family, containing A/T-hook DNA binding motifs, and in the HMGB family, 
containing an HMG-box DNA binding domain, that are considered architectural
factors in chromatin. We have characterized the association of the HMGA protein, 
five different HMGB proteins, and the structure-specific recognition protein 1
(SSRP1) with maize chromatin by extraction experiments using NaCl, ethidium
bromide, spermine, and distamycin A. The difference in the release of the
proteins from chromatin by these reagents indicates that they are differentially 
associated with chromatin. This was confirmed by treatment of chromatin with
micrococcal nuclease, demonstrating that the HMGA, HMGB2/3, and SSRP1 proteins
are enriched in the highly nuclease-sensitive fraction of chromatin, which is
likely to be transcriptionally competent. As examined by electrophoretic mobility
shift analyses, the HMGA protein and the proteins containing an HMG domain (HMGB 
proteins and SSRP1) bind specifically to purified maize mononucleosomes that
contain a histone octamer and approximately 165 bp of DNA. The mode of
interaction with the nucleosomes differs for HMGA and HMGB proteins. In the case 
of the HMGB1 protein, the full-length protein is required for specific nucleosome
binding, as the individual HMG-box DNA binding domain (which is sufficient for
DNA interactions) interacts nonspecifically with the nucleosomes. Collectively,
these findings indicate that HMGA, the various HMGB proteins, and SSPR1 are
differentially associated with plant chromatin and may act as architectural
factors in different nucleoprotein structures.

PMID: 11425313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 13;276(28):25736-41. Epub 2001 May 8.

Interaction of FACT, SSRP1, and the high mobility group (HMG) domain of SSRP1
with DNA damaged by the anticancer drug cisplatin.

Yarnell AT(1), Oh S, Reinberg D, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA.

The structure-specific recognition protein SSRP1, initially isolated from
expression screening of a human B-cell cDNA library for proteins that bind to
cisplatin (cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II))-modified DNA, contains a single
DNA-binding high mobility group (HMG) domain. Human SSRP1 purifies as a
heterodimer of SSRP1 and Spt16 (FACT) that alleviates the nucleosomal block to
transcription elongation by RNAPII in vitro. The affinity and specificity of
FACT, SSRP1, and the isolated HMG domain of SSRP1 for cisplatin-damaged DNA were 
investigated by gel mobility shift assays. FACT exhibits both affinity and
specificity for DNA damaged globally with cisplatin compared with unmodified DNA 
or DNA damaged globally with the clinically ineffective trans-DDP isomer. FACT
binds the major 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand cisplatin adduct, but its isolated SSRP1
subunit fails to form discrete, high affinity complexes with cisplatin-modified
DNA under similar conditions. These results suggest that Spt16 primes SSRP1 for
cisplatin-damaged DNA recognition by unveiling its HMG domain. As expected, the
isolated HMG domain of SSRP1 is sufficient for specific binding to
cisplatin-damaged DNA and binds the major cisplatin 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand
cross-link. The affinity and specificity of FACT for cisplatin-modified DNA, as
well as its importance for transcription of chromatin, suggests that the
interaction of FACT and cisplatin-damaged DNA may be crucial to the anticancer
mechanism of cisplatin.

PMID: 11344167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(10):3491-502.

A bipartite yeast SSRP1 analog comprised of Pob3 and Nhp6 proteins modulates
transcription.

Brewster NK(1), Johnston GC, Singer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 4H7.

The FACT complex of vertebrate cells, comprising the Cdc68 (Spt16) and SSRP1
proteins, facilitates transcription elongation on a nucleosomal template and
modulates the elongation-inhibitory effects of the DSIF complex in vitro. Genetic
findings show that the related yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) complex, termed
CP, also mediates transcription. The CP components Cdc68 and Pob3 closely
resemble the FACT components, except that the C-terminal high-mobility group
(HMG) box domain of SSRP1 is not found in the yeast homolog Pob3. We show here
that Nhp6a and Nhp6b, small HMG box proteins with overlapping functions in yeast,
associate with the CP complex and mediate CP-related genetic effects on
transcription. Absence of the Nhp6 proteins causes severe impairment in
combination with mutations impairing the Swi-Snf chromatin-remodeling complex and
the DSIF (Spt4 plus Spt5) elongation regulator, and sensitizes cells to
6-azauracil, characteristic of elongation effects. An artificial SSRP1-like
protein, created by fusing the Pob3 and Nhp6a proteins, provides both Pob3 and
Nhp6a functions for transcription, and competition experiments indicate that
these functions are exerted in association with Cdc68. This particular Pob3-Nhp6a
fusion protein was limited for certain Nhp6 activities, indicating that its Nhp6a
function is compromised. These findings suggest that in yeast cells the Cdc68
partners may be both Pob3 and Nhp6, functioning as a bipartite analog of the
vertebrate SSRP1 protein.

PMCID: PMC100271
PMID: 11313475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell. 2001 Feb;7(2):283-92.

A DNA damage-induced p53 serine 392 kinase complex contains CK2, hSpt16, and
SSRP1.

Keller DM(1), Zeng X, Wang Y, Zhang QH, Kapoor M, Shu H, Goodman R, Lozano G,
Zhao Y, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Phosphorylation of the human p53 protein at Ser-392 has been shown to be
responsive to UV but not gamma irradiation. Here we describe identification and
purification of a mammalian UV-activated protein kinase complex that
phosphorylates Ser-392 of p53 in vitro. This kinase complex contains casein
kinase 2 (CK2) and the chromatin transcriptional elongation factor FACT (a
heterodimer of hSpt16 and SSRP1). In vitro studies show that FACT alters the
specificity of CK2 in the complex such that it selectively phosphorylates p53
over other substrates including casein. In addition, phosphorylation by the
kinase complex enhances p53 activity. These results thus provide a potential
mechanism for p53 activation by UV irradiation.

PMID: 11239457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Plant J. 2000 Aug;23(3):395-405.

DNA-interactions and nuclear localisation of the chromosomal HMG domain protein
SSRP1 from maize.

Röttgers K(1), Krohn NM, Lichota J, Stemmer C, Merkle T, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Schänzlestr.
1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) is a member of the protein
family containing a high mobility group (HMG) domain DNA-binding motif. We have
functionally characterised the 71.4 kDa Zm-SSRP1 protein from maize. The
chromatin-associated Zm-SSRP1 is detected by immunoblot analysis in maize leaves,
kernels and suspension culture cells, but not in roots. Mediated by its HMG
domain, recombinant Zm-SSRP1 interacts structure-specifically with supercoiled
DNA and DNA minicircles when compared with linear DNA. In linear duplex DNA, the 
protein does not recognise a specific sequence, but it binds preferentially to
sequences containing the deformable dinucleotide TG, as demonstrated by a random 
oligonucleotide selection experiment. Zm-SSRP1 modulates DNA structure by bending
the target sequence, since it promotes the circularisation of short DNA fragments
in the presence of DNA ligase. Moreover, Zm-SSRP1 facilitates the formation of
nucleoprotein structures, as measured using the bacterial site-specific
beta-mediated recombination reaction. Analysis of the subcellular localisation of
various SSRP1-GFP fusions revealed that, in contrast to HMG domain transcription 
factors, the nuclear localisation sequence of Zm-SSRP1 is situated within a
20-amino acid residue region adjacent to the HMG domain rather than within the
DNA-binding domain. The results are discussed in the context of the likely
function of SSRP1 proteins in transcription and replication.

PMID: 10929132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell. 2000 Jun;5(6):1067-72.

FACT relieves DSIF/NELF-mediated inhibition of transcriptional elongation and
reveals functional differences between P-TEFb and TFIIH.

Wada T(1), Orphanides G, Hasegawa J, Kim DK, Shima D, Yamaguchi Y, Fukuda A,
Hisatake K, Oh S, Reinberg D, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Yokohama, Japan.

We report that the chromatin-specific transcription elongation factor FACT
functions in conjunction with the RNA polymerase II CTD kinase P-TEFb to
alleviate transcription inhibition by DSIF (DRB sensitivity-inducing factor) and 
NELF (negative elongation factor). We find that the kinase activity of TFIIH is
dispensable for this activity, demonstrating that TFIIH-mediated CTD
phosphorylation is not involved in the regulation of FACT and DSIF/NELF
activities. Thus, we propose a novel transcriptional regulatory network in which 
DSIF/NELF inhibition of transcription is prevented by P-TEFb in cooperation with 
FACT. This study uncovers a novel role for FACT in the regulation of
transcription on naked DNA that is independent of its activities on chromatin
templates. In addition, this study reveals functional differences between P-TEFb 
and TFIIH in the regulation of transcription.

PMID: 10912001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Sep 1;27(17):e16.

Simplified generation of targeting constructs using ET recombination.

Angrand PO(1), Daigle N, van der Hoeven F, Schöler HR, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Program and Germ Cell Biology Laboratory, European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69177 Heidelberg, Germany.

ET recombination is a way to engineer DNA in Escherichia coli using homologous
recombination. Here we develop the potential of ET recombination in two ways
relevant to complex engineering exercises such as building gene targeting
constructs. First, a targeting construct was made in a single step. Second, ET
recombination was used to place two unique restriction sites at precise positions
in a large genomic clone. Subsequently a complex targeting construct was created 
by ligation with a multifunctional cassette.

PMCID: PMC148577
PMID: 10446259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nature. 1999 Jul 15;400(6741):284-8.

The chromatin-specific transcription elongation factor FACT comprises human SPT16
and SSRP1 proteins.

Orphanides G(1), Wu WH, Lane WS, Hampsey M, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854, USA.

The regulation of gene expression depends critically upon chromatin structure.
Transcription of protein-coding genes can be reconstituted on naked DNA with only
the general transcription factors and RNA polymerase II. This minimal system
cannot transcribe DNA packaged into chromatin, indicating that accessory factors 
may facilitate access to DNA. Two classes of accessory factor, ATP-dependent
chromatin-remodelling enzymes and histone acetyltransferases, facilitate
transcription initiation from chromatin templates. FACT (for facilitates
chromatin transcription) is a chromatin-specific elongation factor required for
transcription of chromatin templates in vitro. Here we show that FACT comprises a
new human homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spt16/Cdc68 protein and the
high-mobility group-1-like protein structure-specific recognition protein-1.
Yeast SPT16/CDC68 is an essential gene that has been implicated in transcription 
and cell-cycle regulation. Consistent with our biochemical analysis of FACT, we
provide evidence that Spt16/Cdc68 is involved in transcript elongation in vivo.
Moreover, FACT specifically interacts with nucleosomes and histone H2A/H2B
dimers, indicating that it may work by promoting nucleosome disassembly upon
transcription. In support of this model, we show that FACT activity is abrogated 
by covalently crosslinking nucleosomal histones.

PMID: 10421373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Aug 1;250(2):313-28.

The HMG protein T160 colocalizes with DNA replication foci and is down-regulated 
during cell differentiation.

Hertel L(1), De Andrea M, Bellomo G, Santoro P, Landolfo S, Gariglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Medical School of Novara, Novara, 28100,
Italy.

The high mobility group protein T160, the murine homolog of the human
structure-specific recognition protein 1, was first supposed to be involved in
the process of V-(D)-J recombination, since it could bind to recombination signal
sequence probes. We have recently cloned T160 by using an unrelated DNA probe and
shown that it binds to either cruciform or linear DNA with no sequence
specificity. In this work, we performed a detailed analysis of T160 expression
and immunolocalization. We show that T160 is a phosphoprotein broadly conserved
from yeast to mammals, with a high level of expression in all the cell lines
tested and in tissues containing a high degree of proliferating cells. Indirect
immunofluorescence analysis by confocal laser microscopy revealed that T160
distribution in the cell nucleus is not uniform, and focus-like staining was
observed. Cell cycle studies by BrdU incorporation suggest that the appearance of
T160 nuclear foci is specific of mid to late S phase. Furthermore, while T160
expression does not change during the cell cycle, it is dramatically
down-regulated when cells begin to differentiate, as highlighted in C2C12
myoblasts and myotubes. The disappearance of T160 nuclear staining in
multinucleated myotubes is shown. Taken together, these data suggest that its
function may be less specific than V-(D)-J recombination and more related to some
cellular basic process, such as DNA replication or repair.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10413586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 28;274(22):15686-93.

Cooperative transcriptional activation by serum response factor and the high
mobility group protein SSRP1.

Spencer JA(1), Baron MH, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235-9148, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF) is a MADS box transcription factor that controls a
wide range of genes involved in cell proliferation and differentiation. The MADS 
box mediates homodimerization and binding of SRF to the consensus sequence
CC(A/T)6GG, known as a CArG box, which is found in the control regions of
numerous serum-inducible and muscle-specific genes. Using a modified yeast
one-hybrid screen to identify potential SRF cofactors, we found that SRF
interacts with the high mobility group factor SSRP1 (structure-specific
recognition protein). This interaction, which occurs in yeast and mammalian
cells, is mediated through the MADS box of SRF and a basic region of SSRP1
encompassing amino acids 489-542, immediately adjacent to the high mobility group
domain. SSRP1 does not bind the CArG box, but interaction of SSRP1 with SRF
dramatically increases the DNA binding activity of SRF, resulting in synergistic 
transcriptional activation of native and artificial SRF-dependent promoters.
These results reveal an important role for SSRP1 as a coregulator of
SRF-dependent transcription in mammalian cells.

PMID: 10336466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Chromosoma. 1999 Apr;108(1):10-25.

CHD1 interacts with SSRP1 and depends on both its chromodomain and its
ATPase/helicase-like domain for proper association with chromatin.

Kelley DE(1), Stokes DG, Perry RP.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

CHD1, an Mr approximately 200,000 protein that contains a chromodomain (C), an
ATPase/helicase-like domain (H) and a DNA-binding domain (D), was previously
shown to be associated with decompacted interphase chromatin in mammalian cells
and with transcriptionally active puffs and interbands in Drosophila polytene
chromosomes. We now show by transient transfection experiments with genes
expressing wild-type and mutant forms of CHD1 that both the C and H domains are
essential for its proper association with chromatin. We also present evidence for
an in vivo interaction between CHD1 and a novel HMG box-containing protein,
SSRP1, which involves an amino-terminal segment of CHD1 that does not include the
chromodomain. Immunocytochemical analyses indicated that CHD1 and SSRP1
colocalize in both mammalian nuclei and Drosophila polytene chromosomes.

PMID: 10199952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2617-28.

The HMG domain protein SSRP1/PREIIBF is involved in activation of the human
embryonic beta-like globin gene.

Dyer MA(1), Hayes PJ, Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

The human embryonic beta-like globin (epsilon-globin) gene is expressed in
primitive erythroid cells of the yolk sac during the first few weeks of
development. We have previously shown that developmental stage-specific
expression of the epsilon-globin gene is mediated by multiple positive and
negative regulatory elements upstream of the start of transcription. Of
particular interest is one positive regulatory element, PRE II, that works
together with other elements (PRE I and PRE V) to confer developmental stage-
and/or tissue-specific expression on a minimal promoter. An approximately 85- to 
90-kDa PRE II binding factor (PREIIBF) was identified in the nuclei of erythroid 
cells and shown to bind specifically to a novel 19-bp region within PRE II;
binding of this protein to PRE II resulted in bending of the target DNA and was
required for promoter activation. In this report, we present the cDNA expression 
cloning of PREIIBF. The cDNA encodes a previously identified member of the HMG
domain family of DNA binding proteins termed SSRP1. By a number of biochemical
and immunological criteria, recombinant SSRP1 appears to be identical to the
PREII binding factor from erythroid nuclei. A hallmark of HMG domain proteins is 
their ability to bend their target DNAs; therefore, as we speculated previously, 
DNA bending by SSRP1/PREIIBF may contribute to the mechanism by which PRE II
synergizes with other regulatory elements located upstream and downstream. In
contrast with reports from other investigators, we demonstrate that SSRP1 binds
DNA with clear sequence specificity. Moreover, we show that SSRP1/PREIIBF lacks a
classical activation domain but that binding by this protein to PRE II is
required for activation of a minimal promoter in stable erythroid cell lines.
These studies provide the first evidence that SSRP1 plays a role in
transcriptional regulation. SSRP1/PREIIBF may serve an architectural function by 
helping to coordinate the assembly of a multiprotein complex required for
stage-specific regulation of the human epsilon-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC110641
PMID: 9566881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochimie. 1997 Dec;79(12):717-23.

Decreased expression of the high-mobility group protein T160 by antisense RNA
impairs the growth of mouse fibroblasts.

Hertel L(1), Foresta P, Barbiero G, Ying GG, Bonelli G, Baccino FM, Landolfo S,
Gariglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Medical School of Novara, Italy.

The T160 protein belongs to the HMG-1 box protein family and preferentially binds
to non-B-DNA conformations with no sequence specificity. Its exact role has yet
to be defined, though it seems to participate in processes involving DNA, such as
replication, transcription and recombination. We have used an antisense RNA
strategy to investigate its role in cell growth and proliferation. T160
expression is strongly suppressed by stable introduction of an antisense
construct into NIH3T3 cells, and this decrease is accompanied by substantial
changes in the growth properties of the stable transfectants. Impaired growth of 
T160- cells was mainly related to two mechanisms: i) decreased rates of cell
proliferation at normal serum concentration; and ii) occurrence of cell death by 
apoptosis at low serum concentration, as demonstrated by both flow cytometry and 
microscopy. The finding that decreased T160 availability affects cell
proliferation, provides further evidence of its involvement in a basic cell
function, such as DNA replication.

PMID: 9523013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cell. 1998 Jan 9;92(1):105-16.

FACT, a factor that facilitates transcript elongation through nucleosomes.

Orphanides G(1), LeRoy G, Chang CH, Luse DS, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854, USA.

The requirements for transcriptional activation by RNA polymerase II were
examined using chromatin templates assembled in vitro and a transcription system 
composed of the human general transcription factors and RNA polymerase II.
Activator-induced, energy-dependent chromatin remodeling promoted efficient
preinitiation complex formation and transcription initiation, but was not
sufficient for productive transcription. Polymerases that initiated transcription
on remodeled chromatin templates encountered a block to transcription proximal to
the promoter. Entry into productive transcription required an accessory factor
present in HeLa cell nuclear extract, FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription),
which we have purified. FACT acts subsequent to transcription initiation to
release RNA polymerase II from a nucleosome-induced block to productive
transcription. The biochemical properties and polypeptide composition of FACT
suggest that it is a novel protein factor that facilitates transcript elongation 
through nucleosomes.

PMID: 9489704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1997 Nov;43(4):781-6.

Characterisation of bovine structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) cDNA.

Nielsen PK(1), Haaning J, Sottrup-Jensen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

A partial bovine SSRP1 (structure-specific recognition protein 1) cDNA has been
isolated from a osteoblast cDNA library and sequenced. The bovine SSRP1 cDNA of
1870 bp encoding 460 amino acid residues showed 86% and 98% sequence identity
with human SSRP1 at the DNA and protein level, respectively. Expression of SSRP1 
mRNA was detected in many human tissues, with a particularly high level in
kidney.

PMID: 9385438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Nov 1;236(2):472-81.

The high-mobility group protein T160 binds to both linear and cruciform DNA and
mediates DNA bending as determined by ring closure.

Gariglio M(1), Ying GG, Hertel L, Gaboli M, Clerc RG, Landolfo S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Medical School of Novara, University of Torino,
Italy.

The high-mobility group protein T160 was isolated by screening a phage library
from a murine pre-B-cell line L1210. South-Western experiments have previously
shown that this protein binds to V-(D)-J recombination signal sequences,
suggesting that it may be a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein. However,
neither gel-shift nor footprinting analyses have been successfully employed with 
the T160 protein, despite an extensive effort. In this study, the T160 protein or
truncated forms made soluble through denaturing and renaturing cycles in urea
were successfully used in gel-shift experiments showing that T160 binds to
cruci-form or linear duplex DNA with no apparent sequence specificity.
Furthermore, fragments longer than 100 bp efficiently formed covalently closed
circular monomers in the presence of T160 and T4 DNA ligase, indicating that the 
protein is capable of introducing bends into the duplex. Last, tissue
distribution by Western blotting analysis showed that the T160 protein is
expressed in various murine tissues in addition to those of lymphoid origin.
Considering its broad evolutionary conservation (from plants to mammals) also,
these results suggest that the functional role of the T160 protein is not limited
to V-(D)-J recombination, but might be involved in basic processes such as DNA
replication and repairing, where irregular DNA structures are generated and very 
likely recognized by HMG domain proteins.

PMID: 9367632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Gen Virol. 1997 Mar;78 ( Pt 3):665-70.

Suppression of high mobility group protein T160 expression impairs mouse
cytomegalovirus replication.

Gariglio M(1), Foresta P, Sacchi C, Lembo M, Hertel L, Landolfo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Medical School of Novara, University of
Torino, Italy.

The high mobility group (HMG-1) box proteins bind both non-B-DNA conformations
and specific nucleotide sequences. They have been implicated in a wide variety of
cellular functions involving DNA, such as transcription, replication and
recombination. To determine whether HMG-1 box protein T160 plays a role in virus 
replication, we employed an antisense strategy to inhibit its expression in NIH
3T3 cells. The two T160 clones that expressed levels of T160 50% lower than those
expressed by clones transfected with the empty vector (Neo+ clones) were
investigated with respect to their permissiveness to the growth of viruses
representing three families: Rhabdoviridae, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV);
Picornaviridae, encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), and Alpha- and
Betaherpesviridae, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and mouse cytomegalovirus
(MCMV), respectively. They displayed a high degree of resistance to MCMV
replication, but were fully permissive to the other viruses. Competitive PCR and 
probing IE-1 products by Western blot analysis showed that this resistance was
not due to depressed levels of virus adsorption during the early phases of
infection. We therefore conclude that T160 is involved in replication of the
betaherpesvirus MCMV.

PMID: 9049420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jan 25;23(2):269-76.

Identification of a cDNA for SSRP1, an HMG-box protein, by interaction with the
c-Myc oncoprotein in a novel bacterial expression screen.

Bunker CA(1), Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

We describe a system for screening cDNA expression libraries in Escherichia coli 
based on protein-protein interactions. The system utilizes fusion proteins
containing the DNA binding domain of the lambda phage cl repressor and a
heterologous dimerization domain, which is the target of the screen. Such
chimeric proteins were functional as transcriptional repressors in E.coli;
function was dependent on the presence of the heterologous dimerization domain,
and function of the chimeras was disrupted by expression of excess dimerization
domain. A screen was designed to identify factors that could interact with the
heterologous dimerization domain and thereby inactivate the chimeric repressor.
We used this screen to identify factors that could interact with the basic
helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper domains of c-Myc, and isolated the cDNA for a
previously characterized HMG domain protein that interacts specifically with
c-Myc in this system. This screening method could be used with proteins that have
the ability to homo- or heterodimerize.

PMCID: PMC306665
PMID: 7862532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Apr 11;21(7):1643-6.

Isolation and characterization of cDNA clones encoding the Drosophila homolog of 
the HMG-box SSRP family that recognizes specific DNA structures.

Bruhn SL(1), Housman DE, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

Recently an HMG-box protein denoted SSRP1, for structure-specific recognition
protein 1, has been discovered which binds to specific DNA structural elements
such as the bent, unwound conformations that occur upon the formation of
intrastrand crosslinks by the anticancer drug cisplatin. The SSRP family includes
the mouse protein T160, which recognizes recombination signal sequences. In order
to delineate functional domains more clearly, a homolog of SSRP1 was cloned from 
Drosophila melanogaster. This homolog maps to polytene region 60A (1-4) and
shares 54% identity with human SSRP1. Comparison of the predicted amino acid
sequences among SSRP family members reveals 48% identity, with structural
conservation in the carboxy terminus of the HMG box as well as domains of highly 
charged residues. Interestingly, however, the most highly conserved regions of
the protein are in the less well understood amino terminus, strongly suggesting
that this portion of the protein is critical for its function.

PMCID: PMC309375
PMID: 8479916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Cancer. 1993 Feb 20;53(4):662-6.

Binding activities of cis-platin-damage-recognition proteins in human tumour cell
lines.

McLaughlin K(1), Coren G, Masters J, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Medical Oncology, Beatson Laboratories, Glasgow, UK.

Proteins can be detected by South-western analyses of human tumour-cell extracts 
binding to double-stranded oligonucleotide DNA treated in vitro with the
chemotherapeutic drug cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (CDDP), but not to
untreated DNA. The relative molecular masses of proteins binding to the
CDDP-treated double-stranded oligonucleotide are 25, 48 and 97 kDa. The binding
activity of 2 of the CDDP-damage-recognition proteins, of relative molecular mass
48 and 97 kDa, is greater in a CDDP-resistant human ovarian tumour cell line than
in the parental sensitive line. South-western analysis of a panel of human
bladder cell lines and CDDP-sensitive testicular cell lines show consistent
patterns of CDDP-damage-recognition proteins within each cell type, however with 
differences between the 2 cell types. Binding of the proteins to CDDP-damaged DNA
and the altered binding activity detected in tumour cell lines suggests that
alteration in damage-recognition proteins could play a role in tumour response to
CDDP.

PMID: 8436440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Mar 15;89(6):2307-11.

Isolation and characterization of human cDNA clones encoding a high mobility
group box protein that recognizes structural distortions to DNA caused by binding
of the anticancer agent cisplatin.

Bruhn SL(1), Pil PM, Essigmann JM, Housman DE, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

Human cDNA clones encoding a structure-specific recognition protein, SSRP1, that 
binds specifically to DNA modified with cisplatin have been isolated and
characterized. The SSRP1 gene maps to human chromosome 11q12. The cDNA clones,
obtained by using partial-length cDNAs described previously, predict an 81-kDa
protein containing several highly charged domains and a stretch of 75 amino acids
47% identical to a portion of the high mobility group (HMG) protein HMG1. This
HMG box most likely constitutes the structure recognition element for
cisplatin-modified DNA, with the probable recognition motif being the local
duplex unwinding and bending toward the major groove that occurs upon formation
of intrastrand cis-[Pt(NH3)2]2+ d(GpG) and d(ApG) cross-links. Although the DNA
recognition properties of members of the HMG-box family of proteins have been
characterized with respect to their sequence specificity, the present work
demonstrates that proteins with this domain can recognize particular DNA
structures as well. The Pt-DNA SSRP described here is the human homolog of a
recently identified mouse protein that binds to recombination signal sequences
[Shirakata, M., Hüppi, K., Usuda, S., Okazaki, K., Yoshida, K. & Sakano, H.
(1991) Mol. Cell. Biol. 11, 4528-4536]. These sequences have been postulated to
form stem-loop structures, further implicating local bends and unwinding in DNA
as a recognition target for HMG-box proteins. Expression analysis in a variety of
tissues and cisplatin-resistant cell lines and the inability of cisplatin to
induce the message in HeLa cells argue against a direct link between SSRP1 mRNA
levels and the response of cells to the drug.

PMCID: PMC48646
PMID: 1372440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Sep;11(9):4528-36.

HMG1-related DNA-binding protein isolated with V-(D)-J recombination signal
probes.

Shirakata M(1), Hüppi K, Usuda S, Okazaki K, Yoshida K, Sakano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720.

In order to isolate cDNA clones for DNA-binding components of the V-(D)-J
recombinase, phage libraries from a pre-B-cell line were screened with a
radiolabeled probe containing recombination signal sequences (RSS). Among
prospective clones, cDNA T160 was analyzed further. It produced a protein of 80.6
kDa which bound to DNA containing RSS but not to DNA in which the RSS had been
mutated. A search of a data base revealed that the T160 protein has significant
sequence homology (56%) to the nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG1 within the
C-terminal region of 80 amino acids. DNA-binding analysis with truncated proteins
showed that the HMG homology region is responsible for DNA binding. Using
restriction fragment length polymorphisms, the T160 gene was mapped at the
proximal end of mouse chromosome 2. Evidence was obtained for genetic linkage
between the T160 gene and the recombination activator genes RAG-1 and RAG-2.

PMCID: PMC361327
PMID: 1678855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


