
1. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25558. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT5A Modulates Chemokine Receptor CCR6 Expression and Enhances Pre-B Cell
Growth in a CCL20-Dependent Manner.

Tsuruyama T(1,)(2), Hiratsuka T(3), Wulamujiang A(2), Nakamura T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, 54
Shogoin-Kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8397, Japan. (2)Center for Anatomical, 
Pathological, Forensic Medical Research, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan. (3)Department of
Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Yoshida Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan. (4)Cancer Institute,
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ariake 3-8021, Koto-ku, Tokyo, 135-8550, Japan.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) contributes to
B-cell responses to cytokines through suppressor of cytokine signaling (Socs)
genes in innate immunity. However, its direct roles in B-cell responses to
chemokines are poorly understood. In this study, we examined the role of STAT5A
in the innate immune response. We found that STAT5A upregulated the transcription
of C-C motif receptor 6 (Ccr6) to induce responses to its ligand, CCL20. STAT5A
transcriptional activity proceeded through binding to the interferon-<U+03B3> activation
site (GAS) element in the CCR6 promoter in the genome of pre-B cells. High levels
of STAT5A and CCR6 increased CCL20-dependent colony growth of pre-B cells. In
human B-lymphoblastic lymphoma with inflammation, STAT5A phosphorylation was
correlated with CCR6 expression (P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05 compared with that in cases without
inflammation). In conclusion, our data supported our hypothesis that STAT5A
enhanced the response of pre-B cells to CCL20 to promote their growth. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27018255  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Data Brief. 2016 Mar 4;7:490-2. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2016.02.073. eCollection 2016.

Dataset of STAT5A status in breast cancer.

Mukhopadhyay UK(1), Cass J(1), Raptis L(1), Craig AW(2), Bourdeau V(3), Varma
S(1), Gupta SS(1), Elliott BE(1), Ferbeyre G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen<U+05F3>s University Cancer Research
Institute, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. (3)Université de Montréal,
Département de Biochimie, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7.

We analysed STAT5A gene expression in breast cancer using the Oncomine database. 
We exemplify four representative studies showing that STAT5A is generally
downregulated in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4792860
PMID: 27014737  [PubMed]


3. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Mar 21;22(11):3175-85. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i11.3175.

Astragalus polysaccharide attenuates rat experimental colitis by inducing
regulatory T cells in intestinal Peyer's patches.

Zhao HM(1), Wang Y(1), Huang XY(1), Huang MF(1), Xu R(1), Yue HY(1), Zhou BG(1), 
Huang HY(1), Sun QM(1), Liu DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hai-Mei Zhao, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Jiangxi University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanchang 330004, Jiangxi Province, China.

AIM: To explore probable mechanism underlying the therapeutic effect of
Astragalus polysaccharide (APS) against experimental colitis.
METHODS: Thirty-two Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into four groups.
Colitis was induced with 2, 4, 6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS). The rats
with colitis were treated with 400 mg/kg of APS for 7 d. The therapeutic effect
was evaluated by colonic weight, weight index of the colon, colonic length, and
macroscopic and histological scores. The levels of regulatory T (Treg) cells in
Peyer's patches were measured by flow cytometry, and cytokines in colonic tissue 
homogenates were analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The expression
of related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t (ROR-<U+03B3>t), IL-23 and STAT-5a was measured by Western
blot.
RESULTS: After 7-d treatment with APS, the weight index of the colon, colonic
weight, macroscopical and histological scores were decreased, while the colonic
length was increased compared with the model group. The expression of interleukin
(IL)-2, IL-6, IL-17, IL-23 and ROR-<U+03B3>t in the colonic tissues was down-regulated, 
but Treg cells in Peyer's patches, TGF-ß and STAT5a in the colonic tissues were
up-regulated.
CONCLUSION: APS effectively ameliorates TNBS-induced experimental colitis in
rats, probably through restoring the number of Treg cells, and inhibiting IL-17
levels in Peyer's patches.

PMCID: PMC4789992
PMID: 27003994  [PubMed - in process]


4. Elife. 2016 Mar 21;5. pii: e08384. doi: 10.7554/eLife.08384. [Epub ahead of
print]

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) paralog dose governs T
cell effector and regulatory functions.

Villarino A(1), Laurence A(1), Robinson GW(2), Bonelli M(1), Dema B(1), Afzali
B(1), Shih HY(1), Sun HW(1), Brooks SR(1), Hennighausen L(2), Kanno Y(1), O'Shea 
JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
United States. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
United States.

The transcription factor STAT5 is fundamental to the mammalian immune system.
However, the relationship between its two paralogs, STAT5A and STAT5B, and the
extent to which they are functionally distinct, remains uncertain. Using mouse
models of paralog deficiency, we demonstrate that they are not equivalent for
CD4(+) 'helper' T cells, the principal orchestrators of adaptive immunity.
Instead, we find that STAT5B is dominant in both effector and regulatory (Treg)
responses and, therefore, uniquely necessary for immunological tolerance.
Comparative analysis of genomic distribution and transcriptomic output reveals
that STAT5B has greater transcriptional output but, surprisingly, our data point 
towards asymmetric expression (i.e. paralog dose), rather than distinct
functional properties, as the key distinguishing feature. Thus, we propose a
quantitative model of STAT5 paralog activity whereby relative abundance imposes
functional specificity (or dominance) in the face of widespread structural
homology.

PMID: 26999798  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Dairy Sci. 2016 Mar 16. pii: S0022-0302(16)30075-3. doi:
10.3168/jds.2015-10420. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of candidate gene polymorphisms on the detailed fatty acids profile
determined by gas chromatography in bovine milk.

Pegolo S(1), Cecchinato A(2), Mele M(3), Conte G(3), Schiavon S(1), Bittante
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy, Food, Natural Resources, Animals and Environment
(DAFNAE), University of Padova, Viale dell'Università 16, 35020 Legnaro, Padova, 
Italy. (2)Department of Agronomy, Food, Natural Resources, Animals and
Environment (DAFNAE), University of Padova, Viale dell'Università 16, 35020
Legnaro, Padova, Italy. Electronic address: alessio.cecchinato@unipd.it.
(3)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, Università di Pisa, Via del
Borghetto, 80, 56124 Pisa, Italy.

Association analyses between candidate genes and bovine milk fatty acids can
improve our understanding of genetic variation in milk fatty acid profiles and
reveal potential opportunities to tailor milk fat composition through selection
strategies. In this work, we investigated the association of 51 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) selected from 37 candidate genes using a functional and
positional approach, with 47 fatty acids, 9 fatty acid groups, and 5
<U+0394>(9)-desaturation indices in milk samples from Brown Swiss cows. Individual milk 
samples were collected from 1,158 Italian Brown Swiss cows, and gas
chromatography was used to obtain detailed milk fatty acid compositions. A
GoldenGate assay system (Illumina, San Diego, CA) was used to perform genotype 96
selected SNP located in 54 genes across 22 chromosomes. In total, 51 polymorphic 
SNP in 37 candidate genes were retained for the association analysis. A Bayesian 
linear animal model was used to estimate the contribution of each SNP. A total of
129 tests indicated relevant additive effects between a given SNP and a single
fatty acid trait; 38 SNP belonging to 30 genes were relevant for a total of 57
fatty acid traits. Most of the studied fatty acid traits (~81%) were relevantly
associated with multiple SNP. Relevantly associated SNP were mainly found in
genes related to fat metabolism, linked to or contained in previously identified 
quantitative trait loci for fat yield or content, or associated with genes
previously identified in association analyses with milk fatty acid profiles in
other cow breeds. The most representative candidate genes were LEP, PRL, STAT5A, 
CCL3, ACACA, GHR, ADRB2, LPIN1, STAT1, FABP4, and CSN2. In particular, relevant
associations with SNP located on bovine chromosome 19 (BTA19) were found. Two
candidate genes on BTA19 (CCL3 and ACACA) were relevantly associated with de novo
short- and medium-chain fatty acids, likely explaining the high heritability
values found for these fatty acids (with the exception of C6:0). Two additional
genes on BTA19 (CCL2 and GH1) showed associations with saturated and
branched-chain fatty acids. Our findings provide basic information on genes and
SNP affecting the milk fatty acid composition of dairy cows. These results may
support the possibility of using genetic selection to modify milk fatty acid
profiles to promote beneficial health-related effects.

Copyright © 2016 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26995140  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Hum Pathol. 2016 Mar 14. pii: S0046-8177(16)00075-7. doi:
10.1016/j.humpath.2016.02.010. [Epub ahead of print]

A Favorable Role of Prolactin in Human Breast Cancer Reveals Novel Pathway Based 
Gene Signatures Indicative of Tumor Differentiation and Favorable Patient
Outcome: Prolactin-Induced Mammary Differentiation Program in Breast Cancer
Prognosis.

Hachim IY(1), Shams A(2), Lebrun JJ(3), Ali S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Cancer Research Program,
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University.
Electronic address: Ibrahim.Hachim@mail.mcgill.ca. (2)Division of Hematology,
Department of Medicine, Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of the McGill
University Health Centre, McGill University. Electronic address:
Anwar.Shams@mail.mcgill.ca. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of the McGill University
Health Centre, McGill University. Electronic address: JJ.Lebrun@mcgill.ca.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Cancer Research Program,
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University.
Electronic address: Suhad.Ali@mcgill.ca.

Prolactin (PRL) hormone is known to play a key role in mammary gland development 
allowing for successful lactation. The role of this hormone in breast
tumorigenesis is still controversial. Here, we evaluated PRL protein and gene
expression levels in human breast cancer using tissue microarray of 100 breast
cancer cases, as well as different publically available human breast cancer gene 
profiling databases. Interestingly, our results showed a significant down
regulation of PRL expression in breast cancer compared to normal adjacent tissue.
Moreover, expression of PRL was associated with more differentiated tumors, early
stage, smaller tumor size and absence of distant metastasis. Importantly, our
results indicate that higher PRL mRNA levels are significantly associated with
prolonged relapse free survival (RFS) in breast cancer patients (P=3.7E-9).
Additionally, examining expression of PRL pathway based gene signature composed
of PRL, PRLR, Jak2 and Stat5a showed a significant association with more
differentiated tumors (P<0.00001), prolonged RFS (P=1.8e-06) as well as overall
survival (OS) (P=0.0026). As well, our results indicate that PRL-directed
differentiation program in mammary epithelial cells offer good prognosis in human
breast cancer. Indeed, expression of a gene signature composed of PRL upregulated
genes showed a significant association with well differentiated tumors
(P<0.00001). Whereas expression of a gene signature composed of PRL down
regulated genes showed a significant association with shortened distant
metastasis free survival (DMFS) (P=0.0086). Altogether our results highlight that
PRL hormone and its signaling pathway may play an important role in maintaining
tumor differentiation state and in turn better patient outcome.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26980025  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Apr 15;472(4):624-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.013. Epub 2016 Mar 10.

Inhibition of the acetyl lysine-binding pocket of bromodomain and extraterminal
domain proteins interferes with adipogenesis.

Goupille O(1), Penglong T(2), Kadri Z(1), Granger-Locatelli M(1), Fucharoen S(3),
Maouche-Chrétien L(4), Prost S(1), Leboulch P(2), Chrétien S(5).

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies (IMETI),
Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay, UMR-E 007, France. (2)CEA,
Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies (IMETI),
Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay, UMR-E 007, France; Thalassemia
Research Center, Mahidol University, Thailand. (3)Thalassemia Research Center,
Mahidol University, Thailand. (4)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases and
Innovative Therapies (IMETI), Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay,
UMR-E 007, France; INSERM, Paris, France. (5)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases 
and Innovative Therapies (IMETI), Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay,
UMR-E 007, France; INSERM, Paris, France. Electronic address:
stany.chretien@cea.fr.

The bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) domain family proteins are epigenetic
modulators involved in the reading of acetylated lysine residues. The first BET
protein inhibitor to be identified, (+)-JQ1, a thienotriazolo-1, 4-diazapine,
binds selectively to the acetyl lysine-binding pocket of BET proteins. We
evaluated the impact on adipogenesis of this druggable targeting of chromatin
epigenetic readers, by investigating the physiological consequences of epigenetic
modifications through targeting proteins binding to chromatin. JQ1 significantly 
inhibited the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes into white and brown
adipocytes by down-regulating the expression of genes involved in adipogenesis,
particularly those encoding the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR-<U+03B3>), the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPa) and, STAT5A and B. The
expression of a constitutively activated STAT5B mutant did not prevent inhibition
by JQ1. Thus, the association of BET/STAT5 is required for adipogenesis but STAT5
transcription activity is not the only target of JQ1. Treatment with JQ1 did not 
lead to the conversion of white adipose tissue into brown adipose tissue (BAT).
BET protein inhibition thus interferes with generation of adipose tissue from
progenitors, confirming the importance of the connections between epigenetic
mechanisms and specific adipogenic transcription factors.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26972250  [PubMed - in process]


8. Epigenetics. 2016 Mar 1:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantitative genome-wide methylation analysis of high-grade non-muscle invasive
bladder cancer.

Kitchen MO(1,)(2), Bryan RT(3), Emes RD(4), Glossop JR(1), Luscombe C(2), Cheng
K(3), Zeegers MP(3,)(5,)(6,)(7), James ND(8), Devall AJ(3), Mein CA(9),
Gommersall L(2), Fryer AA(1), Farrell WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University , UK.
(2)b Urology Department , University Hospitals of North Midlands NHS Trust , UK. 
(3)c Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham , UK.
(4)d Advanced Data Analysis Centre, University of Nottingham , UK. (5)e
Department of Complex Genetics , Maastricht University Medical Centre , The
Netherlands. (6)f NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in
Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre , The Netherlands. (7)g CAPHRI
School for Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht University Medical Centre ,
The Netherlands. (8)h Cancer Research Unit, University of Warwick , UK. (9)i The 
Genome Centre, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry , London ,
UK.

High-grade non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (HG-NMIBC) is a clinically
unpredictable disease with greater risks of recurrence and progression relative
to their low-intermediate-grade counterparts. The molecular events, including
those affecting the epigenome, that characterize this disease entity in the
context of tumor development, recurrence, and progression, are incompletely
understood. We therefore interrogated genome-wide DNA methylation using
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays in 21 primary HG-NMIBC tumors relative to
normal bladder controls. Using strict inclusion-exclusion criteria we identified 
1,057 hypermethylated CpGs within gene promoter-associated CpG islands,
representing 256 genes. We validated the array data by bisulphite pyrosequencing 
and examined 25 array-identified candidate genes in an independent cohort of 30
HG-NMIBC and 18 low-intermediate-grade NMIBC. These analyses revealed
significantly higher methylation frequencies in high-grade tumors relative to
low-intermediate-grade tumors for the ATP5G2, IRX1 and VAX2 genes (P<0.05), and
similarly significant increases in mean levels of methylation in high-grade
tumors for the ATP5G2, VAX2, INSRR, PRDM14, VSX1, TFAP2b, PRRX1, and HIST1H4F
genes (P<0.05). Although inappropriate promoter methylation was not invariantly
associated with reduced transcript expression, a significant association was
apparent for the ARHGEF4, PON3, STAT5a, and VAX2 gene transcripts (P<0.05).
Herein, we present the first genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in a unique
HG-NMIBC cohort, showing extensive and discrete methylation changes relative to
normal bladder and low-intermediate-grade tumors. The genes we identified hold
significant potential as targets for novel therapeutic intervention either alone,
or in combination, with more conventional therapeutic options in the treatment of
this clinically unpredictable disease.

PMID: 26929985  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1859(4):599-611. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2016.02.010. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) controls the invasiveness of glioblastoma through
YAP-dependent expression of CYR61/CCN1 and miR-296-3p.

Lee H(1), Hwang SJ(1), Kim HR(1), Shin CH(1), Choi KH(1), Joung JG(2), Kim HH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (2)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced
Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Institute for Future
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
hyeonhkim@skku.edu.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive type of primary
brain tumor derived from non-neuronal glial cells. Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2)
protein, also termed as merlin, is a well-known tumor suppressor; however, the
molecular mechanism underlying this effect has not yet been fully defined. To
investigate the role of NF2 in the invasiveness of GBM, we used two GBM cell
lines: NF2-expressing T98G cells and NF2-deficient A172 cells. Knockdown of NF2
increased the invasiveness of T98G cells, whereas NF2-overexpressing A172 cells
showed decreased invasive activity. Moreover, re-expression of NF2 reversed the
high invasiveness of NF2-silenced T98G cells, indicating that NF2 negatively
regulates GBM invasiveness. We further found that the NF2-mediated regulation of 
invasiveness was dependent on YAP and TEAD2 expression levels. NF2 also
controlled the expression of YAP targets, including cysteine-rich angiogenic
inducer 61 (CYR61/CCN1), by regulating the nuclear localization of YAP. Silencing
of CYR61/CCN1 blocked the increased invasiveness of T98G cells, suggesting that
CYR61/CCN1 is required for NF2-mediated invasiveness. Through microRNA microarray
analysis, we found that NF2 negatively regulates the expression of miR-296-3p.
Overexpression of miR-296-3p suppressed the expression of STAT5A, induced the
phosphorylation of STAT3 by downregulating SOCS2, and increased the invasiveness 
of T98G cells. Taken together, we demonstrate that NF2 negatively controls the
invasiveness of GBM through YAP-dependent induction of CYR61/CCN1 and miR-296-3p.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923924  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Cytokine. 2016 Feb 11. pii: S1043-4666(16)30013-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cyto.2016.01.013. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT5A is regulated by DNA damage via the tumor suppressor p53.

Mukhopadhyay UK(1), Cass J(1), Raptis L(1), Craig AW(2), Bourdeau V(3), Varma
S(1), SenGupta S(1), Elliott BE(4), Ferbeyre G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's University, Cancer Research
Institute, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. (3)Université de Montréal,
Département de biochimie, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada. (4)Division of Cancer
Biology and Genetics, Queen's University, Cancer Research Institute, Kingston,
Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. Electronic address: elliottb@queensu.ca. (5)Université
de Montréal, Département de biochimie, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada.
Electronic address: g.ferbeyre@umontreal.ca.

Here we report that the STAT5A transcription factor is a direct p53
transcriptional target gene. STAT5A is well expressed in p53 wild type cells but 
not in p53-null cells. Inhibition of p53 reduces STAT5A expression. DNA damaging 
agents such as doxorubicin also induced STAT5A expression in a p53 dependent
manner. Two p53 binding sites were mapped in the STAT5A gene and named PBS1 and
PBS2; these sites were sufficient to confer p53 responsiveness in a luciferase
reporter gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that PBS2 has
constitutive p53 bound to it, while p53 binding to PBS1 required DNA damage. In
normal human breast lobules, weak p53 staining correlated with regions of intense
STAT5A staining. Interestingly, in a cohort of triple negative breast tumor
tissues there was little correlation between regions of p53 and STAT5A staining, 
likely reflecting a high frequency of p53 mutations that stabilize the protein in
these tumors. We thus reveal an unexpected connection between cytokine signaling 
and p53.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26876578  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2016 Feb 8. doi: 10.1002/bit.25948. [Epub ahead of print]

Cytokine-dependent activation of JAK-STAT pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Yoshimoto N(1), Ikeda Y(1), Tatematsu K(1), Iijima M(1), Nakai T(1), Okajima
T(1), Tanizawa K(1), Kuroda S(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University,
Ibaraki, Osaka, 567-0047, Japan.

Protein phosphorylation is an important post-translational modification for
intracellular signaling molecules, mostly found in serine and threonine residues.
Tyrosine phosphorylations are very few events (less than 0.1% to phosphorylated
serine/threonine residues), but capable of governing cell fate decisions involved
in proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and oncogenic transformation.
Hence, it is important for drug discovery and system biology to measure the
intracellular level of phosphotyrosine. Although mammalian cells have been
conventionally utilized for this purpose, accurate determination of
phosphotyrosine level often suffers from high background due to the unexpected
crosstalk among endogenous signaling molecules. This situation led us firstly to 
establish the ligand-induced activation of homomeric receptor tyrosine kinase
(i.e., epidermal growth factor receptor) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a lower
eukaryote possessing organelles similar to higher eukaryote but not showing
substantial level of tyrosine kinase activity. In this study, we expressed
heteromeric receptor tyrosine kinase (i.e., a complex of interleukin-5 receptor
(IL5R) a chain, common ß chain, and JAK2 tyrosine kinase) in yeast. When
coexpressed with a cell wall-anchored form of IL5, the yeast exerted the
autophosphorylation of JAK2, followed by the phosphorylation of transcription
factor STAT5a and subsequent nuclear accumulation of phosphorylated STAT5a. Taken
together, yeast could be an ideal host for sensitive detection of phosphotyrosine
generated by a wide variety of tyrosine kinases. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26853220  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Genetika. 2015 Nov;51(11):1264-72.

INVESTIGATION OF STAT5A, FSHR AND LHR GENE POLYMORPHISMS IN TURKISH INDIGENOUS
CATTLE BREEDS (EAST ANATOLLAN RED, SOUTH ANATOLIAN RED, TURKISH GREY, ANATOLIAN
BLACK AND ZAVOT).

Arslan K, Akyüz B, Agaoglu OK.

The objective of this study was to examine the allelic and genotypic profiles of 
the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5A (STAT5A), Follicle
Stimulating Hormone Receptors (FSHR), and Luteinizing Hormone Receptor (LHR)
genes in five indigenous cattle breeds in Turkey. For this purpose, a total of
329 cattle from East Anatolian Red (EAR), South Anatolian Red (SAR), Turkish Grey
(TG), Anatolian Black (AB), and Zavot were genotyped using by PCR-RFLP method.
A215 bp fragment of STAT5A, a 306bp fragment of FSHR, and a 303 bp fragment of
LHR were amplified and digested with AvaI, AluI, and HhaI restriction enzymes,
respectively. In this study two types of alleles C and Tfor STAT5A, C and G for
FSHR and C and T for LHR were observed. The highest frequencies for STAT5A-C and 
STAT5A-T alleles were estimated for the Zavot and TG breeds (0.86) and the EAR
breed (0.29), respectively. The highest frequency for FSHR-C and FSHR-G alleles
was estimated for the Zavot breed (0.72) and the AB and SARbreeds (0.35),
respectively. The highest frequency for LHR-C and LHR-T alleles was estimated for
the EAR breed (0.75) and the AB breed (0.39), respectively. According to FT
values, a small level of genetic diversity was found among five cattle breeds.
The F(ST) value was calculated 0.019 between AB and Zavot. And, the value was
significant (p < 0.001), while the other F(ST) values were not significant.
According to the genetic distance values (Nei), the highest genetic distance was 
found between AB and TG while the smallest genetic distance was found between
Zavot and TG. The chi-square test showed that the TG and Zavot breeds were in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for STAT5A gene; the EAR, SAR, TG, and Zavot
breeds were in HWE for FSHR gene and the EAR, SAR, and TG breeds were in HWE for 
LHR gene. In conclusion, further investigation is required to determine the
correlation of the FSHR and LHR genes with early puberty for the improvement of
sexual precocity, and it is considered that the STAT5A gene may be used to
improve the milk yield and milk yield traits of local cattle breeds, including
those indigenous to Turkey.

PMID: 26845856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2016 Apr;97:196-212. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2016.01.003. Epub 
2016 Jan 28.

Nuclear introns outperform mitochondrial DNA in inter-specific phylogenetic
reconstruction: Lessons from horseshoe bats (Rhinolophidae: Chiroptera).

Dool SE(1), Puechmaille SJ(2), Foley NM(3), Allegrini B(4), Bastian A(5), Mutumi 
GL(6), Maluleke TG(7), Odendaal LJ(8), Teeling EC(9), Jacobs DS(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Animal Evolution and Systematics Group,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Zoological Institute and
Museum, University of Greifswald, Soldmann-Straße 14, D-17487 Greifswald,
Germany. Electronic address: serena.dool@gmail.com. (2)Zoological Institute and
Museum, University of Greifswald, Soldmann-Straße 14, D-17487 Greifswald,
Germany; Midi-Pyrénées bat group (CREN-GCMP), Toulouse, France; School of Biology
and Environmental Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland. Electronic address: s.puechmaille@gmail.com. (3)School of Biology and
Environmental Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
Electronic address: nicole.ma.foley@gmail.com. (4)Naturalia environnement, 34670 
Baillargues, France. Electronic address: b.allegrini@naturalia-environnement.fr. 
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Animal Evolution and Systematics Group,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address:
anna.bastian@mail.de. (6)Department of Biological Sciences, Animal Evolution and 
Systematics Group, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic
address: gmutumi@gmail.com. (7)Department of Biological Sciences, Animal
Evolution and Systematics Group, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa. Electronic address: Tinyiko.Maluleke2009@gmail.com. (8)Department of
Biological Sciences, Animal Evolution and Systematics Group, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address: lizelle.j.odendaal@gmail.com. 
(9)School of Biology and Environmental Science, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. Electronic address: emma.teeling@ucd.ie.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, Animal Evolution and Systematics Group,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address:
david.jacobs@uct.ac.za.

Despite many studies illustrating the perils of utilising mitochondrial DNA in
phylogenetic studies, it remains one of the most widely used genetic markers for 
this purpose. Over the last decade, nuclear introns have been proposed as
alternative markers for phylogenetic reconstruction. However, the resolution
capabilities of mtDNA and nuclear introns have rarely been quantified and
compared. In the current study we generated a novel ~5kb dataset comprising six
nuclear introns and a mtDNA fragment. We assessed the relative resolution
capabilities of the six intronic fragments with respect to each other, when used 
in various combinations together, and when compared to the traditionally used
mtDNA. We focused on a major clade in the horseshoe bat family (Afro-Palaearctic 
clade; Rhinolophidae) as our case study. This old, widely distributed and
speciose group contains a high level of conserved morphology. This morphological 
stasis renders the reconstruction of the phylogeny of this group with traditional
morphological characters complex. We sampled multiple individuals per species to 
represent their geographic distributions as best as possible (122 individuals, 24
species, 68 localities). We reconstructed the species phylogeny using several
complementary methods (partitioned Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian and Bayesian
multispecies-coalescent) and made inferences based on consensus across these
methods. We computed pairwise comparisons based on Robinson-Foulds tree distance 
metric between all Bayesian topologies generated (27,000) for every gene(s) and
visualised the tree space using multidimensional scaling (MDS) plots. Using our
supported species phylogeny we estimated the ancestral state of key traits of
interest within this group, e.g. echolocation peak frequency which has been
implicated in speciation. Our results revealed many potential cryptic species
within this group, even in taxa where this was not suspected a priori and also
found evidence for mtDNA introgression. We demonstrated that by using just two
introns one can recover a better supported species tree than when using the mtDNA
alone, despite the shorter overall length of the combined introns. Additionally, 
when combining any single intron with mtDNA, we showed that the result is highly 
similar to the mtDNA gene tree and far from the true species tree and therefore
this approach should be avoided. We caution against the indiscriminate use of
mtDNA in phylogenetic studies and advocate for pilot studies to select nuclear
introns. The selection of marker type and number is a crucial step that is best
based on critical examination of preliminary or previously published data. Based 
on our findings and previous publications, we recommend the following markers to 
recover phylogenetic relationships between recently diverged taxa (<20My) in bats
and other mammals: ACOX2, COPS7A, BGN, ROGDI and STAT5A.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26826601  [PubMed - in process]


14. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Apr;15(4):1246-61. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.054593. Epub
2016 Jan 19.

High-resolution Antibody Array Analysis of Childhood Acute Leukemia Cells.

Kanderova V(1), Kuzilkova D(1), Stuchly J(1), Vaskova M(1), Brdicka T(2), Fiser
K(1), Hrusak O(1), Lund-Johansen F(3), Kalina T(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the CLIP - Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of
Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, 2 Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague, V Uvalu 84, 15006 Prague 5, Czech Republic; (2)§Institute of Molecular
Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic; Videnska 1083, 14220 Prague,
Czech Republic; (3)¶Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital,
Rikshospitalet; Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway. (4)From the CLIP -
Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of Paediatric Haematology
and Oncology, 2 Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, V Uvalu 84,
15006 Prague 5, Czech Republic; tomas.kalina@lfmotol.cuni.cz.

Acute leukemia is a disease pathologically manifested at both genomic and
proteomic levels. Molecular genetic technologies are currently widely used in
clinical research. In contrast, sensitive and high-throughput proteomic
techniques for performing protein analyses in patient samples are still lacking. 
Here, we used a technology based on size exclusion chromatography followed by
immunoprecipitation of target proteins with an antibody bead array (Size
Exclusion Chromatography-Microsphere-based Affinity Proteomics, SEC-MAP) to
detect hundreds of proteins from a single sample. In addition, we developed
semi-automatic bioinformatics tools to adapt this technology for high-content
proteomic screening of pediatric acute leukemia patients.To confirm the utility
of SEC-MAP in leukemia immunophenotyping, we tested 31 leukemia diagnostic
markers in parallel by SEC-MAP and flow cytometry. We identified 28 antibodies
suitable for both techniques. Eighteen of them provided excellent quantitative
correlation between SEC-MAP and flow cytometry (p< 0.05). Next, SEC-MAP was
applied to examine 57 diagnostic samples from patients with acute leukemia. In
this assay, we used 632 different antibodies and detected 501 targets. Of those, 
47 targets were differentially expressed between at least two of the three acute 
leukemia subgroups. The CD markers correlated with immunophenotypic categories as
expected. From non-CD markers, we found DBN1, PAX5, or PTK2 overexpressed in
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemias, LAT, SH2D1A, or STAT5A
overexpressed in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias, and HCK, GLUD1, or SYK
overexpressed in acute myeloid leukemias. In addition, OPAL1 overexpression
corresponded to ETV6-RUNX1 chromosomal translocation.In summary, we demonstrated 
that SEC-MAP technology is a powerful tool for detecting hundreds of proteins in 
clinical samples obtained from pediatric acute leukemia patients. It provides
information about protein size and reveals differences in protein expression
between particular leukemia subgroups. Forty-seven of SEC-MAP identified targets 
were validated by other conventional method in this study.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26785729  [PubMed - in process]


15. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17321-32. eCollection 2015.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes based on microarray data of glioma.

Jiang CM(1), Wang XH(1), Shu J(1), Yang WX(2), Fu P(3), Zhuang LL(1), Zhou GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 
Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001,
China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Affiliated 
Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province
310003, China.

Glioma represents one of the main causes of cancer-related death worldwide.
Unfortunately, its exact molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood, which
limits the prognosis and therapy. This study aimed to identify the critical
genes, transcription factors and the possible biochemical pathways that may
affect glioma progression at transcription level. After downloading micro-array
data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between glioma and normal samples were screened. We predicted novel
glioma-related genes and carried on online software DAVID to conduct GO
enrichment and transcription factor analysis of these selected genes. String
software was applied to construct a PPI protein interaction network, as well as
to find the key genes and transcription factors in the regulation of glioma. A
total of 97 DEGs were identified associated with cancer, the GO enrichment
analysis indicated these DEGs were mainly relevant to immune responses as well as
regulation of cell growth. In addition, the transcription factor analysis showed 
these DEGs were regulated by the binding sites of transcription factors GLI2,
SP1, SMAD7, SMAD3, RELA, STAT5B, CTNNB1, STAT5A, TFAP2A and SP3. PPI protein
interaction network analysis demonstrated the hub nodes in the interaction
network were EGFR, TGFB1, FN1 and MYC. The hub DEGs may be the most critical in
glioma and could be considered as drug targets for glioma therapy after further
exploration. Besides, with the identification of regulating transcription
factors, the pathogenesis of glioma at transcription level might be brought to
light.

PMCID: PMC4694224
PMID: 26770324  [PubMed]


16. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Apr;103:247-56. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.023.
Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Relaxin in paraventricular nucleus contributes to sympathetic overdrive and
hypertension via PI3K-Akt pathway.

Sun HJ(1), Chen D(1), Han Y(1), Zhou YB(1), Wang JJ(1), Chen Q(2), Li YH(2), Gao 
XY(1), Kang YM(3), Zhu GQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease and Molecular Intervention,
Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
China. (2)Department of Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, China. (3)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology,
Cardiovascular Research Center, Xi'an Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Xi'an 710061, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease and Molecular
Intervention, Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, China. Electronic address: gqzhucn@njmu.edu.cn.

Relaxin is recognized as an ovarian polypeptide hormone. Abundant relaxin binding
sites are observed in hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN). This study was 
conducted to determine the roles and underlying mechanisms of relaxin in the PVN 
in sympathetic activation and hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats
(SHR). Experiments were performed in normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) and
SHR. Relaxin and its RXFP1 receptors in PVN were up-regulated in SHR.
Relaxin-positive neurons existed in both parvocellular and magnocellular parts of
the PVN. Presympathetic neurons and AVP neurons in the PVN expressed RXFP1, but
not relaxin. Bilateral PVN microinjection of human relaxin-2 increased but
anti-relaxin IgG reduced renal sympathetic nerve activity (RSNA), mean arterial
pressure (MAP), plasma norepinephrine (NE) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) levels 
in SHR. The effects of relaxin-2 on RSNA and MAP were abolished by intravenous
infusion of ganglionic blocker hexamethonium, and attenuated by AVP V1 receptor
antagonist AAVP. Akt phosphorylation was enhanced in SHR, and relaxin-2
stimulated Akt phosphorylation and p85a subunit of PI3K expression. PI3K
inhibitor LY294002 or Akt inhibitor MK-2206 abolished the effects of relaxin-2 on
the RSNA, MAP and plasma NE, and attenuated the relaxin-2-induced AVP secretion. 
STAT5a and polymerase II (Pol II) binding to relaxin-promoter were significantly 
increased in SHR. Chronic PVN infusion of relaxin-2 with osmotic pumps in normal 
rats induced sympathetic activation, AVP secretion and hypertension accompanied
with cardiovascular remodeling. Relaxin in the PVN contributes to sympathetic
overdrive and hypertension via PI3K-Akt pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26746861  [PubMed - in process]


17. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 6;11(1):e0146311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146311.
eCollection 2016.

HER Specific TKIs Exert Their Antineoplastic Effects on Breast Cancer Cell Lines 
through the Involvement of STAT5 and JNK.

Gschwantler-Kaulich D(1), Grunt TW(2,)(3), Muhr D(1), Wagner R(2), Kölbl H(1),
Singer CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecology, Department of OB/GYN and Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (2)Signaling Networks Program,
Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine I and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (3)Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster
Oncology, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: HER-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have demonstrated
pro-apoptotic and antiproliferative effects in vitro and in vivo. The exact
pathways through which TKIs exert their antineoplastic effects are, however,
still not completely understood.
METHODS: Using Milliplex assays, we have investigated the effects of the three
panHER-TKIs lapatinib, canertinib and afatinib on signal transduction cascade
activation in SKBR3, T47D and Jurkat neoplastic cell lines. The growth-inhibitory
effect of blockade of HER and of JNK and STAT5 signaling was measured by
proliferation- and apoptosis-assays using formazan dye labeling of viable cells, 
Western blotting for cleaved PARP-1 and immunolabeling for active caspase 3,
respectively.
RESULTS: All three HER-TKIs clearly inhibited proliferation and increased
apoptosis in HER2 overexpressing SKBR3 cells, while their effect was less
pronounced on HER2 moderately expressing T47D cells where they exerted only a
weak antiproliferative and essentially no pro-apoptotic effect. Remarkably,
phosphorylation/activation of JNK and STAT5A/B were inhibited by HER-TKIs only in
the sensitive, but not in the resistant cells. In contrast,
phosphorylation/activation of ERK/MAPK, STAT3, CREB, p70 S6 kinase, IkBa, and p38
were equally affected by HER-TKIs in both cell lines. Moreover, we demonstrated
that direct pharmacological blockade of JNK and STAT5 abrogates cell growth in
both HER-TKI-sensitive as well as -resistant breast cancer cells, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that HER-TKIs exert a HER2 expression-dependent
anti-cancer effect in breast cancer cell lines. This involves blockade of JNK and
STAT5A/B signaling, which have been found to be required for in vitro growth of
these cell lines.

PMCID: PMC4703392
PMID: 26735495  [PubMed - in process]


18. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2016 Jan 15;226:36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.12.017.
Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Expression profile of IGF paralog genes in liver and muscle of a GH-transgenic
zebrafish.

Nornberg BF(1), Figueiredo MA(1), Marins LF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande - FURG, Rio Grande, RS, Brazil. (2)Laboratório
de Biologia Molecular, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande - FURG, Rio Grande, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: dqmluf@furg.br.

The objective of this study was to investigate the relationship between IGFs
produced in the liver and skeletal muscle with muscle hypertrophy previously
observed in a line of GH-transgenic zebrafish. In this sense, we evaluated the
expression of genes related to the IGF system in liver and muscle of transgenics,
as well as the main intracellular signaling pathways used by GH/IGF axis. Our
results showed an increase in expression of igf1a, igf2a, and igf2b genes in the 
liver. Moreover, there was a decrease in the expression of igf1ra and an increase
in muscle igf2r of transgenics, indicating a negative response of muscle tissue
with respect to excess circulating IGFs. Muscle IGFs expression analyses revealed
a significant increase only for igf2b, accompanied by a parallel induction of
igfbp5a gene. The presence of IGFBP5a may potentiate the IGF2 action in muscle
cells differentiation. Regarding JAK/STAT-related genes, we observed an
alteration in the expression profile of both stat3 and stat5a in transgenic fish 
liver. No changes were observed in the muscle, suggesting that both tissues
respond differently to GH-transgenesis. Western blotting analyses indicated an
imbalance between the phosphorylation levels of the proliferative (MEK/ERK) and
hypertrophic (PI3K/Akt) pathways, in favor of the latter. In summary, the results
of this study suggest that the hypertrophy caused by GH-transgenesis in zebrafish
may be due to circulating IGFs produced by the liver, with an important
participation of muscle IGF2b. This group of IGFs appears to be favoring the
hypertrophic intracellular pathway in muscle tissue of transgenic zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26718079  [PubMed - in process]


19. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 30;10(12):e0145142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145142.
eCollection 2015.

How Intrinsic Molecular Dynamics Control Intramolecular Communication in Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription Factor STAT5.

Langenfeld F(1,)(2), Guarracino Y(1), Arock M(1), Trouvé A(2), Tchertanov L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Cachan, France. (2)Centre de Mathématiques
et de Leurs applications, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, CNRS, Université
Paris-Saclay, Cachan, France.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription STAT5 is a key mediator of cell 
proliferation, differentiation and survival. While STAT5 activity is tightly
regulated in normal cells, its constitutive activation directly contributes to
oncogenesis and is associated with a broad range of hematological and solid tumor
cancers. Therefore the development of compounds able to modulate pathogenic
activation of this protein is a very challenging endeavor. A crucial step of drug
design is the understanding of the protein conformational features and the
definition of putative binding site(s) for such modulators. Currently, there is
no structural data available for human STAT5 and our study is the first footprint
towards the description of structure and dynamics of this protein. We
investigated structural and dynamical features of the two STAT5 isoforms, STAT5a 
and STAT5b, taken into account their phosphorylation status. The study was based 
on the exploration of molecular dynamics simulations by different analytical
methods. Despite the overall folding similarity of STAT5 proteins, the MD
conformations display specific structural and dynamical features for each
protein, indicating first, sequence-encoded structural properties and second,
phosphorylation-induced effects which contribute to local and long-distance
structural rearrangements interpreted as allosteric event. Further examination of
the dynamical coupling between distant sites provides evidence for alternative
profiles of the communication pathways inside and between the STAT5 domains.
These results add a new insight to the understanding of the crucial role of
intrinsic molecular dynamics in mediating intramolecular signaling in STAT5. Two 
pockets, localized in close proximity to the phosphotyrosine-binding site and
adjacent to the channel for communication pathways across STAT5, may constitute
valid targets to develop inhibitors able to modulate the function-related
communication properties of this signaling protein.

PMCID: PMC4696835
PMID: 26717567  [PubMed - in process]


20. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Dec 30. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT5 in Cancer and Immunity.

Rani A(1), Murphy JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Westminster , London, United 
Kingdom .

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5a and STAT5b) are
highly homologous proteins that are encoded by 2 separate genes and are activated
by Janus-activated kinases (JAK) downstream of cytokine receptors. STAT5 proteins
are activated by a wide variety of hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cytokines
and growth factors, all of which use the JAK-STAT signalling pathway as their
main mode of signal transduction. STAT5 proteins critically regulate vital
cellular functions such as proliferation, differentiation, and survival. The
physiological importance of STAT5 proteins is underscored by the plethora of
primary human tumors that have aberrant constitutive activation of these
proteins, which significantly contributes to tumor cell survival and malignant
progression of disease. STAT5 plays an important role in the maintenance of
normal immune function and homeostasis, both of which are regulated by specific
members of IL-2 family of cytokines, which share a common gamma chain (<U+03B3>c) in
their receptor complex. STAT5 critically mediates the biological actions of
members of the <U+03B3>c family of cytokines in the immune system. Essentially, STAT5
plays a critical role in the function and development of Tregs, and consistently 
activated STAT5 is associated with a suppression in antitumor immunity and an
increase in proliferation, invasion, and survival of tumor cells. Thus,
therapeutic targeting of STAT5 is promising in cancer.

PMID: 26716518  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2015 Dec 10. pii: S1096-6374(15)30044-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ghir.2015.12.006. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT5B deficiency: Impacts on human growth and immunity.

Hwa V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Center for Growth Disorders, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, 45229, United States. Electronic address:
vivian.hwa@cchmc.org.

Growth hormone (GH) promotes postnatal human growth primarily by regulating
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production through activation of the GH
receptor (GHR)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5B
signaling cascade. The critical importance of STAT5B in human IGF-I production
was confirmed with the identification of the first homozygous, autosomal
recessive, STAT5B mutation in a young female patient who phenotypically resembled
patients with classical growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) syndrome (Laron
syndrome) due to mutations in the GHR gene, presenting with severe postnatal
growth failure and marked IGF-I deficiency. Of note, the closely related STAT5A, 
which shares >95% amino acid identity with STAT5B, could not compensate for loss 
of functional STAT5B. To date, 7 homozygous, inactivating, STAT5B mutations in 10
patients have been reported. STAT5B deficient patients, unlike patients deficient
in GHR, can also present with a novel, potentially fatal, primary
immunodeficiency, which can manifest as chronic pulmonary disease. STAT5B
deficiency may be underestimated in endocrine, immunology and pulmonary clinics.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26703237  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 16;16(12):29936-47. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226212.

Tudor-SN Regulates Milk Synthesis and Proliferation of Bovine Mammary Epithelial 
Cells.

Ao J(1), Wei C(2), Si Y(3), Luo C(4), Lv W(5), Lin Y(6), Cui Y(7), Gao X(8).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education Ministry, Northeast
Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China. aojinxia@163.com. (2)The Key
Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education Ministry, Northeast Agricultural
University, Harbin 150030, China. chengjiewei@163.com. (3)The Key Laboratory of
Dairy Science of Education Ministry, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin
150030, China. siyushenghua@sina.com. (4)The Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of
Education Ministry, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China.
luochaochao839505@163.com. (5)The Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education
Ministry, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China.
lvwei199063@163.com. (6)The Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education
Ministry, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China.
linlu516@163.com. (7)The Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education Ministry,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China. c_yingjun@sina.com.
(8)The Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education Ministry, Northeast
Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China. gaoxj5390@sina.com.

Tudor staphylococcal nuclease (Tudor-SN) is a highly conserved and ubiquitously
expressed multifunctional protein, related to multiple and diverse cell type- and
species-specific cellular processes. Studies have shown that Tudor-SN is mainly
expressed in secretory cells, however knowledge of its role is limited. In our
previous work, we found that the protein level of Tudor-SN was upregulated in the
nucleus of bovine mammary epithelial cells (BMEC). In this study, we assessed the
role of Tudor-SN in milk synthesis and cell proliferation of BMEC. We exploited
gene overexpression and silencing methods, and found that Tudor-SN positively
regulates milk synthesis and proliferation via Stat5a activation. Both amino
acids (methionine) and estrogen triggered NF<U+03BA>B1 to bind to the gene promoters of 
Tudor-SN and Stat5a, and this enhanced the protein level and nuclear localization
of Tudor-SN and p-Stat5a. Taken together, these results suggest the key role of
Tudor-SN in the transcriptional regulation of milk synthesis and proliferation of
BMEC under the stimulation of amino acids and hormones.

PMCID: PMC4691155
PMID: 26694361  [PubMed - in process]


23. Nucleus. 2015 Nov 2;6(6):490-506. doi: 10.1080/19491034.2015.1128610.

Rapamycin reduces fibroblast proliferation without causing quiescence and induces
STAT5A/B-mediated cytokine production.

Gillespie ZE(1,)(2), MacKay K(3), Sander M(1), Trost B(3), Dawicki W(4),
Wickramarathna A(1), Gordon J(4), Eramian M(3), Kill IR(2), Bridger JM(2),
Kusalik A(3), Mitchell JA(5,)(6), Eskiw CH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Food and Bioproduct Sciences ; University of Saskatchewan ;
Saskatoon , Canada. (2)b Institute of Environment, Health and Societies; Brunel
University; London , Uxbridge , United Kingdom. (3)c Department of Computer
Science ; University of Saskatchewan ; Saskatoon , Canada. (4)d Department of
Medicine ; Division of Respirology, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine; Royal
University Hospital ; Saskatoon , Canada. (5)e Department of Cell and Systems
Biology ; University of Toronto ; Toronto , Canada. (6)f Centre for the Analysis 
of Genome Evolution and Function; University of Toronto , Toronto , ON , Canada.

Rapamycin is a well-known inhibitor of the Target of Rapamycin (TOR) signaling
cascade; however, the impact of this drug on global genome function and
organization in normal primary cells is poorly understood. To explore this
impact, we treated primary human foreskin fibroblasts with rapamycin and observed
a decrease in cell proliferation without causing cell death. Upon rapamycin
treatment chromosomes 18 and 10 were repositioned to a location similar to that
of fibroblasts induced into quiescence by serum reduction. Although similar
changes in positioning occurred, comparative transcriptome analyses demonstrated 
significant divergence in gene expression patterns between rapamycin-treated and 
quiescence-induced fibroblasts. Rapamycin treatment induced the upregulation of
cytokine genes, including those from the Interleukin (IL)-6 signaling network,
such as IL-8 and the Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF), while quiescent
fibroblasts demonstrated up-regulation of genes involved in the complement and
coagulation cascade. In addition, genes significantly up-regulated by rapamycin
treatment demonstrated increased promoter occupancy of the transcription factor
Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5A/B (STAT5A/B). In summary, we 
demonstrated that the treatment of fibroblasts with rapamycin decreased
proliferation, caused chromosome territory repositioning and induced
STAT5A/B-mediated changes in gene expression enriched for cytokines.

PMID: 26652669  [PubMed - in process]


24. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp. 2015 Aug 4;77:90-8. doi: 10.1016/j.curtheres.2015.07.001.
eCollection 2015.

Recombinant Human Erythropoietin Protects Myocardial Cells from Apoptosis via the
Janus-Activated Kinase 2/Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5
Pathway in Rats with Epilepsy.

Ma BX(1), Li J(2), Li H(1), Wu SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University,
Binzhou, China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, First Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential mechanisms underlying the protective
effects of recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) and carbamylated EPO (CEPO)
against myocardial cell apoptosis in epilepsy.
METHODS: Rats were given an intra-amygdala injection of kainic acid to induce
epilepsy. Groups of rats were treated with rhEPO or CEPO before induction of
epilepsy, whereas additional rats were given a caudal vein injection of AG490, a 
selective inhibitor of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2). At different time points after
seizure onset, electroencephalogram changes were recorded, and myocardium samples
were taken for the detection of myocardial cell apoptosis and expression of JAK2,
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5), caspase-3, and bcl-xl
mRNAs and proteins.
RESULTS: Induction of epilepsy significantly enhanced myocardial cell apoptosis
and upregulated the expression of caspase-3 and bcl-xl proteins and JAK2 and
STAT5a at both the mRNA and protein levels. Pretreatment with either rhEPO or
CEPO reduced the number of apoptotic cells, upregulated bcl-xl expression, and
downregulated caspase-3 expression in the myocardium of epileptic rats. Both
myocardial JAK2 and STAT5a mRNAs, as well as phosphorylated species of JAK2 and
STAT5a, were upregulated in epileptic rats in response to rhEPO-but not to
CEPO-pretreatment. AG490 treatment increased apoptosis, upregulated caspase-3
protein expression, and downregulated bcl-xl protein expression in the myocardium
of epileptic rats.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that myocardial cell apoptosis may contribute
to myocardial injury in epilepsy. EPO protects myocardial cells from apoptosis
via the JAK2/STAT5 pathway in rats with experimental epilepsy, whereas CEPO
exerts antiapoptotic activity perhaps via a pathway independent of JAK2/STAT5
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4644243
PMID: 26649078  [PubMed]


25. Mamm Genome. 2016 Feb;27(1-2):81-97. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9613-8. Epub 2015
Nov 27.

Targeted imputation of sequence variants and gene expression profiling identifies
twelve candidate genes associated with lactation volume, composition and calving 
interval in dairy cattle.

Raven LA(1,)(2,)(3), Cocks BG(1,)(2,)(3), Kemper KE(4), Chamberlain AJ(1), Vander
Jagt CJ(1), Goddard ME(1,)(3,)(4), Hayes BJ(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Research Division, Department of Economic Development, Jobs,
Transport and Resources, 5 Ring Road, Bundoora, 3086, Australia. (2)Biosciences
Research Centre, LaTrobe University, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia. (3)Dairy
Futures Co-operative Research Centre, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia. (4)Faculty 
of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
3052, Australia. (5)Biosciences Research Division, Department of Economic
Development, Jobs, Transport and Resources, 5 Ring Road, Bundoora, 3086,
Australia. ben.hayes@ecodev.vic.gov.au. (6)Biosciences Research Centre, LaTrobe
University, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia. ben.hayes@ecodev.vic.gov.au. (7)Dairy
Futures Co-operative Research Centre, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia.
ben.hayes@ecodev.vic.gov.au.

Dairy cattle are an interesting model for gaining insights into the genes
responsible for the large variation between and within mammalian species in the
protein and fat content of their milk and their milk volume. Large numbers of
phenotypes for these traits are available, as well as full genome sequence of key
founders of modern dairy cattle populations. In twenty target QTL regions
affecting milk production traits, we imputed full genome sequence variant
genotypes into a population of 16,721 Holstein and Jersey cattle with excellent
phenotypes. Association testing was used to identify variants within each target 
region, and gene expression data were used to identify possible gene candidates. 
There was statistical support for imputed sequence variants in or close to BTRC, 
MGST1, SLC37A1, STAT5A, STAT5B, PAEP, VDR, CSF2RB, MUC1, NCF4, and GHDC
associated with milk production, and EPGN for calving interval. Of these
candidates, analysis of RNA-Seq data demonstrated that PAEP, VDR, SLC37A1, GHDC, 
MUC1, CSF2RB, and STAT5A were highly differentially expressed in mammary gland
compared to 15 other tissues. For nine of the other target regions, the most
significant variants were in non-coding DNA. Genomic predictions in a third dairy
breed (Australian Reds) using sequence variants in only these candidate genes
were for some traits more accurate than genomic predictions from 632,003 common
SNP on the Bovine HD array. The genes identified in this study are interesting
candidates for improving milk production in cattle and could be investigated for 
novel biological mechanisms driving lactation traits in other mammals.

PMID: 26613780  [PubMed - in process]


26. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Jan 15;310(2):E129-36. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00068.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 24.

The modulation of adiponectin by STAT5-activating hormones.

White UA(1), Maier J(2), Zhao P(3), Richard AJ(1), Stephens JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Adipocyte Biology Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton
Rouge, Louisiana; and. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. (3)Adipocyte Biology Laboratory, Pennington
Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana; and Department of Biological 
Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. (4)Adipocyte
Biology Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana; and Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana jsteph1@lsu.edu.

Adiponectin is a hormone secreted from adipocytes that plays an important role in
insulin sensitivity and protects against metabolic syndrome. Growth hormone (GH) 
and prolactin (PRL) are potent STAT5 activators that regulate the expression of
several genes in adipocytes. Studies have shown that the secretion of adiponectin
from adipose tissue is decreased by treatment with PRL and GH. In this study, we 
demonstrate that 3T3-L1 adipocytes treated with GH or PRL exhibit a reduction in 
adiponectin protein levels. Furthermore, we identified three putative STAT5
binding sites in the murine adiponectin promoter and show that only one of these,
located at -3,809, binds nuclear protein in a GH- or PRL-dependent manner.
Mutation of the STAT5 binding site reduced PRL-dependent protein binding, and
supershift analysis revealed that STAT5A and -5B, but not STAT1 and -3, bind to
this site in response to PRL. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (IP) analysis
demonstrated that only STAT5A, and not STAT1 and -3, bind to the murine
adiponectin promoter in a GH-dependent manner in vivo. Adiponectin
promoter/reporter constructs were responsive to GH, and chromatin IP analysis
reveals that STAT5 binds the adiponectin promoter in vivo following GH
stimulation. Overall, these data strongly suggest that STAT5 activators regulate 
adiponectin transcription through the binding of STAT5 to the -3,809 site that
leads to decreased adiponectin expression and secretion. These mechanistic
observations are highly consistent with studies in mice and humans that have high
GH or PRL levels that are accompanied by lower circulating levels of adiponectin.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4719028 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26601851  [PubMed - in process]


27. Eur Respir J. 2016 Jan;47(1):212-22. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00642-2015. Epub 2015 
Nov 5.

Interleukin-15 is associated with disease severity in viral bronchiolitis.

Leahy TR(1), McManus R(2), Doherty DG(3), Grealy R(4), Coulter T(3), Smyth P(5), 
Blackshields G(5), Sheils O(5), Carr MJ(6), Purandare N(7), Geary M(7),
Hodemaekers HM(8), Janssen R(8), Bont L(8), Slattery D(9), Ryan T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Paediatrics, Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland Dept of
Clinical Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland ronan.leahy@olchc.ie. (2)Dept
of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. (3)Dept of Immunology,
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. (4)Dept of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College, 
Dublin, Ireland Dept of Critical Care Medicine, St James' Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland. (5)Dept of Histopathology, Sir Patrick Dun Research Laboratory, Trinity 
College, Dublin, Ireland. (6)National Virus Reference Laboratory, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. (7)Dept of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Rotunda
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (8)University Medical Center, Wilhelmina Children's
Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (9)Dept of Paediatrics, Children's University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (10)Dept of Critical Care Medicine, St James'
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Disease severity in viral bronchiolitis in infancy is difficult to predict and
has been linked to host innate immunity. The study aimed to investigate the
innate cytokine interleukin-15 (IL-15) as a marker of disease severity.A
prospective single-centre observational study was conducted in a
university-affiliated paediatric teaching hospital, comparing children
(0-18 months) hospitalised for viral bronchiolitis, those admitted to the
paediatric intensive care unit with severe disease and healthy age-matched
controls. IL-15-related parameters were compared between groups. PCR and microRNA
(miRNA) sequencing was undertaken on natural killer (NK) cells collected from
study participants.Samples from 88 children with viral bronchiolitis and 43
controls enrolled between 2009 and 2012 were analysed. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC) IL-15 mRNA expression was significantly higher in those
with moderate severity bronchiolitis compared with controls and those with severe
disease. Serum IL-15 levels correlated with disease severity. The relative
frequency of NK cells in peripheral blood was significantly reduced in
participants with bronchiolitis. The NK cell miRNA transcriptome in bronchiolitis
was distinct. Targets of de-regulated miRNA were differentially expressed in
bronchiolitis, including JAK3, STAT5A and NFKB1 on the IL-15 signalling
pathway.IL-15 is associated with disease severity in children hospitalised with
viral bronchiolitis.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

PMID: 26541527  [PubMed - in process]


28. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:453020. doi: 10.1155/2015/453020. Epub 2015 Sep 29.

Proinflammatory Cytokine IL-6 and JAK-STAT Signaling Pathway in
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.

Cokic VP(1), Mitrovic-Ajtic O(1), Beleslin-Cokic BB(2), Markovic D(1), Buac M(1),
Diklic M(1), Kraguljac-Kurtovic N(3), Damjanovic S(4), Milenkovic P(1), Gotic
M(5), Raj PK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Research, University of Belgrade, 11129 Belgrade,
Serbia. (2)Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Diseases of Metabolism, Clinical
Center of Serbia, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. (3)Clinic of Hematology, Clinical
Center of Serbia, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. (4)Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Diseases of Metabolism, Clinical Center of Serbia, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia ;
Medical Faculty, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. (5)Clinic of
Hematology, Clinical Center of Serbia, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia ; Medical Faculty, 
University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. (6)Division of Cellular and Gene 
Therapies, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA.

The recent JAK1/2 inhibitor trial in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) showed
that reducing inflammation can be more beneficial than targeting gene mutants. We
evaluated the proinflammatory IL-6 cytokine and JAK-STAT signaling pathway
related genes in circulating CD34(+) cells of MPNs. Regarding laboratory data,
leukocytosis has been observed in polycythemia vera (PV) and JAK2V617F mutation
positive versus negative primary myelofibrosis (PMF) patients. Moreover,
thrombocytosis was reduced by JAK2V617F allele burden in essential
thrombocythemia (ET) and PMF. 261 significantly changed genes have been detected 
in PV, 82 in ET, and 94 genes in PMF. The following JAK-STAT signaling pathway
related genes had augmented expression in CD34(+) cells of MPNs: CCND3 and IL23A 
regardless of JAK2V617F allele burden; CSF3R, IL6ST, and STAT1/2 in ET and PV
with JAK2V617F mutation; and AKT2, IFNGR2, PIM1, PTPN11, and STAT3 only in PV.
STAT5A gene expression was generally reduced in MPNs. IL-6 cytokine levels were
increased in plasma, as well as IL-6 protein levels in bone marrow stroma of
MPNs, dependent on JAK2V617F mutation presence in ET and PMF patients. Therefore,
the JAK2V617F mutant allele burden participated in inflammation biomarkers
induction and related signaling pathways activation in MPNs.

PMCID: PMC4602333
PMID: 26491227  [PubMed - in process]


29. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 21;5:15215. doi: 10.1038/srep15215.

Transcription factor and miRNA co-regulatory network reveals shared and specific 
regulators in the development of B cell and T cell.

Lin Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Zhang Q(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Zhang HM(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Liu
W(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Liu CJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Li Q(5), Guo AY(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Bioinformatics &Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China. (4)College
of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, 430074, China. (5)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

The maturation process of lymphocyte was related to many blood diseases, such as 
lymphoma and lymphoid leukemia. Many TFs and miRNAs were separately studied in
the development of B and T cells. In this study, we aim to discover the TF and
miRNA co-regulation and identify key regulators in the B and T cells maturation. 
We obtained the candidate genes, miRNAs and TFs for each stage of their
maturation, then constructed the TF-miRNA-gene feed-forward loops (FFLs) for each
stage by our previous methods. Statistical test for FFLs indicated their
enrichment and significance. TF-miRNA co-regulatory networks for each stage were 
constructed by combining their FFLs. Hub analysis revealed the key regulators in 
each stage, for example, MYC, STAT5A, PAX5 and miR-17<U+2009>~<U+2009>92 in the transition of
pro-B cells into pre-B cells. We also identified a few common regulators and
modules in two stages of B cell maturation (e.g. miR-146a/NFKB1/BCL11A) and two
stages of T cell maturation (e.g. miR-20/CCND2/SORL1), as well as some shared
regulators in the early stages of both B and T cell development. Our network will
help to increase understanding of mature process of B and T cell, as well as the 
related blood diseases.

PMCID: PMC4613730
PMID: 26487345  [PubMed - in process]


30. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Dec 18;10(12):2884-90. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00817. Epub 
2015 Oct 28.

Phosphorylation of Capsaicinoid Derivatives Provides Highly Potent and Selective 
Inhibitors of the Transcription Factor STAT5b.

Elumalai N(1), Berg A(1), Rubner S(1), Berg T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Leipzig , Johannisallee 29,
04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Design approaches for inhibitors of protein-protein interactions are rare, but
highly sought after. Here, we report that O-phosphorylation of simple derivatives
of the natural products dihydrocapsaicin and N-vanillylnonanamide leads to
inhibitors of the SH2 domain of the transcription factor STAT5b. The most potent 
molecule is obtained from dihydrocapsaicin in only three synthetic steps. It has 
submicromolar affinity for the SH2 domain of STAT5b (Ki = 0.34 µM), while
displaying 35-fold selectivity over the highly homologous STAT5a (Ki = 13.0 µM). 
The corresponding pivaloyloxymethyl ester inhibits STAT5b with selectivity over
STAT5a in human tumor cells. Importantly, it inhibits cell viability and induces 
apoptosis in human tumor cells in a STAT5-dependent manner. Our data validate
O-phosphorylation of appropriately preselected natural products or natural
product derivatives as a semirational design approach for small molecules that
selectively inhibit phosphorylation-dependent protein-protein interaction domains
in cultured human tumor cells.

PMID: 26469307  [PubMed - in process]


31. Stroke. 2015 Nov;46(11):3285-7. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.010567. Epub 2015 Oct 
8.

Acute Loss of miR-221 and miR-222 in the Atherosclerotic Plaque Shoulder
Accompanies Plaque Rupture.

Bazan HA(1), Hatfield SA(1), O'Malley CB(1), Brooks AJ(1), Lightell D Jr(1),
Woods TC(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Section of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery
(H.A.B., A.J.B.) and Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology (C.B.O.), Ochsner Clinic,
New Orleans, LA; and Tulane Heart and Vascular Institute and the Department of
Physiology, Tulane School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA (S.A.H., A.J.B., D.L.,
T.C.W.). (2)From the Section of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of 
Surgery (H.A.B., A.J.B.) and Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology (C.B.O.), Ochsner
Clinic, New Orleans, LA; and Tulane Heart and Vascular Institute and the
Department of Physiology, Tulane School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA (S.A.H.,
A.J.B., D.L., T.C.W.). Twoods3@tulane.edu.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability is accompanied by
changes in the molecular and cellular function in the plaque shoulder, including 
a decrease in vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. We aimed to determine
whether the expression of 3 miRNAs that regulate vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation (miR-145, miR-221, and miR-222) is altered with plaque rupture,
suggesting a role in regulating plaque stability.
METHODS: miRNAs were measured in the plaque shoulder of carotid plaques obtained 
from patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy (CEA) for 3 distinct clinical
scenarios: (1) patients without previous neurological events but high-grade
carotid stenosis (asymptomatic), (2) patients with an acute neurological event
within 5 days of the CEA (urgent), and (3) patients undergoing CEA>5 days after a
neurological event (symptomatic).
RESULTS: Mean time from plaque rupture event to CEA was 2.4 days in the urgent
group. The urgent group exhibited a significant decrease in miR-221 and miR-222
expression in the plaque shoulder, whereas no significant differences were seen
in miR-145 across the 3 groups. Regression analysis demonstrated a significant
correlation between time from the neurological event to CEA and increasing
miR-221 and miR-222, but not miR-145. mRNA encoding p27Kip1, a target of miR-221 
and miR-222 that inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, was
increased in the urgent group.
CONCLUSIONS: Atherosclerotic plaque rupture is accompanied by a loss of miR-221
and miR-222 and an increase in p27Kip1 mRNA expression in the plaque shoulder,
suggesting an association between these miRNAs and atherosclerotic plaque
stability.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4624519 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26451018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 18;44(3):1052-63. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv999. Epub 2015 
Oct 7.

An autoregulatory enhancer controls mammary-specific STAT5 functions.

Metser G(1), Shin HY(1), Wang C(1), Yoo KH(1), Oh S(2), Villarino AV(3), O'Shea
JJ(3), Kang K(4), Hennighausen L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714,
Republic of Korea. (3)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, NIAMS,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department of
Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714, Republic of Korea.
(5)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA lotharh@mail.nih.gov.

Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STATs) are principal
transcription factors downstream of cytokine receptors. Although STAT5A is
expressed in most tissues it remains to be understood why its premier,
non-redundant functions are restricted to prolactin-induced mammary gland
development and function. We report that the ubiquitously expressed Stat5a/b
locus is subject to additional lineage-specific transcriptional control in
mammary epithelium. Genome-wide surveys of epigenetic status and transcription
factor occupancy uncovered a putative mammary-specific enhancer within the
intergenic sequences separating the two Stat5 genes. This region exhibited
several hallmarks of genomic enhancers, including DNaseI hypersensitivity, H3K27 
acetylation and binding by GR, NFIB, ELF5 and MED1. Mammary-specific STAT5
binding was obtained at two canonical STAT5 binding motifs. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated 
genome editing was used to delete these sites in mice and determine their
biological function. Mutant animals exhibited an 80% reduction of Stat5 levels in
mammary epithelium and a concomitant reduction of STAT5-dependent gene
expression. Transcriptome analysis identified a class of mammary-restricted genes
that was particularly dependent on high STAT5 levels as a result of the
intergenic enhancer. Taken together, the mammary-specific enhancer enables a
positive feedback circuit that contributes to the remarkable abundance of STAT5
and, in turn, to the efficacy of STAT5-dependent mammary physiology.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2015.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4756855
PMID: 26446995  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Neurosci Res. 2016 Jan;94(1):99-108. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23673. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Identification of STAT3 and STAT5 proteins in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus and
the Day/Night difference in astrocytic STAT3 phosphorylation in response to
lipopolysaccharide.

Moravcová S(1), Cervená K(1), Pacesová D(1), Bendová Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins regulate many 
aspects of cellular physiology from growth and differentiations to immune
responses. Using immunohistochemistry, we show the daily rhythm of STAT3 protein 
in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), with low but significant amplitude
peaking in the morning. We also reveal the strong expression of STAT5A in
astrocytes of the SCN and the STAT5B signal in nonastrocytic cells.
Administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) acutely induced phosphorylation of
STAT3 on Tyr705 during both the day and the night and induced phosphorylation on 
Ser727 but only after the daytime application. The LPS-induced phospho-STAT3
(Tyr705) remained elevated for 24 hr after the daytime application but declined
within 8 hr when LPS was applied at night.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26420542  [PubMed - in process]


34. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2015 Dec;25(12):1397-421. doi:
10.1517/13543776.2015.1086749. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

A STAT inhibitor patent review: progress since 2011.

Lai PS(1), Rosa DA(1), Magdy Ali A(1), Gómez-Biagi RF(1), Ball DP(1), Shouksmith 
AE(1), Gunning PT(1).

Author information: 
(1)a University of Toronto Mississauga, Department of Chemical and Physical
Sciences , 3359 Mississauga Road North, Mississauga, Ontario L5L 1C6, Canada +1
90 55 69 45 88 ; +1 90 55 69 49 29 ; patrick.gunning@utoronto.ca.

INTRODUCTION: The clinical utility of effective direct STAT inhibitors,
particularly STAT3 and STAT5, for treating cancer and other diseases is well
studied and known.
AREAS COVERED: This review will highlight the STAT inhibitor patent literature
from 2011 to 2015 inclusive. Emphasis will be placed on inhibitors of the STAT3, 
STAT5a/b, and STAT1 proteins for cancer treatment. The review will, where
suitably investigated, describe the mode and the site of inhibition, list
indications that were evaluated, and rank the inhibitor's relative potency among 
compounds in the same class. The reader will gain an understanding of the diverse
set of approaches, used both in academia and industry, to target STAT proteins.
EXPERT OPINION: There is still much work to be done to directly target the STAT3 
and STAT5 proteins. As yet, there is still no direct STAT3 inhibitor in the
clinic. While the SH2 domain remains a popular target for therapeutic
intervention, the DNA-binding domain and N-terminal region are now attracting
attention as possible sites for inhibition. Multiple putative STAT3 and STAT5
inhibitors have now been patented across a broad spectrum of chemotypes, each
with their own advantages and limitations.

PMID: 26394986  [PubMed - in process]


35. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 21;10(9):e0138524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138524.
eCollection 2015.

Integrative Analysis of Transcriptomic and Epigenomic Data to Reveal Regulation
Patterns for BMD Variation.

Zhang JG(1), Tan LJ(2), Xu C(1), He H(1), Tian Q(1), Zhou Y(1), Qiu C(1), Chen
XD(2), Deng HW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana, 70112, United States of America; Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, 70112, United States
of America. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and Statistical Genetics, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, Hunan, 410081, China. (3)Center of Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, 70112, United States
of America; Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Tulane University,
New Orleans, Louisiana, 70112, United States of America; Laboratory of Molecular 
and Statistical Genetics, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan, 410081,
China.

Integration of multiple profiling data and construction of functional gene
networks may provide additional insights into the molecular mechanisms of complex
diseases. Osteoporosis is a worldwide public health problem, but the complex
gene-gene interactions, post-transcriptional modifications and regulation of
functional networks are still unclear. To gain a comprehensive understanding of
osteoporosis etiology, transcriptome gene expression microarray, epigenomic miRNA
microarray and methylome sequencing were performed simultaneously in 5 high hip
BMD (Bone Mineral Density) subjects and 5 low hip BMD subjects. SPIA (Signaling
Pathway Impact Analysis) and PCST (Prize Collecting Steiner Tree) algorithm were 
used to perform pathway-enrichment analysis and construct the interaction
networks. Through integrating the transcriptomic and epigenomic data, firstly we 
identified 3 genes (FAM50A, ZNF473 and TMEM55B) and one miRNA (hsa-mir-4291)
which showed the consistent association evidence from both gene expression and
methylation data; secondly in network analysis we identified an interaction
network module with 12 genes and 11 miRNAs including AKT1, STAT3, STAT5A, FLT3,
hsa-mir-141 and hsa-mir-34a which have been associated with BMD in previous
studies. This module revealed the crosstalk among miRNAs, mRNAs and DNA
methylation and showed four potential regulatory patterns of gene expression to
influence the BMD status. In conclusion, the integration of multiple layers of
omics can yield in-depth results than analysis of individual omics data
respectively. Integrative analysis from transcriptomics and epigenomic data
improves our ability to identify causal genetic factors, and more importantly
uncover functional regulation pattern of multi-omics for osteoporosis etiology.

PMCID: PMC4577125
PMID: 26390436  [PubMed - in process]


36. Chin J Physiol. 2015 Oct 31;58(5):275-84. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2015.BAD322.

Histone 3 Trimethylation of IGFBP-7 Gene Promoter by Expression of D5 Stat5a in
Breast Epithelial Cells.

Tan D(1), Zhang J(1), Nie X(1), Yu C(1), Li Z(1), Mamat Z(1), Jiang H(1), Yang
X(1), Zhang J(1), Yao S(1), Tang P(2), Huang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Jishou University School of Medicine, Hunan,
People's Republic of China. (2)Jishou University First Affiliated Hospital,
Department of Breast Surgery, Jishou 416000, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

As a very important transcription factor, signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (Stat5a) has been reported to be involved in human reproductive 
cancers such as breast, prostate and ovarian cancer. However, up to date, the
exact role of Stat5a in breast cancer is still not clear. The data reported are
conflicting. D5 Stat5a is a variant of Stat5a we cloned recently. This newly
cloned variant behave like its full length counterpart in terms of dimerization, 
being activated by prolactin and nuclear translocation, however it also behave
differently in terms of effect on cell proliferation and interaction with other
transcription factors. In the present study, we examined its effect on cell
proliferation of cultured breast cancer cells (MCF-10A and MCF-7) by using
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer and MTS technology. Also, quantitative real
time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
(ChIP) and Western blot were used to probe the possible changes of insulin-like
growth factor binding protein-7 (IGFBP-7) expression including mRNA and protein, 
and the epigenetic changes with overexpression of this newly cloned variant. The 
results clarified that D5 Stat5a (1) behaves as a promoting factor to the cell
proliferation of MCF-10A and MCF-7, (2) induces enhancer of zeste homology 2
(EZH2) expression in breast epithelial cells, as well as histone 3 trimethylation
of IGFBP-7 promoter region, and (3) lower IGFBP-7 expression was detected in
breast cancer tissue. Taking together, we concluded that the mitogenic effect of 
D5 Stat5a on breast cells is, at least partly, through up-regulation of histone
methyltransferase, EZH2, and therefore inhibiting IGFBP-7 expression by
increasing H3K27Me3 of IGFBP-7 promoter region.

PMID: 26387651  [PubMed - in process]


37. Leuk Res. 2015 Sep 11. pii: S0145-2126(15)30379-9. doi:
10.1016/j.leukres.2015.09.004. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT transcript levels in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: STAT1 and STAT3
transcript correlations.

Adamaki M(1), Tsotra M(1), Vlahopoulos S(1), Zampogiannis A(1), Papavassiliou
AG(2), Moschovi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit, First Department of Pediatrics, University
of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sofia" Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens,
Greece. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Athens Medical
School, 11527 Athens, Greece. (3)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit, First
Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sofia"
Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece. Electronic address:
mmoschov@med.uoa.gr.

We investigated the transcript levels of genes STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A and STAT5B in
the diagnostic samples of childhood ALL patients and compared them to those of
healthy controls in order to characterize STAT gene expression in childhood ALL. 
As compared to controls, ALL patients exhibit markedly decreased transcript
levels in all four genes investigated. STAT1 and STAT3 are significantly
correlated in ALL patients as opposed to controls (P<0.0005). Patients with low
transcript levels of STAT1 and STAT3 survive, regardless of minimal residual
disease status and relapse. Lower transcript levels appear in association with a 
particularly high survival outcome in the ALL patients. The identification of
aberrant expression profiles provides insight into the role of STAT genes in the 
development of childhood ALL and enables development of patient-tailored
therapeutic approaches in cases of resistant disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26385310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Am J Pathol. 2015 Sep;185(9):2505-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.04.026.

Jak2-Stat5a/b Signaling Induces Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition and
Stem-Like Cell Properties in Prostate Cancer.

Talati PG(1), Gu L(1), Ellsworth EM(1), Girondo MA(1), Trerotola M(1), Hoang
DT(1), Leiby B(2), Dagvadorj A(1), McCue PA(3), Lallas CD(4), Trabulsi EJ(4),
Gomella L(4), Aplin AE(5), Languino L(6), Fatatis A(7), Rui H(8), Nevalainen
MT(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (2)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Pathology, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of Urology,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (5)Department of Cancer 
Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of
Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (6)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Prostate Cancer Discovery and Development Program,
Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (7)Department of Pharmacology and
Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(8)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (9)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Urology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Prostate Cancer Discovery and Development
Program, Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Medical
Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic
address: mnevalainen@mcw.edu.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2015 Sep;185(9):2351-3.

Active Stat5a/b predicts early recurrence and disease-specific death in prostate 
cancer (PC), which both typically are caused by development of metastatic
disease. Herein, we demonstrate that Stat5a/b induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of PC cells, as shown by Stat5a/b regulation of EMT marker
expression (Twist1, E-cadherin, N-cadherin, vimentin, and fibronectin) in PC cell
lines, xenograft tumors in vivo, and patient-derived PCs ex vivo using organ
explant cultures. Jak2-Stat5a/b signaling induced functional end points of EMT as
well, indicated by disruption of epithelial cell monolayers and increased
migration and adhesion of PC cells to fibronectin. Knockdown of Twist1 suppressed
Jak2-Stat5a/b-induced EMT properties of PC cells, which were rescued by
re-introduction of Twist1, indicating that Twist1 mediates Stat5a/b-induced EMT
in PC cells. While promoting EMT, Jak2-Stat5a/b signaling induced stem-like
properties in PC cells, such as sphere formation and expression of cancer stem
cell markers, including BMI1. Mechanistically, both Twist1 and BMI1 were critical
for Stat5a/b induction of stem-like features, because genetic knockdown of Twist1
suppressed Stat5a/b-induced BMI1 expression and sphere formation in stem cell
culture conditions, which were rescued by re-introduction of BMI1. By using human
prolactin knock-in mice, we demonstrate that prolactin-Stat5a/b signaling
promoted metastases formation of PC cells in vivo. In conclusion, our data
support the concept that Jak2-Stat5a/b signaling promotes metastatic progression 
of PC by inducing EMT and stem cell properties in PC cells.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4597281 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26362718  [PubMed - in process]


39. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3001-10. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500400. Epub 2015
Aug 31.

IL-12p40 Homodimer Ameliorates Experimental Autoimmune Arthritis.

Lee SY(1), Jung YO(2), Kim DJ(3), Kang CM(4), Moon YM(1), Heo YJ(4), Oh HJ(4),
Park SJ(3), Yang SH(3), Kwok SK(4), Ju JH(4), Park SH(4), Sung YC(3), Kim HY(5), 
Cho ML(6).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatism Research Center, Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science,
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Laboratory of
Immune Network, Conversant Research Consortium in Immunologic Disease, Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; (2)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hallym University Kang-Nam Sacred 
Heart Hospital, Seoul 150-950, Republic of Korea; and. (3)Integrative Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, World Class University, Pohang University of Science and
Technology Biotechnology Center, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea. (4)Rheumatism Research Center, Catholic
Research Institutes of Medical Science, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul
137-701, Republic of Korea; (5)Rheumatism Research Center, Catholic Research
Institutes of Medical Science, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701,
Republic of Korea; iammila@catholic.ac.kr ho0919@catholic.ac.kr. (6)Rheumatism
Research Center, Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science, Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Laboratory of Immune
Network, Conversant Research Consortium in Immunologic Disease, Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; iammila@catholic.ac.kr
ho0919@catholic.ac.kr.

IL-23 is the key cytokine that induces the expansion of Th17 cells. It is
composed of p19 and p40 subunits of IL-12. The p40 subunit binds competitively to
the receptor of IL-23 and blocks its activity. Our aim was to assess the
preventive and therapeutic effect of the IL-12p40 homodimer (p40)2 subunit in
autoimmune arthritis animal models. In the current study, using IL-1R
antagonist-knockout mice and a collagen-induced arthritis model, we investigated 
the suppressive effect of (p40)2 on inflammatory arthritis. We demonstrated that 
the recombinant adenovirus-expressing mouse (p40)2 model prevented the
development of arthritis when given before the onset of arthritis. It also
decreased the arthritis index and joint erosions in the mouse model if
transferred after arthritis was established. (p40)2 inhibited the production of
inflammatory cytokines and Ag-specific T cell proliferation. It also induced
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3 regulatory T (Treg) cells in vitro and in vivo, whereas the
generation of retinoic acid receptor-related organ receptor <U+03B3>t and Th17 cells was
suppressed. The induction of Treg cells and the suppression of Th17 cells were
mediated via activated STAT5 and suppressed STAT3. Our data suggest that (p40)2
suppressed inflammatory arthritis successfully. This could be a useful
therapeutic approach in autoimmune arthritis to regulate the Th17/Treg balance
and IL-23 signaling.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4574520
PMID: 26324771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2015 Jun;15 Suppl:S161-6. doi:
10.1016/j.clml.2015.02.012.

Investigating the Role of JAK/STAT Pathway on Dasatinib-Induced Apoptosis for CML
Cell Model K562.

Dalgiç CT(1), Kaymaz BT(2), Özkan MC(3), Dalmizrak A(2), Sahin F(3), Saydam G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir,
Turkey. Electronic address: dr_ceydat@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Medical
Biology, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey. (3)Department of
Hematology, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey.

We aimed to evaluate the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of dasatinib
(BMS-354825) on K562 chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells and to examine the
roles of STAT genes on dasatinib-induced apoptosis. The results showed that
dasatinib decreased proliferation and induced apoptosis in K562 cells in a dose- 
and time-dependent manner. mRNA and protein levels of STAT5A and STAT5B genes
were significantly reduced in dasatinib-treated K562 cells. These data indicated 
that STAT inhibition by dasatinib might be therapeutic in JAK/STAT
pathway-associated malignancies after confirmation with clinical studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297271  [PubMed - in process]


41. Gastroenterology. 2015 Nov;149(6):1575-86. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.065.
Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Characterization of genetic loci that affect susceptibility to inflammatory bowel
diseases in African Americans.

Huang C(1), Haritunians T(2), Okou DT(3), Cutler DJ(4), Zwick ME(4), Taylor
KD(5), Datta LW(6), Maranville JC(7), Liu Z(2), Ellis S(6), Chopra P(4),
Alexander JS(8), Baldassano RN(9), Cross RK(10), Dassopoulos T(11), Dhere TA(12),
Duerr RH(13), Hanson JS(14), Hou JK(15), Hussain SZ(16), Isaacs KL(17),
Kachelries KE(9), Kader H(18), Kappelman MD(19), Katz J(20), Kellermayer R(21),
Kirschner BS(22), Kuemmerle JF(23), Kumar A(3), Kwon JH(24), Lazarev M(6), Mannon
P(25), Moulton DE(26), Osuntokun BO(27), Patel A(28), Rioux JD(29), Rotter JI(5),
Saeed S(30), Scherl EJ(31), Silverberg MS(32), Silverman A(33), Targan SR(2),
Valentine JF(34), Wang MH(6), Simpson CL(35), Bridges SL(36), Kimberly RP(36),
Rich SS(37), Cho JH(38), Di Rienzo A(7), Kao LW(1), McGovern DP(2), Brant SR(39),
Kugathasan S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)F. Widjaja Foundation Inflammatory Bowel
and Immunobiology Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia. (4)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. (5)Institute for Translational Genomics and
Population Sciences and Division of Genomic Outcomes, Departments of Pediatrics
and Medicine, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical
Center, Torrance, California. (6)Meyerhoff Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center,
Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland. (7)Committee on Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacogenomics, and the
Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana. (9)Division of Gastroenterology
and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland.
(11)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri. (12)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia. (13)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition,
Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, and
Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (14)Charlotte Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, PLLC, Charlotte, North Carolina. (15)Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine; VA HSR&D Center for Innovations in Quality, Effectiveness
and Safety, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, Texas. (16)Department 
of Pediatrics, Willis-Knighton Physician Network, Shreveport, Louisiana.
(17)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (18)Department of Pediatrics,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (19)Department of
Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina. (20)Division of Gastroenterology, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio. (21)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas. (22)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago
Comer Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois. (23)Departments of Medicine and
Physiology and Biophysics, VCU Program in Enteric Neuromuscular Sciences, Medical
College of Virginia Campus of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond
Virginia. (24)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (25)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (26)Division of Gastroenterology, Vanderbilt
Children's Hospital, Nashville, Tennessee. (27)Department of Pediatrics, Cook
Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, Texas. (28)Department of Pediatrics,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (29)Universite de
Montreal and the Montreal Heart Institute, Research Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. (30)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. (31)Department of Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. (32)Departments of Medicine,
Surgery, Public Health Sciences, Immunology, and Molecular and Medical Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute and Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
(33)Department of Gastroenterology, Henry Ford Health System Detroit, Michigan.
(34)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah. (35)Statistical Genetics Section, Inherited Disease
Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, Maryland. (36)Division of Clinical Immunology and
Rheumatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(37)Center for Public Health Genomics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia. (38)Department of Medicine, The Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. (39)Department of Epidemiology,
Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; 
Meyerhoff Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Department of Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address:
sbrant@jhmi.edu.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Nov;149(6):1323-6.
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Nov;149(6):1302-4.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has familial aggregation in
African Americans (AAs), but little is known about the molecular genetic
susceptibility. Mapping studies using the Immunochip genotyping array expand the 
number of susceptibility loci for IBD in Caucasians to 163, but the contribution 
of the 163 loci and European admixture to IBD risk in AAs is unclear. We
performed a genetic mapping study using the Immunochip to determine whether IBD
susceptibility loci in Caucasians also affect risk in AAs and identify new
associated loci.
METHODS: We recruited AAs with IBD and without IBD (controls) from 34 IBD centers
in the United States; additional controls were collected from 4 other Immunochip 
studies. Association and admixture loci were mapped for 1088 patients with
Crohn's disease, 361 with ulcerative colitis, 62 with IBD type unknown, and 1797 
controls; 130,241 autosomal single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were analyzed.
RESULTS: The strongest associations were observed between ulcerative colitis and 
HLA rs9271366 (P = 7.5 × 10(-6)), Crohn's disease and 5p13.1 rs4286721 (P = 3.5 ×
10(-6)), and IBD and KAT2A rs730086 (P = 2.3 × 10(-6)). Additional suggestive
associations (P < 4.2 × 10(-5)) were observed between Crohn's disease and IBD and
African-specific SNPs in STAT5A and STAT3; between IBD and SNPs in IL23R, IL12B, 
and C2orf43; and between ulcerative colitis and SNPs near HDAC11 and near
LINC00994. The latter 3 loci have not been previously associated with IBD, but
require replication. Established Caucasian associations were replicated in AAs (P
< 3.1 × 10(-4)) at NOD2, IL23R, 5p15.3, and IKZF3. Significant admixture (P < 3.9
× 10(-4)) was observed for 17q12-17q21.31 (IZKF3 through STAT3),
10q11.23-10q21.2, 15q22.2-15q23, and 16p12.2-16p12.1. Network analyses showed
significant enrichment (false discovery rate <1 × 10(-5)) in genes that encode
members of the JAK-STAT, cytokine, and chemokine signaling pathways, as well
those involved in pathogenesis of measles.
CONCLUSIONS: In a genetic analysis of 3308 AA IBD cases and controls, we found
that many variants associated with IBD in Caucasians also showed association
evidence with these diseases in AAs; we also found evidence for variants and loci
not previously associated with IBD. The complex genetic factors that determine
risk for or protection against IBD in different populations require further
study.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4685036 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26278503  [PubMed - in process]


42. Thorac Cancer. 2015 Jul;6(4):508-16. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12222. Epub 2015 Jan 
26.

Potential anti-cancer effect of curcumin in human lung squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhao W(1), Wang Y(1), Wang Y(2), Gao N(1), Han Z(1), Yu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery Department, Third Hospital of Jilin University Changchun
City, China. (2)Pediatrc Department, Hospital of Jilin Provice Changchun City,
China.

BACKGROUND: To explore the molecular mechanisms of the anti-cancer effect of
curcumin in human lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSQCC) SK-MES-1 cells.
METHODS: Cell viability was determined using MTT assay. Ribonucleic acid
sequencing was performed to measure expression levels of transcripts in LSQCC
cells treated with 15<U+2009>µmol/L curcumin (treatment groups) or an equal amount of
dimethylsulfoxide (control). Cuffdiff software was used to identify
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in treatment groups, followed by enrichment
analysis of DEGs using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integration
Discovery. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks for up and
downregulated DEGs were constructed by Cytoscape software using Search Tool for
the Retrieval of Interacting Genes data to identify hub nodes.
RESULTS: Curcumin significantly reduced cell viability in LSQCC cells. In total, 
380 DEGs including 154<U+2009>upregulated and 126 downregulated genes were found in the 
treatment groups. The upregulated genes were enriched in base excision repair
(BER, such as PCNA, POLL, and MUTYH) and Janus kinase-signal transducer and
activator of transcription (JAT-STAT) signaling pathways (such as AKT1 and
STAT5A), while the downregulated genes were enriched in nine pathways, including 
the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathway (such as PTK2,
VEGFA, MAPK1, and MAPK14) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
pathway (ARRB2, MAPK1, MAPK14, and NFKB1). PCNA and AKT1 were the hub nodes in
the PPI network of upregulated genes while MAPK1, MAPK14, VEGFA, and NFKB1 were
the hub nodes in the PPI network of downregulated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Curcumin might exert anti-cancer effects on LSQCC via regulating
BER, JAT-STAT, VEGF, and MAPK signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4511331
PMID: 26273408  [PubMed]


43. Leukemia. 2015 Dec;29(12):2296-306. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.219. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

The novel function of CD82 and its impact on BCL2L12 via AKT/STAT5 signal pathway
in acute myelogenous leukemia cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T(1), Takeuchi A(1), Nobumoto A(2), Tsuda M(2), Yokoyama
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi University, Nankoku, 
Japan. (2)The Facility for Animal Research, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Japan.

The aim of this study was to explore the biological functions of a tetraspanin
family protein CD82 expressed aberrantly in chemotherapy-resistant
CD34(+)/CD38(-) acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) cells. Microarray analysis of
patient-isolated CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells revealed that the levels of
anti-apoptotic protein BCL2L12 were downregulated after CD82 depletion by
specific short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Western blot analysis indicated that BCL2L12 
was aberrantly expressed in patient-isolated AML cells and AML cell lines.
Furthermore, CD82 blockade by a specific antibody downregulated BCL2L12 in
parallel with dephosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) and AKT, whereas pharmacological inhibition of STAT5 and 
AKT activation decreased BCL2L12 expression in leukemia cells. In addition,
shRNA-mediated downregulation of BCL2L12 increased the levels of cleaved
caspase-3 and suppressed proliferation of leukemia cells, impairing their
engraftment in immunodeficient mice. Taken together, our results indicate that
CD82 regulated BCL2L12 expression via STAT5A and AKT signaling and stimulated
proliferation and engrafting of leukemia cells, suggesting that CD82 and BCL2L12 
may be promising therapeutic targets in AML.

PMID: 26260387  [PubMed - in process]


44. Cancer Cytopathol. 2015 Oct;123(10):603-11. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21594. Epub 2015
Aug 7.

Diagnostic utility of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 immunostaining in the diagnosis of mammary analogue secretory
carcinoma of the salivary gland: A comparative study of salivary gland cancers.

Kawahara A(1), Taira T(1), Abe H(1), Takase Y(1), Kurita T(2), Sadashima
E(3,)(4), Hattori S(3), Imamura I(5), Matsumoto S(6), Fujisaki H(7), Sueyoshi
K(7), Akiba J(8), Kage M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kurume University Hospital, Kurume, Japan.
(2)Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Otolaryngology, Kurume University School 
of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (3)Biostatistics Center, Kurume University, Kurume,
Japan. (4)Shin-Koga Hospital, Kurume, Japan. (5)Chikugo City Hospital, Kurume,
Japan. (6)Department of Pathology, Fukuoka University Hospital and School of
Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan. (7)Kagoshima City Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan.
(8)Department of Pathology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma (MASC) with an ETS variant gene 
6 (ETV6)-neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 3 (NTRK3) translocation is a 
newly described type of salivary gland cancer. It is known that overexpression of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) occurs in secretory 
carcinoma of the breast and MASC, and STAT5a expression may be related to the
ETV6-NTRK3 translocation. It was hypothesized that phosphorylated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (p-STAT5) might be specifically
expressed in MASC of the salivary gland.
METHODS: The expression of p-STAT5 and mammaglobin (MMG) was examined with
immunohistochemistry (IHC)/immunocytochemistry (ICC) in tissue sections from 58
salivary gland cancers (8 MASCs and 50 other salivary gland cancers) and in
cytological smears from 17 salivary gland cancers (7 MASCs with paired histologic
samples and 10 other salivary gland cancers).
RESULTS: p-STAT5 IHC was clearly increased in MASC versus normal salivary gland
tissue and other salivary gland cancers. p-STAT5 expression was found in 7 of 8
MASCs (87.5%) and in none of the 50 other salivary gland cancers (0%) by IHC. On 
cytology, p-STAT5 expression was found in all cases of MASC (7 of 7 or 100%) but 
in none of the 10 other salivary gland cancers (0%) by ICC. The expression rate
of MMG by histology and cytology was higher than that of p-STAT5 in the other
salivary gland cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: p-STAT5 might be useful as a detection marker of MASC in the
differential diagnosis of salivary gland cancers, and initial screening with
p-STAT5 IHC/ICC, combined with auxiliary fluorescence in situ hybridization
confirmation, is a reliable, economical approach to identifying MASC of the
salivary gland.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26252941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Med. 2015 Jul 30. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00122. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypothesis: neuroendocrine mechanisms (hypothalamus-growth hormone-STAT5 axis)
contribute to sex bias in pulmonary hypertension.

Sehgal PB(1,)(2), Yang YM(1), Miller EJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New 
York. (2)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York.
(3)Center for Heart and Lung Research, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, New York.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a disease with high morbidity and mortality. The
prevalence of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) and hereditary
pulmonary arterial hypertension (HPAH) is approximately 2-4-fold higher in women 
than in men. Paradoxically, there is an opposite male bias in typical rodent
models of PH (chronic hypoxia or monocrotaline); in these models administration
of estrogenic compounds [e.g. estradiol-17ß (E2)] is protective. Further
complexities are observed in humans ingesting anorexigens (female bias), and in
rodent models such as after hypoxia plus SU5416/Sugen (little sex bias) or
involving serotonin transporter overexpression or dexfenfluramine administration 
(female bias). These complexities in sex bias in PH remain incompletely
understood. We recently discovered that conditional deletion of STAT5a/b in
vascular smooth muscle cells abrogated the male bias in PH in hypoxic mice, and
that late-stage obliterative lesions in patients of both sexes with IPAH and HPAH
showed reduced STAT5a/b, reduced Tyr-P-STAT5 and reduced BCL6. In trying to
understand the significance of these observations we realized that there existed 
a well-characterized E2-sensitive central neuroendocrine mechanism of sex bias,
studied over the last 40 years, that, at its peripheral end, culminated in
species-specific male ("pulsatile") vs female ("more continuous") temporal
patterns of circulating growth hormone (GH) levels leading to male vs female
patterned activation of STAT5a/b in peripheral tissues, and thus sex-biased
expression of hundreds of genes. In this essay we consider the contribution of
this neuroendocrine mechanism (hypothalamus-GH-STAT5) in the generation of sex
bias in different PH situations.

PMCID: PMC4749490
PMID: 26252185  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 15;43(18):8774-89. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv776. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Loss of EZH2 results in precocious mammary gland development and activation of
STAT5-dependent genes.

Yoo KH(1), Oh S(2), Kang K(3), Hensel T(1), Robinson GW(1), Hennighausen L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA Department of Nanobiomedical Science and BK21 PLUS NBM Global Research Center
for Regenerative Medicine, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714,
Republic of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes 
of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, 
Chungnam 330-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology,
National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA lotharh@mail.nih.gov.

Establishment and differentiation of mammary alveoli during pregnancy are
controlled by prolactin through the transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B
(STAT5), which also regulate temporal activation of mammary signature genes. This
study addressed the question whether the methyltransferase and transcriptional
co-activator EZH2 controls the differentiation clock of mammary epithelium.
Ablation of Ezh2 from mammary stem cells resulted in precocious differentiation
of alveolar epithelium during pregnancy and the activation of mammary-specific
STAT5 target genes. This coincided with enhanced occupancy of these loci by
STAT5, EZH1 and RNA Pol II. Limited activation of differentiation-specific genes 
was observed in mammary epithelium lacking both EZH2 and STAT5, suggesting a
modulating but not mandatory role for STAT5. Loss of EZH2 did not result in overt
changes in genome-wide and gene-specific H3K27me3 profiles, suggesting
compensation through enhanced EZH1 recruitment. Differentiated mammary epithelia 
did not form in the combined absence of EZH1 and EZH2. Transplantation
experiments failed to demonstrate a role for EZH2 in the activity of mammary stem
and progenitor cells. In summary, while EZH1 and EZH2 serve redundant functions
in the establishment of H3K27me3 marks and the formation of mammary alveoli, the 
presence of EZH2 is required to control progressive differentiation of milk
secreting epithelium during pregnancy.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2015.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4605299
PMID: 26250110  [PubMed - in process]


47. Diabetes. 2015 Nov;64(11):3891-902. doi: 10.2337/db15-0516. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Natural Variation in Interleukin-2 Sensitivity Influences Regulatory T-Cell
Frequency and Function in Individuals With Long-standing Type 1 Diabetes.

Yang JH(1), Cutler AJ(2), Ferreira RC(2), Reading JL(3), Cooper NJ(2), Wallace
C(2), Clarke P(2), Smyth DJ(2), Boyce CS(4), Gao GJ(4), Todd JA(2), Wicker LS(2),
Tree TI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King's
College London, London, U.K. National Institute of Health Research Biomedical
Research Centre at Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service Foundation Trust 
and King's College London, London, U.K. timothy.tree@kcl.ac.uk
jennie.yang@kcl.ac.uk. (2)JDRF/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, U.K. (3)Department of Immunobiology, Faculty of Life Sciences &
Medicine, King's College London, London, U.K. National Institute of Health
Research Biomedical Research Centre at Guy's and St Thomas' National Health
Service Foundation Trust and King's College London, London, U.K. (4)BD
Biosciences, Cell Analysis, San Diego, CA.

Defective immune homeostasis in the balance between FOXP3+ regulatory T cells
(Tregs) and effector T cells is a likely contributing factor in the loss of
self-tolerance observed in type 1 diabetes (T1D). Given the importance of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) signaling in the generation and function of Tregs,
observations that polymorphisms in genes in the IL-2 pathway associate with T1D
and that some individuals with T1D exhibit reduced IL-2 signaling indicate that
impairment of this pathway may play a role in Treg dysfunction and the
pathogenesis of T1D. Here, we have examined IL-2 sensitivity in CD4+ T-cell
subsets in 70 individuals with long-standing T1D, allowing us to investigate the 
effect of low IL-2 sensitivity on Treg frequency and function. IL-2
responsiveness, measured by STAT5a phosphorylation, was a very stable phenotype
within individuals but exhibited considerable interindividual variation and was
influenced by T1D-associated PTPN2 gene polymorphisms. Tregs from individuals
with lower IL-2 signaling were reduced in frequency, were less able to maintain
expression of FOXP3 under limiting concentrations of IL-2, and displayed reduced 
suppressor function. These results suggest that reduced IL-2 signaling may be
used to identify patients with the highest Treg dysfunction and who may benefit
most from IL-2 immunotherapy.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 26224887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Nov;26(11):1208-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.05.012. Epub
2015 Jun 20.

In utero growth restriction and catch-up adipogenesis after developmental di
(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate exposure cause glucose intolerance in adult male rats
following a high-fat dietary challenge.

Strakovsky RS(1), Lezmi S(2), Shkoda I(1), Flaws JA(3), Helferich WG(1), Pan
YX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois. (2)Department of Pathobiology, University of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois. (3)Department of Comparative
Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois.
(4)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois; Division of Nutritional Sciences, University 
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois. Electronic address:
yxpan@illinois.edu.

Phthalates impact adipocyte morphology in vitro, but the sex-specific adipogenic 
signature immediately after perinatal di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) exposure 
and adulthood physiology following a high-fat (HF) dietary challenge are unknown.
In the current study, pregnant and lactating dams received DEHP (300 mg/kg body
weight) or oil. At weaning [postnatal day (PND) 21], adipose tissue was sampled
for real-time polymerase chain reaction. The remaining offspring consumed a
control or HF diet. DEHP decreased % fat in males at birth from 13.9%±0.2 to
11.8%±0.6 (mean±S.E.M.), representing a 15.1% decrease in fat by DEHP, and these 
males caught up in adiposity to controls by PND21. Adult DEHP-exposed males had a
27.5% increase in fat (12.5%±0.9% in controls vs. 15.9%±1.5% in the DEHP group); 
adipocyte perimeter was increased as well, with fewer small/medium-sized
adipocytes, and decreased cell number compared to oil controls. HF diet intake in
DEHP-exposed males further increased male energy intake and body weight and led
to glucose intolerance. In PND21 males, DEHP increased the expression of
adipogenic markers (Pparg1, Cebpa, Adipoq, Ppard, Fabp4, Fasn, Igf1), decreased
Lep, and decreased markers of mesenchymal stem cell commitment to the adipogenic 
lineage (Bmp2, Bmp4, Stat1, Stat5a) compared to oil controls. These data suggest 
that DEHP may decrease the adipocyte pool at birth, which initially increases
adaptive adipocyte maturation and lipid accumulation, but leads to adipose tissue
dysfunction in adulthood, decreasing the capacity to adapt to a HF diet, and
leading to systemic glucose intolerance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4631689 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26188368  [PubMed - in process]


49. Am J Pathol. 2015 Sep;185(9):2351-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.06.002. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

Stat5a/b in Prostate Cancer Metastasis.

Gao AC(1), Zhu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California
Davis, Sacramento, California. Electronic address: acgao@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Urology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California
Davis, Sacramento, California.

Comment on
    Am J Pathol. 2015 Sep;185(9):2505-22.

This commentary highlights the article by Talati et al that describes novel
mechanisms promoting metastasis in prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187549  [PubMed - in process]


50. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:747645. doi: 10.1155/2015/747645. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

IFI16 Expression Is Related to Selected Transcription Factors during B-Cell
Differentiation.

Piccaluga PP(1), Agostinelli C(1), Fuligni F(1), Righi S(1), Tripodo C(2), Re
MC(3), Clò A(3), Miserocchi A(3), Morini S(3), Gariglio M(4), Ferri GG(5),
Rinaldi-Ceroni A(5), Piccin O(5), De Andrea M(6), Pileri SA(1), Landolfo S(6),
Gibellini D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Hematopathology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (2)Department of Human Pathology, University of Palermo,
90127 Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty
Medicine, Bologna University Medical School Unit of Microbiology, S. Orsola
Malpighi Hospital, 40138 Bologna, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Medical School of Novara, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Otolaryngology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (6)Department of Public Health and Microbiology, University
of Turin, 10126 Turin, Italy. (7)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic,
University of Verona, 35124 Verona, Italy.

The interferon-inducible DNA sensor IFI16 is involved in the modulation of
cellular survival, proliferation, and differentiation. In the hematopoietic
system, IFI16 is consistently expressed in the CD34+ stem cells and in peripheral
blood lymphocytes; however, little is known regarding its regulation during
maturation of B- and T-cells. We explored the role of IFI16 in normal B-cell
subsets by analysing its expression and relationship with the major transcription
factors involved in germinal center (GC) development and plasma-cell (PC)
maturation. IFI16 mRNA was differentially expressed in B-cell subsets with
significant decrease in IFI16 mRNA in GC and PCs with respect to naïve and memory
subsets. IFI16 mRNA expression is inversely correlated with a few master
regulators of B-cell differentiation such as BCL6, XBP1, POU2AF1, and BLIMP1. In 
contrast, IFI16 expression positively correlated with STAT3, REL, SPIB, RELA,
RELB, IRF4, STAT5B, and STAT5A. ARACNE algorithm indicated a direct regulation of
IFI16 by BCL6, STAT5B, and RELB, whereas the relationship between IFI16 and the
other factors is modulated by intermediate factors. In addition, analysis of the 
CD40 signaling pathway showed that IFI16 gene expression directly correlated with
NF-<U+03BA>B activation, indicating that IFI16 could be considered an upstream modulator
of NF-<U+03BA>B in human B-cells.

PMCID: PMC4491573
PMID: 26185770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Diabetes. 2015 Nov;64(11):3784-97. doi: 10.2337/db15-0083. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Augmented Stat5 Signaling Bypasses Multiple Impediments to Lactogen-Mediated
Proliferation in Human ß-Cells.

Chen H(1), Kleinberger JW(2), Takane KK(3), Salim F(4), Fiaschi-Taesch N(3),
Pappas K(5), Parsons R(5), Jiang J(6), Zhang Y(6), Liu H(3), Wang P(3), Bender
AS(3), Frank SJ(7), Stewart AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY hainanchen2011@gmail.com andrew.stewart@mssm.edu.
(2)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. (3)Diabetes, Obesity
and Metabolism Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. 
(4)Duquesne University School of Nursing, Pittsburgh, PA. (5)Department of
Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. (7)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL Endocrinology
Section, Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL.

Pregnancy in rodents is associated with a two- to threefold increase in ß-cell
mass, which is attributable to large increases in ß-cell proliferation,
complimented by increases in ß-cell size, survival, and function and mediated
mainly by the lactogenic hormones prolactin (PRL) and placental lactogens. In
humans, however, ß-cell mass does not increase as dramatically during pregnancy, 
and PRL fails to activate proliferation in human islets in vitro. To determine
why, we explored the human PRL-prolactin receptor (hPRLR)-Janus kinase 2
(JAK2)-signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5)-cyclin-cdk
signaling cascade in human ß-cells. Surprisingly, adult human ß-cells express
little or no PRLR. As expected, restoration of the hPRLR in human ß-cells rescued
JAK2-STAT5 signaling in response to PRL. However, rescuing hPRLR-STAT5 signaling 
nevertheless failed to confer proliferative ability on adult human ß-cells in
response to PRL. Surprisingly, mouse (but not human) Stat5a overexpression led to
upregulation of cyclins D1-3 and cdk4, as well as their nuclear translocation,
all of which are associated with ß-cell cycle entry. Collectively, the findings
show that human ß-cells fail to proliferate in response to PRL for multiple
reasons, one of which is a paucity of functional PRL receptors, and that murine
Stat5 overexpression is able to bypass these impediments.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4613973 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26159175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Aug;55(1):41-53. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0299. Epub 2015 Jul
1.

Expression mechanism of tryptophan hydroxylase 1 in mouse islets during
pregnancy.

Iida H(1), Ogihara T(2), Min MK(1), Hara A(1), Kim YG(1), Fujimaki K(1), Tamaki
M(1), Fujitani Y(3), Kim H(1), Watada H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and EndocrinologyCenter for Molecular
DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations in DiabetesJapan Science and
Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology
ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science and EngineeringKorea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of
KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima University, Tokushima
770-8503, Japan. (2)Department of Metabolism and EndocrinologyCenter for
Molecular DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations in DiabetesJapan Science 
and Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology
ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science and EngineeringKorea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of
KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima University, Tokushima
770-8503, Japan take@juntendo.ac.jp. (3)Department of Metabolism and
EndocrinologyCenter for Molecular DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations
in DiabetesJapan Science and Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary
Science and Technology ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science
and EngineeringKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon
305-701, Republic of KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan Department of Metabolism and
EndocrinologyCenter for Molecular DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations
in DiabetesJapan Science and Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary
Science and Technology ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science
and EngineeringKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon
305-701, Republic of KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. (4)Department of Metabolism and
EndocrinologyCenter for Molecular DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations
in DiabetesJapan Science and Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary
Science and Technology ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science
and EngineeringKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon
305-701, Republic of KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan Department of Metabolism and
EndocrinologyCenter for Molecular DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations
in DiabetesJapan Science and Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary
Science and Technology ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science
and EngineeringKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon
305-701, Republic of KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan Department of Metabolism and
EndocrinologyCenter for Molecular DiabetologyCenter for Therapeutic Innovations
in DiabetesJapan Science and Technology Agency-Core Research for Evolutionary
Science and Technology ProgramJuntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, JapanGraduate School of Medical Science
and EngineeringKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon
305-701, Republic of KoreaDiabetes Therapeutics and Research CenterTokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Serotonin signaling plays key roles in augmentation of pancreatic ß-cell function
during pregnancy. Increased expression of tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (Tph1), a
rate-limiting enzyme for serotonin synthesis by lactogenic hormones, is involved 
in this phenomenon. To investigate its mechanisms, we here performed 5'-RACE and 
identified ß-cell-specific transcription initiation sites for Tph1. Prolactin
enhanced the expression of mRNA containing these exons; however, reporter gene
plasmids containing the proximal 5'-flanking region of these exons did not show
prolactin responsiveness in MIN6 cells. Prolactin-induced Tph1 expression was
inhibited by a Jak2 inhibitor and was partially inhibited by an MEK1/2 or PI3K
inhibitor. Therefore, we analyzed interferon <U+03B3>-activated sequences (GAS) and
found GAS-A about 9-kbp upstream of the transcription start site. The reporter
gene plasmid containing the GAS-A region linked to a heterologous promoter showed
increased promoter activity by prolactin, which was inhibited by the forced
expression of a dominant-negative mutant form of Stat5A and a Jak2 inhibitor.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that prolactin treatment augmented 
Stat5 binding to the GAS-A region in MIN6 cells, as well as in isolated mouse
islets, and that Stat5 recognized the GAS-A region in pregnant mouse islets. In
addition, the transactivation activity of Stat5 was enhanced by prolactin through
the Erk and PI3K pathways in MIN6 cells. Finally, serotonin expression was
attenuated in islets of ß-cell-specific Stat5-deficient mice compared with that
of control littermates during pregnancy. Our findings suggest that
prolactin-induced Tph1 expression is mediated by the activation of Jak2/Stat5,
Erk, and PI3K pathways in ß cells.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26136513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 24;35(12):1483-92. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.213. Epub 2015 Jun
22.

Resistance to HSP90 inhibition involving loss of MCL1 addiction.

Busacca S(1), Law EW(1), Powley IR(2), Proia DA(3), Sequeira M(3), Le Quesne
J(1,)(2), Klabatsa A(4), Edwards JM(2), Matchett KB(5), Luo JL(1), Pringle JH(1),
El-Tanani M(6), MacFarlane M(2), Fennell DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies, Cancer Research UK Leicester Centre, University 
of Leicester, Leicester, UK. (2)MRC Toxicology Unit, Leicester, UK. (3)Synta
Pharmaceuticals Corp., Lexington, MA, USA. (4)Division of Cancer Studies, King's 
College London, London, UK. (5)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology,
Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK. (6)Institute of Cancer Therapeutics,
School of Life Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK.

Inhibition of the chaperone heat-shock protein 90 (HSP90) induces apoptosis, and 
it is a promising anti-cancer strategy. The mechanisms underpinning apoptosis
activation following HSP90 inhibition and how they are modified during acquired
drug resistance are unknown. We show for the first time that, to induce
apoptosis, HSP90 inhibition requires the cooperation of multi BH3-only proteins
(BID, BIK, PUMA) and the reciprocal suppression of the pro-survival BCL-2 family 
member MCL1, which occurs via inhibition of STAT5A. A subset of tumour cell lines
exhibit dependence on MCL1 expression for survival and this dependence is also
associated with tumour response to HSP90 inhibition. In the acquired resistance
setting, MCL1 suppression in response to HSP90 inhibitors is maintained; however,
a switch in MCL1 dependence occurs. This can be exploited by the BH3
peptidomimetic ABT737, through non-BCL-2-dependent synthetic lethality.

PMID: 26096930  [PubMed - in process]


54. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 18;34:62. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0178-x.

Confrontation of fibroblasts with cancer cells in vitro: gene network analysis of
transcriptome changes and differential capacity to inhibit tumor growth.

Alexeyenko A(1,)(2), Alkasalias T(3,)(4), Pavlova T(5), Szekely L(6), Kashuba
V(7,)(8), Rundqvist H(9), Wiklund P(10), Egevad L(11), Csermely P(12), Korcsmaros
T(13,)(14), Guven H(15), Klein G(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. andrej.alekseenko@scilifelab.se. (2)Bioinformatics
Infrastructure for Life Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska
Institutet, Box 1031, 171 21, Solna, Sweden. andrej.alekseenko@scilifelab.se.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. twana.alkasalias@ki.se. (4)College of Science,
Department of Biology, Salahaddin University, Erbil, Kurdistan-Iraq.
twana.alkasalias@ki.se. (5)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology
(MTC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. tatiana.pavlova@ki.se.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Laszlo.Szekely@ki.se. (7)Department of
Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Vladimir.Kashuba@ki.se. (8)Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
UNAS, Kiev, Ukraine. Vladimir.Kashuba@ki.se. (9)Department of Cell and Molecular 
Biology (CMB), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Helene.Rundqvist@ki.se. 
(10)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, section of Urology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Peter.Wiklund@ki.se. (11)Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Lars.Egevad@ki.se. 
(12)Department of Medical Chemistry, Semmelweis University, P.O. Box 260, H-1444,
Budapest 8, Hungary. csermelynet@gmail.com. (13)TGAC, The Genome Analysis Centre,
Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK. korcsmaros@gmail.com. (14)Gut Health and Food
Safety Programme, Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
korcsmaros@gmail.com. (15)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology
(MTC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Hayrettin.Guven@ki.se.
(16)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Georg.Klein@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: There is growing evidence that emerging malignancies in solid tissues
might be kept under control by physical intercellular contacts with normal
fibroblasts.
METHODS: Here we characterize transcriptional landscapes of fibroblasts that
confronted cancer cells. We studied four pairs of in vitro and ex vivo fibroblast
lines which, within each pair, differed in their capacity to inhibit cancer
cells. The natural process was modeled in vitro by confronting the fibroblasts
with PC-3 cancer cells. Fibroblast transcriptomes were recorded by Affymetrix
microarrays and then investigated using network analysis.
RESULTS: The network enrichment analysis allowed us to separate confrontation-
and inhibition-specific components of the fibroblast transcriptional response.
Confrontation-specific differences were stronger and were characterized by
changes in a number of pathways, including Rho, the YAP/TAZ cascade, NF-kB, and
TGF-beta signaling, as well as the transcription factor RELA. Inhibition-specific
differences were more subtle and characterized by involvement of Rho signaling at
the pathway level and by potential individual regulators such as IL6, MAPK8,
MAP2K4, PRKCA, JUN, STAT3, and STAT5A.
CONCLUSIONS: We investigated the interaction between cancer cells and fibroblasts
in order to shed light on the potential mechanisms and explain the differential
inhibitory capacity of the latter, which enabled both a holistic view on the
process and details at the gene/protein level. The combination of our methods
pointed to proteins, such as members of the Rho pathway, pro-inflammatory
signature and the YAP1/TAZ cascade, that warrant further investigation via tools 
of experimental perturbation. We also demonstrated functional congruence between 
the in vitro and ex vivo models. The microarray data are made available via the
Gene Expression Omnibus as GSE57199.

PMCID: PMC4472614
PMID: 26081588  [PubMed - in process]


55. Leuk Res. 2015 Aug;39(8):897-905. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.05.006. Epub 2015
May 22.

STAT5A regulates DNMT3A in CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells.

Takeuchi A(1), Nishioka C(2), Ikezoe T(3), Yang J(2), Yokoyama A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Okoh-cho, Nankoku 783-8505, Kochi, Japan. Electronic address:
jm-asako@kochi-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine,
Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Okoh-cho, Nankoku 783-8505, Kochi, Japan.
(3)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Okoh-cho, Nankoku 783-8505, Kochi, Japan. Electronic address:
ikezoet@kochi-u.ac.jp.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is activated in
CD34(+)/CD38(-) acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) cells. Inhibition of STAT5
induced apoptosis and sensitized these cells to the growth inhibition mediated by
conventional chemotherapeutic agents. The present study attempted to identify
molecules that are regulated by STAT5 in CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells by utilizing
cDNA microarrays, comparing the gene expression profiles of control and STAT5A
shRNA-transduced CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells. Interestingly, DNA methyltransferase 
(DNMT) 3A was downregulated after depletion of STAT5A in CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML
cells. Reporter gene assays found that an increase in activity of DNMT3A occurred
in response to activation of STAT5A in leukemia cells. On the other hand,
dephosphorylation of STAT5A by AZ960 decreased this transcriptional activity.
Further studies utilizing a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay identified a
STAT5A-binding site on the promoter region of DNMT3A gene. Forced expression of
STAT5A in leukemia cells caused hypermethylation on the promoter region of the
tumor suppressor gene, PTEN, and downregulated its mRNA levels, as measured by
methylation-specific and real-time polymerase chain reaction, respectively. Taken
together, these data suggest that STAT5A positively regulates levels of DNMT3A,
resulting in inactivation of tumor suppressor genes by epigenetic mechanisms in
AML cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26059451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;5(3):1180-9. eCollection 2015.

MiRNA-1469 promotes lung cancer cells apoptosis through targeting STAT5a.

Xu C(1), Zhang L(1), Li H(1), Liu Z(2), Duan L(1), Lu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aviation Medicine Research Laboratory, Air Force General Hospital, PLA Beijing
100142, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College Beijing, 100021, China.

MicroRNAs play key roles in cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. In this 
study, we described the regulation and function of miR-1469 in apoptosis of lung 
cancer cells (A549 and NCI-H1650). Expression analysis verified that miR-1469
expression significantly increased in apoptotic cells. Overexpression of miR-1469
in lung cancer cells increased cell apoptosis induced by etoposide. Additionally,
we identified that Stat5a is a downstream target of miR-1469, which can bind
directly to the 3'-untranslated region of the Stat5a, subsequently reducing both 
the mRNA and protein levels of Stat5a. Finally, co-expression of miR-1469 and
Stat5a in A549 and NCI-H1650 cells partially abrogated the effect of miR-1469 on 
cell apoptosis. Our results show that miR-1469 functions as an apoptosis enhancer
to regulate lung cancer apoptosis through targeting Stat5a and may become a
critical therapeutic target in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4449445
PMID: 26045996  [PubMed]


57. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Sep;98(3):373-84. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1A0514-276RR. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

CD4<U+207A>CD28null T lymphocytes resemble CD8<U+207A>CD28null T lymphocytes in their responses
to IL-15 and IL-21 in HIV-infected patients.

Echeverría A(1), Moro-García MA(1), Asensi V(1), Cartón JA(1), López-Larrea C(1),
Alonso-Arias R(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Immunology Department and Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital Universitario
Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain; and Fundación Renal "Iñigo Alvarez de
Toledo," Madrid, Spain. (2)*Immunology Department and Infectious Diseases Unit,
Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain; and Fundación Renal
"Iñigo Alvarez de Toledo," Madrid, Spain ralonsoarias@hotmail.es.

HIV-infected individuals suffer from accelerated immunologic aging. One of the
most prominent changes during T lymphocyte aging is the accumulation of
CD28(null) T lymphocytes, mainly CD8(+) but also CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Enhancing 
the functional properties of these cells may be important because they provide
antigen-specific defense against chronic infections. The objective of this study 
was to compare the responses of CD4(+)CD28(null) and CD8(+)CD28(null) T
lymphocytes from HIV-infected patients to the immunomodulatory effects of
cytokines IL-15 and IL-21. We quantified the frequencies of CD4(+)CD28(null) and 
CD8(+)CD28(null) T lymphocytes in peripheral blood from 110 consecutive,
HIV-infected patients and 25 healthy controls. Patients showed increased
frequencies of CD4(+)CD28(null) and CD8(+)CD28(null). Both subsets were
positively correlated to each other and showed an inverse correlation with the
absolute counts of CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Higher frequencies of HIV-specific and
CMV-specific cells were found in CD28(null) than in CD28(+) T lymphocytes.
Activation of STAT5 by IL-15 and STAT3 by IL-21 was higher in CD28(null) compared
with CD28(+) T lymphocytes. Proliferation, expression of CD69, and IFN-<U+03B3>
production in CD28(null) T lymphocytes were increased after treatment with IL-15,
and IL-21 potentiated most of those effects. Nevertheless, IL-21 alone reduced
IFN-<U+03B3> production in response to anti-CD3 stimulation but increased CD28
expression, even counteracting the inhibitory effect of IL-15. Intracytoplasmic
stores of granzyme B and perforin were increased by IL-15, whereas IL-21 and
simultaneous treatment with the 2 cytokines also significantly enhanced
degranulation in CD4(+)CD28(null) and CD8(+)CD28(null) T lymphocytes. IL-15 and
IL-21 could have a role in enhancing the effector response of CD28(null) T
lymphocytes against their specific chronic antigens in HIV-infected patients.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 26034206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Aug;14(8):1777-93. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0883. Epub
2015 May 29.

Structure-Based Screen Identifies a Potent Small Molecule Inhibitor of Stat5a/b
with Therapeutic Potential for Prostate Cancer and Chronic Myeloid Leukemia.

Liao Z(1), Gu L(1), Vergalli J(1), Mariani SA(1), De Dominici M(1), Lokareddy
RK(2), Dagvadorj A(1), Purushottamachar P(3), McCue PA(4), Trabulsi E(5), Lallas 
CD(5), Gupta S(6), Ellsworth E(1), Blackmon S(1), Ertel A(1), Fortina P(1), Leiby
B(7), Xia G(1), Rui H(8), Hoang DT(1), Gomella LG(5), Cingolani G(2), Njar V(3), 
Pattabiraman N(9), Calabretta B(1), Nevalainen MT(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of Pathology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (5)Department of
Urology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. (6)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Medical
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (7)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (8)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Pathology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(9)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Oncology, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, District of
Columbia. (10)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Urology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. mnevalainen@mcw.edu.

Bypassing tyrosine kinases responsible for Stat5a/b phosphorylation would be
advantageous for therapy development for Stat5a/b-regulated cancers. Here, we
sought to identify small molecule inhibitors of Stat5a/b for lead optimization
and therapy development for prostate cancer and Bcr-Abl-driven leukemias. In
silico screening of chemical structure databases combined with medicinal
chemistry was used for identification of a panel of small molecule inhibitors to 
block SH2 domain-mediated docking of Stat5a/b to the receptor-kinase complex and 
subsequent phosphorylation and dimerization. We tested the efficacy of the lead
compound IST5-002 in experimental models and patient samples of two known
Stat5a/b-driven cancers, prostate cancer and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The 
lead compound inhibitor of Stat5-002 (IST5-002) prevented both Jak2 and
Bcr-Abl-mediated phosphorylation and dimerization of Stat5a/b, and selectively
inhibited transcriptional activity of Stat5a (IC50 = 1.5µmol/L) and Stat5b (IC50 
= 3.5 µmol/L). IST5-002 suppressed nuclear translocation of Stat5a/b, binding to 
DNA and Stat5a/b target gene expression. IST5-002 induced extensive apoptosis of 
prostate cancer cells, impaired growth of prostate cancer xenograft tumors, and
induced cell death in patient-derived prostate cancers when tested ex vivo in
explant organ cultures. Importantly, IST5-002 induced robust apoptotic death not 
only of imatinib-sensitive but also of imatinib-resistant CML cell lines and
primary CML cells from patients. IST5-002 provides a lead structure for further
chemical modifications for clinical development for Stat5a/b-driven solid tumors 
and hematologic malignancies.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4547362 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26026053  [PubMed - in process]


59. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2015 May-Jun;29(3):182-7. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2015.29.4170.

Increased phosphorylation of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, in nasal polyps.

Linke R(1), Pries R, Könnecke M, Bruchhage KL, Böscke R, Gebhard M, Wollenberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Facial Plastic Surgery, University of 
Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) is a recurrent,
benign, extensively proliferating disease that is triggered by inflammation. The 
signaling pathways in sinusitis and the regulation by intracellular signaling
peptides and proteins are not fully understood. Signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) 5a and STAT5b are two closely related phosphokinases
involved in the regulation of diverse cellular functions, including proliferation
and apoptosis.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to investigate the expression,
activation, and distribution of STAT5 Transcription factor in CRSwNP.
METHODS: We studied these transcription factors in tissue samples of nasal polyps
and inferior turbinates from a total of 35 patients with CRSwNP and compared them
with healthy nasal mucosa. The samples were analyzed by using a DNA microarray,
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, a protein array, immunoblot,
immunoprecipitation and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We found equivalent overall expression of STAT5a in all tissue types. We
observed an increase in the expression of STAT5b protein in both polyps and
turbinates of patients with CRSwNP. In addition, STAT5b, but not STAT5a, was
activated by phosphorylation in nasal polyps. Phosphorylated STAT5a/b was not
detectable in the epithelium of turbinates from either patients with CRSwNP or
patients with healthy mucosa, but it was clearly expressed in the epithelium of
nasal polyps.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of these data indicates distinct expression and activation
of STAT5a and STAT5b in nasal polyps, particularly the activation of STAT5b. It
is possible that STAT5b may contribute to the development of nasal polyps.

PMID: 25975249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Rep. 2015 May 19;11(7):1102-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.015. Epub 2015 
May 7.

An epigenetic memory of pregnancy in the mouse mammary gland.

Dos Santos CO(1), Dolzhenko E(2), Hodges E(3), Smith AD(2), Hannon GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.
(2)Molecular and Computational Biology, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90089, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Watson School of
Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring 
Harbor, NY 11724, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt Genetics Institute,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232-0146, USA. (4)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA; Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge
CB2 0RE, UK. Electronic address: hannon@cshl.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;11(7):383.

Pregnancy is the major modulator of mammary gland activity. It induces a
tremendous expansion of the mammary epithelium and the generation of alveolar
structures for milk production. Anecdotal evidence from multiparous humans
indicates that the mammary gland may react less strongly to the first pregnancy
than it does to subsequent pregnancies. Here, we verify that the mouse mammary
gland responds more robustly to a second pregnancy, indicating that the gland
retains a long-term memory of pregnancy. A comparison of genome-wide profiles of 
DNA methylation in isolated mammary cell types reveals substantial and
long-lasting alterations. Since these alterations are maintained in the absence
of the signal that induced them, we term them epigenetic. The majority of
alterations in DNA methylation affect sites occupied by the Stat5a transcription 
factor and mark specific genes that are upregulated during pregnancy. We
postulate that the epigenetic memory of a first pregnancy primes the activation
of gene expression networks that promote mammary gland function in subsequent
reproductive cycles. More broadly, our data indicate that physiological
experience can broadly alter epigenetic states, functionally modifying the
capacity of the affected cells to respond to later stimulatory events.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4439279
PMID: 25959817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(10):7915-27. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3509-9. Epub 2015
May 8.

Revealing genome-wide mRNA and microRNA expression patterns in leukemic cells
highlighted "hsa-miR-2278" as a tumor suppressor for regain of chemotherapeutic
imatinib response due to targeting STAT5A.

Kaymaz BT(1), Günel NS(2), Ceyhan M(3), Çetintas VB(2), Özel B(2), Yandim MK(4), 
Kipçak S(2), Aktan Ç(2), Gökbulut AA(4), Baran Y(5), Can BK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biology Department, Ege University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey.
burcin.tezcanli@ege.edu.tr. (2)Medical Biology Department, Ege University Medical
School, Izmir, Turkey. (3)Oncology Department, 9 Eylül University Medical School,
Izmir, Turkey. (4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Izmir Institute
of Technology, Izmir, Turkey. (5)Faculty of Life and Natural Sciences, Abdullah
Gul University, Kayseri, Turkey.

BCR-ABL oncoprotein stimulates cell proliferation and inhibits apoptosis in
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). For cure, imatinib is a widely used tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, but developing chemotherapeutic resistance has to be overcome. 
In this study, we aimed to determine differing genome-wide microRNA (miRNA) and
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression profiles in imatinib resistant (K562/IMA-3 µM)
and parental cells by targeting STAT5A via small interfering RNA (siRNA)
applications. After determining possible therapeutic miRNAs, we aimed to check
their effects upon cell viability and proliferation, apoptosis, and find a
possible miRNA::mRNA interaction to discover the molecular basis of imatinib
resistance. We detected that miR-2278 and miR-1245b-3p were most significantly
regulated miRNAs according to miRNome array. Upregulating miR-2278 expression
resulted in the inhibition of resistant leukemic cell proliferation and induced
apoptosis, whereas miR-1245b-3p did not exhibit therapeutic results. Functional
analyses indicated that AKT2, STAM2, and STAT5A mRNAs were functional targets for
miR-2278 as mimic transfection decreased their expressions both at
transcriptional and translational level, thus highlighting miR-2278 as a tumor
suppressor. This study provides new insights in discovering the mechanism of
imatinib resistance due to upregulating the tumor-suppressor hsa-miR-2278 which
stands for a functional therapeutic approach, inhibited leukemic cell
proliferation, induced apoptosis, and regain of chemotherapeutic drug response in
CML therapy.

PMID: 25953263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jul;405(1-2):205-21. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2412-4. Epub 
2015 Apr 21.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and 5 regulate system Xc- and 
redox balance in human breast cancer cells.

Linher-Melville K(1), Haftchenary S, Gunning P, Singh G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON, L8S 4L8, Canada.

System Xc- is a cystine/glutamate antiporter that contributes to the maintenance 
of cellular redox balance. The human xCT (SLC7A11) gene encodes the functional
subunit of system Xc-. Transcription factors regulating antioxidant defense
mechanisms including system Xc- are of therapeutic interest, especially given
that aggressive breast cancer cells exhibit increased system Xc- function. This
investigation provides evidence that xCT expression is regulated by STAT3 and/or 
STAT5A, functionally affecting the antiporter in human breast cancer cells.
Computationally analyzing two kilobase pairs of the xCT promoter/5' flanking
region identified a distal gamma-activated site (GAS) motif, with truncations
significantly increasing luciferase reporter activity. Similar transcriptional
increases were obtained after treating cells transiently transfected with the
full-length xCT promoter construct with STAT3/5 pharmacological inhibitors.
Knock-down of STAT3 or STAT5A with siRNAs produced similar results. However, GAS 
site mutation significantly reduced xCT transcriptional activity, suggesting that
STATs may interact with other transcription factors at more proximal promoter
sites. STAT3 and STAT5A were bound to the xCT promoter in MDA-MB-231 cells, and
binding was disrupted by pre-treatment with STAT inhibitors. Pharmacologically
suppressing STAT3/5 activation significantly increased xCT mRNA and protein
levels, as well as cystine uptake, glutamate release, and total levels of
intracellular glutathione. Our data suggest that STAT proteins negatively
regulate basal xCT expression. Blocking STAT3/5-mediated signaling induces an
adaptive, compensatory mechanism to protect breast cancer cells from stress,
including reactive oxygen species, by up-regulating xCT expression and the
function of system Xc-. We propose that targeting system Xc- together with
STAT3/5 inhibitors may heighten therapeutic anti-cancer effects.

PMID: 25896132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Apoptosis. 2015 Aug;20(8):1033-47. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1130-4.

A soluble receptor for advanced glycation end-products inhibits myocardial
apoptosis induced by ischemia/reperfusion via the JAK2/STAT3 pathway.

Jiang X(1), Guo CX, Zeng XJ, Li HH, Chen BX, Du FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Tian Tan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 6 Tiantan Xili, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100050, China.

sRAGE can protect cardiomyocytes from apoptosis induced by ischemia/reperfusion
(I/R). However, the signaling mechanisms in cardioprotection by sRAGE are
currently unknown. We investigated the cardioprotective effect and potential
molecular mechanisms of sRAGE inhibition on apoptosis in the mouse myocardial I/R
as an in vivo model and neonatal rat cardiomyocyte subjected to ischemic buffer
as an in vitro model. Cardiac function and myocardial infarct size following by
I/R were evaluated with echocardiography and Evans
blue/2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride. Apoptosis was detected by TUNEL
staining and caspase-3 activity. Expression of the apoptosis-related proteins
p53, Bax, Bcl-2, JAK2/p-JAK2, STAT3/p-STAT3, AKT/p-AKT, ERK/p-ERK,
STAT5A/p-STAT5A and STAT6/p-STAT6 were detected by western blot analysis in the
presence and absence of the JAK2 inhibitor AG 490. sRAGE (100 µg/day) improved
the heart function in mice with I/R: the left ventricular ejection fraction and
fractional shortening were increased by 42 and 57%, respectively; the infarct
size was decreased by 52%, the TUNEL-positive myocytes by 66%, and activity of
caspase-3 by 24%, the protein expression of p53 and ratio of Bax to Bcl-2 by 29
and 88%, respectively; protein expression of the p-JAK2, p-STAT3 and p-AKT were
increased by 92, 280 and 31%, respectively. sRAGE have no effect on protein
expression of p-ERK1/2, p-STAT5A and p-STAT6 following by I/R. sRAGE (900 nmol/L)
exhibited anti-apoptotic effects in cardiomyocytes by decreasing TUNEL-positive
myocytes by 67% and caspase-3 activity by 20%, p53 protein level and the
Bax/Bcl-2 ratio by 58 and 86%, respectively; increasing protein expression of the
p-JAK2 and p-STAT3 by 26 and 156%, respectively, p-AKT protein level by 33%. The 
anti-apoptotic effects of sRAGE following I/R were blocked by JAK2 inhibitor AG
490. The effect of sRAGE reduction on TUNEL-positive myocytes and caspase-3
activity were abolished by PI3K inhibitor LY294002, but not ERK 1/2 inhibitor
PD98059. These results suggest that sRAGE protects cardiomyocytes from apoptosis 
induced by I/R in vitro and in vivo by activating the JAK2/STAT3 signaling
pathway.

PMID: 25894538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Commun Signal. 2015 Feb 15;13:10. doi: 10.1186/s12964-014-0081-7.

Src family kinases interfere with dimerization of STAT5A through a
phosphotyrosine-SH2 domain interaction.

Fahrenkamp D(1), de Leur HS(2), Küster A(3), Chatain N(4,)(5), Müller-Newen G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH
Aachen University, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany.
Dirk.Fahrenkamp@rwth-aachen.de. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074,
Aachen, Germany. Hildegard.Schmitz-VandeLeur@rwth-aachen.de. (3)Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, 
Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany. drea.kuester@gmx.de. (4)Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, 
Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany. nchatain@ukaachen.de. (5)Department of 
Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Faculty of
Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. nchatain@ukaachen.de.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH
Aachen University, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany.
mueller-newen@rwth-aachen.de.

BACKGROUND: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is driven by the expression of the
BCR-ABL oncoprotein. STAT5 is a BCR-ABL substrate and persistently activated by
tyrosine phosphorylation in CML cells. Activated STAT5 (pSTAT5) drives
proliferation and survival of leukemic cells and contributes to initial
transformation and maintenance of the disease. In cytokine-induced STAT5
signaling, phosphorylation of STAT5A on Y694 leads to nuclear accumulation of the
transcription factor, followed by DNA-binding and gene induction. However,
Src-family kinases (SFK) mediate cytoplasmic retention of pSTAT5A leading to
attenuated target gene expression and colony formation in CML cells.
RESULTS: In this study we show that autophosphorylation of Y416 in the highly
conserved activation loop of SFK generates a potent recruitment site for the SH2 
domain of STAT5A. Binding of the SH2 domain to the activation loop is required
for STAT5A(Y694) phosphorylation by SFK, but at the same time promotes the
persistent cytoplasmic localization of the transcription factor as found in
BCR-ABL(+) leukemia. As a consequence of the complex formation between
tyrosine-phosphorylated SFK and the SH2 domain of STAT5A, the dimerization of
STAT5A is impaired. We further demonstrate that constitutively active
STAT5A(S710F) escapes from SFK-mediated cytoplasmic retention by enhancing STAT5A
dimer stability.
CONCLUSION: Our results reveal important structural aspects of cytoplasmic
pSTAT5A found in myeloid leukemias and will contribute to the understanding of
STAT5A mediated cytoplasmic signaling.

PMCID: PMC4350284
PMID: 25885255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Phytother Res. 2015 Jul;29(7):1088-96. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5354. Epub 2015 Apr 17.

Alantolactone from Saussurea lappa Exerts Antiinflammatory Effects by Inhibiting 
Chemokine Production and STAT1 Phosphorylation in TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>-induced in
HaCaT cells.

Lim HS(1,)(2), Jin SE(1), Kim OS(3), Shin HK(1), Jeong SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)K-herb Research Center, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon,
305-811, Korea. (2)Division of Allergy and Chronic Respiratory Diseases, Center
for Biomedical Sciences, Korea National Institute of Health, Chungcheongbuk-do,
361-951, Korea. (3)Korean Medicine Convergence Research Division, Korea Institute
of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon, 305-811, Korea.

Skin inflammation is the most common condition seen in dermatology practice and
can be caused by various allergic reactions and certain toxins or chemicals. In
the present study, we investigated the antiinflammatory effects of Saussurea
lappa, a medicinal herb, and its marker compounds alantolactone, caryophyllene,
costic acid, costunolide, and dehydrocostuslactone in the HaCaT human
keratinocyte cell line. HaCaT cells were stimulated with tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-a) and interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), and treated with S.<U+2009>lappa or
each of five marker compounds. Chemokine production and expression were analyzed 
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction, respectively. Phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 1 was determined by immunoblotting. Stimulation with TNF-a
and IFN-<U+03B3> significantly increased the production of the following chemokines:
thymus-regulated and activation-regulated chemokine (TARC): regulated on
activation, normal T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES): macrophage-derived
chemokine (MDC): and interleukin-8 (IL-8). By contrast, S.<U+2009>lappa and the five
marker compounds significantly reduced the production of these chemokines by
TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>-treated cells. S.<U+2009>lappa and alantolactone suppressed the TNF-a
and IFN-<U+03B3>-stimulated increase in the phosphorylation of STAT1. Our results
demonstrate that alantolactone from S.<U+2009>lappa suppresses TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>-induced
production of RANTES and IL-8 by blocking STAT1 phosphorylation in HaCaT cells.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25881570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Dairy Sci. 2015 Jun;98(6):3859-75. doi: 10.3168/jds.2014-9054. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

A functional study of proximal goat ß-casein promoter and intron 1 in
immortalized goat mammary epithelial cells.

Kung MH(1), Lee YJ(2), Hsu JT(1), Huang MC(3), Ju YT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Technology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 10673, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Chung Shan
Medical University, Taichung 40201, Taiwan. (3)Department of Animal Science,
National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 40227, Taiwan. (4)Department of Animal 
Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10673, Taiwan.
Electronic address: ytju@ntu.edu.tw.

Goat ß-casein (CSN2) promoter has been extensively used to derive expression of
recombinant therapeutic protein in transgenic goats; however, little direct
evidence exists for signaling molecules and the cis-elements of goat CSN2
promoter in response to lactogenic hormone stimulation in goat mammary epithelial
cells. Here, we use an immortalized caprine mammary epithelial cell line (CMC) to
search for evidence of the above. Serial 5'-flanking regions deleted of promoter 
and intron 1 in goat CSN2 (-4,047 to +2,054) driven by firefly luciferase
reporter gene were constructed and applied to measure promoter activity in CMC.
The intron 1 region (+393 to +501) significantly decreased basal activity of the 
promoter. This finding contradicts other studies of the role of intron 1. The
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5a played a significant
role in activating promoter activity by prolactin stimulation. Hydrocortisone
enhanced and prolonged the activity of STAT5a and promoter in CMC, but was
independent of the glucocorticoid receptor response element. The minimum length
of the CSN2 promoter segment in response to lactogenic stimulation was confirmed 
by 5' serial deletions. A cis-element located from -300 to -90 in proximal goat
CSN2 promoter that is absent in bovine and human CSN2 promoter was newly
identified. We demonstrated the presence of a STAT5a binding site (-102 to -82)
and preservation of the guanosine nucleotide at position -90 based on responses
to the presence of lactogenic hormone using internal deletions and point
mutations of the predicted STAT5a binding site, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay. Together, these findings demonstrate that the proximal -300 bp of goat
CSN2 promoter containing the STAT5a binding site (-102 to -82) is the response
element for lactogenic hormone stimulation. Additionally, intron 1 may be
required for tissue or developmental stage-specific expression in mammary gland. 
The role of the far-distal regions of goat CSN2 promoter in high-level lactogenic
hormone induction and specific expression require further examination.

Copyright © 2015 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25841968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9189-205.

FLT3-ITD confers resistance to the PI3K/Akt pathway inhibitors by protecting the 
mTOR/4EBP1/Mcl-1 pathway through STAT5 activation in acute myeloid leukemia.

Nogami A(1), Oshikawa G(1), Okada K(1), Fukutake S(1), Umezawa Y(1), Nagao T(1), 
Kurosu T(1), Miura O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD are the most frequent tyrosine kinase mutations in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), with the former associated with poor prognosis. Here, we 
show that the PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941 or the Akt inhibitor MK-2206 induced
apoptosis through the mitochondria-mediated intrinsic pathway more efficiently in
hematopoietic 32D cells driven by FLT3-TKD (32D/TKD) than FLT3-ITD (32D/ITD),
which robustly activated STAT5. The resistance to GDC-0941 and MK-2206 was gained
by expression of the constitutively activated STAT5 mutant STAT5A1*6 in 32D/TKD
cells, while it was abrogated by the STAT5 inhibitor pimozide in 32D/ITD cells or
FLT3-ITD-expressing human leukemic MV4-11 cells. GDC-0941 or MK-2206 induced
dephosphorylation of 4EBP1 more conspicuously in 32D/TKD than in 32D/ITD, which
was prevented or augmented by STAT5A1*6 or pimozide, respectively, and correlated
with downregulation of the eIF4E/eIF4G complex formation and Mcl-1 expression.
Furthermore, exogenous expression of Mcl-1 endowed resistance to GDC-0941 and
MK-2206 on 32D/TKD cells. Finally, it was confirmed in primary AML cells with
FLT3-ITD that pimozide enhanced 4EBP1 dephosphorylation and Mcl-1 downregulation 
to augment cytotoxicity of GDC-0941. These data suggest that the robust STAT5
activation by FLT3-ITD protects cells treated with the PI3K/Akt pathway
inhibitors from apoptosis by maintaining Mcl-1 expression through the
mTORC1/4EBP1/eIF4E pathway.

PMCID: PMC4496211
PMID: 25826077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Animal. 2015 Jul;9(7):1104-12. doi: 10.1017/S1751731115000440. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Genetic variation and effects of candidate-gene polymorphisms on coagulation
properties, curd firmness modeling and acidity in milk from Brown Swiss cows.

Cecchinato A(1), Chessa S(2), Ribeca C(1), Cipolat-Gotet C(1), Bobbo T(1),
Casellas J(3), Bittante G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Agronomy,Food,Natural Resources,Animals and Environment
(DAFNAE),University of Padova,Viale dell'Università 16,35020 Legnaro,Italy.
(2)2Istituto di Biologia e Biotecnologia Agraria,Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche (CNR),via Einstein,26900 Lodi,Italy. (3)3Departament de Ciència Animal i
dels Aliments,Grup de Recerca en Remugants,Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona,08193 Bellaterra,Spain.

The aims of this study were to estimate the genetic variation of traditional milk
coagulation properties (MCPs), milk acidity, curd firmness (CF) modeled on time t
(CF(t) ; comprising: RCT(eq), rennet coagulation time estimated from the
equation; CF(P), the asymptotic potential curd firmness; k(CF), the curd firming 
instant rate constant; and k(SR), the syneresis instant rate constant) and
maximum CF traits (MCF; comprising CF(max), the maximum CF value; and tmax, the
time of attainment). Furthermore, we investigated 96 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from 54 candidate genes, testing their associations with the
above-listed traits. Milk and blood samples were collected from 1271 cows (each
sampled once) from 85 herds. Genotyping was performed using a custom Illumina
VeraCode GoldenGate approach. A Bayesian linear animal model (including the
effects of herd, days in milk, parity and additive polygenic effects) was used to
estimate the genetic parameters of the studied traits. The same model with the
addition of the SNP genotype effect was used for our association analysis. The
heritability estimates of CF t and the MCF traits (RCT(eq)=0.258; k(CF)=0.230;
CF(max)=0.191; t(max)=0.278) were similar to those obtained using traditional
MCPs (0.187 to 0.267), except for the lower estimates for CF(P) (0.064) and k(SR)
(0.077). A total of 13 of the 51 tested SNPs had relevant additive effects on at 
least one trait. We observed associations between MCPs and SNPs in the genes
encoding ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 2 (ABCG2), chemokine ligand 2
(CCL2), growth hormone 1 (GH1), prolactin (PRL) and toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2). 
Whereas, CF(t) and the MCF traits were associated with polymorphisms in the
a-s1-casein (CSN1S1), ß-casein (CSN2), GH1, oxidized low-density lipoprotein
receptor 1 (OLR1), phospholipase C ß1 (PLCB1), PRL and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) genes.

PMID: 25823422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Mar 19;7(1):503-37. doi: 10.3390/cancers7010503.

Stat5 Exerts Distinct, Vital Functions in the Cytoplasm and Nucleus of Bcr-Abl+
K562 and Jak2(V617F)+ HEL Leukemia Cells.

Weber A(1), Borghouts C(2), Brendel C(3), Moriggl R(4), Delis N(5), Brill B(6),
Vafaizadeh V(7), Groner B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. axel.weber@signis.de. (2)Ganymed
Pharmaceuticals AG, Mainz 55131, Germany. c.heinz@ganymed.ag. (3)Boston
Children's Hospital, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
christian.brendel@childrens.harvard.edu. (4)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer
Research (LBI-CR), Vienna 1090, Austria. richard.moriggl@lbicr.lbg.ac.at.
(5)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. delis@gsh.uni-frankfurt.de.
(6)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. brill@gsh.uni-frankfurt.de.
(7)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. vida.vafaizadeh@unibas.ch.
(8)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. Groner@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stats) play central roles in 
the conversion of extracellular signals, e.g., cytokines, hormones and growth
factors, into tissue and cell type specific gene expression patterns. In normal
cells, their signaling potential is strictly limited in extent and duration. The 
persistent activation of Stat3 or Stat5 is found in many human tumor cells and
contributes to their growth and survival. Stat5 activation plays a pivotal role
in nearly all hematological malignancies and occurs downstream of oncogenic
kinases, e.g., Bcr-Abl in chronic myeloid leukemias (CML) and Jak2(V617F) in
other myeloproliferative diseases (MPD). We defined the mechanisms through which 
Stat5 affects growth and survival of K562 cells, representative of Bcr-Abl
positive CML, and HEL cells, representative for Jak2(V617F) positive acute
erythroid leukemia. In our experiments we suppressed the protein expression
levels of Stat5a and Stat5b through shRNA mediated downregulation and
demonstrated the dependence of cell survival on the presence of Stat5.
Alternatively, we interfered with the functional capacities of the Stat5 protein 
through the interaction with a Stat5 specific peptide ligand. This ligand is a
Stat5 specific peptide aptamer construct which comprises a 12mer peptide
integrated into a modified thioredoxin scaffold, S5-DBD-PA. The peptide sequence 
specifically recognizes the DNA binding domain (DBD) of Stat5. Complex formation 
of S5-DBD-PA with Stat5 causes a strong reduction of P-Stat5 in the nuclear
fraction of Bcr-Abl-transformed K562 cells and a suppression of Stat5 target
genes. Distinct Stat5 mediated survival mechanisms were detected in K562 and
Jak2(V617F)-transformed HEL cells. Stat5 is activated in the nuclear and
cytosolic compartments of K562 cells and the S5-DBD-PA inhibitor most likely
affects the viability of Bcr-Abl+ K562 cells through the inhibition of canonical 
Stat5 induced target gene transcription. In HEL cells, Stat5 is predominantly
present in the cytoplasm and the survival of the Jak2(V617F)+ HEL cells is
impeded through the inhibition of the cytoplasmic functions of Stat5.

PMCID: PMC4381271
PMID: 25809097  [PubMed]


70. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 15;21(12):2820-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3322.
Epub 2015 Mar 16.

The Use of Transcriptional Profiling to Improve Personalized Diagnosis and
Management of Cutaneous T-cell Lymphoma (CTCL).

Litvinov IV(1), Netchiporouk E(1), Cordeiro B(1), Doré MA(2), Moreau L(1), Pehr
K(3), Gilbert M(2), Zhou Y(4), Sasseville D(5), Kupper TS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Quebec,
Canada. (2)Division of Dermatology, Université Laval, Québec, Canada. (3)Division
of Dermatology, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
Division of Dermatology, Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (5)Division of Dermatology, McGill
University Health Centre, Montréal, Quebec, Canada. tkupper@partners.org
denis.sasseville@mcgill.ca. (6)Harvard Skin Disease Research Center, Department
of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard University, Boston,
Massachusetts. tkupper@partners.org denis.sasseville@mcgill.ca.

PURPOSE: Although many patients with mycosis fungoides presenting with stage I
disease enjoy an indolent disease course and normal life expectancy, about 15% to
20% of them progress to higher stages and most ultimately succumb to their
disease. Currently, it is not possible to predict which patients will progress
and which patients will have a stable disease. Previously, we conducted
microarray analyses with RT-PCR validation of gene expression in biopsy specimens
from 60 patients with stage I-IV cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), identified
three distinct clusters based upon transcription profile, and correlated our
molecular findings with 6 years of clinical follow-up.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We test by RT-PCR within our prediction model the expression
of about 240 genes that were previously reported to play an important role in
CTCL carcinogenesis. We further extend the clinical follow-up of our patients to 
11 years. We compare the expression of selected genes between mycosis
fungoides/Sézary syndrome and benign inflammatory dermatoses that often mimic
this cancer.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrate that 52 of the about 240 genes can be
classified into cluster 1-3 expression patterns and such expression is consistent
with their suggested biologic roles. Moreover, we determined that 17 genes
(CCL18, CCL26, FYB, T3JAM, MMP12, LEF1, LCK, ITK, GNLY, IL2RA, IL26, IL22, CCR4, 
GTSF1, SYCP1, STAT5A, and TOX) are able to both identify patients who are at risk
of progression and also distinguish mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome from benign
mimickers.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, combined with other gene expression analyses, prepares
the foundation for the development of personalized molecular approach toward
diagnosis and treatment of CTCL.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4470792 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25779945  [PubMed - in process]


71. J Dairy Sci. 2015 May;98(5):3133-42. doi: 10.3168/jds.2014-9003. Epub 2015 Mar
12.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is
linked to ß1-integrin protein abundance in unilaterally milked bovine mammary
glands.

Murney R(1), Stelwagen K(2), Wheeler TT(3), Margerison JK(4), Singh K(3).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ltd., Ruakura Research Centre, P.B. 3123, Hamilton 3240, New
Zealand; Institute of Agriculture and Environment, College of Sciences, Massey
University, P.B. 11222, Palmerston North 4442, New Zealand. Electronic address:
regan.murney@agresearch.co.nz. (2)SciLactis Ltd., Waikato Innovation Park,
Hamilton 3240, New Zealand. (3)AgResearch Ltd., Ruakura Research Centre, P.B.
3123, Hamilton 3240, New Zealand. (4)Institute of Agriculture and Environment,
College of Sciences, Massey University, P.B. 11222, Palmerston North 4442, New
Zealand.

Prolactin (PRL) is important in the regulation of milk synthesis in mammary
epithelial cells (MEC). In cattle, circulating levels of PRL are not limiting,
suggesting the possible involvement of other factors that may control the
response to PRL at the cellular level. The effects of milking frequency (MF) on
milk synthesis are controlled locally within mammary glands and involve PRL
signaling. To further investigate this relationship between MF and PRL signaling,
udder halves of 17 dairy cows were milked either 4 times a day (4×) or once a day
(1×) for 14 d in early lactation. Mammary biopsies were obtained 3 to 5h
following milking from both udder halves of 10 cows, and changes in PRL and
associated pathways were measured. The abundance of STAT5A mRNA was higher after 
4× milking, whereas that of the PRL receptor (PRLR) and STAT3 were lower relative
to that after 1× milking. In 4× mammary tissues, the protein levels of STAT5,
activated STAT5, and ß1-integrin were higher, whereas the those of the long
isoform of PRL receptor and activated STAT3 were lower than 1× tissues. The
activation of STAT5 correlated strongly with major milk protein mRNA abundance
(r=0.86 to 0.94) and ß1-integrin protein levels (r=0.91). These results confirm
that major milk protein gene expression is associated with STAT5 activation and
suggests that the STAT5 and ß1-integrin signaling pathways are linked. Modulation
of ß1-integrin abundance in response to changes in MF may be a mechanism that
controls the MEC ability to respond to PRL and therefore its secretory activity.

Copyright © 2015 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Apr 13;54(16):4758-63. doi: 10.1002/anie.201410672. 
Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Nanomolar inhibitors of the transcription factor STAT5b with high selectivity
over STAT5a.

Elumalai N(1), Berg A, Natarajan K, Scharow A, Berg T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Leipzig, Johannisallee 29, 04103
Leipzig (Germany) http://www.uni-leipzig.de/~tberg.

Src homology 2 (SH2) domains play a central role in signal transduction. Although
many SH2 domains have been validated as drug targets, their structural similarity
makes development of specific inhibitors difficult. The cancer-relevant
transcription factors STAT5a and STAT5b are particularly challenging
small-molecule targets because their SH2 domains are 93% identical on the amino
acid level. Here we present the natural product-inspired development of the
low-nanomolar inhibitor Stafib-1, as the first small molecule which inhibits the 
STAT5b SH2 domain (K(i)=44 nM) with more than 50-fold selectivity over STAT5a.
The binding site of the core moiety of Stafib-1 was validated by functional
analysis of point mutants. A prodrug of Stafib-1 was shown to inhibit STAT5b with
high selectivity over STAT5a in tumor cells. Stafib-1 provides the first
demonstration that naturally occurring SH2 domains with more than 90% sequence
identity can be selectively targeted with small organic molecules.

© 2015 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. This is an
open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non-Commercial NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial
and no modifications or adaptations are made.

PMCID: PMC4471549
PMID: 25702814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 4;5:8234. doi: 10.1038/srep08234.

Jagged-1 signaling suppresses the IL-6 and TGF-ß treatment-induced Th17 cell
differentiation via the reduction of ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17A/IL-17F/IL-23a/IL-12rb1.

Wang Y(1), Xing F(1), Ye S(2), Xiao J(2), Di J(2), Zeng S(2), Liu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Tissue Transplantation and Immunology, Department of
Immunobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China [2] Key Laboratory of
Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (2)Institute of Tissue Transplantation and
Immunology, Department of Immunobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
China. (3)Department of Stomatology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

Jagged-1 signaling has recently been reported to be involved in the Th17 cell
differentiation. However, little is known about its mechanisms. Soluble Jagged-1 
was used to activate the Jagged-1-Notch signaling to interfere with the IL-6 and 
TGF-ß-induced Th17 cell skewing. Genes relevant to the autoimmunity or
inflammation were screened for the first time in this system by qPCR array for
the differential expressions. The 18 genes out of 84, including Clec7a, Il12b,
Il12rb1, Il12rb2, Csf3, Il15, Il17a, Il17f, Il17rc, Il17rd, Il17re, Il23a, Myd88,
Socs1, Stat4, Stat5a, Sykb and Tbx21, were downregulated, but only Cxcl2, Cxcl12 
and Mmp3 were upregulated. The expressions of the genes, Ror<U+03B3>t, Il17a, Il17f,
Il12rb1 and Il23a, induced by simultaneous IL-6 and TGF-ß treatment were
significantly suppressed by Jagged-1, followed by the reduction of ROR<U+03B3>t, IL-17A,
and IL-17F. Consistent with the attenuation of ROR<U+03B3>t, and the reduced production 
and secretion of IL-17A and IL-17F in the cell supernatant and the in situ
stained cells, the number of CD4(+)IL-17(+) cells was also diminished. It is
concluded that the Jagged-1-Notch signaling can suppress the IL-6 and TGF-ß
treatment-induced Th17 cell skewing through the attenuation of ROR<U+03B3>t and, hence
by, the down-regulation of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-23a, and IL-12rb1.

PMCID: PMC4316398
PMID: 25648768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Blood. 2015 Mar 19;125(12):1936-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-585216. Epub 2015 
Jan 20.

FLT3-ITD and TLR9 use Bruton tyrosine kinase to activate distinct transcriptional
programs mediating AML cell survival and proliferation.

Oellerich T(1), Mohr S(2), Corso J(3), Beck J(4), Döbele C(2), Braun H(5), Cremer
A(2), Münch S(2), Wicht J(5), Oellerich MF(6), Bug G(2), Bohnenberger H(7),
Perske C(7), Schütz E(4), Urlaub H(8), Serve H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, 
Germany; German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany; (2)Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology,
Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany; (3)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, 
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany; (4)Chronix
Biomedical, San Jose, CA; (5)German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; (6)Department of Medicine
III, Cardiology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany; and. (7)Department of
Pathology and. (8)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany; Bioanalytics, Georg August University,
Göttingen, Germany.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is driven by niche-derived and cell-autonomous
stimuli. Although many cell-autonomous disease drivers are known, niche-dependent
signaling in the context of the genetic disease heterogeneity has been difficult 
to investigate. Here, we analyzed the role of Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) in
AML. BTK was frequently expressed, and its inhibition strongly impaired the
proliferation and survival of AML cells also in the presence of bone marrow
stroma. By interactome analysis, (phospho)proteomics, and transcriptome
sequencing, we characterized BTK signaling networks. We show that BTK-dependent
signaling is highly context dependent. In Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 internal
tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD)-positive AML, BTK mediates FLT3-ITD-dependent Myc
and STAT5 activation, and combined targeting of FLT3-ITD and BTK showed additive 
effects. In Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 internal tandem duplication
(FLT3-ITD)-negative AML, BTK couples Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) activation to
nuclear factor <U+03BA><U+0392> and STAT5. Both BTK-dependent transcriptional programs were
relevant for cell cycle progression and apoptosis regulation. Thus, we identify
context-dependent oncogenic driver events that may guide subtype-specific
treatment strategies and, for the first time, point to a role of TLR9 in AML.
Clinical evaluation of BTK inhibitors in AML seems warranted.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25605370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. FEBS J. 2015 Mar;282(5):891-903. doi: 10.1111/febs.13187. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Fractalkine promotes chemotaxis of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
towards ischemic brain lesions through Jak2 signaling and cytoskeletal
reorganization.

Zhang Y(1), Zheng J, Zhou Z, Zhou H, Wang Y, Gong Z, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

The fractalkine (FKN)-CX3CR1 (FKN receptor) axis reportedly plays an important
role in the progression of many neural pathologies. However, its role in the
recruitment of bone marrow-derived progenitor cells for neurogenesis remains
elusive. The chemokine-based mechanism underlying the migration of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) was investigated in a
double-chamber transmigration model with recombinant FKN and endogenous FKN
extract, and the results confirmed the involvement of FKN in migration. This
chemotactic response was CX3CR1-dependent and FKN-sensitive. Western blotting,
immunoprecipitation and transmigration assays revealed that the Janus kinase
(Jak)2-signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a-extracellular
signal-related kinase (ERK)1/2 pathway was activated by FKN. Confocal laser
scanning microscopy was used to demonstrate cytoskeletal reorganization caused by
remodeling of the surface receptor integrin a5ß1, intracellular phosphorylation
of Fak and Pax, and upregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 during BMSC
migration. Moreover, significant inhibition of signaling and migration was
detected after treatment of cells with Jak2-interfering RNA or the antagonist
AG490. In addition, the results of a fluorescence immunohistochemical analysis of
an in vivo chemotactic model, developed via transplantation of BMSCs into
transient middle cerebral artery-occluded rats, were consistent with the in vitro
results. These findings suggest that FKN activates Jak2-Stat5a-ERK1/2 signaling
through CX3CR1, thereby triggering integrin-dependent machinery reorganization to
allow chemotactic migration of BMSCs towards an ischemic cerebral lesion.

© 2015 FEBS.

PMID: 25559502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Mar;14(3):713-26. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0819. Epub 
2014 Dec 31.

Inhibition of Stat5a/b Enhances Proteasomal Degradation of Androgen Receptor
Liganded by Antiandrogens in Prostate Cancer.

Hoang DT(1), Gu L(1), Liao Z(1), Shen F(1), Talati PG(1), Koptyra M(1), Tan
SH(1), Ellsworth E(1), Gupta S(2), Montie H(3), Dagvadorj A(1), Savolainen S(4), 
Leiby B(5), Mirtti T(6), Merry DE(3), Nevalainen MT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Deparment of Cancer Biology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Medical Oncology, H. Lee Moffit Cancer Center and Research
Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Deparment of Physiology, University of
Turku, Turku, Finland. Center for Disease Modeling, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland. (5)Division of Biostatistics, Department of 
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (6)Deparment of Cancer Biology,
Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki
and HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland. Finnish Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM),
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (7)Deparment of Cancer Biology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Urology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer 
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
marja.nevalainen@jefferson.edu.

Although poorly understood, androgen receptor (AR) signaling is sustained despite
treatment of prostate cancer with antiandrogens and potentially underlies
development of incurable castrate-resistant prostate cancer. However, therapies
targeting the AR signaling axis eventually fail when prostate cancer progresses
to the castrate-resistant stage. Stat5a/b, a candidate therapeutic target protein
in prostate cancer, synergizes with AR to reciprocally enhance the signaling of
both proteins. In this work, we demonstrate that Stat5a/b sequesters
antiandrogen-liganded (MDV3100, bicalutamide, flutamide) AR in prostate cancer
cells and protects it against proteasomal degradation in prostate cancer. Active 
Stat5a/b increased nuclear levels of both unliganded and antiandrogen-liganded
AR, as demonstrated in prostate cancer cell lines, xenograft tumors, and clinical
patient-derived prostate cancer samples. Physical interaction between Stat5a/b
and AR in prostate cancer cells was mediated by the DNA-binding domain of
Stat5a/b and the N-terminal domain of AR. Moreover, active Stat5a/b increased AR 
occupancy of the prostate-specific antigen promoter and AR-regulated gene
expression in prostate cancer cells. Mechanistically, both Stat5a/b genetic
knockdown and antiandrogen treatment induced proteasomal degradation of AR in
prostate cancer cells, with combined inhibition of Stat5a/b and AR leading to
maximal loss of AR protein and prostate cancer cell viability. Our results
indicate that therapeutic targeting of AR in prostate cancer using antiandrogens 
may be substantially improved by targeting of Stat5a/b.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4456253
PMID: 25552366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 13;112(2):476-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1422916112. Epub 2014 Dec 29.

miR-155 augments CD8+ T-cell antitumor activity in lymphoreplete hosts by
enhancing responsiveness to homeostatic <U+03B3>c cytokines.

Ji Y(1), Wrzesinski C(2), Yu Z(2), Hu J(3), Gautam S(3), Hawk NV(3), Telford
WG(3), Palmer DC(2), Franco Z(2), Sukumar M(2), Roychoudhuri R(2), Clever D(2),
Klebanoff CA(2), Surh CD(4), Waldmann TA(5), Restifo NP(2), Gattinoni L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch and tawald@helix.nih.gov
jiyun@mail.nih.gov gattinol@mail.nih.gov. (2)Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892; (3)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch and. (4)Academy of
Immunology and Microbiology (AIM), Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Pohang,
790-784, Korea; and. (5)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
tawald@helix.nih.gov jiyun@mail.nih.gov gattinol@mail.nih.gov.

Lymphodepleting regimens are used before adoptive immunotherapy to augment the
antitumor efficacy of transferred T cells by removing endogenous homeostatic
"cytokine sinks." These conditioning modalities, however, are often associated
with severe toxicities. We found that microRNA-155 (miR-155) enabled
tumor-specific CD8(+) T cells to mediate profound antitumor responses in
lymphoreplete hosts that were not potentiated by immune-ablation. miR-155
enhanced T-cell responsiveness to limited amounts of homeostatic <U+03B3>c cytokines,
resulting in delayed cellular contraction and sustained cytokine production.
miR-155 restrained the expression of the inositol 5-phosphatase Ship1, an
inhibitor of the serine-threonine protein kinase Akt, and multiple negative
regulators of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5),
including suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (Socs1) and the protein tyrosine
phosphatase Ptpn2. Expression of constitutively active Stat5a recapitulated the
survival advantages conferred by miR-155, whereas constitutive Akt activation
promoted sustained effector functions. Our results indicate that overexpression
of miR-155 in tumor-specific T cells can be used to increase the effectiveness of
adoptive immunotherapies in a cell-intrinsic manner without the need for
life-threatening, lymphodepleting maneuvers.

PMCID: PMC4299215
PMID: 25548153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cancer Lett. 2015 Mar 28;358(2):152-60. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.12.031. Epub
2014 Dec 16.

Blockade of estrogen-stimulated proliferation by a constitutively-active
prolactin receptor having lower expression in invasive ductal carcinoma.

Huang KT(1), Tan D(2), Chen KH(1), Walker AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside, CA
92521, USA. (2)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA; College of Medicine/Institute of Medical Sciences,
Jishou University, Jishou, Hunan 416000, China. (3)Division of Biomedical
Sciences, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. Electronic address:
Ameae.walker@ucr.edu.

A comprehensive understanding of prolactin's (PRL's) role in breast cancer is
complicated by disparate roles for alternatively-spliced PRL receptors (PRLR) and
crosstalk between PRL and estrogen signaling. Among PRLRs, the short form 1b
(SF1b) inhibits PRL-stimulated cell proliferation. In addition to
ligand-dependent PRLRs, constitutively-active varieties, missing the S2 region of
the extracellular domain (<U+0394>S2), naturally occur. Expression analysis of the <U+0394>S2
version of SF1b (<U+0394>S2SF1b) showed higher expression in histologically-normal
contiguous tissue versus invasive ductal carcinoma. To determine the function of 
<U+0394>S2SF1b, a T47D breast cancer line with inducible expression was produced.
Induction of <U+0394>S2SF1b blocked estrogen-stimulated cell proliferation. Unlike
intact SF1b, induction of <U+0394>S2SF1b had no effect on PRL-mediated activation of
Stat5a. However induction inhibited estrogen's stimulatory effects on serine-118 
phosphorylation of estrogen receptor a, serine-473 phosphorylation of Akt,
serine-9 phosphorylation of GSK3ß, and c-myc expression. In addition, induction
of <U+0394>S2SF1b increased expression of the cell cycle-inhibiting protein, p21. Thus, 
increased expression of <U+0394>S2SF1b, such as we demonstrate occurs with the selective
PRLR modulator, S179D PRL, would create a physiological state in which
estrogen-stimulated proliferation was inhibited, but differentiative responses to
PRL were maintained.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25527452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Virchows Arch. 2015 Mar;466(3):245-54. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1701-8. Epub 2014 
Dec 12.

Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma of salivary glands: a new entity associated 
with ETV6 gene rearrangement.

Majewska H(1), Skálová A, Stodulski D, Klimková A, Steiner P, Stankiewicz C,
Biernat W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland,
hania.majewska@gumed.edu.pl.

Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma (MASC) is a recently described salivary
gland tumour that harbours the recurrent ETV6-NTRK3 translocation. This is the
first series of MASC cases identified in the historic cohort of carcinomas of
salivary glands with clinical/pathological correlation and follow-up data. We
reviewed 183 primary carcinomas of major and minor salivary glands resected at
the Medical University of Gdansk, Poland, between 1992 and 2012. Based on
morphology and immunohistochemistry, cases suspicious for MASC were selected, and
the diagnosis was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for ETV6
rearrangement and by RT-PCR for the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion transcript. Seven
carcinomas met the criteria of MASC, as they exhibited a typical appearance with 
solid/microcystic and papillary architecture and intraluminal secretions, and
cells completely devoid of basophilic cytoplasmic zymogen granules indicative of 
true acinar differentiation. The only paediatric case was an unencapsulated
tumour composed of macrocystic structures covered by a mostly single but,
focally, double layer of cells with apocrine morphology. In all cases, the
neoplastic cells revealed immunoreactivity for S100, mammaglobin, cytokeratin
CK7, CK8, STAT5a and vimentin. FISH for ETV6 gene rearrangement was positive in
six out of seven cases, and RT-PCR was positive in three cases. MASC is a new
entity of malignant epithelial salivary gland tumours not included in the 2005
WHO Classification of Head and Neck Tumours. There is a growing body of evidence 
that it is not as rare as was assumed, as is also indicated by our series (3.8
%). In most cases, MASC shares some microscopic features with AciCC,
adenocarcinoma/cystadenocarcinoma NOS and low-grade MEC. In rare cases, MASC with
high-grade transformation may mimic the morphological appearances of high-grade
salivary gland malignancies, such as salivary duct carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4353861
PMID: 25503077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Med. 2015 Mar 13;20:625-38. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00180.

Deletion of STAT5a/b in vascular smooth muscle abrogates the male bias in hypoxic
pulmonary hypertension in mice: implications in the human disease.

Yang YM(1), Yuan H(1), Edwards JG(2), Skayian Y(2), Ochani K(3), Miller EJ(3),
Sehgal PB(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New 
York, United States of America. (2)Department of Physiology, New York Medical
College, Valhalla, New York, United States of America. (3)Center for Heart and
Lung Research, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York,
United States of America. (4)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, New York, United States of America.

Chronic hypoxia typically elicits pulmonary hypertension (PH) in mice with a
male-dominant phenotype. There is an opposite-sex bias in human PH, with a higher
prevalence in women, but greater survival (the "estrogen paradox"). We
investigated the involvement of the STAT5a/b species, previously established to
mediate sexual dimorphism in other contexts, in the sex bias in PH. Mice with
heterozygous or homozygous deletions of the STAT5a/b locus in vascular smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) were generated in crosses between STAT5a/b(fl/fl) and
transgelin (SM22a)-Cre(+/+) parents. Wild-type (wt) males subjected to chronic
hypoxia showed significant PH and pulmonary arterial remodeling, with wt females 
showing minimal changes (a male-dominant phenotype). However, in conditional
STAT5(+/-) or STAT5(-/-) mice, hypoxic females showed the severest manifestations
of PH (a female-dominant phenotype). Immunofluorescence studies on human lung
sections showed that obliterative pulmonary arterial lesions in patients with
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) or hereditary pulmonary
arterial hypertension (HPAH), both male and female, overall had reduced STAT5a/b,
reduced PY-STAT5 and reduced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) GTPase atlastin-3 (ATL3).
Studies of SMCs and endothelial cell (EC) lines derived from vessels isolated
from lungs of male and female IPAH patients and controls revealed instances of
coordinate reductions in STAT5a, STAT5b and ATL3 in IPAH-derived cells, including
SMCs and ECs from the same patient. Taken together, these data provide the first 
definitive evidence for a contribution of STAT5a/b to the sex bias in PH in the
hypoxic mouse and implicate reduced STAT5 in the pathogenesis of the human
disease.

PMCID: PMC4365065
PMID: 25470773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jun;22(6):974-85. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.186. Epub 2014
Nov 14.

Epo-induced erythroid maturation is dependent on Plc<U+03B3>1 signaling.

Schnöder TM(1), Arreba-Tutusaus P(1), Griehl I(1), Bullinger L(2), Buschbeck
M(3), Lane SW(4), Döhner K(2), Plass C(5), Lipka DB(6), Heidel FH(1), Fischer
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Center for Internal Medicine,
Otto-von-Guericke University Medical Center, Magdeburg, Germany. (2)Internal
Medicine III, Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm,
Germany. (3)Institute of Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer (IMPPC), 
Campus Can Ruti, Badalona, Spain. (4)Division of Immunology, QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, Australia. (5)Division of
Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors (C010), German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany. (6)1] Department of Hematology and Oncology, Center for
Internal Medicine, Otto-von-Guericke University Medical Center, Magdeburg,
Germany [2] Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors (C010), German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

Erythropoiesis is a tightly regulated process. Development of red blood cells
occurs through differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) into more
committed progenitors and finally into erythrocytes. Binding of erythropoietin
(Epo) to its receptor (EpoR) is required for erythropoiesis as it promotes
survival and late maturation of erythroid progenitors. In vivo and in vitro
studies have highlighted the requirement of EpoR signaling through Janus kinase 2
(Jak2) tyrosine kinase and Stat5a/b as a central pathway. Here, we demonstrate
that phospholipase C gamma 1 (Plc<U+03B3>1) is activated downstream of EpoR-Jak2
independently of Stat5. Plc<U+03B3>1-deficient pro-erythroblasts and erythroid
progenitors exhibited strong impairment in differentiation and colony-forming
potential. In vivo, suppression of Plc<U+03B3>1 in immunophenotypically defined HSCs
(Lin(-)Sca1(+)KIT(+)CD48(-)CD150(+)) severely reduced erythroid development. To
identify Plc<U+03B3>1 effector molecules involved in regulation of erythroid
differentiation, we assessed changes occurring at the global transcriptional and 
DNA methylation level after inactivation of Plc<U+03B3>1. The top common downstream
effector was H2afy2, which encodes for the histone variant macroH2A2 (mH2A2).
Inactivation of mH2A2 expression recapitulated the effects of Plc<U+03B3>1 depletion on 
erythroid maturation. Taken together, our findings identify Plc<U+03B3>1 and its
downstream target mH2A2, as a 'non-canonical' Epo signaling pathway essential for
erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4423181 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25394487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. FASEB J. 2015 Feb;29(2):455-63. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-259770. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Hind limb unloading, a model of spaceflight conditions, leads to decreased B
lymphopoiesis similar to aging.

Lescale C(1), Schenten V(1), Djeghloul D(1), Bennabi M(1), Gaignier F(1),
Vandamme K(1), Strazielle C(1), Kuzniak I(1), Petite H(1), Dosquet C(1), Frippiat
JP(2), Goodhardt M(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot,
Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM)
UMRS-940, Paris, France; EA7300, Stress Immunity Pathogens Laboratory, Lorraine
University, Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France; and UMR CNRS 7052, Biomécanique et
Biomatériaux Ostéo-articulaires, Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière, Paris, France.
(2)*Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot,
Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM)
UMRS-940, Paris, France; EA7300, Stress Immunity Pathogens Laboratory, Lorraine
University, Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France; and UMR CNRS 7052, Biomécanique et
Biomatériaux Ostéo-articulaires, Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière, Paris, France 
michele.goodhardt@univ-paris-diderot.fr jean-pol.frippiat@univ-lorraine.fr.

Within the bone marrow, the endosteal niche plays a crucial role in B-cell
differentiation. Because spaceflight is associated with osteoporosis, we
investigated whether changes in bone microstructure induced by a ground-based
model of spaceflight, hind limb unloading (HU), could affect B lymphopoiesis. To 
this end, we analyzed both bone parameters and the frequency of early
hematopoietic precursors and cells of the B lineage after 3, 6, 13, and 21 d of
HU. We found that limb disuse leads to a decrease in both bone microstructure and
the frequency of B-cell progenitors in the bone marrow. Although multipotent
hematopoietic progenitors were not affected by HU, a decrease in B lymphopoiesis 
was observed as of the common lymphoid progenitor (CLP) stage with a major block 
at the progenitor B (pro-B) to precursor B (pre-B) cell transition (5- to 10-fold
decrease). The modifications in B lymphopoiesis were similar to those observed in
aged mice and, as with aging, decreased B-cell generation in HU mice was
associated with reduced expression of B-cell transcription factors, early B-cell 
factor (EBF) and Pax5, and an alteration in STAT5-mediated IL-7 signaling. These 
findings demonstrate that mechanical unloading of hind limbs results in a
decrease in early B-cell differentiation resembling age-related modifications in 
B lymphopoiesis.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25376832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Faraday Discuss. 2014;169:303-21. doi: 10.1039/c4fd00024b. Epub 2014 May 30.

Allosteric pathway identification through network analysis: from molecular
dynamics simulations to interactive 2D and 3D graphs.

Allain A(1), Chauvot de Beauchêne I, Langenfeld F, Guarracino Y, Laine E,
Tchertanov L.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, Molecular Dynamics & Modeling (BiMoDyM), Laboratoire de
Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée (LBPA UMR8113 CNRS), École Normale Supérieure
de Cachan, 61 avenue du Président Wilson, 94235 Cachan, France.
Luba.Tchertanov@lbpa.ens-cachan.fr.

Allostery is a universal phenomenon that couples the information induced by a
local perturbation (effector) in a protein to spatially distant regulated sites. 
Such an event can be described in terms of a large scale transmission of
information (communication) through a dynamic coupling between structurally rigid
(minimally frustrated) and plastic (locally frustrated) clusters of residues. To 
elaborate a rational description of allosteric coupling, we propose an original
approach - MOdular NETwork Analysis (MONETA) - based on the analysis of
inter-residue dynamical correlations to localize the propagation of both
structural and dynamical effects of a perturbation throughout a protein
structure. MONETA uses inter-residue cross-correlations and commute times
computed from molecular dynamics simulations and a topological description of a
protein to build a modular network representation composed of clusters of
residues (dynamic segments) linked together by chains of residues (communication 
pathways). MONETA provides a brand new direct and simple visualization of protein
allosteric communication. A GEPHI module implemented in the MONETA package allows
the generation of 2D graphs of the communication network. An interactive PyMOL
plugin permits drawing of the communication pathways between chosen protein
fragments or residues on a 3D representation. MONETA is a powerful tool for
on-the-fly display of communication networks in proteins. We applied MONETA for
the analysis of communication pathways (i) between the main regulatory fragments 
of receptors tyrosine kinases (RTKs), KIT and CSF-1R, in the native and mutated
states and (ii) in proteins STAT5 (STAT5a and STAT5b) in the phosphorylated and
the unphosphorylated forms. The description of the physical support for
allosteric coupling by MONETA allowed a comparison of the mechanisms of (a)
constitutive activation induced by equivalent mutations in two RTKs and (b)
allosteric regulation in the activated and non-activated STAT5 proteins. Our
theoretical prediction based on results obtained with MONETA was validated for
KIT by in vitro experiments. MONETA is a versatile analytical and visualization
tool entirely devoted to the understanding of the functioning/malfunctioning of
allosteric regulation in proteins - a crucial basis to guide the discovery of
next-generation allosteric drugs.

PMID: 25340971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Proteome Res. 2014 Dec 5;13(12):5685-94. doi: 10.1021/pr5006923. Epub 2014 Nov 
7.

Identification of isoform-specific dynamics in phosphorylation-dependent STAT5
dimerization by quantitative mass spectrometry and mathematical modeling.

Boehm ME(1), Adlung L, Schilling M, Roth S, Klingmüller U, Lehmann WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure Analysis, Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German 
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

STAT5A and STAT5B are important transcription factors that dimerize and transduce
activation signals of cytokine receptors directly to the nucleus. A typical
cytokine that mediates STAT5 activation is erythropoietin (Epo). Differential
functions of STAT5A and STAT5B have been reported. However, the extent to which
phosphorylated STAT5A and STAT5B (pSTAT5A, pSTAT5B) form homo- or heterodimers is
not understood, nor is how this might influence the signal transmission to the
nucleus. To study this, we designed a concept to investigate the isoform-specific
dimerization behavior of pSTAT5A and pSTAT5B that comprises isoform-specific
immunoprecipitation (IP), measurement of the degree of phosphorylation, and
isoform ratio determination between STAT5A and STAT5B. For the main analytical
method, we employed quantitative label-free and -based mass spectrometry. For the
cellular model system, we used Epo receptor (EpoR)-expressing BaF3 cells
(BaF3-EpoR) stimulated with Epo. Three hypotheses of dimer formation between
pSTAT5A and pSTAT5B were used to explain the analytical results by a static
mathematical model: formation of (i) homodimers only, (ii) heterodimers only, and
(iii) random formation of homo- and heterodimers. The best agreement between
experimental data and model simulations was found for the last case. Dynamics of 
cytoplasmic STAT5 dimerization could be explained by distinct nuclear import
rates and individual nuclear retention for homo- and heterodimers of
phosphorylated STAT5.

PMID: 25333863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 30;5(20):9564-76.

Inhibition of STAT5: a therapeutic option in BCR-ABL1-driven leukemia.

Berger A(1), Sexl V(1), Valent P(2), Moriggl R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Veterinary Medicine,
Vienna, Austria. (2)Department of Medicine I, Division of Hematology and
Ludwig-Boltzmann Cluster Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(3)Ludwig-Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, University of Veterinary
Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Austria.

The two transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B are central signaling molecules
in leukemias driven by Abelson fusion tyrosine kinases and they fulfill all
criteria of drug targets. STAT5A and STAT5B display unique nuclear shuttling
mechanisms and they have a key role in resistance of leukemic cells against
treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). Moreover, STAT5A and STAT5B
promote survival of leukemic stem cells. We here discuss the possibility of
targeting up-stream kinases with TKI, direct STAT5 inhibition via SH2 domain
obstruction and blocking nuclear translocation of STAT5. All discussed options
will result in a stop of STAT5 transport to the nucleus to block STAT5-mediated
transcriptional activity. In summary, recently described shuttling functions of
STAT5 are discussed as potentially druggable pathways in leukemias.

PMCID: PMC4259420
PMID: 25333255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jan;100(1):282-92. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2401.

Reduced Tregs in peripheral blood of PCOS patients - a consequence of aberrant
Il2 signaling.

Krishna MB(1), Joseph A, Subramaniam AG, Gupta A, Pillai SM, Laloraya M.

Author information: 
(1)Utero-Embryo Repromics Laboratory, Division of Molecular Reproduction (M.B.K.,
A.J., A.G.S., A.G., M.L.), Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram 695 014, India; and SAMAD IVF Hospitals (S.M.P.),
Thiruvananthapuram 695 035, India.

CONTEXT: The immunesupressive action of CD4(+)CD25(+) CD127(-/low) T regulatory
cells (Tregs) is vital for an efficient reproductive function. However no data
exists on their number or functionality in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to analyze the frequency of circulating Tregs and key 
factors modulating them in women with PCOS.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This is a retrospective, case-control cohort
study conducted in women with PCOS recruited from Samad IVF hospitals and Women
and Children Hospital, Thiruvananthapuram, India. Women with PCOS (N = 20) were
diagnosed according to Rotterdam Consensus and normal menstruating women were
taken as controls (N = 2331).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We analyzed the proportion of CD4(+)CD25(+) CD127(-/low)
Tregs in women with PCOS by fluorescent activated cell sorting.
RESULTS: The study discovered that the women with PCOS have reduced numbers of
Tregs (2.626 ± 0.62) compared with controls (4.253 ± 0.87) (t = 6.963, P < .0001,
mean difference = -1.627; 95% confidence interval = -2.099--1.155). We documented
a decrease in the follicular phase Treg expansion in women with PCOS. Our results
revealed a reduced STAT5A (fold change [FC] = 7.642, P < .0004)/STAT5B (FC =
3.824, P < .0001), FOXP3 (FC = 4.1343, P = .0004)/CTLA4 (FC = 2.569, P = .0001)
and elevated AKT (FC = 7.39, P = .05)/PIK3 (FC = 5.326, P = .0002) expression in 
women with PCOS. Recombinant interleukin 2 (rIL2) treatment failed to improve
FOXP3/CTLA4 levels but caused a reduction of AKT/PIK3 arm, possibly due to an
elevated PTEN in women with PCOS.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that women with PCOS have reduced Tregs due to an 
inherent hyporesponsiveness to IL2, which is unable to activate STAT5B and reduce
FOXP3 expression. IL2-based therapeutic strategies can ameliorate complications
in PCOS by suppressing the AKT/PIK3 arm.

PMID: 25303485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 4;15:860. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-860.

Genetic and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in fetal and adult human
livers.

Bonder MJ, Kasela S, Kals M, Tamm R, Lokk K, Barragan I, Buurman WA, Deelen P,
Greve JW, Ivanov M, Rensen SS, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wolfs MG, Fu J, Hofker
MH, Wijmenga C, Zhernakova A, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Franke L(1), Milani L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB Groningen, the Netherlands. lude@ludesign.nl.

BACKGROUND: The liver plays a central role in the maintenance of homeostasis and 
health in general. However, there is substantial inter-individual variation in
hepatic gene expression, and although numerous genetic factors have been
identified, less is known about the epigenetic factors.
RESULTS: By analyzing the methylomes and transcriptomes of 14 fetal and 181 adult
livers, we identified 657 differentially methylated genes with adult-specific
expression, these genes were enriched for transcription factor binding sites of
HNF1A and HNF4A. We also identified 1,000 genes specific to fetal liver, which
were enriched for GATA1, STAT5A, STAT5B and YY1 binding sites. We saw strong
liver-specific effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms on both methylation
levels (28,447 unique CpG sites (meQTL)) and gene expression levels (526 unique
genes (eQTL)), at a false discovery rate (FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Of the 526 unique eQTL
associated genes, 293 correlated significantly not only with genetic variation
but also with methylation levels. The tissue-specificities of these associations 
were analyzed in muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue and visceral adipose tissue.
We observed that meQTL were more stable between tissues than eQTL and a very
strong tissue-specificity for the identified associations between CpG methylation
and gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses generated a comprehensive resource of factors involved 
in the regulation of hepatic gene expression, and allowed us to estimate the
proportion of variation in gene expression that could be attributed to genetic
and epigenetic variation, both crucial to understanding differences in drug
response and the etiology of liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC4287518
PMID: 25282492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 2015 Jul;34(28):3676-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.298. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Progesterone downregulation of miR-141 contributes to expansion of stem-like
breast cancer cells through maintenance of progesterone receptor and Stat5a.

Finlay-Schultz J(1), Cittelly DM(1), Hendricks P(1), Patel P(1), Kabos P(2),
Jacobsen BM(1), Richer JK(1), Sartorius CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Progesterone (P4) has emerged as an important hormone-regulating mammary stem
cell (MaSC) populations. In breast cancer, P4 and synthetic analogs increase the 
number of stem-like cells within luminal estrogen receptor (ER)- and progesterone
receptor (PR)-positive breast cancers. These cells gain expression of
de-differentiated cell markers CD44 and cytokeratin 5 (CK5), lose luminal markers
ER and PR, and are more therapy resistant. We previously described that P4
downregulation of microRNA (miR)-29a contributes to the expansion of CD44(high)
and CK5(+) cells. Here we investigated P4 downregulation of miR-141, a member of 
the miR-200 family of tumor suppressors, in facilitating an increase in stem-like
breast cancer cells. miR-141 was the sole member of the miR-200 family
P4-downregulated at the mature miRNA level in luminal breast cancer cell lines.
Stable inhibition of miR-141 alone increased the CD44(high) population, and
potentiated P4-mediated increases in both CD44(high) and CK5(+) cells. Loss of
miR-141 enhanced both mammosphere formation and tumor initiation. miR-141
directly targeted both PR and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A
(Stat5a), transcription factors important for MaSC expansion. miR-141 depletion
increased PR protein levels, even in cell lines where PR expression is estrogen
dependent. Stat5a suppression via small interfering RNA or a small-molecule
inhibitor reduced the P4-dependent increase in CK5(+) and CD44(high) cells. These
data support a mechanism by which P4-triggered loss of miR-141 facilitates breast
cancer cell de-differentiation through deregulation of PR and Stat5a, two
transcription factors important for controlling mammary cell fate.

PMCID: PMC4369481
PMID: 25241899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Feb;13(2):281-92. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0230. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Bile acids regulate nuclear receptor (Nur77) expression and intracellular
location to control proliferation and apoptosis.

Hu Y(1), Chau T(1), Liu HX(1), Liao D(2), Keane R(1), Nie Y(3), Yang H(4), Wan
YJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, Davis Health Systems, Sacramento, California. (2)Department of
Pathology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, First Municipal's People Hospital of
Guangzhou, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. yjywan@ucdavis.edu yanghui030454@gmail.com. (5)Department of
Medical Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Davis Health
Systems, Sacramento, California. Department of Gastroenterology, First
Municipal's People Hospital of Guangzhou, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. yjywan@ucdavis.edu yanghui030454@gmail.com.

Bile acids (BA) are endogenous agents capable of causing cancer throughout the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract. To uncover the mechanism by which BAs exert
carcinogenic effects, both human liver and colon cancer cells as well as mouse
primary hepatocytes were treated with BAs and assayed for viability, genotoxic
stress, and transcriptional response. BAs induced both Nur77 (NR4A1) and
proinflammatory gene expression. The intracellular location of BA-induced Nur77
was time dependent; short-term (1-3 hours) exposure induced nuclear Nur77,
whereas longer (1-2 days) exposure also increased cytosolic Nur77 expression and 
apoptosis. Inhibiting Nur77 nuclear export with leptomycin B decreased
lithocholic acid (LCA)-induced apoptosis. Extended (7 days) treatment with BA
generated resistance to BA with increased nuclear Nur77, viability, and mobility.
While, knockdown of Nur77 in BA-resistant cells increased cellular susceptibility
to LCA-induced apoptosis. Moreover, in vivo mouse xenograft experiments
demonstrated that BA-resistant cells form larger tumors with elevated Nur77
expression compared with parental controls. DNA-binding and gene expression
assays identified multiple survival genes (CDK4, CCND2, MAP4K5, STAT5A, and
RBBP8) and a proapoptosis gene (BID) as Nur77 targets. Consistently, BA-induced
upregulation of the aforementioned genes was abrogated by a lack of Nur77.
Importantly, Nur77 was overexpressed in high percentage of human colon and liver 
cancer specimens, and the intracellular location of Nur77 correlated with
elevated serum total BA levels in patients with colon cancer. These data show for
the first time that BAs via Nur77 have a dual role in modulating cell survival
and death.IMPLICATIONS: These findings establish a direct link between Nur77 and 
the carcinogenic effect of BAs.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4336821
PMID: 25232032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;20(23):6153-62. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0583.
Epub 2014 Sep 17.

Calreticulin promotes migration and invasion of esophageal cancer cells by
upregulating neuropilin-1 expression via STAT5A.

Shi F(1), Shang L(1), Pan BQ(1), Wang XM(1), Jiang YY(1), Hao JJ(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Cai Y(1), Xu X(1), Zhan QM(1), Wang MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (Hospital),
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute
(Hospital), Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China. wangmr2015@126.com.

PURPOSE: We previously revealed that the calreticulin (CRT) gene is a candidate
oncogene promoting cell migration and invasion and that neuropilin-1 (NRP1) is a 
possible effector downstream of CRT in esophageal squamous carcinoma cells. This 
study aims to explore the mechanisms underlying the migration and invasion of
esophageal cancer cells regulated by CRT through NRP1.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction, Western blot analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter gene
assays were used to investigate the relationship between CRT and NRP1. In vitro
and in vivo assays were carried out to evaluate the effects of NRP1 on malignant 
phenotypes of ESCC cells and tumor metastasis in NOD/SCID mice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to analyze the expression of CRT and NRP1 in
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC).
RESULTS: Knockdown of CRT decreased the expression of NRP1. Inhibition of NRP1
reduced ESCC cell motility in vitro and experimental metastasis in vivo. Ectopic 
expression of NRP1 rescued the defects of cell migration and invasion in
CRT-shRNA cells. CRT depletion inhibited STAT5A phosphorylation at the Y694 site 
via a CaMKII-independent pathway. Moreover, STAT5A directly regulated NRP1
transcription. Knockdown of CRT or NRP1 led to a downregulation of MMP2, MMP9,
and FAK. Notably, positive correlation was found between CRT and NRP1 expression 
in ESCC tissues (P = 5.87 × 10(-5)). CRT and NRP1 coexpression was significantly 
associated with lymph node metastasis (P = 0.025).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that NRP1 is a critical downstream effector of 
CRT in promoting cell migration and invasion, which might contribute to the
metastasis of ESCC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25231404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov 1;307(9):E847-55. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00324.2014. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Differential effects of STAT proteins on growth hormone-mediated IGF-I gene
expression.

Varco-Merth B(1), Rotwein P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon rotweinp@ohsu.edu.

Growth hormone (GH) plays a key role regulating somatic growth and in controlling
metabolism and other physiological processes in humans and other animal species. 
GH acts by binding to the extracellular part of its transmembrane receptor,
leading to induction of multiple intracellular signal transduction pathways that 
culminate in changes in gene and protein expression. A key agent in GH-stimulated
growth is the latent transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 5B, one of four STAT proteins induced by the GH receptor in 
cultured cells and in vivo. As shown by genetic and biochemical studies,
GH-activated STAT5B promotes transcription of the gene encoding the critical
growth peptide, insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), and natural null mutations 
of STAT5B in humans lead to growth failure accompanied by diminished IGF-I
expression. Here we have examined the possibility that other GH-activated STATs
can enhance IGF-I gene transcription, and thus potentially contribute to
GH-regulated somatic growth. We find that human STAT5A is nearly identical to
STAT5B in its biochemical and functional responses to GH but that STAT1 and STAT3
show a weaker profile of in vitro binding to STAT DNA elements from the IGF-I
gene than STAT5B, and are less potent inducers of gene transcription through
these elements. Taken together, our results offer a molecular explanation for why
STAT5B is a key in vivo mediator of GH-activated IGF-I gene transcription and
thus of GH-regulated somatic growth.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4216947
PMID: 25205818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Dec;41(12):8293-301. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3730-4. Epub 2014
Sep 10.

Genetic effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms in JAK2 and STAT5A genes on
susceptibility of Chinese Holsteins to mastitis.

Usman T(1), Yu Y, Liu C, Wang X, Zhang Q, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal
Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, People's 
Republic of China.

The JAK-STAT pathway plays a key role in host immunity. The present study was
designed to evaluate the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
STAT5A and JAK2 genes on some serum cytokines, mastitis and milk production
traits. Two SNPs (SNP1 43046497A/C and SNP2 43047829G/A) in STAT5A, and four SNPs
in JAK2 (SNP3 39652267A/G, SNP4 39630048C/T, SNP5 39631044G/A, and SNP6
39631175T/C) were revealed and genotyped in 268 Chinese Holstein cattle. Fixed
model was used to analyze the association of SNPs with phenotypes by general
linear model procedure of SAS 9.1. SNP1 and SNP4 were significantly associated
with IL-6 and IL-17 (P < 0.05), respectively. In JAK2 gene, SNP3 was highly
significant (P < 0.01) and SNP5 was significant (P < 0.05) in association with
SCC, whereas, the association of SNP6 was found significant (P < 0.05) with both 
SCC and SCS. Combination genotype analysis revealed that SNPs in JAK2 gene
significantly associated with SCC and SCS were associated significantly with the 
corresponding phenotypes in combinations as well. The GG genotype of SNP3
individually and in any combination genotypes showed lowest SCC. The dominant
effect of SNP1, SNP5 and SNP6 was found highly significant (P < 0.01) on the
corresponding phenotypes (IL-6, SCC and SCS). As for haplotype analysis, two
haplotypes were revealed between the two SNPs of STAT5A gene and four haplotypes 
amongst four SNPs in JAK2 gene; strong linkage disequilibrium (D' > 0.9) was
observed between all these haplotypes. The results imply that the identified SNPs
could be powerful markers to select dairy cattle with improved genetic resistance
against mastitis.

PMID: 25205126  [PubMed - in process]


93. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014 Nov;2(11):1103-12. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0103.
Epub 2014 Sep 9.

IL4 limits the efficacy of tumor-targeted antibody therapy in a murine model.

Surana R(1), Wang S(1), Xu W(2), Jablonski SA(1), Weiner LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia. (2)Department of
Pathology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of
Columbia. (3)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
weinerl@georgetown.edu.

Tumor-targeted antibody therapy has had a major impact on reducing morbidity and 
mortality in a wide range of cancers. Antibodies mediate their antitumor activity
in part by activating immune effector cells; however, the tumor microenvironment 
(TME) is enriched with cellular and soluble mediators that actively suppress
generation of antitumor immunity. Here, we investigate the potential of
prospectively identifying and neutralizing an immunomodulatory soluble mediator
within the TME to enhance therapeutic efficacy of the HER2-directed antibody
trastuzumab. Using the D5-HER2 cell line and an immunocompetent human HER2
transgenic animal (hmHER2Tg) in which human HER2 is a self-antigen, we determined
that IL4 was present in the TME and produced by both tumor and stromal cells. A
siRNA-based screening approach identified STAT5A as a novel negative regulator of
IL4 production by D5-HER2 tumor cells. Furthermore, IL4 neutralization using the 
anti-IL4 antibody 11B11 enhanced the efficacy of trastuzumab and modulated the
TME. For example, IL4 neutralization resulted in reduced levels of myeloid
chemoattractants CCL2, CCL11, and CXCL5 in the TME. Combination therapy with
11B11 and trastuzumab resulted in a reduction of tumor-infiltrating
CD11b(+)CD206(+) myeloid cells compared with monotherapy. These data suggest that
IL4 neutralization enhances the efficacy of trastuzumab by influencing the
phenotype of myeloid cells within the TME and provide further rationale for
combining tumor-targeted antibody therapy with agents that neutralize factors in 
the TME that suppress generation of productive antitumor immune responses.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4221424
PMID: 25204776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Gene. 2014 Nov 10;551(2):279-89. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Sep
4.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a inhibited by pimozide may
regulate survival of goat mammary gland epithelial cells by regulating
parathyroid hormone-related protein.

Li H(1), Zheng H(2), Sun Y(1), Yu Q(1), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
Electronic address: zhenghuiling@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (Stat5a) modulates genes 
involved in proliferation and survival and plays pivotal roles in regulating the 
function of the mammary gland during pregnancy, lactation, and involution.
However, there is little information about the effects of Stat5a on apoptosis of 
goat mammary gland epithelial cells (GMECs). In addition, parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is a key regulator in cellular calcium transport,
mammary gland development and breast tumor biology. This study aimed to explore
the interaction of Stat5a and PTHrP in GMEC apoptosis. Quantitative real time PCR
(qRT-PCR) suggested that Stat5a was predominantly expressed in the mammary gland,
lung, liver and spleen of goats. Treating the GMECs with pimozide, an inhibitor
of Stat5a that decreases Stat5a tyrosine phosphorylation, increased PTHrP levels 
in GMECs in a dose-dependent manner and simultaneously promoted apoptosis of the 
GMECs. We also demonstrated that PTHrP inhibition induced GMEC apoptosis and
restrained cell proliferation. In contrast, PTHrP overexpression protected GMECs 
from pimozide- and calcium-induced apoptosis, and promoted cell proliferation.
Furthermore, pimozide and CaCl2 downregulated the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2
mRNA expression, respectively, and these effects were protected by PTHrP
overexpression. Interestingly, we also found that Stat5a suppressed the
expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) which can induce goat mammary
epithelial cell migration, but PTHrP increased MMP-9 mRNA level. Thus, Stat5a may
regulate GMEC survival by regulating the expression of PTHrP.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25194899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):9079-91.

Prolactin induces up-regulation of its cognate receptor in breast cancer cells
via transcriptional activation of its generic promoter by cross-talk between ERa 
and STAT5.

Kavarthapu R(1), Tsai Morris CH(1), Dufau ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Prolactin (PRL) serves a critical role in breast cancer progression via
activation of its cognate receptor. These studies reveal up-regulation of PRLR
gene expression by PRL in absence of estradiol in MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer
cells. PRL/PRLR via activation of STAT5 that binds a GAS-element in the PRLR gene
and the participation of ERa stimulates PRLR transcription/expression. PRL/PRLR
induces phosphorylation of ERa through the JAK2/PI3K/MAPK/ERK and JAK2/HER2
activated pathways. The increased recruitment of phospho-ERa, induced by PRL to
Sp1 and C/EBPß at PRLR promoter sites is essential for PRL-induced PRLR
transcription. This recruitment is prevented by blockade of PRL expression using 
RNA interference or ERa phosphorylation using specific inhibitors of PI3K and
ERK. Direct evidence is provided for local actions of PRL, independent of
estradiol, in the up-regulation of PRLR transcription/expression by an
activation-loop between STAT5 and the phospho-ERa/Sp1/C/EBPß complex with
requisite participation of signaling mechanisms. PRL's central role in the
up-regulation of PRLR maximizes the action of the endogenous hormone. This study 
offers mechanistically rational basis for invasiveness fueled by prolactin in
refractory states to adjuvant therapies in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4253420
PMID: 25193864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e104265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104265.
eCollection 2014.

Expression of STAT5, COX-2 and PIAS3 in correlation with NSCLC histhopathological
features.

Pastuszak-Lewandoska D(1), Domanska D(1), Czarnecka KH(1), Kordiak J(2),
Migdalska-Sek M(1), Nawrot E(1), Kiszalkiewicz J(1), Antczak A(3), Górski P(4),
Brzezianska E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bases of Medicine, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz,
Poland. (2)Department of Chest Surgery, General and Oncological Surgery,
University Hospital No. 2, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(3)Department of General and Oncological Pulmonology, Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland. (4)Department of Pneumology and Allergology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs), their inhibitors and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) participate in transformations of many various types of 
cancers. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the relationship between
STAT5A/B, COX-2, and PIAS3 mRNA expression and tumor staging, metastasis status, 
and histopathological subtype in 71 patients with confirmed non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) diagnosis. Total RNA was isolated from NSCLC tissue samples and
the expression of the studied genes was assessed using TaqMan probes in real-time
PCR assay. The expression levels of STAT5A, STAT5B, and COX-2 genes were
increased in 69%, 79%, and 71% NSCLC samples respectively, while PIAS3 expression
was decreased in the majority (69%) of the studied tissues. Statistically
significant differences were observed between STAT5 isoforms (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0008), with
higher expression of STAT5B. We found statistically significant positive
correlation between STAT5B and COX-2 (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.045), and significant negative
correlation between STAT5B and PIAS3 (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.049). The negative correlation
between STAT5B and PIAS3 (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.43) was also observed in T2a+T2b tumor group. 
Additionally, STAT5B and COX-2 expression levels were significantly different
between T1a+T1b and T2a+T2b tumors (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041, respectively), with 
higher expression of both genes in T2 tumor stage. PIAS3 expression was
significantly lower in NSCC subtype as compared with SCC subtype (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.017).
Also, STAT5A and STAT5B immunoexpression was assessed, and the results indicated 
significantly higher protein levels in NSCLC patients as compared with controls
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.048 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.034, respectively). High STAT5B immunoexpression was
positively correlated with STAT5B gene expression in tumors (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.755). STAT5B
protein level was also significantly higher in T2a+T2b tumors, reflecting high
STAT5B gene expression in this group. There was no statistically significant
association between mRNA and protein expression levels of the studied genes and
patients' characteristics: age, gender, smoking. The obtained results highlight
the importance of the genes STAT5B and COX-2 in lung cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4138089
PMID: 25137041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Aug;147(1):145-58. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3071-y. 
Epub 2014 Aug 8.

Genetic variation in the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway influences breast
cancer-specific mortality through interaction with cigarette smoking and use of
aspirin/NSAIDs: the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Hines LM, Torres-Mejia G, Wolff RK, Stern MC, John
EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, 383 Colorow, Salt Lake City, UT,
84108, USA, marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu.

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway is involved in immune function and cell growth; genetic
variation in this pathway could influence breast cancer risk. We examined 12
genes in the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway with breast cancer risk and
mortality in an admixed population of Hispanic (2,111 cases, 2,597 controls) and 
non-Hispanic white (1,481 cases, 1,585 controls) women. Associations were
assessed by Indigenous American (IA) ancestry. After adjustment for multiple
comparisons, JAK1 (three of ten SNPs) and JAK2 (4 of 11 SNPs) interacted with
body mass index (BMI) among pre-menopausal women, while STAT3 (four of five SNPs)
interacted significantly with BMI among post-menopausal women to alter breast
cancer risk. STAT6 rs3024979 and TYK2 rs280519 altered breast cancer-specific
mortality among all women. Associations with breast cancer-specific mortality
differed by IA ancestry; SOCS1 rs193779, STAT3 rs1026916, and STAT4 rs11685878
associations were limited to women with low IA ancestry, and associations with
JAK1 rs2780890, rs2254002, and rs310245 and STAT1 rs11887698 were observed among 
women with high IA ancestry. JAK2 (5 of 11 SNPs), SOCS2 (one of three SNPs), and 
STAT4 (2 of 20 SNPs) interacted with cigarette smoking status to alter breast
cancer-specific mortality. SOCS2 (one of three SNPs) and all STAT3, STAT5A, and
STAT5B SNPs significantly interacted with use of aspirin/NSAIDs to alter breast
cancer-specific mortality. Genetic variation in the JAK/STAT/SOCS pathway was
associated with breast cancer-specific mortality. The proportion of SNPs within a
gene that significantly interacted with lifestyle factors lends support for the
observed associations.

PMCID: PMC4167366
PMID: 25104439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2014 Oct;21(10):767-76. doi: 10.1002/jhbp.131. Epub
2014 Jul 16.

STATs profiling reveals predominantly-activated STAT3 in cholangiocarcinoma
genesis and progression.

Dokduang H(1), Techasen A, Namwat N, Khuntikeo N, Pairojkul C, Murakami Y,
Loilome W, Yongvanit P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, 40002, Thailand; Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Khon
Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the aberrant expression of the STAT family in humans 
and liver fluke (Opisthorchis viverrini, Ov)-induced hamster cholangiocarcinoma
(CCA) tissues.
METHODS: The expression and phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4,
STAT5a, STAT5b and STAT6 in human hamster CCA tissues were
immunohistochemistry-profiled. Localizations of STAT5 in macrophages and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophage-conditioned media mediated STAT3
activation in CCA cells were demonstrated.
RESULTS: The expressions of STAT 1-4 and 6 were detected in the cytoplasm of
hyperplastic bile ducts and tumor cells, whereas STAT5a and STAT5b were observed 
in macrophages and connective tissues surrounding tumor, respectively. The
expressions of STAT3 and STAT5b were significantly observed in tumors with a
poorer histological differentiation. STAT3 expression was significantly
associated with shorter survival of CCA patients and was predominately activated 
in CCA cell lines. In the CCA-hamsters, STATs expression was gradually increased 
along the carcinogenesis, especially at 30 days post-infection in which the
inflammatory response was markedly observed, showing the correlation between the 
inflammation and STATs activation. Moreover, LPS-induced macrophage-conditioned
media could mediate STAT3 activation in CCA cells.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT3 is the major STAT, which plays roles in the inflammation that 
contributes to CCA carcinogenesis and progression and may serve as a marker for a
poor prognosis of CCA.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery.

PMID: 25044480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 11;9(7):e100822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100822.
eCollection 2014.

Reliable quantification of protein expression and cellular localization in
histological sections.

Schlederer M(1), Mueller KM(1), Haybaeck J(2), Heider S(3), Huttary N(3), Rosner 
M(4), Hengstschläger M(4), Moriggl R(5), Dolznig H(4), Kenner L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(3)Institute of Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (4)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria. (5)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna,
Austria; Unit for Translational Methods in Cancer Research University of
Veterinary Medicine Vienna (Vetmeduni Vienna), Vienna, Austria. (6)Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna, Austria; Institute of
Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Unit of
Pathology of Laboratory Animals, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna
(Vetmeduni Vienna), Vienna, Austria.

In targeted therapy, patient tumors are analyzed for aberrant activations of core
cancer pathways, monitored based on biomarker expression, to ensure efficient
treatment. Thus, diagnosis and therapeutic decisions are often based on the
status of biomarkers determined by immunohistochemistry in combination with other
clinical parameters. Standard evaluation of cancer specimen by
immunohistochemistry is frequently impeded by its dependence on subjective
interpretation, showing considerable intra- and inter-observer variability. To
make treatment decisions more reliable, automated image analysis is an attractive
possibility to reproducibly quantify biomarker expression in patient tissue
samples. We tested whether image analysis could detect subtle differences in
protein expression levels. Gene dosage effects generate well-graded expression
patterns for most gene-products, which vary by a factor of two between wildtype
and haploinsufficient cells lacking one allele. We used conditional mouse models 
with deletion of the transcription factors Stat5ab in the liver as well Junb
deletion in a T-cell lymphoma model. We quantified the expression of total or
activated STAT5AB or JUNB protein in normal (Stat5ab+/+ or JunB+/+), hemizygous
(Stat5ab+/<U+0394> or JunB+/<U+0394>) or knockout (Stat5ab<U+0394>/<U+0394> or JunB<U+0394>/<U+0394>) settings. Image
analysis was able to accurately detect hemizygosity at the protein level.
Moreover, nuclear signals were distinguished from cytoplasmic expression and
translocation of the transcription factors from the cytoplasm to the nucleus was 
reliably detected and quantified using image analysis. We demonstrate that image 
analysis supported pathologists to score nuclear STAT5AB expression levels in
immunohistologically stained human hepatocellular patient samples and decreased
inter-observer variability.

PMCID: PMC4094387
PMID: 25013898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec;70(3):1705-11. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0117-z.

IL-2 inhibited the generation of CD4+ memory T cells.

Lu H(1), Chen J, Nie X, Liu C, Sun W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and
Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road,
Shanghai, 200433, People's Republic of China.

The survival of T cells at different stages of development is dependent on
extrinsic signals. IL-7 is necessary for the development of memory T cells. IL-7 
could induce and maintain the differentiation, survival, and proliferation of
CD4(+) memory T cells, and the roles of IL-2 and IL-15 in the generation of
CD4(+) memory T cells were still unclear. A CD4(+) memory T cells in vitro
generated system by adding IL-7. The phenotype of CD4(+) memory T cells was
identified by FACS. The cells proliferation was analyzed by CFSE staining. The
involved signal pathways were analyzed by Western blot. We found that IL-2, not
IL-15, could inhibit CD4(+) memory T cells generation. Western blot showed that
IL-7 up-regulated the P-STAT5A expression and down-regulated Bax expression, IL-2
reduced the effect of IL-7. Besides, IL-2-combined IL-7 up-regulated the P-AKT
and Foxo3a expression a little. In conclusion, our data revealed the inhibitory
role of IL-2 in CD4(+) memory T cells generation and indicated that PI3K/AKT
signal pathway was involved.

PMID: 24989679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Anticancer Res. 2014 Jul;34(7):3303-12.

CRBP-1 expression in ovarian cancer: a potential therapeutic target.

Doldo E(1), Costanza G(1), Ferlosio A(1), Passeri D(1), Bernardini S(2), Scioli
MG(1), Mazzaglia D(1), Agostinelli S(1), Del Bufalo D(3), Czernobilsky B(4),
Orlandi A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomic Pathology, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tor
Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (3)Experimental Chemotherapy Laboratory,
Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy. (4)Patho-Lab Diagnostics,
Ness-Zione, Israel. (5)Anatomic Pathology, Department of Biomedicine and
Prevention, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy orlandi@uniroma2.it.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Cellular retinol binding protein-1 regulates retinol
bioavailability and contributes to cell differentiation maintenance, but its role
in ovarian carcinogenesis remains uncertain. We investigated CRBP-1 expression in
ovarian tumors and CRBP-1 signaling-regulated pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed immunohistochemistry, methylation-specific
PCR, gene copy number analysis in ovarian tumors and proliferation/apoptosis
evaluation, gene array, blot and real-time PCR in CRBP-1-transfected A2780
ovarian cancer cells.
RESULTS: CRBP-1 expression was reduced or absent in G2 and G3 ovarian carcinomas.
CRBP-1 silencing in 60% of G2 and 66.7% of G3 carcinomas was due to CRBP-1
promoter methylation. A2780 CRBP-1-transfected cells showed increased
retinol-induced apoptosis, retinoid-induced reduced clonogenicity and
down-regulation of proliferation and transcription genes, including AKT1, AKT3,
EGFR, FOS, JUN, STAT1 and STAT5A.
CONCLUSION: CRBP-1 loss in G2/G3 ovarian carcinomas and increased apoptotic
susceptibility to retinoids in CRBP-1-transfected-A2780 cells suggest CRBP-1
screening as a target to ensure efficacy of an adjuvant retinoid therapy.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 24982334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cytokine. 2014 Sep;69(1):146-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.05.021. Epub 2014 Jun
16.

Comparative dose-responses of recombinant human IL-2 and IL-7 on STAT5
phosphorylation in CD4+FOXP3- cells versus regulatory T cells: a whole blood
perspective.

Dupont G(1), Demaret J(2), Venet F(2), Malergue F(3), Malcus C(4), Poitevin-Later
F(4), Morel J(5), Monneret G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Laboratoire d'Immunologie,
Lyon F-69003, France; Département d'anesthésie réanimation, Centre hospitalier
universitaire de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne F-42055, France. (2)Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Lyon F-69003,
France; Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, EAM 4174, Lyon F-69008, France.
(3)Beckman Coulter Immunotech, Life Sciences Global Assay and Applications
Development, Marseille, France. (4)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Edouard
Herriot, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Lyon F-69003, France. (5)Département
d'anesthésie réanimation, Centre hospitalier universitaire de Saint-Etienne,
Saint-Etienne F-42055, France. (6)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Edouard
Herriot, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Lyon F-69003, France; Université Claude
Bernard Lyon 1, EAM 4174, Lyon F-69008, France. Electronic address:
guillaume.monneret@chu-lyon.fr.

Interleukin(IL)-2 and IL-7 are cytokines with important functions related to
CD4(+) lymphocyte proliferation, differentiation and survival. Depending on
doses, they theoretically activate regulatory (Treg) and/or effector T cells
(Teff) and thus may be indicated with different therapeutic objectives. In this
study we assessed ex vivo the differential dose-responses of CD4(+) T cell
subsets (Treg versus CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cells) to recombinant human (rh) IL-2 and
rhIL-7. Fresh whole blood from healthy donors was stimulated with increasing
doses of cytokines. By using a novel flow cytometry procedure of intracellular
signaling pathway staining (e.g., detection of STAT5 phosphorylation; a pivotal
marker of cytokine-induced activation; in combination with intracellular FOXP3
staining), we were able to specifically measure Treg and CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cell
responses in the same tube. Half maximal effective concentrations (EC50) were
calculated. We observed a dose-response effect on Treg and CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cells
for both cytokines. Interestingly, low doses of hIL-2 preferentially activated
Treg (EC50 Treg = 0.15 pg/ml versus CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cells = 750 pg/ml - p <
0.0001) whereas low doses of rhIL-7 preferentially induced CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cell
activation (EC50 Treg = 25 pg/ml and CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cells = 2.5 pg/ml - p <
0.0001). To our knowledge, this work is the first to show differential
dose-response effects on CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cells versus Treg of rhIL-7 and rhIL-2 in
one ex vivo whole blood single tube assay including two intracellular stainings
(i.e., pSTAT5 and FOXP3). Beyond the confirmation of the dose-dependent
differential effects of IL-2 versus IL-7 on CD4(+)FOXP3(-) cells/Treg, our
results illustrate the value of this approach for monitoring drugs' activities by
flow cytometry in daily clinical practice.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24947990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Oct;35(10):2244-53. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu132. Epub 2014
Jun 12.

Inhibition of STAT5a by Naa10p contributes to decreased breast cancer metastasis.

Zeng Y(1), Min L(2), Han Y(2), Meng L(3), Liu C(2), Xie Y(4), Dong B(5), Wang
L(3), Jiang B(6), Xu H(2), Zhuang Q(2), Zhao C(3), Qu L(7), Shou C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing 100142,
China, Key Laboratory of Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Disease, School of Medicine,
Shihezi University, Shihezi, Xinjiang 832000, China and. (2)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing 100142, China. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. (4)Breast Cancer Center. (5)Department of
Pathology and. (6)Department of Minimally Invasive Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing 100142, China.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, scc@bjcancer.org
qulike@bjcancer.org. (8)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research, Ministry of Education, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute,
Beijing 100142, China, scc@bjcancer.org.

N-a-Acetyltransferase 10 protein (Naa10p, also called arrest-defective 1), the
catalytic subunit of N-acetyltransferase A, is a critical regulator of cell death
and proliferation. Naa10p is also shown to regulate cancer metastasis by
inhibiting cell motility; however, its role in cancer metastasis is not fully
understood. In this study, we found that high expression of Naa10p is positively 
correlated with the survival of patients with breast cancer, whereas negatively
correlated with lymph node metastasis. Naa10p inhibits breast cancer cell
migration and invasion in vitro and decreases the xenograft growth and metastasis
in nude mice. Microarray screening revealed that Naa10p downregulates inhibitors 
of differentiation 1 (ID1) expression. Naa10p binds to signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and decreases STAT5a-stimulated ID1
expression in an acetyltransferase-independent manner. Moreover, Naa10p
antagonizes Janus kinase 2-STAT5a signaling by lowering p65-activated
interleukin-1ß expression. Our results demonstrate a novel mechanism through
which Naa10p inhibits the metastasis of breast cancer cells by targeting STAT5a.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24925029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Mar;51(3):434-42. doi: 10.1002/mus.24314. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Influence of resistance exercise intensity and metabolic stress on anabolic
signaling and expression of myogenic genes in skeletal muscle.

Popov DV(1), Lysenko EA, Bachinin AV, Miller TF, Kurochkina NS, Kravchenko IV,
Furalyov VA, Vinogradova OL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Exercise Physiology, Institute of Biomedical Problems, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 76A Khoroshevskoe Shosse, Moscow, 123007, Russia.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated the effect of resistance exercise intensity and
exercise-induced metabolic stress on the activation of anabolic signaling and
expression of myogenic genes in skeletal muscle.
METHODS: Ten strength-trained athletes performed high-intensity [HI, 74% of
1-repetition maximum (RM)], middle-intensity (MI, 54% 1RM), or middle-intensity
(54% 1RM) no-relaxation exercise (MIR). Kinase phosphorylation level and myogenic
gene expression in muscle samples were evaluated before, 45 min, 5 h, and 20 h
after exercise.
RESULTS: The lactate concentration in MI was approximately 2-fold lower than in
the 2 other sessions, and was highest in MIR. The phosphorylation level of
extracellular kinase 1/2Thr202/Tyr204 after exercise was related to metabolic
stress. Metabolic stress induced a decrease in myostatin mRNA expression, whereas
mechano-growth factor mRNA level depended on exercise intensity.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that both intensity and exercise-induced
metabolic stress can be manipulated to affect muscle anabolic signaling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24916884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jun 9;14:415. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-415.

The transcriptional responsiveness of LKB1 to STAT-mediated signaling is
differentially modulated by prolactin in human breast cancer cells.

Linher-Melville K, Singh G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada. singhg@mcmaster.ca.

BACKGROUND: Liver kinase 1 (LKB1) is an important multi-tasking protein linked
with metabolic signaling, also controlling polarity and cytoskeletal
rearrangements in diverse cell types including cancer cells. Prolactin (PRL) and 
Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins have been
associated with breast cancer progression. The current investigation examines the
effect of PRL and STAT-mediated signaling on the transcriptional regulation of
LKB1 expression in human breast cancer cells.
METHODS: MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, and T47D human breast cancer cells, and CHO-K1 cells 
transiently expressing the PRL receptor (long form), were treated with 100 ng/ml 
of PRL for 24 hours. A LKB1 promoter-luciferase construct and its truncations
were used to assess transcriptional changes in response to specific siRNAs or
inhibitors targeting Janus activated kinase 2 (JAK2), STAT3, and STAT5A.
Real-time PCR and Western blotting were applied to quantify changes in mRNA and
protein levels. Electrophoretic mobility shift (EMSA) and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to examine STAT3 and STAT5A binding
to the LKB1 promoter.
RESULTS: Consistent with increases in mRNA, the LKB1 promoter was up-regulated by
PRL in MDA-MB-231 cells, a response that was lost upon distal promoter
truncation. A putative GAS element that could provide a STAT binding site mapped 
to this region, and its mutation decreased PRL-responsiveness. PRL-mediated
increases in promoter activity required signaling through STAT3 and STAT5A, also 
involving JAK2. Both STATs imparted basally repressive effects in MDA-MB-231
cells. PRL increased in vivo binding of STAT3, and more definitively, STAT5A, to 
the LKB1 promoter region containing the GAS site. In T47D cells, PRL
down-regulated LKB1 transcriptional activity, an effect that was reversed upon
culture in phenol red-free media. Interleukin 6, a cytokine activating STAT
signaling in diverse cell types, also increased LKB1 mRNA levels and promoter
activity in MDA-MB-231 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: LKB1 is differentially regulated by PRL at the level of
transcription in representative human breast cancer cells. Its promoter is
targeted by STAT proteins, and the cellular estrogen receptor status may affect
PRL-responsiveness. The hormonal and possibly cytokine-mediated control of LKB1
expression is particularly relevant in aggressive breast cancer cells,
potentially promoting survival under energetically unfavorable conditions.

PMCID: PMC4064823
PMID: 24913037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Sep;210(9):582-5. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.04.019. Epub
2014 May 9.

Association between STAT5 polymorphisms and glioblastoma risk in Han Chinese
population.

Liu YL(1), Liu PF(2), Liu HE(3), Ma LX(2), Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 107 Wenhua
Western Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China; Department of Neurosurgery,
Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical College, Binzhou, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical College,
Binzhou, Shandong, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, People's Hospital of
Binzhou City, Binzhou, Shandong, China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu
Hospital of Shandong University, 107 Wenhua Western Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012,
China. Electronic address: drdoctorligang@163.com.

The aim of this study was to investigate the associations between STAT5 gene
polymorphisms and glioblastoma (GBM) risk predisposition. We undertook a
case-control study to analyze two STAT5 polymorphisms (STAT5a rs11079041 and
STAT5b rs2293157) in a Han Chinese population, by extraction of genomic DNA from 
the peripheral blood of 328 patients with glioma and 342 control participants,
and performed STAT5 genotyping using DNA sequencing. The obtained results
indicated that overall, no statistically significant association was observed in 
STAT5a rs11079041. Nevertheless, STAT5b rs2293157 G/T genotype was at increased
risk of glioma (P=0.001). Furthermore, rs2293157T allele was more significantly
prognostic in patients suffering from glioblastoma compared to other subtypes of 
gliomas (P<0.001; odds ratio (OR)=5.14, CI 95%: 2.70-9.79). These findings led us
to conclude that polymorphism in STAT5b rs2293157 G/T was observed to be
associated with susceptibility of glioblastoma. Nevertheless, further
investigation with a later confirmation in another ethnical or geographical
cohort is required.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24878107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Aug;21(2):375-82. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.021.
Epub 2014 May 28.

The molecular mechanism of curcumol on inducing cell growth arrest and apoptosis 
in Jurkat cells, a model of CD4<U+207A> T cells.

Wang H(1), Wang Y(2), Jiang X(3), Wang Z(3), Zhong B(4), Fang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China; Department of Rheumatology,
Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR
China. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China. Electronic address:
wangyongjhy@126.com. (3)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southwest
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, PR China. (5)Department of Rheumatology, Southwest 
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China.
Electronic address: fangyongfei@qq.com.

CD4(+) T cells in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) express growth signaling pathway in
association with deregulated growth and resistance to apoptosis. The janus kinase
(Jak) 3 and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway play 
a critical role in interleukin-2 (IL-2)-induced CD4(+) T cell proliferation. The 
present study aimed to explore the anti-cell proliferation mechanism of curcumol,
a pure monomer extracted from Chinese medical plant Rhizoma curcumae. Cell
proliferation was determined using WST-1 assay after curcumol treatment. The cell
cycle distribution and Bcl-2 protein expression were assessed by flow cytometry. 
The cellular morphology of apoptosis was evaluated by Hoechst 33258 staining. The
expressions of phosphorylated-Jak3 (p-Jak3), p-STAT3, and p-STAT5a following IL-2
stimulation were determined by western blot analysis. The Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assay was used to detect the DNA binding activities of
transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5. The study results showed that curcumol
could inhibit the IL-2-induced Jurkat cell proliferation in a concentration- and 
time-dependent manner in vitro. Curcumol could cause cell cycle arrest at the S
phase, induce cell apoptosis, and inhibit the expression of Bcl-2 in a
dose-dependent manner. Curcumol at 50µg/mL and Jak3 inhibitor ZM39923 could
inhibit the phosphorylation of Jak3 and STAT5a. In conclusion, the underlying
mechanism of curcumol on suppressing CD4(+) T cell proliferation and inducing
apoptosis might partly be mediated by inhibition of Jak3-STAT5-related molecular 
activities and Bcl-2 expression, respectively; further studies are required in
vivo to test the use of curcumol as a promising therapeutic option for RA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24877754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2014 May 16;9(5):e97243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097243. eCollection
2014.

BCR-ABL affects STAT5A and STAT5B differentially.

Schaller-Schönitz M(1), Barzan D(1), Williamson AJ(2), Griffiths JR(2), Dallmann 
I(1), Battmer K(1), Ganser A(1), Whetton AD(2), Scherr M(1), Eder M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hannover Medical School, Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and
Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover, Germany. (2)Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester,
Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are latent cytoplasmic
transcription factors linking extracellular signals to target gene transcription.
Hematopoietic cells express two highly conserved STAT5-isoforms (STAT5A/STAT5B), 
and STAT5 is directly activated by JAK2 downstream of several cytokine receptors 
and the oncogenic BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. Using an IL-3-dependent cell line with
inducible BCR-ABL-expression we compared STAT5-activation by IL-3 and BCR-ABL in 
a STAT5-isoform specific manner. RNAi targeting of STAT5B strongly inhibits
BCR-ABL-dependent cell proliferation, and STAT5B but not STAT5A is essential for 
BCL-XL-expression in the presence of BCR-ABL. Although BCR-ABL induces
STAT5-tyrosine phosphorylation independent of JAK2-kinase activity, BCR-ABL is
less efficient in inducing active STAT5A:STAT5B-heterodimerization than IL-3,
leaving constitutive STAT5A and STAT5B-homodimerization unaffected. In comparison
to IL-3, nuclear accumulation of a STAT5A-eGFP fusion protein is reduced by
BCR-ABL, and BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase activity induces STAT5A-eGFP translocation
to the cell membrane and co-localization with the IL-3 receptor. Furthermore,
BCR-ABL-dependent phosphorylation of Y682 in STAT5A was detected by
mass-spectrometry. Finally, RNAi targeting STAT5B but not STAT5A sensitizes human
BCR-ABL-positive cell lines to imatinib-treatment. These data demonstrate
differences between IL-3 and BCR-ABL-mediated STAT5-activation and
isoform-specific effects, indicating therapeutic options for isoform-specific
STAT5-inhibition in BCR-ABL-positive leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4023949
PMID: 24836440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):7861-70. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2048-0. Epub 2014
May 14.

Bortezomib induces apoptosis by interacting with JAK/STAT pathway in K562
leukemic cells.

Selvi N(1), Kaymaz BT, Gündüz C, Aktan C, Kiper HD, Sahin F, Cömert M, Selvi AF, 
Kosova B, Saydam G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Ege University, Bornova,
35100, Izmir, Turkey, selvi.nur@gmail.com.

In the current study, we aimed to identify the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of
bortezomib (BOR) on human K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cells and to evaluate
the potential roles of Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway members STAT3, STAT5, and JAK2 on BOR-induced
cell death of leukemic cells. Cell viability was assessed via trypan blue dye
exclusion test, and cytotoxicity of the BOR-treated cells was conducted by
2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulphophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner
salt (XTT) assay. The relative messenger RNA (mRNA) expression levels of STAT3,
STAT5A, STAT5B, and JAK2 were analyzed by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). On the other hand, their
protein expression levels were detected by western blot method. The obtained
results indicated that BOR treatment reduced cell viability and induced leukemic 
cell apoptosis in a dose- and time-dependent manner as compared to untreated
control cells. While mRNA expression levels of STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT3 were
significantly reduced following BOR treatment when compared to untreated
controls, it had no effect upon JAK2 mRNA expression. As for protein levels, STAT
expressions were downregulated after BOR treatment especially at 72nd and 96th
hours. Our results pointed out that BOR treatment had a significant potential of 
being an anticancer agent for chronic myelogenous leukemia therapy, and this
effect could be due to the expressional downregulations of JAK/STAT pathway
members.

PMID: 24824872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Nov;51(5):660-7. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0117OC.

The NAMPT promoter is regulated by mechanical stress, signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5, and acute respiratory distress syndrome-associated 
genetic variants.

Sun X(1), Elangovan VR, Mapes B, Camp SM, Sammani S, Saadat L, Ceco E, Ma SF,
Flores C, MacDougall MS, Quijada H, Liu B, Kempf CL, Wang T, Chiang ET, Garcia
JG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine and.

Increased nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) transcription is
mechanistically linked to ventilator-induced inflammatory lung injury (VILI),
with VILI severity attenuated by reduced NAMPT bioavailability. The molecular
mechanisms of NAMPT promoter regulation in response to excessive mechanical
stress remain poorly understood. The objective of this study was to define the
contribution of specific transcription factors, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS)-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and promoter
demethylation to NAMPT transcriptional regulation in response to mechanical
stress. In vivo NAMPT protein expression levels were examined in mice exposed to 
high tidal volume mechanical ventilation. In vitro NAMPT expression levels were
examined in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells exposed to 5 or 18% cyclic
stretch (CS), with NAMPT promoter activity assessed using NAMPT promoter
luciferase reporter constructs with a series of nested deletions. In vitro NAMPT 
transcriptional regulation was further characterized by measuring luciferase
activity, DNA demethylation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation. VILI-challenged
mice exhibited significantly increased NAMPT expression in bronchoalveolar lavage
leukocytes and in lung endothelium. A mechanical stress-inducible region (MSIR)
was identified in the NAMPT promoter from -2,428 to -2,128 bp. This MSIR
regulates NAMPT promoter activity, mRNA expression, and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) binding, which is significantly increased by
18% CS. In addition, NAMPT promoter activity was increased by pharmacologic
promoter demethylation and inhibited by STAT5 silencing. ARDS-associated NAMPT
promoter SNPs rs59744560 (-948G/T) and rs7789066 (-2,422A/G) each significantly
elevated NAMPT promoter activity in response to 18% CS in a STAT5-dependent
manner. Our results show that NAMPT is a key novel ARDS therapeutic target and
candidate gene with genetic/epigenetic transcriptional regulation in response to 
excessive mechanical stress.

PMCID: PMC4224084
PMID: 24821571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Animal. 2014 Jul;8(7):1062-70. doi: 10.1017/S1751731114001098. Epub 2014 May 7.

Candidate gene association analysis for milk yield, composition, urea nitrogen
and somatic cell scores in Brown Swiss cows.

Cecchinato A(1), Ribeca C(1), Chessa S(2), Cipolat-Gotet C(1), Maretto F(1),
Casellas J(3), Bittante G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Agronomy,Food,Natural Resources,Animals and Environment
(DAFNAE),University of Padova,Viale dell'Università 16,35020 Legnaro,Italy.
(2)2Istituto di Biologia e Biotecnologia Agraria,Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche (CNR),via Einstein,26900 Lodi,Italy. (3)3Grup de Recerca en
Remugants,Departament de Ciència Animal i dels Aliments,Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona,08193 Bellaterra,Spain.

The aim of this study was to investigate 96 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) from 54 candidate genes, and test the associations of the polymorphic SNPs
with milk yield, composition, milk urea nitrogen (MUN) content and somatic cell
score (SCS) in individual milk samples from Italian Brown Swiss cows. Milk and
blood samples were collected from 1271 cows sampled once from 85 herds. Milk
production, quality traits (i.e. protein, casein, fat and lactose percentages),
MUN and SCS were measured for each milk sample. Genotyping was performed using a 
custom Illumina VeraCode GoldenGate approach. A Bayesian linear animal model that
considered the effects of herd, days in milk, parity, SNP genotype and additive
polygenic effect was used for the association analysis. Our results showed that
14 of the 51 polymorphic SNPs had relevant additive effects on at least one of
the aforementioned traits. Polymorphisms in the glucocorticoid receptor
DNA-binding factor 1 (GRLF1), prolactin receptor (PRLR) and chemokine ligand 2
(CCL2) were associated with milk yield; an SNP in the stearoyl-CoA desaturase
(SCD-1) was related to fat content; SNPs in the caspase recruitment domain 15
protein (CARD15) and lipin 1 (LPIN1) affected the protein and casein contents;
SNPs in growth hormone 1 (GH1), lactotransferrin (LTF) and SCD-1 were relevant
for casein number; variants in beta casein (CSN2), GH1, GRLF1 and LTF affected
lactose content; SNPs in beta-2 adrenergic receptor (ADRB2), serpin peptidase
inhibitor (PI) and SCD-1 were associated with MUN; and SNPs in acetyl-CoA
carboxylase alpha (ACACA) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A
(STAT5A) were relevant in explaining the variation of SCS. Although further
research is needed to validate these SNPs in other populations and breeds, the
association between these markers and milk yield, composition, MUN and SCS could 
be exploited in gene-assisted selection programs for genetic improvement
purposes.

PMID: 24804775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Bone Marrow Res. 2013 May 23;1:122.

Genomic Analysis of Invasive Human Bone Marrow Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Mathews LA(1), Hurt EM(2), Zhang X(3), Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Med Immune, LLC, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA. (3)Cancer Stem Cell Section,
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer Research, Frederick National
Laboratories, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are capable 
of differentiation into multiple cell lineages and demonstrate a wide variety of 
use in various therapeutic applications. Only recently has research begun to
understand the gene expression profiles of hMSCs and their differentiated
counterparts in vivo and ex vivo.
PURPOSE: The research presented here aimed at gaining a better understanding of
gene expression patterns present during hMSC invasion through a basement
membrane.
METHODS: Changes in gene expression were evaluated between invasive and
non-invasive cells using Agilent's gene expression arrays and Matrigel invasion
chambers. The cells were specifically attracted to a defined stem cell media
called SCM.
RESULTS: A total 435 genes were up-regulated by 2- fold or more in the invasive
population of cells and classified into developmental programs and
immunological/inflammatory signaling pathways determined by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA). This list included a variety of regulators of growth and
differentiation including NANOG, STAT3 and STAT5A and members of the polycomb
repressive complex-2 (PCRC2) EZH2 and SUZ12. The known regulator of inflammation 
and hypoxia HIF-1a was also increased suggesting that regulation of the
microenvironment is important during this process. Finally, the invasion process 
could be reversed using the STAT3 inhibitor Static.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall these data will increase the understanding of the genetic
pathways functioning during hMSC invasion and aid in the development of their
therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3999892
PMID: 24772452  [PubMed]


113. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014 Apr;2(4):332-40. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0136.
Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Large-scale evaluation of common variation in regulatory T cell-related genes and
ovarian cancer outcome.

Charbonneau B, Moysich KB, Kalli KR, Oberg AL, Vierkant RA, Fogarty ZC, Block MS,
Maurer MJ, Goergen KM, Fridley BL, Cunningham JM, Rider DN, Preston C, Hartmann
LC, Lawrenson K, Wang C, Tyrer J, Song H, deFazio A, Johnatty SE, Doherty JA,
Phelan CM, Sellers TA, Ramirez SM, Vitonis AF, Terry KL, Van Den Berg D, Pike MC,
Wu AH, Berchuck A, Gentry-Maharaj A, Ramus SJ, Diergaarde B, Shen H, Jensen A,
Menkiszak J, Cybulski C, Lubilski J, Ziogas A, Rothstein JH, McGuire V, Sieh W,
Lester J, Walsh C, Vergote I, Lambrechts S, Despierre E, Garcia-Closas M, Yang H,
Brinton LA, Spiewankiewicz B, Rzepecka IK, Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Seibold P,
Rudolph A, Paddock LE, Orlow I, Lundvall L, Olson SH, Hogdall CK, Schwaab I, du
Bois A, Harter P, Flanagan JM, Brown R, Paul J, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Hein A,
Eccles D, Lurie G, Hays LE, Bean YT, Pejovic T, Goodman MT, Campbell I, Fasching 
PA, Konecny G, Kaye SB, Heitz F, Hogdall E, Bandera EV, Chang-Claude J,
Kupryjanczyk J, Wentzensen N, Lambrechts D, Karlan BY, Whittemore AS, Culver HA, 
Gronwald J, Levine DA, Kjaer SK, Menon U, Schildkraut JM, Pearce CL, Cramer DW,
Rossing MA, Chenevix-Trench G; AOCS group; ACS, Pharoah PD, Gayther SA, Ness RB, 
Odunsi K, Sucheston LE, Knutson KL, Goode EL.

The presence of regulatory T cells (Treg) in solid tumors is known to play a role
in patient survival in ovarian cancer and other malignancies. We assessed
inherited genetic variations via 749 tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in
25 Treg-associated genes (CD28, CTLA4, FOXP3, IDO1, IL10, IL10RA, IL15, 1L17RA,
IL23A, IL23R, IL2RA, IL6, IL6R, IL8, LGALS1, LGALS9, MAP3K8, STAT5A, STAT5B,
TGFB1, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1, TGRBR2, and TGFBR3) in relation to ovarian cancer
survival. We analyzed genotype and overall survival in 10,084 women with invasive
epithelial ovarian cancer, including 5,248 high-grade serous, 1,452 endometrioid,
795 clear cell, and 661 mucinous carcinoma cases of European descent across 28
studies from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC). The strongest
associations were found for endometrioid carcinoma and IL2RA SNPs rs11256497 [HR,
1.42; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.22-1.64; P = 5.7 × 10(-6)], rs791587 (HR,
1.36; 95% CI, 1.17-1.57; P = 6.2 × 10(-5)), rs2476491 (HR, = 1.40; 95% CI,
1.19-1.64; P = 5.6 × 10(-5)), and rs10795763 (HR, 1.35; 95% CI, 1.17-1.57; P =
7.9 × 10(-5)), and for clear cell carcinoma and CTLA4 SNP rs231775 (HR, 0.67; 95%
CI, 0.54-0.82; P = 9.3 × 10(-5)) after adjustment for age, study site, population
stratification, stage, grade, and oral contraceptive use. The rs231775 allele
associated with improved survival in our study also results in an amino acid
change in CTLA4 and previously has been reported to be associated with autoimmune
conditions. Thus, we found evidence that SNPs in genes related to Tregs seem to
play a role in ovarian cancer survival, particularly in patients with clear cell 
and endometrioid epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4000890
PMID: 24764580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Aug;66(8):2015-25. doi: 10.1002/art.38671.

Use of whole-blood transcriptomic profiling to highlight several pathophysiologic
pathways associated with response to rituximab in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis: data from a randomized, controlled, open-label trial.

Sellam J(1), Marion-Thore S, Dumont F, Jacques S, Garchon HJ, Rouanet S, Taoufik 
Y, Hendel-Chavez H, Sibilia J, Tebib J, Le Loët X, Combe B, Dougados M, Mariette 
X, Chiocchia G.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Saint-Antoine, AP-HP, DHU i2B, and Université Pierre et Marie Curie
Paris 6, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To identify a molecular signature that could be predictive of the
clinical response to rituximab (RTX) and elucidate the transcriptomic changes
after RTX therapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), with the use of
whole-blood transcriptomic profiling.
METHODS: A microarray assay of the whole human genome was performed using RNA
from peripheral blood samples obtained before the first cycle of RTX from 68
patients with RA in the SMART study. The transcriptomic profile was also assessed
24 weeks after the first administration of RTX (among 24 nonresponders and 44
responders, according to the European League Against Rheumatism response criteria
at week 24). Ingenuity Interactive Pathways Analysis was used to identify
molecular pathways that were modified by RTX therapy according to the clinical
response. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was performed to confirm the
microarray results.
RESULTS: In total, 198 genes showed significant baseline differential expression 
between patient groups according to their subsequent response to RTX (good or
moderate responder versus nonresponder). This molecular signature could be
reduced to 143 genes, which allowed for correctly classifying 89% of the patients
by their EULAR response status at week 24, with 93% identification of responders 
and 100% identification of nonresponders. The signature for response featured
up-regulation of inflammatory genes centered on NF-<U+03BA>B, including IL33 and STAT5A,
and down-regulation of the interferon pathway. As expected, at week 24 post-RTX
therapy, genes involved in the development and functions of B cells were the
genes most strongly down-regulated, without any difference between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSION: Whole-blood transcriptomic analyses may accurately identify patients 
with RA who will not respond to RTX therapy. These findings could open new
perspectives on the clinical management of RA.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 24756903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 30;289(22):15642-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.544320. Epub
2014 Apr 21.

Regulation of the interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF-8) tumor suppressor gene by
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) transcription
factor in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Waight JD(1), Banik D(1), Griffiths EA(2), Nemeth MJ(3), Abrams SI(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Immunology. (2)Pharmacology and Therapeutics, and
Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 14263. (3)From the
Departments of Immunology, Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New 
York 14263 Michael.Nemeth@RoswellPark.org. (4)Pharmacology and Therapeutics, and 
Scott.Abrams@RoswellPark.org.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib can effectively target the BCR-ABL
oncoprotein in a majority of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Unfortunately, some patients are resistant primarily to imatinib and others
develop drug resistance, prompting interest in the discovery of new drug targets.
Although much of this resistance can be explained by the presence of mutations
within the tyrosine kinase domain of BCR-ABL, such mutations are not universally 
identified. Interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF-8) is a transcription factor that
is essential for myelopoiesis. Depressed IRF-8 levels are observed in a majority 
of CML patients and Irf-8(-/-) mice exhibit a CML-like disease. The underlying
mechanisms of IRF-8 loss in CML are unknown. We hypothesized that BCR-ABL
suppresses transcription of IRF-8 through STAT5, a proximal BCR-ABL target.
Treatment of primary cells from newly diagnosed CML patients in chronic phase as 
well as BCR-ABL(+) cell lines with imatinib increased IRF-8 transcription.
Furthermore, IRF-8 expression in cell line models was necessary for
imatinib-induced antitumor responses. We have demonstrated that IRF-8 is a direct
target of STAT5 and that silencing of STAT5 induced IRF-8 expression. Conversely,
activating STAT5 suppressed IRF-8 transcription. Finally, we showed that STAT5
blockade using a recently discovered antagonist increased IRF-8 expression in
patient samples. These data reveal a previously unrecognized BCR-ABL-STAT5-IRF-8 
network, which widens the repertoire of potentially new anti-CML targets.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4140919
PMID: 24753251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Brain Res. 2014 May 30;1566:47-59. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.04.018. Epub 2014
Apr 19.

Prolactin-sensitive neurons express estrogen receptor-a and depend on sex
hormones for normal responsiveness to prolactin.

Furigo IC(1), Kim KW(2), Nagaishi VS(1), Ramos-Lobo AM(1), de Alencar A(1),
Pedroso JA(1), Metzger M(1), Donato J Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Department of Pharmacology,
Institute of Lifestyle Medicine, and Nuclear Receptor Research Consortium, Yonsei
University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju 220-701, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
jdonato@icb.usp.br.

Estrogens and prolactin share important target tissues, including the gonads,
brain, liver, kidneys and some types of cancer cells. Herein, we sought
anatomical and functional evidence of possible crosstalk between prolactin and
estrogens in the mouse brain. First, we determined the distribution of
prolactin-responsive neurons that express the estrogen receptor a (ERa). A large 
number of prolactin-induced pSTAT5-immunoreactive neurons expressing ERa mRNA
were observed in several brain areas, including the anteroventral periventricular
nucleus, medial preoptic nucleus, arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus,
ventrolateral subdivision of the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH), 
medial nucleus of the amygdala and nucleus of the solitary tract. However,
although the medial preoptic area, periventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus,
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, retrochiasmatic area, dorsomedial
subdivision of the VMH, lateral hypothalamic area, dorsomedial nucleus of the
hypothalamus and ventral premammillary nucleus contained significant numbers of
prolactin-responsive neurons, these areas showed very few pSTAT5-immunoreactive
cells expressing ERa mRNA. Second, we evaluated prolactin sensitivity in
ovariectomized mice and observed that sex hormones are required for a normal
responsiveness to prolactin as ovariectomized mice showed a lower number of
prolactin-induced pSTAT5 immunoreactive neurons in all analyzed brain nuclei
compared to gonad-intact females. In addition, we performed hypothalamic gene
expression analyses to determine possible post-ovariectomy changes in components 
of prolactin signaling. We observed no significant changes in the mRNA expression
of prolactin receptor, STAT5a or STAT5b. In summary, sex hormones exert a
permissive role in maintaining the brain's prolactin sensitivity, most likely
through post-transcriptional mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24751572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(11):1811-26. doi: 10.4161/cc.28758. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

miR-221/222 control luminal breast cancer tumor progression by regulating
different targets.

Dentelli P(1), Traversa M(1), Rosso A(1), Togliatto G(1), Olgasi C(1), Marchiò
C(1), Provero P(2), Lembo A(2), Bon G(3), Annaratone L(1), Sapino A(1), Falcioni 
R(3), Brizzi MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences; University of Torino; Torino, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences; University of
Torino; Torino, Italy; Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics; San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute; Milan, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental
Oncology; Regina Elena National Cancer Institute; Rome, Italy.

a6ß4 integrin is an adhesion molecule for laminin receptors involved in tumor
progression. We present a link between ß4 integrin expression and miR-221/222 in 
the most prevalent human mammary tumor: luminal invasive carcinomas (Lum-ICs).
Using human primary tumors that display different ß4 integrin expression and
grade, we show that miR-221/222 expression inversely correlates with tumor
proliferating index, Ki67. Interestingly, most high-grade tumors express ß4
integrin and low miR-221/222 levels. We ectopically transfected miR-221/222 into 
a human-derived mammary tumor cell line that recapitulates the luminal subtype to
investigate whether miR-221/222 regulates ß4 expression. We demonstrate that
miR-221/222 overexpression results in ß4 expression downregulation, breast cancer
cell proliferation, and invasion inhibition. The role of miR-221/222 in driving
ß4 integrin expression is also confirmed via mutating the miR-221/222 seed
sequence for ß4 integrin 3'UTR. Furthermore, we show that these 2 miRNAs are also
key breast cancer cell proliferation and invasion regulators, via the
post-transcriptional regulation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5A (STAT5A) and of a disintegrin and metalloprotease-17 (ADAM-17). 
We further confirm these data by silencing ADAM-17, using a dominant-negative or 
an activated STAT5A form. miR-221/222-driven ß4 integrin, STAT5A, and ADAM-17 did
not occur in MCF-10A cells, denoted "normal" breast epithelial cells, indicating 
that the mechanism is cancer cell-specific.   These results provide the first
evidence of a post-transcriptional mechanism that regulates ß4 integrin, STAT5A, 
and ADAM-17 expression, thus controlling breast cancer cell proliferation and
invasion. Pre-miR-221/222 use in the aggressive luminal subtype may be a powerful
therapeutic anti-cancer strategy.

PMCID: PMC4111727
PMID: 24736554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Nat Prod. 2014 Apr 25;77(4):948-54. doi: 10.1021/np401028h. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Inhibitory effect of turmeric curcuminoids on FLT3 expression and cell cycle
arrest in the FLT3-overexpressing EoL-1 leukemic cell line.

Tima S(1), Ichikawa H, Ampasavate C, Okonogi S, Anuchapreeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Program, Faculty of Graduate School, Chiang Mai
University , Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.

Leukemia is a hematologic malignancy with a frequent incidence and high mortality
rate. Previous studies have shown that the FLT3 gene is overexpressed in leukemic
blast cells, especially in acute myeloid leukemia. In this study, a commercially 
available curcuminoid mixture (1), pure curcumin (2), pure demethoxycurcumin (3),
and pure bisdemethoxycurcumin (4) were investigated for their inhibitory effects 
on cell growth, FLT3 expression, and cell cycle progression in an
FLT3-overexpressing EoL-1 leukemic cell line using an MTT assay, Western
blotting, and flow cytometry, respectively. The mixture (1) and compounds 2-4
demonstrated cytotoxic effects with IC50 values ranging from 6.5 to 22.5 µM. A
significant decrease in FLT3 protein levels was found after curcuminoid treatment
with IC20 doses, especially with mixture 1 and compound 2. In addition, mixture 1
and curcumin (2) showed activity on cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase and
decreased the FLT3 and STAT5A protein levels in a dose-dependent manner. Compound
2 demonstrated the greatest potential for inhibiting cell growth, cell cycle
progression, and FLT3 expression in EoL-1 cells. This investigation has provided 
new findings regarding the effect of turmeric curcuminoids on FLT3 expression in 
leukemic cells.

PMID: 24689857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Pulm Circ. 2013 Sep;3(3):533-50. doi: 10.1086/674336. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Subcellular mechanisms in pulmonary arterial hypertension: combinatorial
modalities that inhibit anterograde trafficking and cause bone morphogenetic
protein receptor type 2 mislocalization.

Yang YM(1), Lane KB, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, 
New York, USA.

Abstract The natural history of familial pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
typically involves mutations in and/or haploinsuffciency of BMPR2 (gene for bone 
morphogenetic protein receptor type 2) but with low penetrance (10%-15%), delayed
onset (in the third or fourth decade), and a gender bias (two- to fourfold more
prevalent in postpubertal women). Thus, investigators have sought an
understanding of "second-hit" modalities that might affect BMPR2 anterograde
trafficking and/or function. Indeed, vascular lung lesions in PAH have been
reported to contain enlarged "vacuolated" endothelial and smooth muscle cells
with dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cisternae, increased ER structural
protein reticulon 4 (also called Nogo-B), and enlarged and fragmented Golgi
apparatus. We recently replicated this cellular phenotype in primary human
pulmonary arterial endothelial cells and human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle
cells in culture by acute knockdown of the estradiol 17ß (E2)-responsive proteins
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b using
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). We have now investigated whether functional
haploinsufficiences of these molecules, alone or in combination with other
modalities, might interfere with anterograde membrane trafficking using (a) the
quantitative tsO45VSV-G-GFP trafficking assay and (b) assays for cell-surface
localization of Flag-tagged BMPR2 molecules. The G glycoprotein of the vesicular 
stomatitis virus (VSV-G) trafficking assay was validated in EA.hy926 endothelial 
cells by showing that cells exposed to monocrotaline pyrrole displayed reduced
anterograde trafficking. Thereafter, the combinatorial knockdowns of STAT5a,
STAT5b, BMPR2, and/or endothelial nitric oxide synthase as well as exposure to E2
or 2-methoxyestradiol were observed to significantly inhibit VSV-G trafficking.
These combinations also led to intracellular trapping of wild-type Flag-tagged
BMPR2. Overexpression of the PAH disease-derived F14 and KDF mutants of BMPR2,
which were trapped in the ER/Golgi, also inhibited VSV-G trafficking in trans.
Moreover, probenecid, a chemical chaperone in clinical use today, partially
restored cell-surface localization of the KDF but not the F14 mutant. These data 
identify several combinatorial modalities that inhibit VSV-G anterograde
trafficking and cause mislocalization of BMPR2. These modalities merit
consideration in defining aspects of the late-developing and gender-biased
natural history of human PAH.

PMCID: PMC4070808
PMID: 24618539  [PubMed]


120. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 3;9(3):e90275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090275. eCollection 
2014.

The synthetic a-bromo-2',3,4,4'-tetramethoxychalcone (a-Br-TMC) inhibits the
JAK/STAT signaling pathway.

Pinz S(1), Unser S(1), Brueggemann S(1), Besl E(1), Al-Rifai N(2), Petkes H(2),
Amslinger S(2), Rascle A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stat5 Signaling Research Group, Institute of Immunology, University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e105845.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription STAT5 and its upstream
activating kinase JAK2 are essential mediators of cytokine signaling. Their
activity is normally tightly regulated and transient. However, constitutive
activation of STAT5 is found in numerous cancers and a driving force for
malignant transformation. We describe here the identification of the synthetic
chalcone a-Br-2',3,4,4'-tetramethoxychalcone (a-Br-TMC) as a novel JAK/STAT
inhibitor. Using the non-transformed IL-3-dependent B cell line Ba/F3 and its
oncogenic derivative Ba/F3-1*6 expressing constitutively activated STAT5, we show
that a-Br-TMC targets the JAK/STAT pathway at multiple levels, inhibiting both
JAK2 and STAT5 phosphorylation. Moreover, a-Br-TMC alters the mobility of
STAT5A/B proteins in SDS-PAGE, indicating a change in their post-translational
modification state. These alterations correlate with a decreased association of
STAT5 and RNA polymerase II with STAT5 target genes in chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. Interestingly, expression of STAT5 target genes such 
as Cis and c-Myc was differentially regulated by a-Br-TMC in normal and cancer
cells. While both genes were inhibited in IL-3-stimulated Ba/F3 cells, expression
of the oncogene c-Myc was down-regulated and that of the tumor suppressor gene
Cis was up-regulated in transformed Ba/F3-1*6 cells. The synthetic chalcone
a-Br-TMC might therefore represent a promising novel anticancer agent for
therapeutic intervention in STAT5-associated malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3940872
PMID: 24595334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Apr;33(4):1019-26. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1649. Epub 2014 Feb
10.

Integrative genomic analyses of the histamine H1 receptor and its role in cancer 
prediction.

Wang M(1), Wei X(2), Shi L(1), Chen B(1), Zhao G(1), Yang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Yijishan Hospital of
Wannan Medical College, Wuhu 241001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology,
Cancer Hospital of Shantou University Medical College, Shantou 515041, P.R.
China. (3)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China.

The human histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) gene is located on chromosome 3p25 and
encodes for a 487 amino acid G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) with a long third 
intracellular loop (IL3). The HRH1 predominantly couples to Gaq/11 proteins,
leading to the activation of phospholipase C (PLC) and subsequent release of the 
second messengers inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) followed 
by the activation of PKC and the release of [Ca2+]i. In the present study, we
identified HRH1 genes from 14 vertebrate genomes and found that HRH1 exists in
all types of vertebrates including fish, amphibians, birds and mammals. We
identified 88 SNPs including 4 available alleles disrupting an existing exonic
splicing enhancer and 84 SNPs causing missense mutation, which may impact the
effect of histamine on the HRH1 protein. We found that the human HRH1 gene was
expressed in many tissues or organs, and predominant expression of HRH1 was shown
in the bone marrow, whole blood, lymph node, thymus, brain, cerebellum, retina,
spinal cord, heart, smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, small intestine, colon,
adipocytes, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, thyroid salivary gland, skin, ovary,
uterus, placenta, prostate and testis. When searched in the PrognoScan database, 
human HRH1 was also found to be expressed in bladder cancer, blood cancer, brain 
cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, eye cancer, head and neck cancer, lung 
cancer, ovarian cancer, skin cancer and soft tissue cancer tissues. The
relationship between the expression of HRH1 and prognosis was found to vary in
different types of cancers, even in the same cancer from different databases.
This implies that the function of HRH1 in these tumors may be multidimensional.
GR, STAT5A and c-Myb regulatory transcription factor binding sites were
identified in the HRH1 gene upstream (promoter) region, which may be involved in 
the effect of HRH1 in tumors.

PMID: 24535227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 15;192(6):2913-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302951. Epub 2014
Feb 12.

Cutaneous T cell lymphoma expresses immunosuppressive CD80 (B7-1) cell surface
protein in a STAT5-dependent manner.

Zhang Q(1), Wang HY, Wei F, Liu X, Paterson JC, Roy D, Mihova D, Woetmann A,
Ptasznik A, Odum N, Schuster SJ, Marafioti T, Riley JL, Wasik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Abramson Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104;

In this article, we report that cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) cells and
tissues ubiquitously express the immunosuppressive cell surface protein CD80
(B7-1). CD80 expression in CTCL cells is strictly dependent on the expression of 
both members of the STAT5 family, STAT5a and STAT5b, as well as their joint
ability to transcriptionally activate the CD80 gene. In IL-2-dependent CTCL
cells, CD80 expression is induced by the cytokine in a Jak1/3- and
STAT5a/b-dependent manner, whereas in the CTCL cells with constitutive STAT5
activation, CD80 expression is also STAT5a/b dependent but is independent of Jak 
activity. Although depletion of CD80 expression does not affect the proliferation
rate and viability of CTCL cells, induced expression of the cell-inhibitory
receptor of CD80, CD152 (CTLA-4), impairs growth of the cells. Coculture of CTCL 
cells with normal T lymphocytes consisting of both CD4(+) and CD8(+) populations 
or the CD4(+) subset alone, transfected with CD152 mRNA, inhibits proliferation
of normal T cells in a CD152- and CD80-dependent manner. These data identify a
new mechanism of immune evasion in CTCL and suggest that the CD80-CD152 axis may 
become a therapeutic target in this type of lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3984051
PMID: 24523507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Acta Haematol. 2014;132(1):75-86. doi: 10.1159/000356784. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Effects of Jak2 type 1 inhibitors NVP-BSK805 and NVP-BVB808 on Jak2
mutation-positive and Bcr-Abl-positive cell lines.

Ringel F(1), Kaeda J, Schwarz M, Oberender C, Grille P, Dörken B, Marque F,
Manley PW, Radimerski T, le Coutre P.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik m.S. Hämatologie und Onkologie, Campus Virchow Klinikum,
Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Janus kinases are critical components of signaling pathways that regulate
hematopoiesis. Mutations of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase JAK2 are found in
many BCR-ABL-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms. Preclinical results support
that JAK2 inhibitors could show efficacy in treating chronic myeloproliferative
neoplasms. JAK2 has also been postulated to play a role in BCR-ABL signal
transduction. Therefore, inhibitors of JAK2 kinases are turning into therapeutic 
strategies for treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). In this study,
the effects of two novel JAK2 inhibitors, NVP-BSK805 and NVP-BVB808, have been
investigated in cell lines expressing either BCR-ABL or mutant JAK2. Possible
synergies between NVP-BSK805/NVP-BVB808 and the kinase inhibitors imatinib and
nilotinib were assessed. Proliferation and apoptosis tests with both substances
showed response in the following cell lines: CHRF-288-11, SET-2 and UKE-1. All
BCR-ABL-positive cell lines showed some reduction in proliferation, but with
half-maximal growth-inhibitory values >1 µM. Combination of the JAK2 inhibitors
with imatinib and nilotinib showed no significant additive or synergistic
effects, although all BCR-ABL-positive cell lines responded well to both CML
therapeutic agents. Interestingly, it seemed that the combination of imatinib
with NVP-BSK805 had a protective effect on the cells. Combination treatment with 
nilotinib did not show this effect.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24504330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Anim Sci. 2014 Jul;92(7):2922-30. doi: 10.2527/jas.2013-7118. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Effects of the plant extract silymarin on prolactin concentrations, mammary gland
development, and oxidative stress in gestating gilts.

Farmer C(1), Lapointe J(2), Palin MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Dairy and Swine R & D Centre, 2000 College
St., Sherbrooke, QC J1M 0C8, Canada chantal.farmer@agr.gc.ca. (2)Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada, Dairy and Swine R & D Centre, 2000 College St., Sherbrooke, QC 
J1M 0C8, Canada.

The impacts of supplementing the diet of gestating gilts twice daily with 4 g of 
the plant extract silymarin on circulating hormonal concentrations, oxidative
status, mammary development, and mammary gene expression at the end of gestation 
were determined. Gilts were fed conventional diets during gestation and on d 90
they were assigned as controls (CTL; n = 16) or treated (TRT; n = 17) animals.
Treatment consisted of providing 4 g of silymarin twice daily until d 110, at
which time all gilts were slaughtered to collect mammary tissue for compositional
analyses and measures of gene expression and oxidative status, and liver and
corpora lutea for measures of oxidative stress variables. Blood samples for
hormonal assays and evaluation of oxidative stress biomarkers were obtained on d 
89, 94, and 109 of gestation. Silymarin increased (P = 0.05) circulating
concentrations of prolactin over all samples in the repeated in time analysis. In
separate analyses for each sampling time, prolactin concentrations in TRT gilts
tended (P < 0.10) to be greater than in CTL gilts on d 94 of gestation. Repeated 
in time analysis also revealed that silymarin reduced (P = 0.05) plasmatic
accumulation of biomarkers of oxidative damage to protein (protein carbonyls)
between d 89 and 109. There was no effect (P > 0.10) of treatment on
progesterone, estradiol, leptin, or 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine concentrations.
Percent fat in mammary parenchyma was greater (P = 0.05), percent protein was
lesser (P = 0.05), and concentrations of both RNA (P = 0.01) and DNA (P < 0.05)
were lesser in TRT than CTL gilts. Mammary parenchyma from TRT gilts had lower (P
= 0.05) mRNA abundance for STAT5A and leptin and tended to have lower (P = 0.10) 
abundance for STAT5B than CTL gilts. Silymarin reduced (P = 0.001) protein
carbonyls concentrations in liver of TRT gilts. No effect of treatment was
observed on antioxidant gene expression and enzymatic activities in liver samples
while total superoxide dismutase activity tended to be higher (P = 0.10) in the
corpora lutea of TRT animals when compared with CTL. This is the first
demonstration that, in female pigs, silymarin can increase prolactin
concentrations and protect against oxidative stress, yet the increase in
prolactin was not enough to have beneficial effects on mammary gland development 
in late gestation.

PMID: 24504042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 30;9(1):e86790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086790. eCollection
2014.

Identification of STAT5A and STAT5B target genes in human T cells.

Kanai T(1), Seki S(1), Jenks JA(1), Kohli A(1), Kawli T(2), Martin DP(2), Snyder 
M(2), Bacchetta R(3), Nadeau KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, School of
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America. (3)Division of Immunology and Allergy,
Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America ; San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene
Therapy (HSR-TIGET), San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) comprises a family of
universal transcription factors that help cells sense and respond to
environmental signals. STAT5 refers to two highly related proteins, STAT5A and
STAT5B, with critical function: their complete deficiency is lethal in mice; in
humans, STAT5B deficiency alone leads to endocrine and immunological problems,
while STAT5A deficiency has not been reported. STAT5A and STAT5B show peptide
sequence similarities greater than 90%, but subtle structural differences suggest
possible non-redundant roles in gene regulation. However, these roles remain
unclear in humans. We applied chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by DNA
sequencing using human CD4(+) T cells to detect candidate genes regulated by
STAT5A and/or STAT5B, and quantitative-PCR in STAT5A or STAT5B knock-down (KD)
human CD4(+) T cells to validate the findings. Our data show STAT5A and STAT5B
play redundant roles in cell proliferation and apoptosis via SGK1 interaction.
Interestingly, we found a novel, unique role for STAT5A in binding to genes
involved in neural development and function (NDRG1, DNAJC6, and SSH2), while
STAT5B appears to play a distinct role in T cell development and function via
DOCK8, SNX9, FOXP3 and IL2RA binding. Our results also suggest that one or more
co-activators for STAT5A and/or STAT5B may play important roles in establishing
different binding abilities and gene regulation behaviors. The new identification
of these genes regulated by STAT5A and/or STAT5B has major implications for
understanding the pathophysiology of cancer progression, neural disorders, and
immune abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC3907443
PMID: 24497979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 30;9(1):e85123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085123. eCollection
2014.

MiR-21 is under control of STAT5 but is dispensable for mammary development and
lactation.

Feuermann Y(1), Kang K(1), Shamay A(2), Robinson GW(1), Hennighausen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States of America. (2)Animal Science Departments, The Volcani Center, The 
Ministry of Agriculture, Bet Dagan, Israel.

Development of mammary alveolar epithelium during pregnancy is controlled by
prolactin, through the transcription factors STAT5A/B that activate specific sets
of target genes. Here we asked whether some of STAT5's functions are mediated by 
microRNAs. The miR-21 promoter sequence contains a bona-fide STAT5 binding site
and miR-21 levels increased in HC11 mammary cells upon prolactin treatment. In
vivo miR-21 was abundantly expressed in mammary epithelium at day 6 of pregnancy.
Analysis of mice lacking miR-21 revealed that their mammary tissue developed
normally during pregnancy and dams were able to nurse their pups. Our study
demonstrated that although expression of miR-21 is under prolactin control
through the transcription factors STAT5A/B its presence is dispensable for
mammary development and lactation.

PMCID: PMC3907398
PMID: 24497923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e24860. doi: 10.4161/jkst.24860. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Non-genomic STAT5-dependent effects at the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
apparatus and STAT6-GFP in mitochondria.

Sehgal PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology & Anatomy, and Medicine; New York Medical College;
Valhalla, NY USA.

STAT protein species are well-known as transcription factors that regulate
nuclear gene expression. Recent novel lines of research suggest new non-genomic
functions of STAT5A/B and STAT6. It was discovered in human pulmonary arterial
endothelial cells that STAT5A, including STAT5A-GFP, constitutively associated
with the Golgi apparatus, and both STAT5A and B with the endoplasmic reticulum.
Acute siRNA-mediated knockdown of STAT5A/B led to the rapid development of a
dramatic cystic change in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) characterized by
deposition of the ER structural protein reticulon-4 (RTN4; also called Nogo-B)
and the ER-resident GTPase atlastin-3 (ATL3) along cyst membranes and cyst-zone
boundaries, accompanied by Golgi fragmentation. Functional consequences included 
reduced anterograde trafficking, an ER stress response (increased GRP78/BiP) and 
eventual mitochondrial fragmentation. This phenotype was "non-genomic" in that it
was elicited in enucleated cytoplasts. In cross-immunopanning assays STAT5A and B
species associated with ATL3, and the ER-lumen spacer CLIMP63 (also called
cytoskeleton-associated protein 4, CKAP4) but not RTN4. From a disease
significance perspective we posit that STAT5, which is known to be affected by
estradiol-17ß and prolactin, represents the gender-sensitive determinant in the
pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension (IPAH), a disease which
includes ER/Golgi dysfunctions but with a 2- to 4-fold higher prevalence in
postpubertal women. A separate line of recent research produced evidence for the 
association of STAT6-GFP, but not STAT3-GFP, STAT3-DsRed, or STAT3-Flag, with
mitochondria in live-cell, immunofluorescence, and immunoelectron microscopy. An 
N-terminal truncation of STAT6-GFP (1-459), which lacked the SH2 domain and
Tyr-phosphorylation site, constitutively associated with mitochondria. Thus, the 
emergent new of biology STAT proteins includes non-genomic roles-structurally and
functionally-in the three closely related membrane organelles consisting of the
endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and mitochondria.

PMCID: PMC3894245
PMID: 24470974  [PubMed]


128. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jan 16;8(1):e2639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002639.
eCollection 2014.

Increase in TGF-ß secreting CD4<U+207A>CD25<U+207A> FOXP3<U+207A> T regulatory cells in anergic
lepromatous leprosy patients.

Saini C(1), Ramesh V(2), Nath I(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Lepromatous leprosy caused by Mycobacterium leprae is associated with
antigen specific T cell unresponsiveness/anergy whose underlying mechanisms are
not fully defined. We investigated the role of CD25(+)FOXP3(+) regulatory T cells
in both skin lesions and M.leprae stimulated PBMC cultures of 28 each of freshly 
diagnosed patients with borderline tuberculoid (BT) and lepromatous leprosy (LL) 
as well as 7 healthy household contacts of leprosy patients and 4 normal skin
samples.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPLE FINDINGS: Quantitative reverse transcribed PCR (qPCR),
immuno-histochemistry/flowcytometry and ELISA were used respectively for gene
expression, phenotype characterization and cytokine levels in PBMC culture
supernatants. Both skin lesions as well as in vitro antigen stimulated PBMC
showed increased percentage/mean fluorescence intensity of cells and higher gene 
expression for FOXP3(+), TGF-ß in lepromatous (p<0.01) as compared to tuberculoid
leprosy patients. CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+) T cells (Tregs) were increased in
unstimulated basal cultures (p<0.0003) and showed further increase in in vitro
antigen but not mitogen (phytohemaglutinin) stimulated PBMC (iTreg) in
lepromatous as compared to tuberculoid leprosy patients (p<0.002). iTregs of
lepromatous patients showed intracellular TGF-ß which was further confirmed by
increase in TGF-ß in culture supernatants (p<0.003). Furthermore, TGF-ß in iTreg 
cells was associated with phosphorylation of STAT5A. TGF-ß was seen in CD25(+)
cells of the CD4(+) but not that of CD8(+) T cell lineage in leprosy patients.
iTregs did not show intracellular IFN-<U+03B3> or IL-17 in lepromatous leprosy patients.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that FOXP3(+) iTregs with TGF-ß
may down regulate T cell responses leading to the antigen specific anergy
associated with lepromatous leprosy.

PMCID: PMC3894184
PMID: 24454972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2014 Jan 21;5(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2049-1891-5-9.

Emerging evidence of the physiological role of hypoxia in mammary development and
lactation.

Shao Y, Zhao FQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lactation and Metabolic Physiology, Department of Animal
Science, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA. fzhao@uvm.edu.

Hypoxia is a physiological or pathological condition of a deficiency of oxygen
supply in the body as a whole or within a tissue. During hypoxia, tissues undergo
a series of physiological responses to defend themselves against a low oxygen
supply, including increased angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, and glucose uptake. The
effects of hypoxia are mainly mediated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1),
which is a heterodimeric transcription factor consisting of a and ß subunits.
HIF-1ß is constantly expressed, whereas HIF-1a is degraded under normal oxygen
conditions. Hypoxia stabilizes HIF-1a and the HIF complex, and HIF then
translocates into the nucleus to initiate the expression of target genes. Hypoxia
has been extensively studied for its role in promoting tumor progression, and
emerging evidence also indicates that hypoxia may play important roles in
physiological processes, including mammary development and lactation. The mammary
gland exhibits an increasing metabolic rate from pregnancy to lactation to
support mammary growth, lactogenesis, and lactation. This process requires
increasing amounts of oxygen consumption and results in localized chronic hypoxia
as confirmed by the binding of the hypoxia marker pimonidazole HCl in mouse
mammary gland. We hypothesized that this hypoxic condition promotes mammary
development and lactation, a hypothesis that is supported by the following
several lines of evidence: i) Mice with an HIF-1a deletion selective for the
mammary gland have impaired mammary differentiation and lipid secretion,
resulting in lactation failure and striking changes in milk compositions; ii) We 
recently observed that hypoxia significantly induces HIF-1a-dependent glucose
uptake and GLUT1 expression in mammary epithelial cells, which may be responsible
for the dramatic increases in glucose uptake and GLUT1 expression in the mammary 
gland during the transition period from late pregnancy to early lactation; and
iii) Hypoxia and HIF-1a increase the phosphorylation of signal transducers and
activators of transcription 5a (STAT5a) in mammary epithelial cells, whereas
STAT5 phosphorylation plays important roles in the regulation of milk protein
gene expression and mammary development. Based on these observations, hypoxia
effects emerge as a new frontier for studying the regulation of mammary
development and lactation.

PMCID: PMC3929241
PMID: 24444333  [PubMed]


130. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e26102. doi: 10.4161/jkst.26102. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

STAT5 acetylation: Mechanisms and consequences for immunological control and
leukemogenesis.

Kosan C(1), Ginter T(1), Heinzel T(1), Krämer OH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine (CMB); Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics; University of Jena; Jena, Germany. (2)Center for Molecular
Biomedicine (CMB); Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics; University of Jena; 
Jena, Germany ; Institute of Toxicology; Medical Center of the University Mainz; 
Mainz, Germany.

The cytokine-inducible transcription factors signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5A and 5B (STAT5A and STAT5B) are important for the proper
development of multicellular eukaryotes. Disturbed signaling cascades evoking
uncontrolled expression of STAT5 target genes are associated with cancer and
immunological failure. Here, we summarize how STAT5 acetylation is integrated
into posttranslational modification networks within cells. Moreover, we focus on 
how inhibitors of deacetylases and tyrosine kinases can correct leukemogenic
signaling nodes involving STAT5. Such small molecules can be exploited in the
fight against neoplastic diseases and immunological disorders.

PMCID: PMC3876427
PMID: 24416653  [PubMed]


131. Dev Cell. 2014 Jan 27;28(2):147-60. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.11.019. Epub 2014 
Jan 9.

Basal cell signaling by p63 controls luminal progenitor function and lactation
via NRG1.

Forster N(1), Saladi SV(1), van Bragt M(2), Sfondouris ME(3), Jones FE(3), Li
Z(2), Ellisen LW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Genetics, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA. (4)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: ellisen@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Jan 27;28(2):114-5.

The mammary epithelium is organized as a bilayer of luminal and
basal/myoepithelial cells. During pregnancy, the luminal compartment expands for 
milk production, while basal cells are thought to provide structural and
contractile support. Here, we reveal a pregnancy-specific role of basal epithelia
as a central coordinator of lactogenesis. We demonstrate that genetic deletion of
the transcription factor p63 (Trp63) gene exclusively within basal cells of the
adult gland during pregnancy leads to dramatic defects in luminal cell
proliferation and differentiation, resulting in lactation failure. This phenotype
is explained by direct transcriptional activation of the epidermal growth factor 
family ligand gene Nrg1 by p63 selectively in basal cells, which is required for 
luminal ERBB4/STAT5A activation and consequent luminal progenitor cell
maturation. Thus, paracrine basal-to-luminal cell signaling, controlled by p63
via NRG1, orchestrates the entire lactation program. Collectively, these findings
redefine the paradigm for cellular interactions specifying the functional
maturation of the mammary gland.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951056
PMID: 24412575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cell Rep. 2014 Jan 30;6(2):366-76. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.029. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

Critical role for mast cell Stat5 activity in skin inflammation.

Ando T(1), Xiao W(1), Gao P(2), Namiranian S(3), Matsumoto K(4), Tomimori Y(1),
Hong H(1), Yamashita H(1), Kimura M(1), Kashiwakura J(5), Hata TR(6), Izuhara
K(7), Gurish MF(8), Roers A(9), Rafaels NM(2), Barnes KC(2), Jamora C(3),
Kawakami Y(1), Kawakami T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (4)Department of
Allergy and Immunology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Allergic Disease, RIKEN
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences (IMS-RCAI), Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(6)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (7)Division of Medical Biochemistry, Department
of Biomolecular Sciences and Department of Laboratory Medicine, Saga Medical
School, Saga 849-85-01, Japan. (8)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (9)Institute for Immunology, University of
Technology Dresden, Medical Faculty Carl-Gustav Carus, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(10)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Laboratory for Allergic Disease, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences (IMS-RCAI), Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. Electronic
address: toshi@lji.org.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease. Here, we show that
phospholipase C-ß3 (PLC-ß3)-deficient mice spontaneously develop AD-like skin
lesions and more severe allergen-induced dermatitis than wild-type mice. Mast
cells were required for both AD models and remarkably increased in the skin of
Plcb3(-/-) mice because of the increased Stat5 and reduced SHP-1 activities. Mast
cell-specific deletion of Stat5 gene ameliorated allergen-induced dermatitis,
whereas that of Shp1 gene encoding Stat5-inactivating SHP-1 exacerbated it.
PLC-ß3 regulates the expression of periostin in fibroblasts and TSLP in
keratinocytes, two proteins critically involved in AD pathogenesis. Furthermore, 
polymorphisms in PLCB3, SHP1, STAT5A, and STAT5B genes were associated with human
AD. Mast cell expression of PLC-ß3 was inversely correlated with that of
phospho-STAT5, and increased mast cells with high levels of phospho-STAT5 were
found in lesional skin of some AD patients. Therefore, STAT5 regulatory
mechanisms in mast cells are important for AD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4329986
PMID: 24412367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 6;9(1):e84859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084859. eCollection 
2014.

miR-223 is a coordinator of breast cancer progression as revealed by
bioinformatics predictions.

Pinatel EM(1), Orso F(2), Penna E(1), Cimino D(2), Elia AR(3), Circosta P(3),
Dentelli P(4), Brizzi MF(4), Provero P(5), Taverna D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC), University of Torino, Torino, Italy ;
Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino, 
Torino, Italy. (2)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC), University of Torino,
Torino, Italy ; Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences,
University of Torino, Torino, Italy ; Center for Molecular Systems Biology,
University of Torino, Torino, Italy. (3)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC),
University of Torino, Torino, Italy. (4)Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Torino, Torino, Italy. (5)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC),
University of Torino, Torino, Italy ; Department of Molecular Biotechnology and
Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy ; Center for Translational
Genomics and Bioinformatics, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

MicroRNAs are single-stranded non-coding RNAs that simultaneously down-modulate
the expression of multiple genes post-transcriptionally by binding to the 3'UTRs 
of target mRNAs. Here we used computational methods to predict microRNAs relevant
in breast cancer progression. Specifically, we applied different microRNA target 
prediction algorithms to various groups of differentially expressed
protein-coding genes obtained from four breast cancer datasets. Six potential
candidates were identified, among them miR-223, previously described to be highly
expressed in the tumor microenvironment and known to be actively transferred into
breast cancer cells. To investigate the function of miR-223 in tumorigenesis and 
to define its molecular mechanism, we overexpressed miR-223 in breast cancer
cells in a transient or stable manner. Alternatively we overexpressed miR-223 in 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts or HEK293 cells and used their conditioned medium to 
treat tumor cells. With both approaches, we obtained elevated levels of miR-223
in tumor cells and observed decreased migration, increased cell death in anoikis 
conditions and augmented sensitivity to chemotherapy but no effect on adhesion
and proliferation. The analysis of miR-223 predicted targets revealed enrichment 
in cell death and survival-related genes and in pathways frequently altered in
breast cancer. Among these genes, we showed that protein levels for STAT5A, ITGA3
and NRAS were modulated by miR-223. In addition, we proved that STAT5A is a
direct miR-223 target and highlighted a possible correlation between miR-223 and 
STAT5A in migration and chemotherapy response. Our investigation revealed that a 
computational analysis of cancer gene expression datasets can be a relevant tool 
to identify microRNAs involved in cancer progression and that miR-223 has a
prominent role in breast malignancy that could potentially be exploited
therapeutically.

PMCID: PMC3882278
PMID: 24400121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Blood. 2014 Apr 17;123(16):2550-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-456889. Epub 2014 
Jan 6.

Bortezomib inhibits STAT5-dependent degradation of LEF-1, inducing granulocytic
differentiation in congenital neutropenia CD34(+) cells.

Gupta K(1), Kuznetsova I, Klimenkova O, Klimiankou M, Meyer J, Moore MA, Zeidler 
C, Welte K, Skokowa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematopoiesis, and.

The transcription factor lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1 (LEF-1), which plays 
a definitive role in granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)
receptor-triggered granulopoiesis, is downregulated in granulocytic progenitors
of severe congenital neutropenia (CN) patients. However, the exact mechanism of
LEF-1 downregulation is unclear. CN patients are responsive to therapeutically
high doses of G-CSF and are at increased risk of developing acute myeloid
leukemia. The normal expression of LEF-1 in monocytes and lymphocytes, whose
differentiation is unaffected in CN, suggests the presence of a
granulopoiesis-specific mechanism downstream of G-CSF receptor signaling that
leads to LEF-1 downregulation. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(STAT5) is activated by G-CSF and is hyperactivated in acute myeloid leukemia.
Here, we investigated the effects of activated STAT5 on LEF-1 expression and
functions in hematopoietic progenitor cells. We demonstrated that constitutively 
active STAT5a (caSTAT5a) inhibited LEF-1-dependent autoregulation of the LEF-1
gene promoter by binding to the LEF-1 protein, recruiting Nemo-like kinase and
the E3 ubiquitin-ligase NARF to LEF-1, leading to LEF-1 ubiquitination and a
reduction in LEF-1 protein levels. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib reversed
the defective G-CSF-triggered granulocytic differentiation of CD34(+) cells from 
CN patients in vitro, an effect that was accompanied by restoration of LEF-1
protein levels and LEF-1 messenger RNA autoregulation. Taken together, our data
define a novel mechanism of LEF-1 downregulation in CN patients via enhanced
ubiquitination and degradation of LEF-1 protein by hyperactivated STAT5.

PMID: 24394665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Gene. 2014 Mar 1;537(1):29-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.038. Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Analysis of changes in transcription start site distribution by a classification 
approach.

Liang KC(1), Suzuki Y(2), Kumagai Y(3), Nakai K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa-shi, Chiba-ken 227-8561, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Host Defense, World Premier International Immunology Frontier
Research Center, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa-shi,
Chiba-ken 227-8561, Japan. Electronic address: knakai@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Change in transcription start site (TSS) usage is an important mechanism for the 
control of transcription process, and has a significant effect on the isoforms
being transcribed. One of the goals in the study of TSS is the understanding of
how and why their usage differs in different tissues or under different
conditions. In light of recent efforts in the mapping of transcription start site
landscape using high-throughput sequencing approaches, a quantitative and
automated method is needed to process all the data that are being produced. In
this work we propose a statistical approach that will classify changes in TSS
distribution between different samples into several categories of changes that
may have biological significance. Genes selected by the classifiers can then be
analyzed together with additional supporting data to determine their biological
significance. We use a set of time-course TSS data from mouse dendritic cells
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to demonstrate the usefulness of our
method.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24389500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Lett. 2014 Apr 28;346(1):148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.030. Epub
2013 Dec 30.

An N-terminal splice variant of human Stat5a that interacts with different
transcription factors is the dominant form expressed in invasive ductal
carcinoma.

Tan D(1), Chen KE(2), Deng C(3), Tang P(4), Huang J(4), Mansour T(2), Luben
RA(3), Walker AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside,
Riverside, CA 92521-0121, United States; College of Medicine/Institute of Medical
Sciences, Jishou University, Jishou 416000, Hunan, PR China. (2)Division of
Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA
92521-0121, United States. (3)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of
California, Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521-0121, United States; Department of
Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521-0121,
United States. (4)People's Hospital of Xiangxi Autonomous Region, Jishou
University, Jishou 416000, Hunan, PR China. (5)Division of Biomedical Sciences,
University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521-0121, United States.
Electronic address: ameae.walker@ucr.edu.

We have identified a new variant of human Stat5a, found at higher ratios to
full-length Stat5a in invasive ductal carcinoma versus contiguous normal tissue. 
The variant, missing exon 5, inhibits p21 and Bax production and increases cell
number. After prolactin stimulation, only full-length Stat5a interacts with the
vitamin D and retinoid X receptors, whereas only <U+0394>5 Stat5a interacts with
activating protein 1-2 and specificity protein 1. Prolactin also oppositely
regulates interaction of the two Stat5a forms with ß-catenin. We propose that a
change in splicing leading to upregulation of this new isoform is a pathogenic
aspect of invasive ductal carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3959904
PMID: 24384092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nutr Cancer. 2014;66(2):308-14. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2014.864419. Epub 2013 Dec 
31.

Naturally occurring phenolic acids modulate TPA-induced activation of EGFR, AP-1,
and STATs in mouse epidermis.

Cichocki M(1), Dalek M, Szamalek M, Baer-Dubowska W.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry , Poznan University of Medical
Sciences , Poznan , Poland.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role in epithelial
carcinogenesis and appears to be involved in STATs activation. In this study we
investigated the possible interference of naturally occurring phenolic acids with
EGFR, activator protein-1 (AP-1), and signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STATs) pathways activated by topical application of tumor promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in Balb/c mice epidermis. Pretreatment
with tannic or chlorogenic acid resulted in a significant decrease in the
phosphorylation of EGFR Y-1068 and Y-1173 tyrosine residues, which was
accompanied by reduced activation of AP-1. Tannic acid decreased also the c-Jun
AP-1 subunit level and binding to TPA response element (TRE) (3- and 2-fold in
comparison with TPA-treated group respectively). Simultaneous reduction of JNK
activity might be responsible for reduced activation of AP-1. In contrast to
these more complex phenolics, protocatechuic acid increased the activity of JNK
and was also the most efficient inhibitor of STATs activation. These results
indicate that naturally occurring phenolic acids, by decreasing EGFR, AP-1, and
STATs activation, may modulate other elements both upstream and downstream in
these pathways and thus inhibit the tumor development. Although more complex
phenolics affect mainly the EGFR/AP-1 pathway, STATs seem to be the most
important targets for simple compounds, such as protocatechuic acid.

PMID: 24380573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):996-1003. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301991. Epub 2013
Dec 23.

STAT5-induced lunatic fringe during Th2 development alters delta-like 4-mediated 
Th2 cytokine production in respiratory syncytial virus-exacerbated airway
allergic disease.

Mukherjee S(1), Rasky AJ, Lundy PA, Kittan NA, Kunkel SL, Maillard IP, Kowalski
PE, Kousis PC, Guidos CJ, Lukacs NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109;

Notch activation plays an important role in T cell development and mature T cell 
differentiation. In this study, we investigated the role of Notch activation in a
mouse model of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-exacerbated allergic airway
disease. During RSV exacerbation, in vivo neutralization of a specific Notch
ligand, Delta-like ligand (Dll)-4, significantly decreased airway
hyperreactivity, mucus production, and Th2 cytokines. Lunatic Fringe (Lfng), a
glycosyltransferase that enhances Notch activation by Dll4, was increased during 
RSV exacerbation. Lfng loss of function in Th2-skewed cells inhibited Dll4-Notch 
activation and subsequent IL-4 production. Further knockdown of Lfng in T cells
in CD4Cre(+)Lfng(fl/fl) mice showed reduced Th2 response and disease pathology
during RSV exacerbation. Finally, we identified STAT5-binding cis-acting
regulatory element activation as a critical driver of Lfng transcriptional
activation. These data demonstrate that STAT5-dependent amplification of
Notch-modifying Lfng augments Th2 response via Dll4 and is critical for
amplifying viral exacerbation during allergic airway disease.

PMCID: PMC3946958
PMID: 24367028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1055-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-521963. Epub 2013
Dec 11.

Constitutive activation of STAT5A and STAT5B regulates IgM secretion in
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia.

Hodge LS(1), Ziesmer SC, Yang ZZ, Secreto FJ, Novak AJ, Ansell SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Activation of the Janus kinase family/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway has been associated with the
pathogenesis and progression of both solid and hematologic malignancies. We have 
detected constitutive activation of STAT5 in malignant B cells derived from
patients with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia (WM). Although short hairpin
RNA-mediated knockdown of the STAT5A and STAT5B isoforms did not affect cellular 
proliferation, loss of STAT5 significantly decreased immunoglobulin M (IgM)
secretion. A similar dose-dependent inhibition of IgM secretion was observed when
WM cell lines were treated with a small molecule inhibitor of STAT5. These data
suggest that STAT5 is involved in regulating IgM production in WM and that
inhibition of STAT5 may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for lowering IgM
levels in WM patients.

PMCID: PMC3924927
PMID: 24335105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2014 Jan;406(2):537-48. doi: 10.1007/s00216-013-7486-9. Epub
2013 Dec 7.

Analyzing abundance of mRNA molecules with a near-infrared fluorescence
technique.

Chen Y(1), Pan Y, Zhang B, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, Sipailou 2,
Nanjing, 210096, China.

Erratum in
    Anal Bioanal Chem. 2014 Apr;406(9-10):2491.

This study describes a simple method for analyzing the abundance of mRNA
molecules in a total DNA sample. Due to the dependence on the near-infrared
fluorescence technique, this method is named near-infrared fluorescence gene
expression detection (NIRF-GED). The procedure has three steps: (1) isolating
total RNA from detected samples and reverse-transcription into cDNA with a
biotin-labeled oligo dT; (2) hybridizing cDNA to oligonucleotide probes coupled
to a 96-well microplate; and (3) detecting biotins with NIRF-labeled
streptavidin. The method was evaluated by performing proof-in-concept detections 
of absolute and relative expressions of housekeeping and NF-<U+03BA>B target genes in
HeLa cells. As a result, the absolute expression of three genes, Ccl20, Cxcl2,
and Gapdh, in TNF-a-uninduced HeLa cells was determined with a standard curve
constructed on the same microplate, and the relative expression of five genes,
Ccl20, Cxcl2, Il-6, STAT5A, and Gapdh, in TNF-a-induced and -uninduced HeLa cells
was measured by using NIRF-GED. The results were verified by quantitative PCR
(qPCR) and DNA microarray detections. The biggest advantage of NIRF-GED over the 
current techniques lies in its independence of exponential or linear
amplification of nucleic acids. Moreover, NIRF-GED also has several other
benefits, including high sensitivity as low as several fmols, absolute
quantification in the range of 9 to 147 fmols, low cDNA consumption similar to
qPCR template, and the current medium throughput in 96-well microplate format and
future high throughput in DNA microarray format. NIRF-GED thus provides a new
tool for analyzing gene transcripts and other nucleic acid molecules.

PMID: 24317515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Adv Pharm Bull. 2013;3(2):461-4. doi: 10.5681/apb.2013.076. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Evaluation of STAT5A Gene Expression in Aflatoxin B1 Treated Bovine Mammary
Epithelial Cells.

Forouharmehr A(1), Harkinezhad T, Qasemi-Panahi B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Zanjan,
Zanjan, Iran.

PURPOSE: Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is a potent mycotoxin which has been produced by
fungi such as Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus as secondary
metabolites due to their growth on food stuffs and induces hepatocellular
carcinoma in many animal species, including humans. In the present study, the
effect of AFB1 on STAT5A gene expression was investigated in bovine mammary
epithelial cells using real time RT-PCR.
METHODS: Bovine mammary epithelial cells were seeded in a 24-well culture plate
for three-dimensional (3D) culture in Matrigel matrix. After 21 days of 3D
culture and reaching the required number of cells, cells were treated with AFB1
and incubated for 8 h. For real time PCR reaction, total RNA from the cultured
and treated cells was extracted and used for complementary DNA synthesis.
RESULTS: The expression of STAT5A gene was significantly down regulated by AFB1
in dose- dependent manner and led to the reduction of proliferation and
differentiation of epithelial cells, which has direct effect in milk protein
quantity and quality.
CONCLUSION: According to the results, it seems that down regulation of STAT5A
gene in AFB1-treated cells maybe due to DNA damage induced by AFB1 in bovine
mammary epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3848230
PMID: 24312879  [PubMed]


142. J Hematol Oncol. 2013 Dec 5;6:90. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-6-90.

STAT inhibitors for cancer therapy.

Furqan M(1), Akinleye A, Mukhi N, Mittal V, Chen Y, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College and Westchester Medical
Center, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. delong_liu@nymc.edu.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins are a family of 
cytoplasmic transcription factors consisting of 7 members, STAT1 to STAT6,
including STAT5a and STAT5b. STAT proteins are thought to be ideal targets for
anti-cancer therapy since cancer cells are more dependent on the STAT activity
than their normal counterparts. Inhibitors targeting STAT3 and STAT5 have been
developed. These included peptidomimetics, small molecule inhibitors and
oligonucleotides. This review summarized advances in preclinical and clinical
development of these compounds.

PMCID: PMC4029528
PMID: 24308725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Cancer. 2013 Dec 5;13:573. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-573.

Association of cellular and molecular responses in the rat mammary gland to
17ß-estradiol with susceptibility to mammary cancer.

Ding L, Zhao Y, Warren CL, Sullivan R, Eliceiri KW, Shull JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin Madison, 1400 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA. shull@oncology.wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: We are using ACI and BN rats, which differ markedly in their
susceptibility to 17ß-estradiol (E2)-induced mammary cancer, to identify genetic 
variants and environmental factors that determine mammary cancer susceptibility. 
The objective of this study was to characterize the cellular and molecular
responses to E2 in the mammary glands of ACI and BN rats to identify qualitative 
and quantitative phenotypes that associate with and/or may confer differences in 
susceptibility to mammary cancer.
METHODS: Female ACI and BN rats were treated with E2 for 1, 3 or 12 weeks.
Mammary gland morphology and histology were examined by whole mount and
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Cell proliferation and epithelial density
were evaluated by quantitative immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was evaluated by
quantitative western blotting and flow cytometry. Mammary gland differentiation
was examined by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression was evaluated by
microarray, qRT-PCR and quantitative western blotting assays. Extracellular
matrix (ECM) associated collagen was evaluated by Picrosirius Red staining and
Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) microscopy.
RESULTS: The luminal epithelium of ACI rats exhibited a rapid and sustained
proliferative response to E2. By contrast, the proliferative response exhibited
by the mammary epithelium of BN rats was restrained and transitory. Moreover, the
epithelium of BN rats appeared to undergo differentiation in response to E2, as
evidenced by production of milk proteins as well as luminal ectasia and
associated changes in the ECM. Marked differences in expression of genes that
encode proteins with well-defined roles in mammary gland development (Pgr, Wnt4, 
Tnfsf11, Prlr, Stat5a, Areg, Gata3), differentiation and milk production (Lcn2,
Spp1), regulation of extracellular environment (Mmp7, Mmp9), and cell-cell or
cell-ECM interactions (Cd44, Cd24, Cd52) were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that these cellular and molecular phenotypes are
heritable and may underlie, at least in part, the differences in mammary cancer
susceptibility exhibited by ACI and BN rats.

PMCID: PMC3924185
PMID: 24304664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(6):466-76. doi: 10.1159/000355409. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Association analysis of ten candidate genes in a large multinational cohort of
small for gestational age children and children with idiopathic short stature
(NESTEGG study).

de Graaff LC(1), Clark AJ, Tauber M, Ranke MB, Johnston LB, Caliebe J, Molinas C,
Amin N, van Duijn C, Wollmann H, Wallaschofski H, Savage MO, Hokken-Koelega AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Fetal growth failure has been associated with an increased risk of
hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetes in adulthood. Exploring the
mechanisms underlying this association should improve our understanding of these 
common adult diseases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We investigated 225 SNPs in 10 genes involved in growth and
glucose metabolism (GH1, GHR, IGF1, IGF1R, STAT5A, STAT5B, MAPK1, MAPK3, PPAR<U+03B3>
and INS) in 1,437 children from the multinational NESTEGG consortium: 345
patients born small for gestational age who remained short (SGA-S), 288 who
showed catch-up growth (SGA-Cu), 410 idiopathic short stature (ISS) and 394
controls. We related genotype to pre- and/or postnatal growth parameters,
response to growth hormone (if applicable) and blood pressure.
RESULTS: We found several clinical associations for GH1, GHR, IGF1, IGF1R, PPAR<U+03B3> 
and MAPK1. One SNP remained significant after Bonferroni's correction: IGF1R SNP 
rs4966035's minor allele A was significantly more prevalent among SGA and
associated with smaller birth length (p = 0.000378) and birth weight (weaker
association), independent of gestational age.
CONCLUSION: IGF1R SNP rs4966035 is significantly associated with birth length,
independent of gestational age. This and other associations suggest that
polymorphisms in these genes might partly explain the phenotype of short children
born SGA and children with ISS.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24280783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biomark Res. 2013 Jan 16;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2050-7771-1-5.

Dysregulation of JAK-STAT pathway in hematological malignancies and JAK
inhibitors for clinical application.

Furqan M(1), Mukhi N, Lee B, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College and Westchester Medical
Center, Valhalla, NY, 10595, USA. DELONG_LIU@NYMC.EDU.

JAK-STAT (Janus associated kinase-signal transducer and activator of
transcription) pathway plays a critical role in transduction of extracellular
signals from cytokines and growth factors involved in hematopoiesis, immune
regulation, fertility, lactation, growth and embryogenesis. JAK family contains
four cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases, JAK1-3 and Tyk2. Seven STAT proteins have been
identified in human cells, STAT1-6, including STAT5a and STAT5b. Negative
regulators of JAK-STAT pathways include tyrosine phosphatases (SHP1 and 2, CD45),
protein inhibitors of activated STATs (PIAS), suppressors of cytokine signaling
(SOCS) proteins, and cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS).
Dysregulation of JAK-STAT pathway have been found to be key events in a variety
of hematological malignancies. JAK inhibitors are among the first successful
agents reaching clinical application. Ruxolitinib (Jakafi), a non-selective
inhibitor of JAK1 & 2, has been approved by FDA for patients with intermediate to
high risk primary or secondary myelofibrosis. This review will also summarize
early data on selective JAK inhibitors, including SAR302503 (TG101348),
lestaurtinib (CEP701), CYT387, SB1518 (pacritinib), LY2784544, XL019, BMS-911543,
NS-018, and AZD1480.

PMCID: PMC3776247
PMID: 24252238  [PubMed]


146. Mol Cancer. 2013 Nov 5;12(1):133. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-133.

Combining radiotherapy with MEK1/2, STAT5 or STAT6 inhibition reduces survival of
head and neck cancer lines.

Stegeman H(1), Kaanders JH, Verheijen MM, Peeters WJ, Wheeler DL, Iida M, Grénman
R, van der Kogel AJ, Span PN, Bussink J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
PO Box 9101, 6500, HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. h.stegeman@rther.umcn.nl.

BACKGROUND: Kinases downstream of growth factor receptors have been implicated in
radioresistance and are, therefore, attractive targets to improve radiotherapy
outcome in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients.
METHODS: An antibody-based array was used to quantify the expression levels of
multiple phospho-kinases involved in growth factor signaling in nine untreated or
irradiated HNSCC lines. Radiosensitivity was assessed with clonogenic cell
survival assays and correlated with the expression levels of the phospho-kinases.
Inhibitors of the kinases that were associated with radiosensitivity were tested 
for their ability to increase radiosensitivity in the 3 most radioresistant HNSCC
lines.
RESULTS: The basal expression of phosphorylated Yes, Src and STAT5A, and the
expression after radiotherapy of phosphorylated AKT, MSK1/2, Src, Lyn, Fyn, Hck, 
and STAT6, were correlated with radiosensitivity in the panel of HNSCC lines. In 
combination with radiotherapy, inhibitors of AKT, p38 and Src Family Kinases
(SFK) were variably able to reduce survival, whereas MEK1/2, STAT5 and STAT6
inhibition reduced survival in all cell lines. The combined effect of
radiotherapy and the kinase inhibitors on cell survival was mostly additive,
although also supra-additive effects were observed for AKT, MEK1/2, p38 and STAT5
inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: Kinases of the AKT, MAPK, STAT and SFK pathways correlated with
radiosensitivity in a panel of HNSCC lines. Particularly inhibitors against
MEK1/2, STAT5 and STAT6 were able to decrease survival in combination with
radiotherapy. Hence, inhibitors against these kinases have the potential to
improve radiotherapy outcome in HNSCC patients and further research is warranted 
to confirm this in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3842630
PMID: 24192080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 14;8(10):e76155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076155.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of a STAT5 target gene, Dpf3, provides novel insights in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Theodorou M(1), Speletas M, Mamara A, Papachristopoulou G, Lazou V, Scorilas A,
Katsantoni E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of
Athens, Athens, Greece.

STAT5 controls essential cellular functions and is encoded by two genes, Stat5a
and Stat5b. To provide insight to the mechanisms linking hematologic malignancy
to STAT5 activation/regulation of target genes, we identified STAT5 target genes 
and focused on Dpf3 gene, which encodes for an epigenetic factor. Dpf3 expression
was induced upon IL-3 stimulation in Ba/F3 cells, while strong binding of both
STAT5a and STAT5b was detected in its promoter. Reduced expression of Dpf3 was
detected in Ba/F3 cells with Stat5a and Stat5b knock-down, suggesting that this
gene is positively regulated by STAT5, upon IL-3 stimulation. Furthermore, this
gene was significantly up-regulated in CLL patients, where DPF3 gene/protein
up-regulation and strong STAT5 binding to the DPF3 promoter, correlated with
increased STAT5 activation, mainly in non-malignant myeloid cells (granulocytes).
Our findings provide insights in the STAT5 dependent transcriptional regulation
of Dpf3, and demonstrate for the first time increased STAT5 activation in
granulocytes of CLL patients. Novel routes of investigation are opened to
facilitate the understanding of the role of STAT5 activation in the communication
between non-malignant myeloid and malignant B-cells, and the functions of STAT5
target genes networks in CLL biology.

PMCID: PMC3796511
PMID: 24155890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Molecules. 2013 Oct 17;18(10):12987-3002. doi: 10.3390/molecules181012987.

SOCS3-mediated blockade reveals major contribution of JAK2/STAT5 signaling
pathway to lactation and proliferation of dairy cow mammary epithelial cells in
vitro.

Huang YL(1), Zhao F, Luo CC, Zhang X, Si Y, Sun Z, Zhang L, Li QZ, Gao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Dairy Science of Education Ministry, Northeast Agricultural 
University, Harbin 150030, Heilongjiang, China. gaoxj5390@sina.com.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) is a cytokine-induced negative
feedback-loop regulator of cytokine signaling. More and more evidence has proved 
it to be an inhibitor of signal transducers and activators of transcription 5
(STAT5). Here, we used dairy cow mammary epithelial cells (DCMECs) to analyze the
function of SOCS3 and the interaction between SOCS3 and STAT5a. The expression of
SOCS3 was found in cytoplasm and nucleus of DCMECs by fluorescent immunostaining.
Overexpression and inhibition of SOCS3 brought a remarkable milk protein
synthesis change through the regulation of JAK2/STAT5a pathway activity, and
SOCS3 expression also decreased SREBP-1c expression and fatty acid synthesis.
Inhibited STAT5a activation correlated with reduced SOCS3 expression, which
indicated that SOCS3 gene might be one of the targets of STAT5a activation,
DCMECs treated with L-methionine (Met) resulted in a decrease of SOCS3
expression. SOCS3 could also decrease cell proliferation and viability by CASY-TT
detection. Together, our findings indicate that SOCS3 acts as an inhibitor of
JAK2/STAT5a pathway and disturbs fatty acid synthesis by decreasing SREBP-1c
expression, which validates its involvement in both milk protein synthesis and
fat synthesis. In aggregate, these results reveal that low SOCS3 expression is
required for milk synthesis and proliferation of DCMECs in vitro.

PMID: 24141248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Nov 30;142(3-4):106-12. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.09.018. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Mutations in genes involved in oestrous cycle associated expression of oestrus.

Homer EM(1), Derecka K, Webb R, Garnsworthy PC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nottingham, School of Biosciences, Sutton Bonington Campus,
Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK.

Detection of oestrus is a key determinant of profitability of dairy herds, but
oestrus is increasingly difficult to observe in the modern dairy cow, with
shorter duration and less intense oestrus. Concurrent with the unfavourable
correlation between milk yield and fertility, oestrous detection rates have
decreased to less than 50%. A number of mutations have been identified in genes
associated with fertility and production traits, but, to date, no single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) has been associated with oestrous expression.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate SNPs, linked to
fertility, for the association with oestrous expression. Blood was collected from
205 Holstein Friesian dairy cows and genotyped at 41 loci of 18 genes chosen for 
their roles in the oestrous cycle and milk production. SNPs were then examined
for correlations with increase in activity at oestrus, recorded via activity
monitors, using generalised linear models. Physical activity increased at oestrus
between two and four fold. Larger increases were associated with mutant alleles
in oestrogen receptor-a and gonadotrophin releasing hormone receptor genes
(P<0.05) and in the STAT5A gene (P<0.05). Smaller increases were associated with 
mutant alleles of the activin receptor type IIB and prolactin receptor genes
(P<0.10). In conclusion, alleles in these five genes provide the opportunity for 
selection of animals displaying greater oestrous activity which could aid
reversal of the decrease in oestrous detection and thereby contribute to
sustainability of the dairy industry worldwide.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24139696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Nov;146(5):1305-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.04.047.

Which is more important in the potential interference on cardioprotection by
remote ischemic preconditioning: ß-blockers or anesthetic choice?

Liu Y(1), Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

Comment on
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):376-82.

PMID: 24128912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. JAKSTAT. 2013 Apr 1;2(2):e23228. doi: 10.4161/jkst.23228.

Making milk: A new link between STAT5 and Akt1.

Oliver CH(1), Watson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; University of Cambridge; Cambridge, UK.

The transcription factor STAT5A is essential for two processes during mammary
gland development. First, it controls the development of luminal progenitor cells
from stem cells(1) and second, it has a role during pregnancy where it is
required for alveologenesis(2) (,) (3) the production of clusters of luminal
cells that synthesize and secrete milk during lactation. Thus, deletion of STAT5A
in late pregnancy results in lactation failure. Alveologenesis requires the
proliferation of a different lineage of luminal epithelial cells in response to
the pregnancy hormones progesterone and prolactin, the latter of which activates 
STAT5. Prolactin is required additionally during lactation to ensure adequate
milk production and the transcription of several milk protein genes has been
shown to be regulated by STAT5.(4) (,) (5) On the other hand, the PI3K/Akt
pathway is essential for the synthesis of other milk components such as lipids
and lactose.(6) In recent elegant work from Lewis Chodosh's laboratory, published
in Genes and Development, these two pathways are now shown to be directly
linked.(7) More specifically, it is shown that the PI3K/Akt pathway induces
autocrine prolactin production and that this is required for the initiation of
lactation.

PMCID: PMC3710317
PMID: 24058804  [PubMed]


152. Phytother Res. 2014 Jun;28(6):841-8. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5061. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Quercetin and EGCG exhibit chemopreventive effects in cholangiocarcinoma cells
via suppression of JAK/STAT signaling pathway.

Senggunprai L(1), Kukongviriyapan V, Prawan A, Kukongviriyapan U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, and Liver Fluke and
Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Khon Kaen University, 40002, Thailand.

Quercetin and epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) are dietary phytochemicals with
antiinflammatory and antitumor effects. In the present study, we examined the
effects of these two compounds on Janus-like kinase (JAK)/signal transduction and
transcription (STAT) pathway of cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) cells, because CCA is
one of the aggressive cancers with very poor prognosis and JAK/STAT pathway is
critically important in inflammation and carcinogenesis. The results showed that 
the JAK/STAT pathway activation by proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 and
interferon-<U+03B3> in CCA cells was suppressed by pretreatment with quercetin and EGCG,
evidently by a decrease of the elevated phosphorylated-STAT1 and STAT3 proteins
in a dose-dependent manner. The cytokine-mediated up-regulation of inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) via
JAK/STAT cascade was abolished by both quercetin and EGCG pretreatment. Moreover,
these flavonoids also could inhibit growth and cytokine-induced migration of CCA 
cells. Pretreatment with specific JAK inhibitors, AG490 and piceatannol,
abolished cytokine-induced iNOS and ICAM-1 expression. These results demonstrate 
beneficial effects of quercetin and EGCG in the suppression of JAK/STAT cascade
of CCA cells. Quercetin and EGCG would be potentially useful as cancer
chemopreventive agents against CCA.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24038588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):234-46. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.116. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

Dysregulated STAT1-SOCS1 control of JAK2 promotes mammary luminal progenitor cell
survival and drives ERa(+) tumorigenesis.

Chan SR(1), Rickert CG(1), Vermi W(2), Sheehan KC(1), Arthur C(1), Allen JA(1),
White JM(1), Archambault J(1), Lonardi S(3), McDevitt TM(4), Bhattacharya D(1),
Lorenzi MV(4), Allred DC(1), Schreiber RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 425S Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)1] Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, 425S Euclid
Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA [2] Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, Section of Pathology, University of Brescia School of Medicine,
Piazzale Spedali Civili 1, Brescia 25123, Italy. (3)Department of Molecular and
Translational Medicine, Section of Pathology, University of Brescia School of
Medicine, Piazzale Spedali Civili 1, Brescia 25123, Italy. (4)Oncology Drug
Discovery, Research and Development, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ 08543,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):185-6.

We previously reported that STAT1 expression is frequently abrogated in human
estrogen receptor-a-positive (ERa(+)) breast cancers and mice lacking STAT1
spontaneously develop ERa(+) mammary tumors. However, the precise mechanism by
which STAT1 suppresses mammary gland tumorigenesis has not been fully elucidated.
Here we show that STAT1-deficient mammary epithelial cells (MECs) display
persistent prolactin receptor (PrlR) signaling, resulting in activation of JAK2, 
STAT3 and STAT5A/5B, expansion of CD61(+) luminal progenitor cells and
development of ERa(+) mammary tumors. A failure to upregulate SOCS1, a
STAT1-induced inhibitor of JAK2, leads to unopposed oncogenic PrlR signaling in
STAT1(-/-) MECs. Prophylactic use of a pharmacological JAK2 inhibitor restrains
the proportion of luminal progenitors and prevents disease induction. Systemic
inhibition of activated JAK2 induces tumor cell death and produces therapeutic
regression of pre-existing endocrine-sensitive and refractory mammary tumors.
Thus, STAT1 suppresses tumor formation in mammary glands by preventing the
natural developmental function of a growth factor signaling pathway from becoming
pro-oncogenic. In addition, targeted inhibition of JAK2 may have significant
therapeutic potential in controlling ERa(+) breast cancer in humans.

PMCID: PMC3890946
PMID: 24037089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jan;95(1):105-15. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0912475. Epub 2013 Sep 9.

Gfi-1 is the transcriptional repressor of SOCS1 in acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Lee MC(1), Kuo YY, Chou WC, Hou HA, Hsiao M, Tien HF.

Author information: 
(1)1.National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7, Chung-Shan South Rd., Taipei,
Taiwan. hftien@ntu.edu.tw.

Silencing of SOCS1, a TSG, has been detected in various malignancies, including
AML. However, the underlying mechanism of SOCS1 inactivation remains elusive. In 
this study, we explored the role of histone methylation in SOCS1 expression in
AML cells. By ChIP assay, we demonstrated that G9a and SUV39H1, two enzymes
catalyzing H3K9 methylation, were physically associated with the SOCS1 promoter, 
and treatment with chaetocin, a histone methyltransferase inhibitor, suppressed
H3K9 methylation on the SOCS1 promoter and enhanced SOCS1 expression.
Furthermore, knockdown of G9a and SUV39H1 by siRNA could also induce SOCS1
expression. On the other hand, SOCS1 knockdown by shRNA eliminated
chaetocin-induced cell apoptosis. To investigate further whether any
transcription factor was involved in H3K9 methylation-related SOCS1 repression,
we scanned the sequences of the SOCS1 gene promoter and found two binding sites
for Gfi-1, a transcription repressor. By DNA pull-down and ChIP assays, we showed
that Gfi-1 directly bound the SOCS1 promoter, and ectopic Gfi-1 expression
suppressed STAT5-induced SOCS1 promoter activation. In contrast, Gfi-1 knockdown 
by shRNA enhanced SOCS1 expression and inhibited STAT5 expression. Moreover, the 
knockdown of G9a completely rescued the repressive effect of Gfi-1 on
STAT5A-induced SOCS1 promoter activation. Collectively, our study indicates that 
the expression of Gfi-1 contributes to SOCS1 silencing in AML cells through
epigenetic modification, and suppression of histone methyltransferase can provide
new insight in AML therapy.

PMID: 24018353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Nov;27(11):1808-24. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1077. Epub 2013 Sep
6.

Progesterone receptor and Stat5 signaling cross talk through RANKL in mammary
epithelial cells.

Obr AE(1), Grimm SL, Bishop KA, Pike JW, Lydon JP, Edwards DP.

Author information: 
(1)PhD, Department of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
BCM Box 130, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030. deane@bcm.edu.

Progesterone (P4) stimulates proliferation of the mammary epithelium by a
mechanism that involves paracrine signaling mediated from progesterone receptor
(PR)-positive to neighboring PR-negative cells. Here we used a primary mouse
mammary epithelial cell (MEC) culture system to define the molecular mechanism by
which P4 regulates the expression of target gene effectors of proliferation
including the paracrine factor receptor and activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B ligand
(RANKL). MECs from adult virgin mice grown and embedded in three-dimensional
basement-membrane medium resemble mammary ducts in vivo structurally and with
respect to other properties including a heterogeneous pattern of PR expression,
P4 induction of RANKL and other target genes in a PR-dependent manner, and a
proliferative response to progestin. RANKL was demonstrated to have multiple
functional P4-responsive enhancers that bind PR in a hormone-dependent manner as 
detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. P4 also stimulated recruitment
of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a to RANKL enhancers
through an apparent tethering with PR. Analysis of primary MECs from Stat5a
knockout mice revealed that P4 induction of RANKL and a broad range of other PR
target genes required Stat5a, as did P4-stimulated cell proliferation. In the
absence of Stat5a, PR binding was lost at selective RANKL enhancers but was
retained with others, suggesting that Stat5a acts to facilitate PR DNA binding at
selective sites and to function as a coactivator with DNA-bound PR at others.
These results show that RANKL is a direct PR target gene and that Stat5a has a
novel role as a cofactor in PR-mediated transcriptional signaling in the mammary 
gland.

PMCID: PMC3805851
PMID: 24014651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Zygote. 2015 Apr;23(2):307-11. doi: 10.1017/S0967199413000427. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Expression pattern of STAT5A gene during early bovine embryogenesis.

Flisikowski K(1), Boulhaeve M(2), Lopes FP(2), Wolf E(2), Zwierzchowski L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität München,Liesel-Beckmann-Str. 1,85354 Freising,Germany. 
(2)Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,Hackerstrasse 27,85764
Oberschleissheim,Germany. (3)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding,Polish
Academy of Sciences,Jastrzebiec,05-552 Magdalenka,Poland.

Growth hormone (GH) plays an important role in early embryo development. It has
been shown to activate multiple pathways, the most comprehensively studied being 
the STAT/JAK (Signal transducers and activators of transcription/Janus kinase)
pathway. The objective of the present study was to investigate STAT5A gene
expression during early bovine embryogenesis. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was used to measure the abundance of STAT5A transcripts. The mRNA was
present at all stages of preimplantation bovine embryos investigated. The most
abundant STAT5A expression occurred at the 2-cell stage. Expression was markedly 
reduced between the 4-cell and 8-cell stages, coinciding with the known time of
embryo genome activation and loss of maternal mRNAs. This finding suggests that
the embryonic STAT5A gene is primarily activated by maternal gene products.

PMID: 23981721  [PubMed - in process]


157. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 15;19(20):5658-74. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0422. 
Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Pharmacologic inhibition of Jak2-Stat5 signaling By Jak2 inhibitor AZD1480
potently suppresses growth of both primary and castrate-resistant prostate
cancer.

Gu L(1), Liao Z, Hoang DT, Dagvadorj A, Gupta S, Blackmon S, Ellsworth E, Talati 
P, Leiby B, Zinda M, Lallas CD, Trabulsi EJ, McCue P, Gomella L, Huszar D,
Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Cancer Biology, Urology, Pathology, and 
Medical Oncology, Kimmel Cancer Center; Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; and Oncology iMED, AstraZeneca R&D Boston, Waltham, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Progression of prostate cancer to the lethal castrate-resistant stage
coincides with loss of responsiveness to androgen deprivation and requires
development of novel therapies. We previously provided proof-of-concept that
Stat5a/b is a therapeutic target protein for prostate cancer. Here, we show that 
pharmacologic targeting of Jak2-dependent Stat5a/b signaling by the Jak2
inhibitor AZD1480 blocks castrate-resistant growth of prostate cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Efficacy of AZD1480 in disrupting Jak2-Stat5a/b signaling
and decreasing prostate cancer cell viability was evaluated in prostate cancer
cells. A unique prostate cancer xenograft mouse model (CWR22Pc), which mimics
prostate cancer clinical progression in patients, was used to assess in vivo
responsiveness of primary and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) to
AZD1480. Patient-derived clinical prostate cancers, grown ex vivo in organ
explant cultures, were tested for responsiveness to AZD1480.
RESULTS: AZD1480 robustly inhibited Stat5a/b phosphorylation, dimerization,
nuclear translocation, DNA binding, and transcriptional activity in prostate
cancer cells. AZD1480 reduced prostate cancer cell viability sustained by
Jak2-Stat5a/b signaling through induction of apoptosis, which was rescued by
constitutively active Stat5a/b. In mice, pharmacologic targeting of Stat5a/b by
AZD1480 potently blocked growth of primary androgen-dependent as well as
recurrent castrate-resistant CWR22Pc xenograft tumors, and prolonged survival of 
tumor-bearing mice versus vehicle or docetaxel-treated mice. Finally, nine of 12 
clinical prostate cancers responded to AZD1480 by extensive apoptotic epithelial 
cell loss, concurrent with reduced levels of nuclear Stat5a/b.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first evidence for efficacy of pharmacologic targeting
of Stat5a/b as a strategy to inhibit castrate-resistant growth of prostate
cancer, supporting further clinical development of Stat5a/b inhibitors as therapy
for advanced prostate cancer.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23942095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Histopathology. 2013 Oct;63(4):558-67. doi: 10.1111/his.12192. Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma of salivary glands is a lipid-rich tumour,
and adipophilin can be valuable in its identification.

Mariano FV(1), dos Santos HT, Azañero WD, da Cunha IW, Coutinho-Camilo CM, de
Almeida OP, Kowalski LP, Altemani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Sciences Faculty, University of Campinas
(UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.

AIMS: Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma (MASC) of salivary glands shows
morphological similarities to milk-secreting mammary epithelial cells. The aim of
this study was to analyse the immunohistochemical expression of adipophilin (a
component of milk lipid globule membranes) and of proteins related to secretory
mechanisms (STAT5a and mammaglobin) in MASC and other salivary tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ten cases of MASC (all with ETV6 translocation) and 83 other
salivary carcinomas were studied. In all MASC cases, adipophilin stained numerous
large lipid droplets. These droplets were minute in other salivary carcinomas,
except for sebaceous carcinoma. Overexpression of STAT5a was detected in all MASC
cases, but only occasionally in other carcinomas. Mammaglobin expression occurred
frequently in MASC (70% of cases), whereas, in other carcinomas, it was uncommon 
and limited. Only MASC showed cytoplasmic reactivity for p63, particularly in
papillary-cystic areas. Positivity for S100, vimentin and high molecular weight
keratin was observed in 100% of MASC cases.
CONCLUSIONS: MASC is a lipid-rich tumour containing large lipid droplets covered 
by adipophilin. This finding can be included among its defining
immunohistochemical features, and possibly represents lactation-like secretory
differentiation. Strong expression of STAT5a and cytoplasmic p63 in MASC
reinforces this hypothesis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23931576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct;41(19):8926-42. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt706. Epub 2013
Aug 5.

A Common Docking Domain in Progesterone Receptor-B links DUSP6 and CK2 signaling 
to proliferative transcriptional programs in breast cancer cells.

Hagan CR(1), Knutson TP, Lange CA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Cell Signaling Program; Masonic
Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Cancer Cardiology Research Building, 2231
6th Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Progesterone receptors (PR) are transcription factors relevant to breast cancer
biology. Herein, we describe an N-terminal common docking (CD) domain in PR-B, a 
motif first described in mitogen-activated protein kinases. Binding studies
revealed PR-B interacts with dual-specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) via the CD
domain. Mutation of the PR-B CD domain (mCD) attenuated cell cycle progression
and expression of PR-B target genes (including STAT5A and Wnt1); mCD PR-B failed 
to undergo phosphorylation on Ser81, a ck2-dependent site required for expression
of these genes. PR-B Ser81 phosphorylation was dependent on binding with DUSP6
and required for recruitment of a transcriptional complex consisting of PR-B,
DUSP6 and ck2 to an enhancer region upstream of the Wnt1 promoter. STAT5 was
present at this site in the absence or presence of progestin. Furthermore,
phospho-Ser81 PR-B was recruited to the STAT5A gene upon progestin treatment,
suggestive of a feed-forward mechanism. Inhibition of JAK/STAT-signaling blocked 
progestin-induced STAT5A and Wnt1 expression. Our studies show that DUSP6 serves 
as a scaffold for ck2-dependent PR-B Ser81 phosphorylation and subsequent
PR-B-specific gene selection in coordination with STAT5. Coregulation of select
target genes by PR-B and STAT5 is likely a global mechanism required for growth
promoting programs relevant to mammary stem cell biology and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3799453
PMID: 23921636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Nov;138:273-80. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.06.008. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß is involved in the breed-dependent
transcriptional regulation of 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/<U+0394>(5)-<U+0394>(4)-isomerase
in adrenal gland of preweaning piglets.

Li X(1), Li R, Jia Y, Sun Z, Yang X, Sun Q, Zhao R.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology & Biochemistry, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, PR China.

The enzyme 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/<U+0394>(5)-<U+0394>(4)-isomerase (3ß-HSD) catalyzes
the biosynthesis of all steroid hormones. The molecular mechanisms regulating
porcine adrenal 3ß-HSD expression in different breeds are still poorly
understood. In this study, we aimed to compare the expression of 3ß-HSD between
preweaning purebred Large White (LW) and Erhualian (EHL) piglets and to explore
the potential factors regulating 3ß-HSD transcription. EHL had significantly
higher serum levels of cortisol (P<0.01) and testosterone (P<0.01), which were
associated with significantly higher expression of 3ß-HSD mRNA (P<0.01) and
protein (P<0.05) in the adrenal gland, compared with LW piglets. The 5' flanking 
region of the porcine 3ß-HSD gene showed significant sequence variations between 
breeds, and the sequence of EHL demonstrated an elevated promoter activity
(P<0.05) in luciferase reporter gene assay. Higher adrenal expression of 3ß-HSD
in EHL was accompanied with higher CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß)
expression (P<0.05), enriched histone H3 acetylation (P<0.05) and C/EBPß binding 
to 3ß-HSD promoter (P<0.05). In addition, higher androgen receptor (AR) (P=0.06) 
and lower glucocorticoid receptor (GR) (P<0.05) were detected in EHL.
Co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed interactions of C/EBPß with both AR and 
GR. These results indicate that the C/EBPß binding to 3ß-HSD promoter is
responsible, at least in part, for the breed-dependent 3ß-HSD expression in
adrenal gland of piglets. The sequence variations of 3ß-HSD promoter and the
interactions of AR and/or GR with C/EBPß may also participate in the regulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Sep;11(9):986-94. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0704. Epub
2013 Jun 27.

PTP1B contributes to calreticulin-induced metastatic phenotypes in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Wang XM(1), Shang L, Zhang Y, Hao JJ, Shi F, Luo W, Zhang TT, Wang BS, Yang Y,
Liu ZH, Zhan QM, Wang MR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (Hospital),
PUMC/CAMS, 17 Panjiayuan Nanli, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100021, China.
wangmr2015@cicams.ac.cn.

Calreticulin (CRT) is a Ca(2+)-binding chaperone protein that alters cellular
Ca(2+)-homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Previously it was shown
that CRT was overexpressed in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), and
elevated CRT expression promoted the migration and invasion of ESCC cells. In the
present study, the mechanisms underlying the role of CRT in esophageal carcinoma 
progression were investigated. Critically, depletion of CRT or protein-tyrosine
phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) reduced ESCC cell migration and metastasis to the lung,
whereas restoration of PTP1B protein levels rescued cell migration in
CRT-silenced cells. Knockdown of CRT decreased PTP1B protein expression by
reducing phosphorylation at the Y694 site of STAT5A, whereas knockdown of PTP1B
reduced ERK1/2 phosphorylation at T204. Immunohistochemical analysis of CRT and
PTP1B expression in ESCC patient tissues was strongly correlated. Importantly,
PTP1B expression was associated with poor survival in patients with CRT
overexpression. Overall, these data indicate a novel signaling pathway connecting
CRT, STAT5A, PTP1B, and ERK1/2 in the regulation of ESCC cell
migration.IMPLICATIONS: These findings suggest that PTP1B is a downstream
effector of CRT signaling, promotes tumor progression, and can potentially be
used as a new drug target for ESCC.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23814025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jan 1;134(1):55-64. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28348. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

CD82 regulates STAT5/IL-10 and supports survival of acute myelogenous leukemia
cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T, Yang J, Nobumoto A, Kataoka S, Tsuda M, Udaka K,
Yokoyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku,
Kochi, 783-8505, Japan; Research Fellow of the Japanese Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS), Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-8472, Japan.

We recently reported that adhesion molecule CD82 is aberrantly expressed in
CD34(+) /CD38(-) leukemia stem cells (LSCs). Here, we report the results of a
functional analysis of CD82 in CD34(+) /CD38(-) acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) 
cells. Short hairpin (sh)RNA-mediated downregulation of CD82 resulted in a
decrease in the level of IL-10. In contrast, forced expression of CD82 in
CD34(+)/CD38(+) AML cells by transduction with CD82-expressing lentiviral
particles resulted in an increase in the levels of IL-10. Notably, exposure of
CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells to IL-10 stimulated clonogenic growth of these cells.
Moreover, downregulation of CD82 by a shRNA dephosphorylated STAT5 in
CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells. On the other hand, forced expression of CD82 resulted 
in increase in the levels of p-STAT5 in CD34(+)/CD38(+) AML cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay results indicated that STAT5A binds to the
promoter region of the IL-10 gene, while reporter gene assay results indicated
stimulation of IL-10 expression at the transcriptional level. These results
suggest that CD82 positively regulates the STAT5/IL-10 signaling pathway.
Moreover, shRNA-mediated downregulation of CD82 expression in CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML
cells dephosphorylated STAT5 in immunodeficient mice. Taken together, our data
suggest that the CD82/STAT5/IL-10 signaling pathway is involved in the survival
of CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells and may thus be a promising therapeutic target for
eradication of AML LSCs.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23797738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;148(2):227-36. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014. Epub 2013 
May 5.

Differentiating the roles of STAT5B and STAT5A in human CD4+ T cells.

Jenks JA(1), Seki S, Kanai T, Huang J, Morgan AA, Scalco RC, Nath R, Bucayu R,
Wit JM, Al-Herz W, Ramadan D, Jorge AA, Bacchetta R, Hwa V, Rosenfeld R, Nadeau
KC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.

STAT5A and STAT5B are highly homologous proteins whose distinctive roles in human
immunity remain unclear. However, STAT5A sufficiency cannot compensate for STAT5B
defects, and human STAT5B deficiency, a rare autosomal recessive primary
immunodeficiency, is characterized by chronic lung disease, growth failure and
autoimmunity associated with regulatory T cell (Treg) reduction. We therefore
hypothesized that STAT5A and STAT5B play unique roles in CD4(+) T cells. Upon
knocking down STAT5A or STAT5B in human primary T cells, we found differentially 
regulated expression of FOXP3 and IL-2R in STAT5B knockdown T cells and
down-regulated Bcl-X only in STAT5A knockdown T cells. Functional ex vivo studies
in homozygous STAT5B-deficient patients showed reduced FOXP3 expression with
impaired regulatory function of STAT5B-null Treg cells, also of increased memory 
phenotype. These results indicate that STAT5B and STAT5A act partly as
non-redundant transcription factors and that STAT5B is more critical for Treg
maintenance and function in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4169138
PMID: 23773921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Leuk Res. 2013 Sep;37(9):1120-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.05.003. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

Polymorphisms in JAK/STAT signaling pathway genes and risk of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Chen Y(1), Lan Q, Zheng T, Zhao N, Holford TR, Lerro C, Dai M, Huang H, Liang J, 
Ma S, Leaderer B, Boyle P, Chanock S, Rothman N, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Hospital/Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China.

Impaired function of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway genes leads to immunodeficiency and
various hematopoietic disorders. We evaluated the association between genetic
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 JAK/STAT pathway genes (JAK3, STAT1, STAT2, STAT3,
STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT6, SCOS1, SCOS2, SCOS3, and SCOS4) and NHL risk in a
population-based case-control study of Connecticut women. We identified three
SNPs in STAT3 (rs12949918 and rs6503695) and STAT4 (rs932169) associated with NHL
risk after adjustment for multiple comparison. Our results suggest that genetic
variation in JAK/STAT pathway genes may play a role in lymphomagenesis and
warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3998836
PMID: 23768868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 18;110(25):10213-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1221243110. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Unphosphorylated STAT5A stabilizes heterochromatin and suppresses tumor growth.

Hu X(1), Dutta P, Tsurumi A, Li J, Wang J, Land H, Li WX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Tumor suppressors known to date impede cancer growth by arresting the cell cycle 
or promoting apoptosis. Here we show that unphosphorylated human STAT5A functions
as a tumor suppressor capable of repressing multiple oncogenes via
heterochromatin formation. Unphosphorylated STAT5A binds to heterochromatin
protein 1a (HP1a) and stabilizes heterochromatin. Expressing unphosphorylated
STAT5A or HP1a inhibits colon cancer growth in mouse xenograft models.
Transcriptome profiling shows that expressing an unphosphorylatable STAT5A has
similar effects to overexpressing HP1a in global gene expression. Notably, the
majority of the genes commonly repressed by unphosphorylated STAT5A and HP1a have
been implicated in cancer development. Finally, down-regulation, somatic
mutations, and deletions of STAT5 genes are found in certain human cancers. These
results suggest that unphosphorylated STAT5A may epigenetically suppress tumor
growth by promoting heterochromatin formation.

PMCID: PMC3690839
PMID: 23733954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Physiol. 2013 Aug 1;591(15):3789-804. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.257121. Epub
2013 Jun 3.

Ageing is associated with diminished muscle re-growth and myogenic precursor cell
expansion early after immobility-induced atrophy in human skeletal muscle.

Suetta C(1), Frandsen U, Mackey AL, Jensen L, Hvid LG, Bayer ML, Petersson SJ,
Schrøder HD, Andersen JL, Aagaard P, Schjerling P, Kjaer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sports Medicine and Center of Healthy Ageing, Faculty of Health
and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Hospital, Denmark.
csuetta@gmail.com

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2013 Aug 1;591(15):3671-2.

Recovery of skeletal muscle mass from immobilisation-induced atrophy is faster in
young than older individuals, yet the cellular mechanisms remain unknown. We
examined the cellular and molecular regulation of muscle recovery in young and
older human subjects subsequent to 2 weeks of immobility-induced muscle atrophy. 
Retraining consisted of 4 weeks of supervised resistive exercise in 9 older (OM: 
mean age) 67.3, range 61-74 yrs) and 11 young (YM: mean age 24.4, range 21-30
yrs) males. Measures of myofibre area (MFA), Pax7-positive satellite cells (SCs) 
associated with type I and type II muscle fibres, as well as gene expression
analysis of key growth and transcription factors associated with local skeletal
muscle milieu, were performed after 2 weeks immobility (Imm) and following 3 days
(+3d) and 4 weeks (+4wks) of retraining. OM demonstrated no detectable gains in
MFA (vastus lateralis muscle) and no increases in number of Pax7-positive SCs
following 4wks retraining, whereas YM increased their MFA (P < 0.05), number of
Pax7-positive cells, and had more Pax7-positive cells per type II fibre than OM
at +3d and +4wks (P < 0.05). No age-related differences were observed in mRNA
expression of IGF-1Ea, MGF, MyoD1 and HGF with retraining, whereas myostatin
expression levels were more down-regulated in YM compared to OM at +3d (P <
0.05). In conclusion, the diminished muscle re-growth after immobilisation in
elderly humans was associated with a lesser response in satellite cell
proliferation in combination with an age-specific regulation of myostatin. In
contrast, expression of local growth factors did not seem to explain the
age-related difference in muscle mass recovery.

PMCID: PMC3752458
PMID: 23732643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 19;288(29):21184-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.481119. Epub
2013 Jun 2.

STAT5 and prolactin participate in a positive autocrine feedback loop that
promotes angiogenesis.

Yang X(1), Meyer K, Friedl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA

We have shown previously that the murine prolactin/growth hormone family member
proliferin plays a pivotal role in angiogenesis induced by the FGF2/STAT5
signaling cascade. To delineate the signaling pathway downstream of STAT5 in the 
human system, where proliferin does not exist, we expressed constitutively active
(CA) or dominant-negative (DN) mutant STAT5A in hCMEC/D3 human brain endothelial 
cells. We found that conditioned medium from CA-STAT5A- but not from
DN-STAT5A-overexpressing endothelial cells (EC) is sufficient to induce EC
migration and tube formation but not proliferation, indicating that STAT5A
regulates the secretion of autocrine proangiogenic factors. We identified
prolactin (PRL) as a candidate autocrine factor. CA-STAT5A expression stimulates 
PRL production at the RNA and protein level, and STAT5A binds to the PRL promoter
region, suggesting direct transcriptional regulation. Medium conditioned by
CA-STAT5A-overexpressing EC induces phosphorylation of the PRL receptor and
activates MAPK. Knockdown of PRL expression by shRNA or blocking of PRL activity 
with neutralizing antibodies removed the CA-STAT5A-dependent proangiogenic
activity from the conditioned medium of EC. The addition of recombinant PRL
restores this activity. STAT5A-induced PRL in the conditioned medium can activate
STAT5, STAT1, and to a lesser extent STAT3 in hCMEC/D3 cells, suggesting the
existence of a positive feedback loop between STAT5 and PRL that promotes
angiogenesis. Furthermore, we find that VEGF, a potent proangiogenic factor, is
induced by activation of STAT5A, and VEGF induction depends on PRL expression.
These observations demonstrate a STAT5/PRL/VEGF signaling cascade in human brain 
EC and implicate PRL and VEGF as autocrine regulators of EC migration, invasion, 
and tube formation.

PMCID: PMC3774384
PMID: 23729680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2013 May 10;8(5):e63723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063723. Print 2013.

Hypoxic tumor kinase signaling mediated by STAT5A in development of
castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Røe K(1), Bratland Å, Vlatkovic L, Ragnum HB, Saelen MG, Olsen DR, Marignol L,
Ree AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
Kathrine.Roe@ahus.no

In this study, we hypothesized that androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) in
prostate cancer, although initially efficient, induces changes in the tumor
kinome, which subsequently promote development of castration-resistant (CR)
disease. Recognizing the correlation between tumor hypoxia and poor prognosis in 
prostate cancer, we further hypothesized that such changes might be influenced by
hypoxia. Microarrays with 144 kinase peptide substrates were applied to analyze
CWR22 prostate carcinoma xenograft samples from ADT-naïve, androgen-deprived
(AD), long-term AD (ADL), and CR disease stages. The impact of hypoxia was
assessed by matching the xenograft kinase activity profiles with those acquired
from hypoxic and normoxic prostate carcinoma cell cultures, whereas the clinical 
relevance was evaluated by analyzing prostatectomy tumor samples from patients
with locally advanced disease, either in ADT-naïve or early CR disease stages. By
using this novel peptide substrate microarray method we revealed high kinase
activity mediated by signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A)
in CR prostate cancer. Additionally, we uncovered high STAT5A kinase activity
already in regressing ADL xenografts, before renewed CR growth was evidenced.
Finally, since increased STAT5A kinase activity also was detected after exposing 
prostate carcinoma cells to hypoxia, we propose long-term ADT to induce tumor
hypoxia and stimulate STAT5A kinase activity, subsequently leading to renewed CR 
tumor growth. Hence, the study detected STAT5A as a candidate to be further
investigated for its potential as marker of advanced prostate cancer and as
possible therapeutic target protein.

PMCID: PMC3651196
PMID: 23675504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Oct 1;192:115-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.04.033.
Epub 2013 May 9.

Transcriptomic profiling of progesterone in the male fathead minnow (Pimephales
promelas) testis.

Chishti YZ(1), Feswick A, Munkittrick KR, Martyniuk CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada E2L 4L5.

P4 is a hormone with diverse functions that include roles in reproduction,
growth, and development. The objectives of this study were to examine the effects
of P4 on androgen production in the mature teleost testis and to identify
molecular signaling cascades regulated by P4 to improve understanding of its role
in male reproduction. Fathead minnow (FHM) testis explants were treated in vitro 
with two concentrations of P4 (10(-8) and 10(-6) M) for 6 and 12 h. P4
significantly increased testosterone (T) production in the FHM testis but did not
affect 11-ketotestosterone. Gene network analysis revealed that insulin growth
factor (Igf1) and tumor necrosis factor receptor (Tnfr) signaling was
significantly depressed with P4 treatment after 12h. There was also a 20%
increase in a gene network for follicle-stimulating hormone secretion and an 18% 
decrease in genes involved in vasopressin signaling. Genes in steroid metabolism 
(e.g. star, cyp19a, 11bhsd) were not significantly affected by P4 treatments in
this study, and it is hypothesized that pre-existing molecular machinery may be
more involved in the increased production of T rather than the de novo expression
of steroid-related transcripts and receptors. There was a significant decrease in
prostaglandin E synthase 3b (cytosolic) (ptges3b) after treatment with P4,
suggesting that there is cross talk between P4 and prostaglandin pathways in the 
reproductive testis. P4 has a role in regulating steroid production in the male
testis and may do so by modulating gene networks related to endocrine pathways,
such as Igf1, Tnfr, and vasopressin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jun;182(6):2264-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.02.044. Epub
2013 May 7.

STAT5A/B gene locus undergoes amplification during human prostate cancer
progression.

Haddad BR(1), Gu L, Mirtti T, Dagvadorj A, Vogiatzi P, Hoang DT, Bajaj R, Leiby
B, Ellsworth E, Blackmon S, Ruiz C, Curtis M, Fortina P, Ertel A, Liu C, Rui H,
Visakorpi T, Bubendorf L, Lallas CD, Trabulsi EJ, McCue P, Gomella L, Nevalainen 
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

The molecular mechanisms underlying progression of prostate cancer (PCa) to
castrate-resistant (CR) and metastatic disease are poorly understood. Our
previous mechanistic work shows that inhibition of transcription factor Stat5 by 
multiple alternative methods induces extensive rapid apoptotic death of
Stat5-positive PCa cells in vitro and inhibits PCa xenograft tumor growth in nude
mice. Furthermore, STAT5A/B induces invasive behavior of PCa cells in vitro and
in vivo, suggesting involvement of STAT5A/B in PCa progression. Nuclear STAT5A/B 
protein levels are increased in high-grade PCas, CR PCas, and distant metastases,
and high nuclear STAT5A/B expression predicts early disease recurrence and
PCa-specific death in clinical PCas. Based on these findings, STAT5A/B represents
a therapeutic target protein for advanced PCa. The mechanisms underlying
increased Stat5 protein levels in PCa are unclear. Herein, we demonstrate
amplification at the STAT5A/B gene locus in a significant fraction of clinical
PCa specimens. STAT5A/B gene amplification was more frequently found in PCas of
high histologic grades and in CR distant metastases. Quantitative in situ
analysis revealed that STAT5A/B gene amplification was associated with increased 
STAT5A/B protein expression in PCa. Functional studies showed that increased
STAT5A/B copy numbers conferred growth advantage in PCa cells in vitro and as
xenograft tumors in vivo. The work presented herein provides the first evidence
of somatic STAT5A/B gene amplification in clinical PCas.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3668029
PMID: 23660011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):4541-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-474577. Epub 2013 
Apr 17.

Discovery of somatic STAT5b mutations in large granular lymphocytic leukemia.

Rajala HL(1), Eldfors S, Kuusanmäki H, van Adrichem AJ, Olson T, Lagström S,
Andersson EI, Jerez A, Clemente MJ, Yan Y, Zhang D, Awwad A, Ellonen P,
Kallioniemi O, Wennerberg K, Porkka K, Maciejewski JP, Loughran TP Jr, Heckman C,
Mustjoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Unit Helsinki, Department of Medicine, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia is characterized by clonal expansion of
cytotoxic T cells or natural killer cells. Recently, somatic mutations in the
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) gene were discovered
in 28% to 40% of LGL leukemia patients. By exome and transcriptome sequencing of 
2 STAT3 mutation-negative LGL leukemia patients, we identified a recurrent,
somatic missense mutation (Y665F) in the Src-like homology 2 domain of the STAT5b
gene. Targeted amplicon sequencing of 211 LGL leukemia patients revealed 2
additional patients with STAT5b mutations (N642H), resulting in a total frequency
of 2% (4 of 211) of STAT5b mutations across all patients. The Y665F and N642H
mutant constructs increased the transcriptional activity of STAT5 and tyrosine
(Y694) phosphorylation, which was also observed in patient samples. The clinical 
course of the disease in patients with the N642H mutation was aggressive and
fatal, clearly different from typical LGL leukemia with a relatively favorable
outcome. This is the first time somatic STAT5 mutations are discovered in human
cancer and further emphasizes the role of STAT family genes in the pathogenesis
of LGL leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3668487
PMID: 23596048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(4):e1003295. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003295. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

The JAK-STAT transcriptional regulator, STAT-5, activates the ATM DNA damage
pathway to induce HPV 31 genome amplification upon epithelial differentiation.

Hong S(1), Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) must evade innate immune surveillance to
establish persistent infections and to amplify viral genomes upon
differentiation. Members of the JAK-STAT family are important regulators of the
innate immune response and HPV proteins downregulate expression of STAT-1 to
allow for stable maintenance of viral episomes. STAT-5 is another member of this 
pathway that modulates the inflammatory response and plays an important role in
controlling cell cycle progression in response to cytokines and growth factors.
Our studies show that HPV E7 activates STAT-5 phosphorylation without altering
total protein levels. Inhibition of STAT-5 phosphorylation by the drug pimozide
abolishes viral genome amplification and late gene expression in differentiating 
keratinocytes. In contrast, treatment of undifferentiated cells that stably
maintain episomes has no effect on viral replication. Knockdown studies show that
the STAT-5ß isoform is mainly responsible for this activity and that this is
mediated through the ATM DNA damage response. A downstream target of STAT-5, the 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) contributes to the effects
on members of the ATM pathway. Overall, these findings identify an important new 
regulatory mechanism by which the innate immune regulator, STAT-5, promotes HPV
viral replication through activation of the ATM DNA damage response.

PMCID: PMC3616964
PMID: 23593005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun 1;304(11):C1091-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00343.2012. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Regulation of adipocyte differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells by PDZRN3.

Honda T(1), Ishii A, Inui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

PDZRN3, a member of the PDZRN (or LNX) family of proteins, is essential for the
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells into myotubes, but it plays an
inhibitory role in the differentiation of these cells into osteoblasts. Given
that mesenchymal stem cells also differentiate into adipocytes, we examined the
possible role of PDZRN3 in adipogenesis in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. The
expression of PDZRN3 decreased at both the mRNA and protein levels during
adipogenic differentiation. RNAi-mediated depletion of PDZRN3 enhanced the
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells into adipocytes as assessed on the basis of lipid
accumulation. The upregulation of aP2 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP)-ß during adipocyte differentiation was also enhanced in the
PDZRN3-depleted cells, as was the induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), an upstream regulator of aP2 and C/EBPa, at both the mRNA and
protein levels. Among transcription factors that control the expression of PPAR<U+03B3>,
we found that STAT5b, but not STAT5a, was upregulated in PDZRN3-depleted cells at
both mRNA and protein levels. Tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b, but not that of
STAT5a, was also enhanced at an early stage of differentiation by PDZRN3
depletion. In addition, the expression of C/EBPß during the induction of
differentiation was enhanced at the mRNA and protein levels in PDZRN3-depleted
cells. Our results thus suggest that PDZRN3 negatively regulates adipogenesis in 
3T3-L1 cells through downregulation of STAT5b and C/EBPß and consequent
suppression of PPAR<U+03B3> expression.

PMID: 23576576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60902. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060902. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Gain-of-function of Stat5 leads to excessive granulopoiesis and lethal
extravasation of granulocytes to the lung.

Lin WC(1), Schmidt JW, Creamer BA, Triplett AA, Wagner KU.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

The Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5 (Stat5) plays a
significant role in normal hematopoiesis and a variety of hematopoietic
malignancies. Deficiency in Stat5 causes impaired cytokine-mediated proliferation
and survival of progenitors and their differentiated descendants along major
hematopoietic lineages such as erythroid, lymphoid, and myeloid cells.
Overexpression and persistent activation of Stat5 are sufficient for neoplastic
transformation and development of multi-lineage leukemia in a transplant model.
Little is known, however, whether a continuous activation of this signal
transducer is essential for the maintenance of hematopoietic malignancies. To
address this issue, we developed transgenic mice that express a hyperactive
mutant of Stat5 in hematopoietic progenitors and derived lineages in a
ligand-controlled manner. In contrast to the transplant model, expression of
mutant Stat5 did not adversely affect normal hematopoiesis in the presence of
endogenous wildtype Stat5 alleles. However, the gain-of-function of this signal
transducer in mice that carry Stat5a/b hypomorphic alleles resulted in abnormally
high numbers of circulating granulocytes that caused severe airway obstruction.
Downregulation of hyperactive Stat5 in diseased animals restored normal
granulopoiesis, which also resulted in a swift clearance of granulocytes from the
lung. Moreover, we demonstrate that Stat5 promotes the initiation and maintenance
of severe granulophilia in a cell autonomous manner. The results of this study
show that the gain-of-function of Stat5 causes excessive granulopoiesis and
prolonged survival of granulocytes in circulation. Collectively, our findings
underline the critical importance of Stat5 in maintaining a normal balance
between myeloid and lymphoid cells during hematopoiesis, and we provide direct
evidence for a function of Stat5 in granulophilia-associated pulmonary
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3614894
PMID: 23565285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jun;43(6):1588-97. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242754. Epub 2013 May 
17.

Pathophysiological hypoxia affects the redox state and IL-2 signalling of human
CD4+ T cells and concomitantly impairs survival and proliferation.

Gaber T(1), Tran CL, Schellmann S, Hahne M, Strehl C, Hoff P, Radbruch A,
Burmester GR, Buttgereit F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité University
Hospital, Berlin, Germany. gaber@drfz.de

Inflamed areas are characterized by infiltration of immune cells, local hypoxia
and alterations of cellular redox states. We investigated the impact of hypoxia
on survival, proliferation, cytokine secretion, intracellular energy and redox
state of human CD4(+) T cells. We found that pathophysiological hypoxia (<2% O2 )
significantly decreased CD4(+) T-cell survival after mitogenic stimulation. This 
effect was not due to an increased caspase-3/7-mediated apoptosis or
adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP) consumption/depletion. However, the ability of
stimulated T cells to proliferate was reduced under hypoxic conditions, despite
increased expression of CD25. Pathophysiological hypoxia was also found to modify
intracellular ROS (iROS) levels in stimulated T cells over time as compared with 
levels found in normoxia. Physiological hypoxia (5% O2 ) did not decrease CD4(+) 
T-cell survival and proliferation or modify iROS levels as compared with
normoxia. We conclude that pathophysiological hypoxia affects T-cell
proliferation and viability via disturbed IL-2R signalling downstream of STAT5a
phosphorylation, but not as a result of impaired cellular energy homeostasis. We 
suggest iROS links early events in T-cell stimulation to the inhibition of the
lymphoproliferative response under pathophysiological hypoxic conditions. The
level of iROS may therefore act as a mediator of immune functions leading to
down-regulation of long-term T-cell activity in inflamed tissues.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23519896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. IUBMB Life. 2013 May;65(5):462-71. doi: 10.1002/iub.1152. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

IGF-1 stimulated upregulation of cyclin D1 is mediated via STAT5 signaling
pathway in neuronal cells.

Kalita A(1), Gupta S, Singh P, Surolia A, Banerjee K.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna
Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STATs) regulate various target 
genes such as cyclin D1, MYC, and BCL2 in nonneuronal cells which contribute
towards progression as well as prevention of apoptosis and are involved in
differentiation and cell survival. However, in neuronal cells, the role of STATs 
in the activation and regulation of these target genes and their signaling
pathways are still not well established. In this study, a robust cyclin D1
expression was observed following IGF-1 stimulation in SY5Y cells as well as
neurospheres. JAK/STAT pathway was shown to be involved in this upregulation. A
detailed promoter analysis revealed that the specific STAT involved was STAT5,
which acted as a positive regulatory element for cyclin D1 expression.
Overexpression studies confirmed increase in cyclin D1 expression in response to 
STAT5a and STAT5b constructs when compared to dominant-negative STAT5. siRNA
targeting STAT5, diminished the cyclin D1 expression, further confirming that
STAT5 specifically regulated cyclin D1 in neuronal cells. Together, these
findings shed new light on the mechanism of IGF-1 mediated upregulation of cyclin
D1 expression in neural cell lines as well as in neural stem cells via the
JAK/STAT5 signaling cascade.

Copyright © 2013 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 23504816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):376-82. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.01.005. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Interference of propofol with signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 
activation and cardioprotection by remote ischemic preconditioning during
coronary artery bypass grafting.

Kottenberg E(1), Musiolik J(2), Thielmann M(3), Jakob H(3), Peters J(4), Heusch
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Anästhesiologie und Intensivmedizin, Universität Duisburg-Essen,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. Electronic address:
eva.kottenberg@uni-duisburg-essen.de. (2)Institut für Pathophysiologie,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Klinik
für Thorax- und Kardiovaskuläre Chirurgie, Universität Duisburg-Essen,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. (4)Klinik für Anästhesiologie und
Intensivmedizin, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Sep;146(3):732-3.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Nov;146(5):1305-6.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Sep;146(3):733-4.

OBJECTIVE: Remote ischemic preconditioning protects the myocardium from
ischemia/reperfusion injury. We recently identified protection by remote ischemic
preconditioning to be associated with the activation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 in left ventricular biopsy specimens of patients
undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting during isoflurane anesthesia. Because 
remote ischemic preconditioning did not protect the heart during propofol
anesthesia, we hypothesized that propofol anesthesia interferes with signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation.
METHODS: In a randomized, single-blind, placebo-controlled, prospective study, we
analyzed an array of established cardioprotective proteins during propofol
anesthesia with or without remote ischemic preconditioning in 24 nondiabetic
patients with 3-vessel coronary artery disease.
RESULTS: Remote ischemic preconditioning (n = 12) compared with no remote
ischemic preconditioning (n = 12) failed to decrease the area under the troponin 
I time curve (273 ± 184 ng/mL × 72 hours vs 365 ± 301 ng/mL × 72 hours; P =
.374). Although phosphorylation of several protein kinases was increased from
baseline to reperfusion, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
phosphorylation was not increased and was not different between the remote
ischemic preconditioning and no remote ischemic preconditioning groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Remote ischemic preconditioning during propofol anesthesia did not
evoke either signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation or
cardioprotection, implying interaction of propofol with cardioprotective
signaling upstream of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23465551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncotarget. 2012 Dec;3(12):1669-87.

STAT5 triggers BCR-ABL1 mutation by mediating ROS production in chronic myeloid
leukaemia.

Warsch W(1), Grundschober E, Berger A, Gille L, Cerny-Reiterer S, Tigan AS,
Hoelbl-Kovacic A, Valent P, Moriggl R, Sexl V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Veterinary University Vienna,
Veterinaerplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jun 15;12(12):1813-4.

We recently reported that chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) patients harbour high
levels of STAT5 when they progress to advanced phases of disease. Advanced
disease is characterized by an increased incidence of BCR-ABL1 mutations. We now 
describe a highly significant correlation between STAT5 expression and the
incidence of BCR-ABL1 mutations in primary CML. Forced expression of STAT5 in
murine BCR-ABL1 transformed cells sufficed to enhance the production of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and to trigger DNA damage. STAT5-mediated ROS production is 
independent of JAK2 but requires concomitant BCR-ABL1 signalling as forced STAT5 
expression in untransformed BCR-ABL1 negative cells has no impact on ROS levels. 
Only within the context of a BCR-ABL1 positive cell does STAT5 transcriptionally 
regulate a target gene or set of genes that causes the enhanced ROS production.
Our study suggests the existence of a feed-forward loop accelerating disease
progression, in which BCR-ABL1 enhances its own mutation rate in a STAT5-ROS
dependent manner. This model explains the increased occurrence of
inhibitor-resistant BCR-ABL1 mutations in advanced disease stages driven and
characterized by high STAT5 expression.

PMCID: PMC3681503
PMID: 23458731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057326. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Genome wide mapping reveals PDE4B as an IL-2 induced STAT5 target gene in
activated human PBMCs and lymphoid cancer cells.

Nagy ZS(1), Ross JA, Rodriguez G, Balint BL, Szeles L, Nagy L, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
Texas, United States of America. nagyzsu@med.unideb.hu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(2). doi:10.1371/annotation/cb55d096-61f8-46de-b58f-81a872be6dd3.

IL-2 is the primary growth factor for promoting survival and proliferation of
activated T cells that occurs following engagement of the Janus Kinase
(JAK)1-3/and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) 5 signaling 
pathway. STAT5 has two isoforms: STAT5A and STAT5B (commonly referred to as
STAT5) which, in T cells, play redundant roles transcribing cell cycle and
survival genes. As such, inhibition of STAT5 by a variety of mechanisms can
rapidly induce apoptosis in certain lymphoid tumor cells, suggesting that it and 
its target genes represent therapeutic targets to control certain lymphoid
diseases. To search for these molecules we aligned IL-2 regulated genes detected 
by Affymetrix gene expression microarrays with the STAT5 cistrome identified by
chip-on-ChIP analysis in an IL-2-dependent human leukemia cell line, Kit225.
Select overlapping genes were then validated using qRT(2)PCR medium-throughput
arrays in human PHA-activated PBMCs. Of 19 putative genes, one key regulator of T
cell receptor signaling, PDE4B, was identified as a novel target, which was
readily up-regulated at the protein level (3 h) in IL-2 stimulated, activated
human PBMCs. Surprisingly, only purified CD8+ primary T-cells expressed PDE4B,
but not CD4+ cells. Moreover, PDE4B was found to be highly expressed in CD4+
lymphoid cancer cells, which suggests that it may represent a physiological role 
unique to the CD8+ and lymphoid cancer cells and thus might represent a target
for pharmaceutical intervention for certain lymphoid diseases.

PMCID: PMC3581501
PMID: 23451206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(9):1797-808. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01410-12. Epub 2013 Feb 
25.

Fyn regulates adipogenesis by promoting PIKE-A/STAT5a interaction.

Tse MC(1), Liu X, Yang S, Ye K, Chan CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Fyn is a tyrosine kinase with multiple roles in a variety of cellular processes. 
Here we report that Fyn is a new kinase involved in adipocyte differentiation.
Elevated Fyn protein is detected specifically in the adipocytes of obese mice.
Moreover, Fyn expression increases progressively in 3T3-L1 cells during in vitro 
adipogenesis, which correlates with its kinase activity. Inhibition of Fyn by
either genetic or pharmacological manipulation restrains the 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
from fully differentiating into mature adipocytes. Mechanistically, Fyn regulates
the activity of the adipogenic transcription factor signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) through enhancing its interaction with the
GTPase phosphoinositide 3-kinase enhancer A (PIKE-A). The STAT5a activity is
therefore reduced in Fyn- or PIKE-ablated adipose tissues, leading to diminished 
expression of adipogenic markers and adipocyte differentiation. Our data thus
demonstrate a novel functional interaction between Fyn, PIKE-A, and STAT5a in
mediating adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3624174
PMID: 23438599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Development. 2013 Mar;140(5):1079-89. doi: 10.1242/dev.085720.

The transcriptional co-factor RIP140 regulates mammary gland development by
promoting the generation of key mitogenic signals.

Nautiyal J(1), Steel JH, Mane MR, Oduwole O, Poliandri A, Alexi X, Wood N,
Poutanen M, Zwart W, Stingl J, Parker MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Nuclear receptor interacting protein (Nrip1), also known as RIP140, is a
co-regulator for nuclear receptors that plays an essential role in ovulation by
regulating the expression of the epidermal growth factor-like family of growth
factors. Although several studies indicate a role for RIP140 in breast cancer,
its role in the development of the mammary gland is unclear. By using RIP140-null
and RIP140 transgenic mice, we demonstrate that RIP140 is an essential factor for
normal mammary gland development and that it functions by mediating oestrogen
signalling. RIP140-null mice exhibit minimal ductal elongation with no
side-branching, whereas RIP140-overexpressing mice show increased cell
proliferation and ductal branching with age. Tissue recombination experiments
demonstrate that RIP140 expression is required in both the mammary epithelial and
stromal compartments for ductal elongation during puberty and that loss of RIP140
leads to a catastrophic loss of the mammary epithelium, whereas RIP140
overexpression augments the mammary basal cell population and shifts the
progenitor/differentiated cell balance within the luminal cell compartment
towards the progenitors. For the first time, we present a genome-wide global view
of oestrogen receptor-a (ERa) binding events in the developing mammary gland,
which unravels 881 ERa binding sites. Unbiased evaluation of several ERa binding 
sites for RIP140 co-occupancy reveals selectivity and demonstrates that RIP140
acts as a co-regulator with ERa to regulate directly the expression of
amphiregulin (Areg), the progesterone receptor (Pgr) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5a (Stat5a), factors that influence key mitogenic
pathways that regulate normal mammary gland development.

PMCID: PMC3583043
PMID: 23404106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 1;73(7):2052-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3955. Epub
2013 Feb 11.

Differential contributions of STAT5A and STAT5B to stress protection and tyrosine
kinase inhibitor resistance of chronic myeloid leukemia stem/progenitor cells.

Casetti L(1), Martin-Lannerée S, Najjar I, Plo I, Augé S, Roy L, Chomel JC,
Lauret E, Turhan AG, Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.

STAT5 fulfills essential roles in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) self-renewal and 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), a prototypical stem cell malignancy. However, the
specific contributions of the two related genes STAT5A and STAT5B have not been
determined. In this study, we used a RNAi-based strategy to establish
participation of these genes to CML disease and persistence following targeted
therapy. We showed that STAT5A/STAT5B double-knockdown triggers CML cell
apoptosis and suppresses both normal and CML HSC long-term clonogenic potential. 
STAT5A and STAT5B exhibited similar prosurvival activity, but STAT5A attenuation 
alone was ineffective at impairing growth of normal and CML CD34(+) cells
isolated at diagnosis. In contrast, STAT5A attenuation was sufficient to enhance 
basal oxidative stress and DNA damage of normal CD34(+) and CML cells.
Furthermore, it weakened the ability to manage exogenous oxidative stress,
increased p53 (TRP53)/CHK-2 (CHEK2) stress pathway activation, and enhanced
prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD)-3 (EGLN3) mRNA expression. Only STAT5A and its
transactivation domain-deficient mutant STAT5A<U+0394>749 specifically rescued these
activities. STAT5A attenuation was also active at inhibiting growth of CML
CD34(+) cells from patients with acquired resistance to imatinib. Our findings
show that STAT5A has a selective role in contributing to stress resistance
through unconventional mechanisms, offering new opportunities to eradicate the
most primitive and tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant CML cells with an
additional potential to eradicate persistent stem cell populations.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23400594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Autoimmun. 2013 May;42:117-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.01.011. Epub 2013 Feb
8.

SIRT1 activation protects against autoimmune T cell-driven retinal disease in
mice via inhibition of IL-2/Stat5 signaling.

Gardner PJ(1), Joshi L, Lee RW, Dick AD, Adamson P, Calder VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London EC1V 9EL, UK.
p.gardner@ucl.ac.uk

Sirtuins are a mammalian family of NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylases that
regulate cell function and survival as well as regulating cell responses under
inflammatory conditions. SIRT1 activator treatment in vitro using mouse pLN
cells, normal human and ocular Behçet's disease donor PBMC resulted in suppressed
T cell proliferation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Our data suggest a
novel mechanism by which SIRT1 activators contribute to suppression of T cell
proliferation by both down regulating STAT5A/B expression and suppression of
pSTAT5A/B signaling in response to IL-2. Experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis
(EAU) in B10.RIII mice is an antigen-specific cell-mediated model of human
intra-ocular inflammatory disease. Infiltrating CD4(+) T cells in the retina
secrete both IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 and are accompanied by inflammatory granulocytes and
macrophages which together result in retinal destruction. Oral SIRT1 activator
treatment administered to EAU mice suppressed disease with an accompanying
reduction in retinal leukocytic infiltrate, suppressed antigen-specific T cell
responses and marked suppression of innate and adaptive pro-inflammatory cytokine
production in the eye including IL-6, IL-17A and IFN-<U+03B3>. In vivo SIRT1 activator
treatment also suppressed production of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-6, TGFß and IL-22 by
pLN cells. Oral SIRT1 activator treatment administered to mice during the
efferent phase (days7-14) of EAU was effective at suppressing disease. These
observations demonstrate that SIRT1 activation is anti-inflammatory in nature and
future targeted activation of SIRT1 shows promise as a potential treatment for
non-infectious intra-ocular disorders such as uveitis associated with Behçets
disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23395551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;33(10):823-8.

[Effects of humanized interleukin 21 on anti-leukemic activity of cytokine
induced killer cells and the mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao N(1), Zhao MF, Rajbhandary S, Lu WY, Zhu HB, Xiao X, Deng Q, Li YM.

Author information: 
(1)First Center Clinical College of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of humanized interleukin 21 (IL-21) on
anti-leukemic activity of cytokine induced killer(CIK) cells derived from
peripheral blood(PB) and the mechanism.
METHODS: Mononuclear cells were separated from peripheral blood and cultured with
cytokines to induce CIK cells. Proliferation of CIK cells with or without IL-21
stimulation and their cytotoxic activity against K562 cells was measured by MTT
method. IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) and immunophenotypes of CIK cells were measured
by flow cytometry. The expression of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a), tumor necrosis factor-ß (TNF-ß), perforin, granzyme A, granzyme
B, FasL and NKG2D mRNA were measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. FasL on the
surface of CIK cells and intra-cellular perforin and granzyme B of CIK cells were
measured by flow cytometry. The concentration of IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a in the cultured 
supernatant were measured by enzyme immunoassay. JAK-STAT signalling pathway of
CIK cells were measured by Western-blot.
RESULTS: After IL-21 stimulation, the proportion of CIK cells increased from
(17.5 ± 4.7)% to (26.5 ± 2.1)%. Cytotoxic activity against K562 cells by CIK
cells increased from (22.8 ± 2.8)% to(44.6 ± 8.3)%. The expression of IL-21R
increased about 2 folds. The mRNA expression of IFN-<U+03B3> increased almost 2 folds
from (0.3760 ± 0.2358) to (0.7786 ± 0.2493), TNF-a increased almost 2 folds from 
(0.6557 ± 0.1598) to (1.3145 ± 0.2136), perforin increased almost 1.5 folds from 
(0.6361 ± 0.1457) to (0.9831 ± 0.1265), granzyme B increased almost 2 folds from 
(0.4084 ± 0.1589) to (0.7319 ± 0.1639), FasL increased almost 2 folds from
(0.4015 ± 0.2842) to (0.7381 ± 0.2568), the expression of granzyme A, TNF-ß and
NKG2D were similar with control. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the
expression of FasL of CIK cells was higher than that of control (0.19% vs 0.04%),
the expression of perforin increased from 35.28% to 53.16%, and the expression of
granzyme B increased from 43.16% to 78.82%. The concentration of IFN-<U+03B3> in the
culture supernatant increased almost 2 folds from (25.8 ± 6.1) ng/L to (56.0 ±
2.3) ng/L, and TNF-a increased almost 3 folds from (5.64 ± 0.61) µg/L to (15.14 ±
0.93) µg/L. Western blot showed that the expression of STAT1 and STAT5a had no
significant differences, but the expression of STAT3 and STAT5b were higher than 
that of control.
CONCLUSION: Humanized IL-21 could enhance the anti-leukemic activity of CIK cells
via increasing IL-21R, perforin, granzyme B, FasL, IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a, as well as
activating JAK-STAT signaling pathway. These data indicate that IL-21 has a
potential clinical value in the enhancement of anti-leukemic immunotherapy.

PMID: 23384903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Metab Eng. 2013 Mar;16:87-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2012.12.004. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Stable inhibition of mmu-miR-466h-5p improves apoptosis resistance and protein
production in CHO cells.

Druz A(1), Son YJ, Betenbaugh M, Shiloach J.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Core Laboratory NIDDK, NIH, Building 14A, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

MiRNAs have been shown to be involved in regulation of multiple cellular
processes including apoptosis. Since a single miRNA can affect the expression of 
several genes, the utilization of miRNAs for apoptosis engineering in mammalian
cells can be more efficient than the conventional approach of manipulating a
single gene. Mmu-miR-466h-5p was previously shown to have a pro-apoptotic role in
CHO cells by reducing the expression of several anti-apoptotic genes and its
transient inhibition delayed both the activation of Caspase-3/7 and the loss of
cell viability. The present study evaluates the effect of stable inhibition of
mmu-miR-466h-5p in CHO cells on their ability to resist apoptosis onset and their
production properties. The expression of mmu-miR-466h-5p in the engineered
anti-miR-466h CHO cell line was significantly lower than in the negative control 
and the parental CHO cells. These engineered cells reached higher maximum viable 
cell density and extended viability compared with negative control and parental
CHO cells in batch cell cultures which resulted in the 53.8% and 41.6% increase
of integral viable cells. The extended viability of anti-miR-466h CHO cells was
the result of delayed Caspase-3/7 activation by more than 35h, and the increased 
levels of its anti-apoptotic gene targets (smo, stat5a, dad1, birc6, and bcl2l2) 
to between 2.1- and 12.5-fold compared with the negative control CHO in apoptotic
conditions. The expression of secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) increased 43% 
and the cell-specific productivity increased 11% in the stable pools of
anti-miR-466h CHO compared with the stable pools of negative control CHO cells.
The above results demonstrate the potential of this novel approach to create more
productive cell lines through stable manipulation of specific miRNA expression.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3644357
PMID: 23376592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Exp Dermatol. 2013 Feb;22(2):119-24. doi: 10.1111/exd.12086.

The antihistamines clemastine and desloratadine inhibit STAT3 and c-Myc
activities and induce apoptosis in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cell lines.

Döbbeling U(1), Waeckerle-Men Y, Zabel F, Graf N, Kündig TM, Johansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Mycosis fungoides and its leukaemic counterpart Sézary syndrome are the most
frequent cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL), and there is no cure for these
diseases. We evaluated the effect of clinically approved antihistamines on the
growth of CTCL cell lines. CTCL cell lines as well as blood lymphocytes from
patients with Sézary syndrome were cultured with antihistamines, and the cell
were analysed for proliferation, apoptosis and expression of programmed death
molecules and transcription factors. The two antihistamines clemastine and
desloratadine, currently used for symptom alleviation in allergy, induced potent 
reduction of the activities of the constitutively active transcription factors
c-Myc, STAT3, STAT5a and STAT5b in mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome cell
lines. This inhibition was followed by apoptosis and cell death, especially in
the Sézary syndrome-derived cell line Hut78 that also showed increased expression
of the programmed death-1 (PD-1) after clemastine treatment. In lymphocytes
isolated from Sézary syndrome patients, the CD4-positive fraction underwent
apoptosis after clemastine treatment, while CD4-negative lymphocytes were little 
affected. Because both c-Myc and STAT transcription factors are highly expressed 
in proliferating tumours, their inhibition by clemastine, desloratadine and other
inhibitors could complement established chemotherapies not only for cutaneous
T-cell lymphomas but perhaps also other cancers.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23362870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Am J Blood Res. 2013;3(1):58-70. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Suppression of STAT5A and STAT5B chronic myeloid leukemia cells via siRNA and
antisense-oligonucleotide applications with the induction of apoptosis.

Kaymaz BT(1), Selvi N, Gokbulut AA, Aktan C, Gündüz C, Saydam G, Sahin F,
Cetintas VB, Baran Y, Kosova B.

Author information: 
(1)Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins function in
the JAK/STAT signaling pathway and are activated by phosphorylation. As a result 
of this signaling event, they affect many cellular processes including cell
growth, proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Increases in the
expressions of STAT5A and STAT5B play a remarkable role in the development of
leukemia in which leukemic cells gain uncontrolled proliferation and angiogenesis
ability. At the same time, these cells acquire ability to escape from apoptosis
and host immune system. In this study, we aimed to suppress STAT-5A and -5B genes
in K562 CML cells by siRNA transfection and antisense oligonucleotides (ODN)
targeting and then to evaluate apoptosis rate. Finally, we compared the
transfection efficiencies of these approaches. Quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blot results indicated that STAT expressions were downregulated at both mRNA and 
protein levels following siRNA transfection. However, electroporation mediated
ODN transfection could only provide limited suppression rates at mRNA and protein
levels. Moreover, it was displayed that apoptosis were significantly induced in
siRNA treated leukemic cells as compared to ODN treated cells. As a conclusion,
siRNA applications were found to be more effective in terms of gene silencing
when compared to ODN treatment based on the higher apoptosis and mRNA suppression
rates. siRNA application could be a new and alternative curative method as a
supporting therapy in CML patients.

PMCID: PMC3555192
PMID: 23358828  [PubMed]


188. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 Mar;209(3):167-72. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2012.12.005. Epub
2013 Jan 26.

Mammary analog secretory carcinoma of salivary glands: a report of 2 cases with
expression of basal/myoepithelial markers (calponin, CD10 and p63 protein).

Laco J(1), vajdler M Jr, Andrejs J, Hrubala D, Hácová M, Vanecek T, Skálová A,
Ryka A.

Author information: 
(1)The Fingerland Department of Pathology, Charles University Faculty of Medicine
and Faculty Hospital Hradec Králové, Czech Republic. lacoj@lfhk.cuni.cz

Mammary analog secretory carcinoma (MASC) of salivary glands is a recently
described neoplasm with favorable outcome. We describe 2 cases of MASC occurring 
in a 34-year-old female and a 58-year-old male, both presenting with a swelling
of upper lip and right parotid gland, measuring 15 and 20mm, respectively.
Without adjuvant treatment, both patients have been free of disease for 15 months
and 12 months since the operation. Microscopically, both tumors were cystic and
showed tubular and cystopapillary architecture. The tumor cells had round to oval
nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Presence of eosinophilic material was evident 
within cystic spaces. Immunohistochemically, both tumors expressed cytokeratins
(CK), CK7, CK8, CK18, epithelial membrane antigen, vimentin, S-100 protein,
mammaglobin, and STAT5a (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a).
Interestingly, both tumors showed variable expression of basal/myoepithelial
markers. In one case, we observed diffuse expression of calponin and focal
expression of p63 whereas expression of CD10 was absent. In the second case, the 
staining of calponin was negative, but there was focal expression of both p63 and
CD10. Both neoplasms harbored the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion transcript as proved by
RT-PCR. Although previously reported only rarely, we conclude that MASC may show 
expression of basal/myoepithelial markers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23357688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 8;288(10):7137-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.408765. Epub 2013 
Jan 22.

Forskolin-inducible cAMP pathway negatively regulates T-cell proliferation by
uncoupling the interleukin-2 receptor complex.

Rodriguez G(1), Ross JA, Nagy ZS, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, Texas 79902, USA.

Cytokine-mediated regulation of T-cell activity involves a complex interplay
between key signal transduction pathways. Determining how these signaling
pathways cross-talk is essential to understanding T-cell function and
dysfunction. In this work, we provide evidence that cross-talk exists between at 
least two signaling pathways: the Jak3/Stat5 and cAMP-mediated cascades. The
adenylate cyclase activator forskolin (Fsk) significantly increased intracellular
cAMP levels and reduced proliferation of the human T-cells via inhibition of cell
cycle regulatory genes but did not induce apoptosis. To determine this inhibitory
mechanism, effects of Fsk on IL-2 signaling was investigated. Fsk treatment of
MT-2 and Kit 225 T-cells inhibited IL-2-induced Stat5a/b tyrosine and serine
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and DNA binding activity. Fsk treatment
also uncoupled IL-2 induced association of the IL-2Rß and <U+03B3>c chain, consequently 
blocking Jak3 activation. Interestingly, phosphoamino acid analysis revealed that
Fsk-treated cells resulted in elevated serine phosphorylation of Jak3 but not
Stat5, suggesting that Fsk can negatively regulate Jak3 activity possibly
mediated through PKA. Indeed, in vitro kinase assays and small molecule
inhibition studies indicated that PKA can directly serine phosphorylate and
functionally inactivate Jak3. Taken together, these findings suggest that Fsk
activation of adenylate cyclase and PKA can negatively regulate IL-2 signaling at
multiple levels that include IL-2R complex formation and Jak3/Stat5 activation.

PMCID: PMC3591623
PMID: 23341462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Feb;60:112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.11.004. Epub 2012
Dec 4.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of new N-alkylcarbazole derivatives as STAT3 
inhibitors: preliminary study.

Saturnino C(1), Palladino C, Napoli M, Sinicropi MS, Botta A, Sala M, Carcereri
de Prati A, Novellino E, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, University of Salerno, Via Ponte Don
Melillo 8, 84024 Fisciano (SA), Italy. saturnino@unisa.it

The signalling pathway of Janus tyrosine Kinases-Signal Transducers and
Activators of Transcription (JAK-STAT) is activated by a number of cytokines,
hormones (GH, erythropoietin and prolactin), and growth factors. JAK-STAT
signalling is involved in regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. These activities are due to different members of JAK-STAT family
consisting of: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, Tyk2 and STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a,
STAT5b, STAT6. Recent studies suggest a key role for STAT family proteins, in
particular for STAT3, in selectively inducing and maintaining a pro-carcinogenic 
inflammatory microenvironment, that promote tumour cells transformation.
Moreover, a striking correlation between cancer development/progression and STAT3
persistent activation exists, probably due to STAT3 promoting of the
pro-oncogenic inflammatory pathways, like NF-kB, IL-6 and JAK family kinases.
Recent study demonstrated that carbazoles can inhibit STAT3 mediated
transcription. From these evidences, STAT3 represents a therapeutic target, so we
have synthesized a new set of N-alkylcarbazole derivatives substituted in
positions 2, 4 and 6, to evaluate their activity on STAT3. Some of these
compounds showed an interesting activity as STAT3 selective inhibitors; in
particular, compounds 9a 9b and 9c revealed to inhibit the STAT3 activation for
the 50%, 90% and 95%, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23287056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(3):1622-36. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1310. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Sequential activation of genetic programs in mouse mammary epithelium during
pregnancy depends on STAT5A/B concentration.

Yamaji D(1), Kang K, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20815,
USA.

The transcription factors Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)
5A/B mediate prolactin-induced mammary development during pregnancy. However, it 
is not clear how the different processes, expansion and maturation of alveolar
precursor cells and the differential induction of milk protein genes are
regulated on a molecular level. We have used mouse genetics and genome-wide
analyses to determine how altering concentrations of STAT5A and STAT5B impacts
mammary epithelial development during pregnancy and the regulation of target
genes. The presence of only a single Stat5a or Stat5b allele was sufficient for
the establishment of histologically undifferentiated alveolar units and two
alleles permitted the execution of a differentiation program similar to that
found with all four alleles. While one copy of Stat5 induced limited expression
of target genes, two copies activated a lactation-like gene signature. Using
ChIP-seq analyses on intact tissue under physiological conditions, we found that 
highly expressed and regulated genes were bound by STAT5 in their promoter
proximal regions, whereas upstream binding had minor biological consequences.
Remarkably, 80% of the genes bound by STAT5 in vivo were not under STAT5 control.
RNA polymerase II intensity was directly proportional to STAT5 concentration only
on STAT5 regulated genes providing mechanistic insight by which STAT5 activates
mammary specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3561979
PMID: 23275557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Dec;20(6):1496-500.

[Roles of STAT5 in hematopoietic regulation and blood diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YZ(1), Yuan WP, Cheng T.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Disease Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is an important
transcription factor existing in the cytoplasm of various types of cells. Once
activated, STAT5 dimers translocate into nucleus and bind to the corresponding
DNA sequence to regulate the transcription of its target genes. There are two
isoforms of STAT5: STAT5A and STAT5B with 96% sequence homology and are encoded
by two closely related but different genes. Studies have shown that STAT5 can
regulate the survival, proliferation, differentiation and death of hematopoietic 
cells. Furthermore, elevated activation of STAT5 was found in many malignant
hematologic diseases and therefore raised the possibility that STAT5 may be used 
as a new therapeutic target for blood related diseases. This review discusses the
regulatory role of STAT5 in hematopoietic cells and its effect on the occurrence 
and development of blood diseases.

PMID: 23257461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Apr;19(2):329-43. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9588-7. Epub
2012 Dec 20.

DARPP32, STAT5 and STAT3 mRNA expression ratios in glioblastomas are associated
with patient outcome.

Televantou D(1), Karkavelas G, Hytiroglou P, Lampaki S, Iliadis G, Selviaridis P,
Polyzoidis KS, Fountzilas G, Kotoula V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, University Campus, 54006, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Based on recent developments in glioblastoma subtyping, we examined DARPP32
(PPP1R1B), a neuronal marker against STAT5 and STAT3 that are pro-oncogenic in
glioblastoma. mRNA ratios of DARPP32, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A and STAT5B were
assessed in routinely diagnosed gliomas s including a series of glioblastomas
from patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>67) treated with chemoradiotherapy (temozolomide), out of
which 88 % had sequencing validated IDH-negative disease. DARPP32/STAT1
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0007), DARPP32/STAT3 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0004) and DARPP32/STAT5B (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0039) ratios
were significantly higher in grade II and III as compared to grade IV tumours.
The same high ratios were also associated with absence of immunohistochemically
assessed AKT/PKB phosphorylation and survivin protein expression. High
DARPP32/STAT3, DARPP32/STAT5B, and STAT5B/STAT3 ratios were associated with
longer patient progression free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Upon
multivariate analysis, total/subtotal removal of the tumour (HR:0.431;
95%CI:0.241-0.771, Wald p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), high DARPP32/STAT5B (HR:0.341;
95%CI:0.169-0.690; Wald p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) and STAT5B/STAT3 mRNA ratios (HR:0.480;
95%CI:0.280-0.824; Wald p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008) were independent favorable parameters for
prolonged PFS. Extent of surgery (HR:0.198; 95%CI:0.101-0.390; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and
high DARPP32/STAT5A ratios (HR:0.320; 95%CI:0.160-0.638, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001) were
independently predictive for longer OS. The presented approach is applicable for 
prospective validation and appears promising towards an effective glioblastoma
patient stratification in addition to IDH mutations. These data may contribute to
understanding the biology of gliomas with respect to their potential neuronal
characteristics and justify STAT-inhibiting therapeutic interventions in the same
tumour system.

PMCID: PMC3622752
PMID: 23250732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Funct Integr Genomics. 2013 Mar;13(1):143-54. doi: 10.1007/s10142-012-0305-0.
Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Subset of genes targeted by transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B in TNFa-stimulated human
HeLa cells.

Xing Y(1), Zhou F, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, Nanjing,
210096, People's Republic of China.

Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) is a ubiquitous transcription factor that plays a
pivotal role in controlling important cellular processes, ranging from normal
cell growth and differentiation to apoptosis and cancer. In recent years, many
new target genes of NF-<U+03BA>B have been identified in several cell lines that were
treated with various stimuli using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-based
high-throughput techniques. However, the target genes from various cell lines and
stimuli are not identical, and many of them are cell or stimulus specific. This
suggests that it is necessary to investigate different cell lines and stimuli for
identifying all target genes of this transcription factor. In this study, the
direct target genes (DTGs) of NF-<U+03BA>B in the TNFa-stimulated HeLa cells were
identify by using ChIP-Seq, RNAi, and gene expression profiling techniques. As a 
result, 584 DTGs were identified, in which 266 were activated and 318 were
repressed. The <U+03BA>B motif searching revealed that 50 % of these genes contained
canonical <U+03BA>B sites in their ChIP peaks and 90 % contained non-canonical <U+03BA>B sites 
in their ChIP peaks. In comparison with target genes identified in LPS-treated
U937 and THP-1, only limited numbers (10~23) of target genes were shared by each 
of two cell lines, and only two gene (NFKB2 and STAT5A) were commonly shared by
three cell lines.

PMID: 23247759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Dec;16(14):1967-73.

Gene networks implicated in diabetic kidney disease.

Tang W(1), Gao Y, Li Y, Shi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of Southeast
University Medical College, Jiangyin, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
drtangwei@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is one of the main causes of renal
end-stage disease. The incidence of DKD has increased substantially over the past
few years. However, our understanding to the molecular mechanism of DKD is still 
essential, and an effective treatment has not been developed.
AIM: We aimed to explore the molecule mechanism in the development of DKD, and
provide a comparison of DKD in different compartments.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we implemented a system biology approach
and analyzed gene expression profiles in 22 microdissected human renal glomerular
and 22 tubule samples from healthy patients and patients with DKD.
RESULTS: The WGCNA (Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis) analysis
identified 10 modules of genes with high topological overlap in tubuli and 12
modules in glomeruli. Several TFs (transcription factors) were found expressed in
both compartments, such as ETS1, ETV4, JUN, LITAF, NFE2, RARG and STAT5A. These
genes may be used as therapeutic targets for DKD. By comparing the modules in the
two compartments, we found that dysregulation of cell proliferation may
significantly contribute to the development of DKD. Furthermore, our results
concluded that DKD may be an immune-mediated degenerative disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies identified multiple genes that may play an important
role in the pathogenesis of DKD and provided a system understanding of the
potential relationships among these genes. We hope our study could aid in
understanding of DKD and could provide the basis for DKD biomarker discovery.

PMID: 23242724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Acta Biochim Pol. 2012;59(4):467-74. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

The role of microRNA in metastatic colorectal cancer and its significance in
cancer prognosis and treatment.

Tokarz P(1), Blasiak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Biology and Environmental
Protection, University of Lodz, Lódz, Poland.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNA molecules that regulate gene
expression by targeting specific mRNAs. microRNAs play a role in several
physiological processes in the cell, including migration, proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. Apart from their role in regular metabolism,
abnormal profiles of miRNA expression accompany cancer transformation, including 
colorectal cancer (CRC) metastasis. microRNAs may play a role in each phase of
CRC metastasis including angiogenesis, invasion, intravasation, circulation,
extravasation and metastatic colonization. microRNA levels may serve as a
predictive CRC marker, which was confirmed by the serum level of miR-29a
targeting KLF4, a marker of cell stemness, and the plasma level of miR-221
down-regulating c-Kit, Stat5A and ETS1, which are signal transducers and
transcription factor, respectively. In turn, the level of miR-143 in CRC cells
decreasing the amount of MACC1 (metastasis-associated in colon cancer-1) and
oncogenic KRAS protein, may be utilized as a prognostic marker. Also, single
nucleotide polymorphisms of genes encoding miRNAs, including miR-423 and miR-608,
which correlate with tumor recurrence, may be useful as diagnostic, prognostic
and predictive indicators in CRC metastasis. Pre-miR-34a and pre-miR-199a
decreased the level of Axl, a tyrosine-protein kinase receptor, so they can be
considered as drugs in antimetastatic therapy. On the other hand, miR-222
targeting ADAM-17, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase, and miR-328 interacting
with ABCG2, an ABC transporter, may overcome drug resistance of cancer cells.
microRNAs may be considered in wide-range application to facilitate CRC
metastasis diagnosis, prognosis, prediction and therapy, however, further
clinical, epidemiological and in vitro studies should be conducted to verify
their utility.

PMID: 23173124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jan;182(1):217-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.09.021. Epub 2012
Nov 14.

The prolactin receptor transactivation domain is associated with steroid hormone 
receptor expression and malignant progression of breast cancer.

Fiorillo AA(1), Medler TR, Feeney YB, Wetz SM, Tommerdahl KL, Clevenger CV.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Cancer Research Program, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
and the Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois
60611, USA.

The polypeptide hormone prolactin (PRL) stimulates breast epithelial cell growth,
differentiation, and motility through its cognate receptor, PRLr. PRLr is
expressed in most breast cancers; however, its exact role remains elusive. Our
laboratory previously described a novel mode of PRLr signaling in which
Stat5a-mediated transcription is regulated through ligand-induced phosphorylation
of the PRLr transactivation domain (TAD). Herein, we used a PRLr
transactivation-deficient mutant (PRLrYDmut) to identify novel TAD-specific
target genes. Microarray analysis identified 120 PRL-induced genes up-regulated
by wild type but not PRLrYDmut. Compared with control, PRLr expression
significantly induced expression of approximately 4700 PRL-induced genes, whereas
PRLrYDmut ablated induction of all but 19 of these genes. Ingenuity pathway
analysis found that the PRLr TAD most profoundly affected networks involving
cancer and proliferation. In support of this, PRLrYDmut expression reduced
anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent growth. In addition, pathway
analysis identified a link between the PRLr TAD and the estrogen and progesterone
receptors (ERa/PR). Although neither ERa nor PR was identified as a PRL target
gene, a TAD mutation significantly impaired ERa/PR expression and estrogen
responsiveness. TMA analysis revealed a marked increase in nuclear, but not
cytoplasmic, PRLr TAD phosphorylation as a function of neoplastic progression. We
propose that PRLr TAD phosphorylation contributes to breast cancer pathogenesis, 
in part through regulation of ERa and PR, and has potential utility as a
biomarker in this disease.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb 15;304(4):C312-23. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00311.2012. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Definitive evidence using enucleated cytoplasts for a nongenomic basis for the
cystic change in endoplasmic reticulum structure caused by STAT5a/b siRNAs.

Lee JE(1), Yang YM, Yuan H, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

STAT5a/b species are well known as transcription factors that regulate nuclear
gene expression. In a novel line of research in human pulmonary arterial
endothelial cells (HPAECs), we previously observed that STAT5a associated with
the Golgi apparatus and that siRNA-mediated knockdown of STAT5a/b led to the
rapid development of a dramatic cystic change in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
characterized by deposition along cyst membranes and tubule-to-cyst boundaries of
the proteins reticulon-4 (RTN4; also called Nogo-B) and the ER-resident GTPase
atlastin-3 (ATL3) and Golgi fragmentation. We now report that STAT5a can be
observed in ER sheets in digitonin-permeabilized HPAECs and that anti-STAT5a
cross- immunopanned ATL3 but not RTN4. Moreover, there was marked accumulation of
the 63-kDa cytoskeleton-linking membrane protein and ER-spacer CLIMP63 (also
called cytoskeleton-associated protein 4, CKAP4) and KDEL-mCherry within the
cysts. That the STAT5a/b-siRNA-induced cystic ER phenotype developed in the
presence of the transcription inhibitor
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) had suggested that the
mechanism was independent of the transcription factor functions of STAT5a/b,
i.e., was "nongenomic." We have now definitively tested the requirement for the
nucleus in eliciting the STAT5a/b-siRNA-induced cystic ER phenotype. Enucleated
HPAEC cytoplasts were prepared using adherent 35-mm cultures using the
cytochalasin B-centrifugation method (typically yielding 65-75% enucleation).
STAT5a/b siRNAs readily elicited the cystic ER phenotype including the marked
luminal accumulation of CLIMP63 and Golgi fragmentation in the recovered HPAEC
cytoplasts demonstrably lacking a nucleus. These studies provide unequivocal
evidence using enucleated cytoplasts for a nongenomic mechanism(s) underlying the
cystic change in ER structure elicited by STAT5a/b knockdown.

PMCID: PMC3566531
PMID: 23151802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Int J Oncol. 2012 Dec;41(6):2285-95. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1660. Epub 2012 Oct
15.

The prolactin receptor mediates HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity in mammary
carcinoma cells.

Hou L(1), Xu B, Mohankumar KM, Goffin V, Perry JK, Lobie PE, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

The HOX genes are a highly conserved subgroup of homeodomain-containing
transcription factors that are crucial to normal development. Forced expression
of HOXA1 results in oncogenic transformation of immortalized human mammary cells 
with aggressive tumour formation in vivo. Microarray analysis identified that the
prolactin receptor (PRLR) was significantly upregulated by forced expression of
HOXA1 in mammary carcinoma cells. To determine prolactin (PRL) involvement in
HOXA1-induced oncogenicity in mammary carcinoma cells (MCF-7), we examined the
effect of human prolactin (hPRL)-initiated PRLR signal transduction on changes in
cellular behaviour mediated by HOXA1. Forced expression of HOXA1 in MCF-7 cells
increased PRLR mRNA and protein expression. Forced expression of HOXA1 also
enhanced hPRL-stimulated phosphorylation of both STAT5A/B and p44/42 MAPK, and
increased subsequent transcriptional activity of STAT5A and STAT5B, and Elk-1 and
Sap1a, respectively. Moreover, forced expression of HOXA1 in MCF-7 cells enhanced
the hPRL-stimulated increase in total cell number as a consequence of enhanced
cell proliferation and cell survival, and also enhanced hPRL-stimulated
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. Increased anchorage-independent growth
was attenuated by the PRLR antagonist <U+2206>1-9-G129R-hPRL. In conclusion, we have
demonstrated that HOXA1 increases expression of the cell surface receptor PRLR
and enhances PRLR-mediated signal transduction. Thus, the PRLR is one mediator of
HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity in mammary carcinoma cells.

PMID: 23064471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2012 Oct;48(9):554-61. doi:
10.1007/s11626-012-9545-5. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Stat5a increases lactation of dairy cow mammary gland epithelial cells cultured
in vitro.

Liu XF(1), Li M, Li QZ, Lu LM, Tong HL, Gao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science of Education Ministry, Northeast Agricultural 
University, Harbin, People's Republic of China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (Stat5a) transduces signals
of extracellular cytokines and growth factors to the nucleus of mammary gland
epithelial cells and thereby regulates gene transcription during pregnancy,
lactation, and weaning. However, its function on the milk production of dairy
cows needs further investigation. In this experiment, the effects of Stat5a on
lactation ability of dairy cow mammary gland epithelial cells (DCMECs) were
analyzed. Eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1+-stat5a-aS1 was constructed by
inserting stat5a gene into the plasmid vector pcDNA3.1+ and replacing CMV
promoter with a-S1-casein 5' flanking sequence. The recombinant vector was stably
transfected into DCMECs after geneticin (G418) selection. The proliferation and
viability of DCMECs, expression of ß-casein and stat5a gene, and the content of
lactose were detected. The results showed that stat5a gene in eukaryotic
expression vector pcDNA3.1+-stat5a-aS1 was highly expressed in DCMECs and could
increase the lactation ability of DCMECs. The associativity of Stat5a with
nutrients on the lactation ability of DCMECs was also evaluated. Lysine (Lys),
methionine (Met), sodium acetate, ß-sodium hydroxybutyrate, and glucose all had
more positive effects on the lactation function of DCMECs after
pcDNA3.1+-stat5a-aS1 transfection. The proliferation and viability of DCMECs,
expression of ß-casein and stat5a gene, and contents of lactose and triglyceride 
were detected. The results revealed that nutrients could promote expression of
Stat5a gene to increase lactation of DCMECs. These data help to clarify the
function of stat5 gene on lactation and gene regulatory networks linking stat5a.

PMID: 23054437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Ann Hematol. 2013 Jan;92(2):151-62. doi: 10.1007/s00277-012-1575-2. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Repression of STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B expressions in chronic myelogenous
leukemia cell line K-562 with unmodified or chemically modified siRNAs and
induction of apoptosis.

Kaymaz BT(1), Selvi N, Gündüz C, Aktan C, Dalmizrak A, Saydam G, Kosova B.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Ege University, Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey. burcin.tezcanli@ege.edu.tr

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent
cytoplasmic transcription factors that affect several cellular processes
including cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Following
phosphorylation, STATs are activated, and their upregulated expressions increase 
in malignancies with playing a role in the development of leukemia. In this
study, transfection of K-562 cells with either unmodified or chemically modified 
anti-STAT3, -STAT5A, -STAT5B siRNAs for duration of 12 days, determining gene
silencing at mRNA and protein levels, evaluating apoptosis rate, and detecting
JAK/STAT pathway members' gene expression profiles via array method were aimed.
Quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot assays indicated that STAT expressions were 
downregulated both at mRNA and protein levels, and TUNEL assay showed that
leukemic cell apoptosis was induced due to inhibition of STATs. Array analysis
resulted with decreases in signal transducer, phosphorylation inducer, and
oncogene expressions, whereas increased expressions in STAT inhibitor and
apoptosis inducer genes were observed. These results point out that siRNA
application could constitute a new and alternative curative method for supporting
therapy of CML-diagnosed patients in the future.

PMID: 23053176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 4;14(5):R130. doi: 10.1186/bcr3328.

Low levels of Stat5a protein in breast cancer are associated with tumor
progression and unfavorable clinical outcomes.

Peck AR, Witkiewicz AK, Liu C, Klimowicz AC, Stringer GA, Pequignot E, Freydin B,
Yang N, Ertel A, Tran TH, Girondo MA, Rosenberg AL, Hooke JA, Kovatich AJ,
Shriver CD, Rimm DL, Magliocco AM, Hyslop T, Rui H.

INTRODUCTION: Signal transducer and activator of transcripton-5a (Stat5a) and its
close homologue, Stat5b, mediate key physiological effects of prolactin and
growth hormone in mammary glands. In breast cancer, loss of nuclear localized and
tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5a/b is associated with poor prognosis and increased 
risk of antiestrogen therapy failure. Here we quantify for the first time levels 
of Stat5a and Stat5b over breast cancer progression, and explore their potential 
association with clinical outcome.
METHODS: Stat5a and Stat5b protein levels were quantified in situ in
breast-cancer progression material. Stat5a and Stat5b transcript levels in breast
cancer were correlated with clinical outcome in 936 patients. Stat5a protein was 
further quantified in four archival cohorts totaling 686 patients with clinical
outcome data by using multivariate models.
RESULTS: Protein levels of Stat5a but not Stat5b were reduced in primary breast
cancer and lymph node metastases compared with normal epithelia. Low tumor levels
of Stat5a but not Stat5b mRNA were associated with poor prognosis.
Experimentally, only limited overlap between Stat5a- and Stat5b-modulated genes
was found. In two cohorts of therapy-naïve, node-negative breast cancer patients,
low nuclear Stat5a protein levels were an independent marker of poor prognosis.
Multivariate analysis of two cohorts treated with antiestrogen monotherapy
revealed that low nuclear Stat5a levels were associated with a more than fourfold
risk of unfavorable outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of Stat5a represents a new independent marker of poor prognosis
in node-negative breast cancer and may be a predictor of response to antiestrogen
therapy if validated in randomized clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4053108
PMID: 23036105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Hum Pathol. 2013 Mar;44(3):310-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.06.001. Epub 2012
Sep 29.

Nuclear Stat5a/b predicts early recurrence and prostate cancer-specific death in 
patients treated by radical prostatectomy.

Mirtti T(1), Leiby BE, Abdulghani J, Aaltonen E, Pavela M, Mamtani A, Alanen K,
Egevad L, Granfors T, Josefsson A, Stattin P, Bergh A, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki and
HUSLAB, Helsinki 00014, Finland.

There is an urgent need for reliable markers to identify patients whose prostate 
cancer (PCa) will recur after initial therapy and progress to lethal disease.
Gleason score (GS) is considered the most accurate predictive marker for
disease-specific mortality after primary treatment of localized PCa. Most PCas
cluster into groups of GS 6 and 7 with considerable variation in the disease
recurrence and disease-specific death. In preclinical PCa models, Stat5a/b
promotes PCa growth and progression. Stat5a/b is critical for PCa cell viability 
in vitro and for tumor growth in vivo and promotes metastatic dissemination of
cancer in nude mice. Here, we analyzed the predictive value of high nuclear
Stat5a/b protein levels in 2 cohorts of PCas: Material I (n = 562) PCas treated
by radical prostatectomy (RP), and Material II (n = 106) PCas treated by deferred
palliative therapy. In intermediate GS PCas treated by radical prostatectomy,
high levels of nuclear Stat5a/b predicted both early recurrence (univariable
analysis; P < .0001, multivariable analysis; HR = 1.82, P = .017) and early
PCa-specific death (univariable analysis; P = .028). In addition, high nuclear
Stat5a/b predicted early disease recurrence in both univariable (P < .0001) and
multivariable (HR = 1.61; P = .012) analysis in the entire cohort of patients
treated by RP regardless of the GS. Patients treated by deferred palliative
therapy, elevated nuclear Stat5a/b expression was associated with early
PCa-specific death by univariable Cox regression analysis (HR = 1.59; 95% CI =
[1.04, 2.44]; P = .034). If confirmed in future prospective studies, nuclear
Stat5a/b may become a useful independent predictive marker of recurrence of
lethal PCa after RP for intermediate GS PCas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3548055
PMID: 23026195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 1;189(9):4237-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201476. Epub 2012
Sep 19.

The role of IL-15 in activating STAT5 and fine-tuning IL-17A production in CD4 T 
lymphocytes.

Pandiyan P(1), Yang XP, Saravanamuthu SS, Zheng L, Ishihara S, O'Shea JJ, Lenardo
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-15 is an important IL-2-related cytokine whose role in Th17 cell biology has
not been fully elucidated. In this study, we show that exogenous IL-15 decreased 
IL-17A production in Th17 cultures. Neutralization of IL-15 using an Ab led to
increases in IL-17A production in Th17 cultures. Both Il15(-/-) and Il15r(-/-) T 
cell cultures displayed higher frequency of IL-17A producers and higher amounts
of IL-17A in the supernatants compared with those of wild-type (WT) cells in
vitro. IL-15 down-modulated IL-17A production independently of retinoic
acid-related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t, Foxp3, and IFN-<U+03B3> expression. Both Th17 cells and
APCs produced IL-15, which induced binding of STAT5, an apparent repressor to the
Il17 locus in CD4 T cells. Also, in a model of myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), Il15(-/-)
mice displayed exacerbated inflammation-correlating with increased IL-17A
production by their CD4(+) T cells-compared with WT controls. Exogenous IL-15
administration and IL-17A neutralization reduced the severity of EAE in Il15(-/-)
mice. Taken together, these data indicate that IL-15 has a negative regulatory
role in fine-tuning of IL-17A production and Th17-mediated inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3647038
PMID: 22993203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;90(10):1354-63. doi: 10.1139/y2012-099. Epub
2012 Sep 14.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependence of dioxin's effects on constitutive mouse
hepatic cytochromes P450 and growth hormone signaling components.

Lee C(1), Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) has physiological roles in the absence of
exposure to exogenous ligands, and mediates adaptive and toxic responses to the
environmental pollutant 2,3,7,8-tetracholorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). A readily
metabolized AHR agonist, 3-methylcholanthrene, disrupts the expression of mouse
hepatic growth hormone (GH) signaling components and suppresses cytochrome P450
2D9 (Cyp2d9), a male-specific gene controlled by pulsatile GH via signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b). Using TCDD as an
essentially nonmetabolized AHR agonist, and Ahr<U+2009>(-/-) mice as the preferred model
to determine the AHR-dependence of biological responses, we now show that 2 mouse
hepatic STAT5b target genes, Cyp2d9, and major urinary protein 2 (Mup2), are
suppressed by TCDD in an AHR-dependent manner. TCDD also decreased hepatic mRNA
levels for GH receptor, Janus kinase 2, and STAT5a/b with AHR-dependence. Without
inducing selected hepatic inflammatory markers, TCDD caused AHR-dependent
induction of Cyp1a1 and NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (Por) and
suppression of Cyp3a11. In vehicle-treated mice, basal mRNA levels for CYP2D9,
CYP3A11, POR, serum amyloid protein P, and MUP2 were influenced by Ahr genetic
status. We conclude that AHR activation per se leads to dysregulation of hepatic 
GH signaling components and suppression of some, but not all, STAT5b target
genes.

PMCID: PMC3515668
PMID: 22978700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044213. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

DNA methylation profiles of airway epithelial cells and PBMCs from healthy,
atopic and asthmatic children.

Stefanowicz D(1), Hackett TL, Garmaroudi FS, Günther OP, Neumann S, Sutanto EN,
Ling KM, Kobor MS, Kicic A, Stick SM, Paré PD, Knight DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, James Hogg Research Centre at the Heart and Lung
Institute, University of British Columbia and St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Allergic inflammation is commonly observed in a number of conditions 
that are associated with atopy including asthma, eczema and rhinitis. However,
the genetic, environmental or epigenetic factors involved in these conditions are
likely to be different. Epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation, can be
influenced by the environment and result in changes to gene expression.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize the DNA methylation pattern of airway epithelial
cells (AECs) compared to peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and to
discern differences in methylation within each cell type amongst healthy, atopic 
and asthmatic subjects.
METHODS: PBMCs and AECs from bronchial brushings were obtained from children
undergoing elective surgery for non-respiratory conditions. The children were
categorized as atopic, atopic asthmatic, non-atopic asthmatic or healthy
controls. Extracted DNA was bisulfite treated and 1505 CpG loci across 807 genes 
were analyzed using the Illumina GoldenGate Methylation Cancer Panel I. Gene
expression for a subset of genes was performed using RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We demonstrate a signature set of CpG sites that are differentially
methylated in AECs as compared to PBMCs regardless of disease phenotype. Of
these, 13 CpG sites were specific to healthy controls, 8 sites were only found in
atopics, and 6 CpGs were unique to asthmatics. We found no differences in the
methylation status of PBMCs between disease phenotypes. In AECs derived from
asthmatics compared to atopics, 8 differentially methylated sites were identified
including CpGs in STAT5A and CRIP1. We demonstrate STAT5A gene expression is
decreased whereas CRIP1 gene expression is elevated in the AECs from asthmatic
compared to both healthy and atopic subjects.
DISCUSSION: We characterized a cell specific DNA methylation signature for AECs
compared to PBMCs regardless of asthmatic or atopic status. Our data highlight
the importance of understanding DNA methylation in the epithelium when studying
the epithelial contribution to asthma.

PMCID: PMC3435400
PMID: 22970180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Oct;135(3):749-58. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2216-0. 
Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Mammary differentiation induces expression of Tristetraprolin, a tumor suppressor
AU-rich mRNA-binding protein.

Goddio MV(1), Gattelli A, Slomiansky V, Lacunza E, Gingerich T, Tocci JM,
Facchinetti MM, Curino AC, LaMarre J, Abba MC, Kordon EC.

Author information: 
(1)LEGMA, IFIBYNE-CONICET, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a RNA-binding protein that inhibits the expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and invasiveness-associated genes. TTP levels are
decreased in many different cancer types and it has been proposed that this
protein could be used as a prognostic factor in breast cancer. Here, using
publicly available DNA microarray datasets, "serial analysis of gene expression" 
libraries and qRT-PCR analysis, we determined that TTP mRNA is present in normal 
breast cells and its levels are significantly decreased in all breast cancer
subtypes. In addition, by immunostaining, we found that TTP expression is higher 
in normal breast tissue and benign lesions than in infiltrating carcinomas. Among
these, lower grade tumors showed increased TTP expression compared to higher
grade cancers. Therefore, these data indicate that TTP protein levels would
provide a better negative correlation with breast cancer invasiveness than TTP
transcript levels. In mice, we found that TTP mRNA and protein expression is also
diminished in mammary tumors. Interestingly, a strong positive association of TTP
expression and mammary differentiation was identified in normal and tumor cells. 
In fact, TTP expression is highly increased during lactation, showing good
correlation with various mammary differentiation factors. TTP expression was also
induced in mammary HC11 cells treated with lactogenic hormones, mainly by
prolactin, through Stat5A activation. The effect of this hormone was highly
dependent on mammary differentiation status, as prolactin was unable to elicit a 
similar response in proliferating or neoplastic mammary cells. In summary, these 
studies show that TTP expression is strongly linked to the mammary
differentiation program in human and mice, suggesting that this protein might
play specific and relevant roles in the normal physiology of the gland.

PMID: 22968621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 1;32(31):3587-97. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.369. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Src family kinases mediate cytoplasmic retention of activated STAT5 in
BCR-ABL-positive cells.

Chatain N(1), Ziegler P, Fahrenkamp D, Jost E, Moriggl R, Schmitz-Van de Leur H, 
Müller-Newen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.

Persistent activation of the Abl tyrosine kinase in the BCR-ABL fusion protein is
the major cause of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Among many other substrates
BCR-ABL phosphorylates STAT5 and Src family kinases (SFK). Activated pSTAT5 is
essential for initial transformation and maintenance of the disease.
Cytokine-induced phosphorylation on tyrosine 694 typically leads to nuclear
accumulation of pSTAT5 and target gene expression. We verified that in
BCR-ABL-positive progenitor cells from a CML patient and in K562 cells pSTAT5 is 
cytoplasmic. However, upon ectopic expression of BCR-ABL p210 in non-myeloid
cells, co-transfected STAT5A is phosphorylated on Y694 and localized in the
nucleus arguing for an additional factor mediating cytoplasmic retention in CML
cells. Expression of the SFK v-Src, Hck or Lyn together with STAT5A results in
phosphorylation on Y694 and cytoplasmic retention. Upon coexpression of BCR-ABL
and individual SFK the cytoplasmic retention of activated STAT5A mediated by
v-Src and Hck but not Lyn is dominant over nuclear translocation induced by
BCR-ABL. Cytoplasmic retention depends on the kinase activity of SFK and is
mediated through the interaction of the SH2 domain of STAT5A with the SFK.
Interestingly, nuclear accumulation of STAT5A as a result of activation by
FLT3-ITD, an oncogene found in acute myeloid leukemia, cannot be prevented by
coexpression of SFK. Importantly, inhibition of SFK in K562 cells restored
nuclear accumulation of pSTAT5A, enhanced STAT5 target gene expression and
increased colony formation. Thus, SFK mediate cytoplasmic retention of pSTAT5A in
BCR-ABL-positive cells. Cytoplasmic pSTAT5A in CML cells might balance the
controversial functions of STAT5 in cellular senescence and differentiation
versus G1/S progression and survival.

PMID: 22926520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Dairy Sci. 2012 Oct;95(10):6122-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-5591. Epub 2012 Aug
23.

Comparative genomics between fly, mouse, and cattle identifies genes associated
with sire conception rate.

Li G(1), Peñagaricano F, Weigel KA, Zhang Y, Rosa G, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China.

The decline in reproductive performance in cattle is of major concern to farmers 
and the dairy industry worldwide. Most fertility studies in cattle have focused
on fertility of the cow, whereas the genetics of male fertility have not been
thoroughly investigated. The present study hypothesizes that the high
conservation of spermatogenesis genes from fly to human implies important roles
of these genes in male fertility in cattle. To test this hypothesis, we performed
an association analysis between highly conserved spermatogenesis genes and sire
conception rate (SCR) in US Holsteins as a measure of bull fertility. Sequencing 
analysis revealed 24 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 9 genes in the bull
population using the pooled DNA sequencing approach. Five SNP previously
identified in 5 genes from the POU1F1 pathway were also included in this study
because they have shown significant associations with female and male fertility
traits. Overall, 29 SNP located in 14 candidate genes were tested for association
with sire conception rate in a population of 1,988 bulls. Three SNP located in
MAP1B and 1 SNP in PPP1R11 showed significant associations with SCR. For the
POU1F1 pathway, single gene analysis revealed significant associations of POU1F1 
and STAT5A with SCR. Analysis of genotypic interactions between adjacent genes in
the pathway revealed significant associations of STAT5A and UTMP genotypic
combinations with SCR. The most significant spermatogenesis gene, MAP1B, was
found to be associated with fertilization and blastocyst rates. Thus, the
association of these genes with bull fertility testifies to the usefulness of the
comparative genomics approach in selecting candidate male fertility genes.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22921614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Front Immunol. 2012 Aug 14;3:234. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00234. eCollection
2012.

The STAT5b Pathway Defect and Autoimmunity.

Kanai T(1), Jenks J, Nadeau KC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, School of
Medicine, Stanford University Stanford, CA, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b is a universal
transcription factor that plays key biological roles in allergic diseases,
immunodeficiencies, autoimmunities, cancers, hematological diseases, growth
disorders, and lung diseases. The identification of distinct pathological
manifestations of STAT5b deficiency in humans has highlighted the critical role
of the STAT5b pathway. Proper gene transcription at IL-2R a, FOXP3, Bcl-2, and
growth hormone (GH) associated loci are thought to be associated with normal
STAT5b transcriptional activity. These genes are thought to play important roles 
in allergy/autoimmunity, immunodeficiency, cancer/anemia, and growth,
respectively. The STAT5A and STAT5B genes are collocated on 17q11. Although these
two monomeric proteins exhibit peptide sequence similarities of >90%, it is known
through observations of STAT5b deficient subjects that STAT5a and STAT5b are not 
fully redundant in humans. Patients with STAT5b deficiency have decreased numbers
of regulatory CD4(+)CD25(high) T cell (Treg) despite their STAT5a levels being
normal. Prior studies on STAT5b deficient subjects have revealed immunological
aberrations associated with the following disease phenotype: modest lymphopenia
and decreased populations of Treg, <U+03B3>-d T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells.
Most subjects with STAT5b deficiency show severe eczema, and autoimmune disease
(juvenile idiopathic arthritis, autoimmune thyroiditis, idiopathic thrombocytic
purpura) which are thought to be associated with Treg dysfunction. We will review
the likely pathophysiological mechanisms associated with STAT5b deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3418548
PMID: 22912632  [PubMed]


211. Nutr Res. 2012 Jul;32(7):514-21. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2012.06.001. Epub 2012 Jul
18.

Grape skin extract reduces adipogenesis- and lipogenesis-related gene expression 
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes through the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
signaling pathway.

Jeong YS(1), Hong JH, Cho KH, Jung HK.

Author information: 
(1)Bio Industry Center, Daegu Technopark, 891-5 Daecheon-dong, Daegu 704-801,
Korea.

We previously reported that grape skin ethanol extract (GSE) decreases adipogenic
transcription factor gene expression, inhibiting triglyceride accumulation in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. In this study, we hypothesized that GSE may induce
differential expression profiles in adipocytes, thus providing protection against
obesity. Thirty-five genes involved in the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) signaling pathway, lipid metabolism, or adipogenesis were
identified through microarray analysis of adipocytes treated with GSE. Expression
of the genes involved in PPAR<U+03B3> signaling, Adipoq, Scd1, Nr1h3, Fabp5, Scd2, and
Pparg decreased with GSE treatment, whereas expression of Ppargc1a increased.
Lipid metabolism-associated genes Mlxp1, Stat5a, Hsl, Plin1, and Vdr were
down-regulated. Interestingly, GSE also affected expression of genes related to
the mitogen-activated protein kinases pathway. GSE extract treatment decreased
expression of aP2, Fas, and Tnfa, known markers of adipogenesis, as measured by
real-time polymerase reaction. These findings demonstrate the antiadipogenic
effects of GSE on 3T3-L1 adipocytes at the genetic level, primarily on the PPAR<U+03B3> 
signaling pathway.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22901559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biotechnol Lett. 2012 Nov;34(11):1991-9. doi: 10.1007/s10529-012-1009-1. Epub
2012 Jul 25.

Bovine prolactin elevates hTF expression directed by a tissue-specific goat
ß-casein promoter through prolactin receptor-mediated STAT5a activation.

Jiang S(1), Ren Z, Xie F, Yan J, Huang S, Zeng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Medical Genetics, Children's Hospital of Shanghai,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Prolactin promotes the expression of exogenous human transferrin gene in the milk
of transgenic mice. To elucidate this, a recombinant plasmid of bovine prolactin 
plus human transferrin vector was co-transfected into cultured murine mammary
gland epithelial cells. Prolactin-receptor antagonist and shRNA corresponding to 
prolactin-receptor mRNA were added into the cell culture mixture to investigate
the relations between prolactin-receptor and human transferrin expression after
bovine prolactin inducement. Levels of human transferrin in the supernatants were
increased under the presentation of bovine prolactin (from 1,076 ± 115 to
1,886 ± 114 pg/ml). With the treatment of prolactin-receptor antagonist or shRNA,
human transferrin in cells was declined (1,886 ± 113 vs. 1,233 ± 85 pg/ml or
1,114 ± 75 pg/ml, respectively). An inverse correlation was found between the
dosage of prolactin-receptor antagonist and expression level of human
transferrin. Real-time qRT-PCR analysis showed that the relative level of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) transcript in transfected
cells correlated with expression levels of human transferrin in the supernatant
of the same cells. Bovine prolactin thus improved the expression of human
transferrin through such a possible mechanism that bovine prolactin activated
STAT5a transcription expression via combined with prolactin-receptor and suggest 
a potential utility of the bovine prolactin for efficient expression of valuable 
pharmaceutical proteins in mammary glands of transgenic animals.

PMID: 22829284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Neuroendocrinol. 2012 Dec;24(12):1484-91. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2012.02357.x.

Prolactin signalling in the mouse hypothalamus is primarily mediated by signal
transducer and activator of transcription factor 5b but not 5a.

Yip SH(1), Eguchi R, Grattan DR, Bunn SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Centre for Neuroendocrinology, University of Otago,
Dunedin, New Zealand.

Prolactin acts at multiple targets throughout the body, including the mammary
gland, heart, liver, muscle and brain. Upon binding to its receptors, prolactin
signals through the phosphorylation and thus activation of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5). There are two very similar STAT5 isoforms, 
termed STAT5a and STAT5b, which are selectively activated by prolactin in
specific tissues. Various brain regions, including the hypothalamus, are
prolactin responsive, although the STAT5 isoform involved in these actions is
unknown. Immunohistochemical and western blot analysis were used to determine the
expression and activation of STAT5a and STAT5b throughout the hypothalamus in
adult wild-type and STAT5b-deficient mice. Both groups were pretreated with
bromocriptine to suppress endogenous prolactin levels followed by the
administration of ovine prolactin (10 mg/kg) for 45 min. STAT5a and STAT5b were
expressed throughout the hypothalamus of wild-type mice. As expected, only STAT5a
was detected in STAT5b-deficient mice, although, unexpectedly, there was a marked
reduction in its expression compared to wild-type mice. When stimulated with
prolactin, phosphorylated STAT5 was observed in the hypothalamus of wild-type but
not STAT5b-deficient mice. By contrast, phosphorylated STAT5 was detected in
mammary gland epithelial cells and adipocytes of STAT5b-deficient animals. Thus, 
although STAT5a was still expressed in the STAT5b-deficient mice, it was not
phosphorylated in the hypothalamus in response to prolactin. These observations
indicate that STAT5b but not STAT5a is the primary mediator of the action of
prolactin in the hypothalamus. Despite the similarity between the two STAT5
isoforms, STAT5a was unable to compensate for the absence of STAT5b, suggesting
that each isoform exhibits a unique biological activity.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neuroendocrinology © 2012 British Society for
Neuroendocrinology.

PMID: 22775396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Oct;51(10):1887-93. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Increased production of IL-5 and dominant Th2-type response in airways of
Churg-Strauss syndrome patients.

Jakiela B(1), Szczeklik W, Plutecka H, Sokolowska B, Mastalerz L, Sanak M,
Bazan-Socha S, Szczeklik A, Musial J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, ul. Skawinska
8, 31-066 Krakow, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) is a rare systemic vasculitis associated 
with eosinophilia and asthma. We assessed the local immune response in airways of
CSS patients with different activity of the disease.
METHODS: Concentration of IL-5, CCL17, CCL22 and CCL26 (ELISA) together with cell
expression of T-helper-related genes (real-time PCR array) were measured in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) sampled from 11 patients with active CSS, 11 
patients with CSS in remission and 9 control subjects with bronchial asthma.
RESULTS: In active CSS, both BALF and blood eosinophil counts were increased
(P<0.01). BALF cells in active disease were characterized by an increased
expression of Th2 and regulatory-type transcripts: STAT6, STAT3, GATA3, IL4, IL5 
and IL10 as compared with asthmatics, and STAT5A, CCR4, FOXP3, IL4, IL5 and IL10 
when compared with inactive CSS. There was significant increase in BALF
concentration of IL-5 and CCL26 in exacerbation of CSS. CCR4-active chemokines
were detected more frequently in active disease. We found a strong positive
correlation between clinical parameters of disease activity (BVAS, eosinophilia) 
and expression of IL4, IL5, IL10 and STAT5A.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that as compared with asthma, active-CSS
patients have much stronger local Th2 response in the airways. Airway cells may
contribute to lung eosinophilia in CSS by producing IL-5 and eosinophil active
chemokines.

PMID: 22772323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jul;32(7):2885-93.

Enalapril-induced apoptosis of acute promyelocytic leukaemia cells involves
STAT5A.

Purclutepe O(1), Iskender G, Kiper HD, Tezcanli B, Selvi N, Avci CB, Kosova B,
Gokbulut AA, Sahin F, Baran Y, Saydam G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Ege University, Bornova, 
Izmir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: In this study, we aimed at evaluating the cytotoxic and apoptotic
effects of enalapril on human HL60 acute promyelocytic leukaemia cells and at
clarifying the roles of signal transducers and activator of transcription
proteins (STATs) on enalapril-induced cell death.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell viability and cytotoxicity tests were conducted by
Trypan blue dye exclusion and
2,3-Bis[2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulphophenyl]-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner
salt (XTT) assays, respectively. Apoptotic analyses were performed by the
AnnexinV-enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) staining method and by
fluorescence microscopy. Expression levels of STAT3, -5A and -5B genes were
analysed by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: The results showed that enalapril reduced viability and proliferation,
and induced apoptosis in HL60 cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner as
compared to untreated controls. The expression levels of STAT5A gene were
significantly reduced in enalapril-treated HL60 cells as compared to untreated
controls.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, all data showed for the first time that enalapril has
significant anticancer potential for the treatment of acute premyelocytic
leukaemia.

PMID: 22753752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. JAKSTAT. 2012 Jul 1;1(3):203-7. doi: 10.4161/jkst.21232.

Acetylation and sumoylation control STAT5 activation antagonistically.

Krämer OH(1), Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine; Institute for Biochemistry and Biophysics;
Department of Biochemistry; Friedrich Schiller University of Jena; Jena, Germany.

STAT5 proteins are activated by tyrosine phosphorylation, but recently further
post-translation modifications such as serine/threonine phosphorylation,
acetylation at lysine residues or sumoylation in close vicinity of the critical
tyrosine residue have been reported. Here, we discuss new findings on impaired
STAT5 signaling in lymphocytes isolated from a SUMO-specific protease knockout
mouse (SENP1(-/-)), which results in sumoylated STAT5 and abolishes tyrosine
phosphorylation. Van Nguyen and colleagues examined acetylation and sumoylation
of STAT5 and found that both modifications act antagonistically to control
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC3670247
PMID: 24058773  [PubMed]


217. JAKSTAT. 2012 Jul 1;1(3):151-8. doi: 10.4161/jkst.19691.

The spectrum of STAT functions in mammary gland development.

Hughes K(1), Watson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; University of Cambridge; Cambridge, UK.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family of
transcription factors have a spectrum of functions in mammary gland development. 
In some cases these roles parallel those of STATs in other organ systems, while
in other instances the function of individual STATs in the mammary gland is
specific to this tissue. In the immune system, STAT6 is associated with
differentiation of T helper cells, while in the mammary gland, it has a
fundamental role in the commitment of luminal epithelial cells to the alveolar
lineage. STAT5A is required for the production of luminal progenitor cells from
mammary stem cells and is essential for the differentiation of milk producing
alveolar cells during pregnancy. By contrast, the initiation of regression
following weaning heralds a dramatic and specific activation of STAT3, reflecting
its pivotal role in the regulation of cell death and tissue remodeling during
mammary involution. Although it has been demonstrated that STAT1 is regulated
during a mammary developmental cycle, it is not yet determined whether it has a
specific, non-redundant function. Thus, the mammary gland constitutes an unusual 
example of an adult organ in which different STATs are sequentially activated to 
orchestrate the processes of functional differentiation, cell death and tissue
remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3670238
PMID: 24058764  [PubMed]


218. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7776-87. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks571. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Rac1 signalling modulates a STAT5/BCL-6 transcriptional switch on
cell-cycle-associated target gene promoters.

Barros P(1), Lam EW, Jordan P, Matos P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, National Health Institute Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Avenida
Padre Cruz, 1649-016 Lisbon, Portugal.

Gene expression depends on binding of transcriptional regulators to gene
promoters, a process controlled by signalling pathways. The transcriptional
repressor B-cell lymphoma (BCL)-6 downregulates genes involved in cell-cycle
progression and becomes inactivated following phosphorylation by the Rac1
GTPase-activated protein kinase PAK1. Interestingly, the DNA motifs recognized by
BCL-6 and signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) are
similar. Because STAT5 stimulation in epithelial cells can also be triggered by
Rac1 signalling, we asked whether both factors have opposing roles in
transcriptional regulation and whether Rac1 signalling may coordinate a
transcription factor switch. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation to show that
active Rac1 promotes release of the repressor BCL-6 while increasing binding of
STAT5A to a BCL-6-regulated reporter gene. We further show in colorectal cell
lines that the endogenous activation status of the Rac1/PAK1 pathway correlated
with the phosphorylation status of BCL-6 and STAT5A. Three cellular genes (cyclin
D2, p15(INK4B), small ubiquitin-like modifier 1) were identified to be inversely 
regulated by BCL-6 and STAT5A and responded to Rac1 signalling with increased
expression and corresponding changes in promoter occupancy. Together, our data
show that Rac1 signalling controls a group of target genes that are repressed by 
BCL-6 and activated by STAT5A, providing novel insights into the modulation of
gene transcription by GTPase signalling.

PMCID: PMC3439931
PMID: 22723377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Endocrinology. 2012 Aug;153(8):3692-700. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1114. Epub 2012 Jun
6.

Up-regulating relaxin expression by G-quadruplex interactive ligand to achieve
antifibrotic action.

Gu HP(1), Lin S, Xu M, Yu HY, Du XJ, Zhang YY, Yuan G, Gao W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing,
China.

Myocardial fibrosis is a key pathological change in a variety of heart diseases
contributing to the development of heart failure, arrhythmias, and sudden death. 
Recent studies have shown that relaxin prevents and reverses cardiac fibrosis.
Endogenous expression of relaxin was elevated in the setting of heart disease;
the extent of such up-regulation, however, is insufficient to exert compensatory 
actions, and the mechanism regulating relaxin expression is poorly defined. In
the rat relaxin-1 (RLN1, Chr1) gene promoter region we found presence of repeated
guanine (G)-rich sequences, which allowed formation and stabilization of
G-quadruplexes with the addition of a G-quadruplex interactive ligand berberine. 
The G-rich sequences and the G-quadruplexes were localized adjacent to the
binding motif of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3, which 
negatively regulates relaxin expression. Thus, we hypothesized that the formation
and stabilization of G-quadruplexes by berberine could influence relaxin
expression. We found that berberine-induced formation of G-quadruplexes did
increase relaxin gene expression measured at mRNA and protein levels. Formation
of G-quadruplexes significantly reduced STAT3 binding to the promoter of relaxin 
gene. This was associated with consequent increase in the binding of RNA
polymerase II and STAT5a to relaxin gene promoter. In cardiac fibroblasts and
rats treated with angiotensin II, berberine was found to suppress fibroblast
activation, collagen synthesis, and extent of cardiac fibrosis through
up-regulating relaxin. The antifibrotic action of berberine in vitro and in vivo 
was similar to that by exogenous relaxin. Our findings document a novel
therapeutic strategy for fibrosis through up-regulating expression of endogenous 
relaxin.

PMID: 22673230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Hematology. 2012 Mar;17(2):93-9. doi: 10.1179/102453312X13221316477859.

Methylprednisolone induces apoptosis by interacting with the JAK/STAT pathway in 
HL-60 and K-562 leukemic cells.

Kaymaz BT(1), Selvi N, Saydam G, Sahin F, Kosova B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey. burcin.tezcanli@ege.edu.tr

OBJECTIVE: To determine the gene expression profiles of the JAK/STAT pathway
members STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B at both mRNA and protein levels in HL-60 and K-562 
leukemia cells that were undergoing apoptosis following high-dose
methylprednisolone (MP) treatment.
METHODS: HL-60 cells were treated with 0.1 mM MP and K-562 cells were treated
with 0.4 mM MP according to their IC(50) values. STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B mRNA
relative expression levels were determined by qRT-PCR whereas the protein levels 
were detected via western-blot analysis and apoptosis was evaluated by Annexin V 
method.
RESULTS: A significant decrease was seen in STAT5A mRNA relative expression level
at 48 hours of MP treatment (P < 0.05) both in HL-60 and K-562 cells. Other STATs
showed a lower downregulation in their relative expressions at 48 hours at mRNA
level for both of the cell lines. STAT proteins showed no expression change in
K-562 cells in time course experiments but while STAT5A expression was
downregulated; STAT5B showed an increase at 96 hours in HL-60 cells. Apoptosis
was triggered by high-dose MP treatment that was evaluated by fluorescent
microscopy.
CONCLUSION: The JAK/STAT pathway components may play an important role in the
apoptosis mechanism of leukemic cells under MP treatment in HL-60 and K-562
cells. Other pathways may also be involved with a post-translational modification
seen in the HL-60 cell line, with both upregulation and downregulation of protein
expression levels of STAT5B and STAT5A, respectively.

PMID: 22664047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013 Jan;113(1):117-25. doi: 10.1007/s00421-012-2418-5. Epub 
2012 May 17.

Overload training inhibits phagocytosis and ROS generation of peritoneal
macrophages: role of IGF-1 and MGF.

Xiao W(1), Chen P, Wang R, Dong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sports Medicine, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai 200438, 
China.

We tested the hypothesis that overload training inhibits the phagocytosis and the
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation of peritoneal macrophages (M<U+03D5>s), and
that insulin-like growth factor-1(IGF-1) and mechano-growth factor (MGF) produced
by macrophages may contribute to this process. Rats were randomized to two
groups, sedentary control group (n = 10) and overload training group (n = 10).
The rats of overload training group were subjected to 11 weeks of experimental
training protocol. Blood sample was used to determine the content of hemoglobin, 
testosterone, and corticosterone. The phagocytosis and the ROS generation of M<U+03D5>s 
were measured by the uptake of neutral red and the flow cytometry, respectively. 
IGF-1 and MGF mRNA levels in M<U+03D5>s were determined by real-time PCR. In addition,
we evaluated the effects of IGF-1 and MGF peptide on phagocytosis and ROS
generation of M<U+03D5>s in vitro. The data showed that overload training significantly 
decreased the body weight (19.3 %, P < 0.01), the hemoglobin (13.5 %, P < 0.01), 
the testosterone (55.3 %, P < 0.01) and the corticosterone (40.6 %, P < 0.01) in 
blood. Moreover, overload training significantly decreased the phagocytosis (27
%, P < 0.05) and the ROS generation (35 %, P < 0.01) of M<U+03D5>s. IGF-1 and MGF mRNA
levels in M<U+03D5>s from overload training group increased significantly compared with 
the control group (21-fold and 92-fold, respectively; P < 0.01). In vitro
experiments showed that IGF-1 had no significant effect on the phagocytosis and
the ROS generation of M<U+03D5>s. Unlike IGF-1, MGF peptide impaired the phagocytosis of
M<U+03D5>s in dose-independent manner. In addition, MGF peptide of some concentrations
(i.e., 1, 10, 50, 100 ng/ml) significantly inhibited the ROS generation of M<U+03D5>s.
These results suggest that overload training inhibits the phagocytosis and the
ROS generation of peritoneal macrophages, and that MGF produced by macrophages
may play a key role in this process. This may represent a novel mechanism of
immune suppression induced by overload training.

PMID: 22592456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Pineal Res. 2012 Oct;53(3):307-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.01000.x. Epub 
2012 May 14.

Impaired mouse mammary gland growth and development is mediated by melatonin and 
its MT1G protein-coupled receptor via repression of ERa, Akt1, and Stat5.

Xiang S(1), Mao L, Yuan L, Duplessis T, Jones F, Hoyle GW, Frasch T, Dauchy R,
Blask DE, Chakravarty G, Hill SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

To determine whether melatonin, via its MT(1)  G protein-coupled receptor,
impacts mouse mammary gland development, we generated a mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV)-MT1-Flag-mammary gland over-expressing (MT1-mOE) transgenic mouse.
Increased expression of the MT(1) -Flag transgene was observed in the mammary
glands of pubescent MT1-mOE transgenic female mice, with further significant
increases during pregnancy and lactation. Mammary gland whole mounts from MT1-mOE
mice showed significant reductions in ductal growth, ductal branching, and
terminal end bud formation. Elevated MT(1) receptor expression in pregnant and
lactating female MT1-mOE mice was associated with reduced lobulo-alveolar
development, inhibition of mammary epithelial cell proliferation, and significant
reductions in body weights of suckling pups. Elevated MT(1) expression in
pregnant and lactating MT1-mOE mice correlated with reduced mammary gland
expression of Akt1, phospho-Stat5, Wnt4, estrogen receptor alpha, progesterone
receptors A and B, and milk proteins ß-casein and whey acidic protein. Estrogen- 
and progesterone-stimulated mammary gland development was repressed by elevated
MT(1) receptor expression and exogenous melatonin administration. These studies
demonstrate that the MT(1) melatonin receptor and its ligand melatonin play an
important regulatory role in mammary gland development and lactation in mice
through both growth suppression and alteration of developmental paradigms.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3422609
PMID: 22582905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(4):e1002629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002629. Epub 2012 Apr 
19.

Epigenome-wide scans identify differentially methylated regions for age and
age-related phenotypes in a healthy ageing population.

Bell JT(1), Tsai PC, Yang TP, Pidsley R, Nisbet J, Glass D, Mangino M, Zhai G,
Zhang F, Valdes A, Shin SY, Dempster EL, Murray RM, Grundberg E, Hedman AK, Nica 
A, Small KS; MuTHER Consortium, Dermitzakis ET, McCarthy MI, Mill J, Spector TD, 
Deloukas P.

Collaborators: Ahmadi KR, Ainali C, Barrett A, Bataille V, Bell JT, Buil A,
Deloukas P, Dermitzakis ET, Dimas AS, Durbin R, Glass D, Grundberg E, Hassanali
N, Hedman ÅK, Ingle C, Knowles D, Krestyaninova M, Lindgren CM, Lowe CE, McCarthy
MI, Meduri E, di Meglio P, Min JL, Montgomery SB, Nestle FO, Nica AC, Nisbet J,
O'Rahilly S, Parts L, Potter S, Sekowska M, Shin SY, Small KS, Soranzo N, Spector
TD, Surdulescu G, Travers ME, Tsaprouni L, Tsoka S, Wilk A, Yang TP, Zondervan
KT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
jordana.bell@kcl.ac.uk

Age-related changes in DNA methylation have been implicated in cellular
senescence and longevity, yet the causes and functional consequences of these
variants remain unclear. To elucidate the role of age-related epigenetic changes 
in healthy ageing and potential longevity, we tested for association between
whole-blood DNA methylation patterns in 172 female twins aged 32 to 80 with age
and age-related phenotypes. Twin-based DNA methylation levels at 26,690 CpG-sites
showed evidence for mean genome-wide heritability of 18%, which was supported by 
the identification of 1,537 CpG-sites with methylation QTLs in cis at FDR 5%. We 
performed genome-wide analyses to discover differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) for sixteen age-related phenotypes (ap-DMRs) and chronological age
(a-DMRs). Epigenome-wide association scans (EWAS) identified age-related
phenotype DMRs (ap-DMRs) associated with LDL (STAT5A), lung function (WT1), and
maternal longevity (ARL4A, TBX20). In contrast, EWAS for chronological age
identified hundreds of predominantly hyper-methylated age DMRs (490 a-DMRs at FDR
5%), of which only one (TBX20) was also associated with an age-related phenotype.
Therefore, the majority of age-related changes in DNA methylation are not
associated with phenotypic measures of healthy ageing in later life. We
replicated a large proportion of a-DMRs in a sample of 44 younger adult MZ twins 
aged 20 to 61, suggesting that a-DMRs may initiate at an earlier age. We next
explored potential genetic and environmental mechanisms underlying a-DMRs and
ap-DMRs. Genome-wide overlap across cis-meQTLs, genotype-phenotype associations, 
and EWAS ap-DMRs identified CpG-sites that had cis-meQTLs with evidence for
genotype-phenotype association, where the CpG-site was also an ap-DMR for the
same phenotype. Monozygotic twin methylation difference analyses identified one
potential environmentally-mediated ap-DMR associated with total cholesterol and
LDL (CSMD1). Our results suggest that in a small set of genes DNA methylation may
be a candidate mechanism of mediating not only environmental, but also genetic
effects on age-related phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3330116
PMID: 22532803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Leukemia. 2012 Nov;26(11):2390-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.112. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Evidence for a protective role of the STAT5 transcription factor against
oxidative stress in human leukemic pre-B cells.

Cholez E(1), Debuysscher V, Bourgeais J, Boudot C, Leprince J, Tron F, Brassart
B, Regnier A, Bissac E, Pecnard E, Gouilleux F, Lassoued K, Gouilleux-Gruart V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Inserm U925, Université Picardie Jules Verne, CHU
Amiens, Amiens, France.

STAT5 transcription factors are involved in normal B lymphocyte development and
in leukemogenesis. We show that the inhibition of STAT5A expression or activity
in the NALM6, 697 and Reh leukemic pre-B cell lines, results in a higher
spontaneous apoptosis and an increased FAS-induced cell death. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying the altered pre-B cell survival are unclear. We
used a proteomic approach to identify proteins that are differentially regulated 
in cells expressing (NALM6<U+0394>5A) or not a dominant negative form of STAT5A. Among
the 14 proteins identified, six were involved in the control of the oxidative
stress like glutathione (GSH) synthetase and DJ-1. Accordingly, we showed
increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in NALM6<U+0394>5A cells and
suppression of the increased sensitivity to Fas-mediated apoptosis by the GSH
tripeptide. Similar results were observed when NALM6 cells were treated with
TAT-STAT5<U+0394>5A fusion proteins or STAT5A shRNA. In addition, the 697 and Reh pre-B 
cells were found to share number of molecular changes observed in NALM6<U+0394>5A cells 
including ROS generation, following inhibition of STAT5 expression or function.
Our results point out to a hitherto undescribed link between STAT5 and oxidative 
stress and provide new insights into STAT5 functions and their roles in
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 22522791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Immunity. 2012 Apr 20;36(4):586-99. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.02.017.

Critical Role of STAT5 transcription factor tetramerization for cytokine
responses and normal immune function.

Lin JX(1), Li P, Liu D, Jin HT, He J, Ata Ur Rasheed M, Rochman Y, Wang L, Cui K,
Liu C, Kelsall BL, Ahmed R, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Apr 20;36(4):553-5.

Cytokine-activated STAT proteins dimerize and bind to high-affinity motifs, and
N-terminal domain-mediated oligomerization of dimers allows tetramer formation
and binding to low-affinity tandem motifs, but the functions of dimers versus
tetramers are unknown. We generated Stat5a-Stat5b double knockin (DKI) N-domain
mutant mice in which STAT5 proteins form dimers but not tetramers, identified
cytokine-regulated genes whose expression required STAT5 tetramers, and defined
dimer versus tetramer consensus motifs. Whereas Stat5-deficient mice exhibited
perinatal lethality, DKI mice were viable; thus, STAT5 dimers were sufficient for
survival. Nevertheless, STAT5 DKI mice had fewer CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells, NK cells,
and CD8(+) T cells, with impaired cytokine-induced and homeostatic proliferation 
of CD8(+) T cells. Moreover, DKI CD8(+) T cell proliferation after viral
infection was diminished and DKI Treg cells did not efficiently control colitis. 
Thus, tetramerization of STAT5 is critical for cytokine responses and normal
immune function, establishing a critical role for STAT5 tetramerization in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3551341
PMID: 22520852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034561. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Focused examination of the intestinal lamina propria yields greater molecular
insight into mechanisms underlying SIV induced immune dysfunction.

Mohan M(1), Kaushal D, Aye PP, Alvarez X, Veazey RS, Lackner AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, Louisiana, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The Gastrointestinal (GI) tract is critical to AIDS pathogenesis as
it is the primary site for viral transmission and a major site of viral
replication and CD4(+) T cell destruction. Consequently GI disease, a major
complication of HIV/SIV infection can facilitate translocation of lumenal
bacterial products causing localized/systemic immune activation leading to AIDS
progression.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To better understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying GI disease we analyzed global gene expression profiles sequentially in
the intestine of the same animals prior to and at 21 and 90d post SIV infection
(PI). More importantly we maximized information gathering by examining distinct
mucosal components (intraepithelial lymphocytes, lamina propria leukocytes [LPL],
epithelium and fibrovascular stroma) separately. The use of sequential intestinal
resections combined with focused examination of distinct mucosal compartments
represents novel approaches not previously attempted. Here we report data
pertaining to the LPL. A significant increase (±1.7-fold) in immune
defense/inflammation, cell adhesion/migration, cell signaling, transcription and 
cell division/differentiation genes were observed at 21 and 90d PI. Genes
associated with the JAK-STAT pathway (IL21, IL12R, STAT5A, IL10, SOCS1) and
T-cell activation (NFATc1, CDK6, Gelsolin, Moesin) were notably upregulated at
21d PI. Markedly downregulated genes at 21d PI included IL17D/IL27 and
IL28B/IFN<U+03B3>3 (anti-HIV/viral), activation induced cytidine deaminase (B-cell
function) and approximately 57 genes regulating oxidative phosphorylation, a
critical metabolic shift associated with T-cell activation. The 90d transcriptome
revealed further augmentation of inflammation (CXCL11, chitinase-1, JNK3), immune
activation (CD38, semaphorin7A, CD109), B-cell dysfunction (CD70), intestinal
microbial translocation (Lipopolysaccharide binding protein) and mitochondrial
antiviral signaling (NLRX1) genes. Reduced expression of CD28, CD4, CD86, CD93,
NFATc1 (T-cells), TLR8, IL8, CCL18, DECTIN1 (macrophages), HLA-DOA and GPR183
(B-cells) at 90d PI suggests further deterioration of overall immune function.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The reported transcriptional signatures provide
significant new details on the molecular pathology of HIV/SIV induced GI disease 
and provide new opportunity for future investigation.

PMCID: PMC3325268
PMID: 22511950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3374-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-406611.

Advancing the STATus of MPN pathogenesis.

Shah NP(1), Shannon K.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3550-60.
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3539-49.

In this issue of Blood, Yan et al and Walz et al exploit mouse genetics to
investigate the contribution of signal transducer and activator of transcription 
5 (STAT5) to the abnormal in vivo growth of hematopoietic cells expressing
JAK2(V617F) or BCR-ABL. Eliminating STAT5 expression had dramatic effects in both
contexts, and this new work and other recent studies support the therapeutic
potential of targeting pathways regulated by this important signaling molecule in
patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs).

PMID: 22500049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034467. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Dual anti-OX40/IL-2 therapy augments tumor immunotherapy via IL-2R-mediated
regulation of OX40 expression.

Redmond WL(1), Triplett T, Floyd K, Weinberg AD.

Author information: 
(1)Earle A. Chiles Research Institute, Providence Portland Medical Center,
Portland, Oregon, United States of America. william.redmond@providence.org

The provision of T cell co-stimulation via members of the TNFR super-family,
including OX40 (CD134) and 4-1BB (CD137), provides critical signals that promote 
T cell survival and differentiation. Recent studies have demonstrated that
ligation of OX40 can augment T cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity in pre-clinical 
models and more importantly, OX40 agonists are under clinical development for
cancer immunotherapy. OX40 is of particular interest as a therapeutic target as
it is not expressed on naïve T cells but rather, is transiently up-regulated
following TCR stimulation. Although TCR engagement is necessary for inducing OX40
expression, the downstream signals that regulate OX40 itself remain unclear. In
this study, we demonstrate that OX40 expression is regulated through a TCR and
common gamma chain cytokine-dependent signaling cascade that requires
JAK3-mediated activation of the downstream transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5.
Furthermore, combined treatment with an agonist anti-OX40 mAb and IL-2 augmented 
tumor immunotherapy against multiple tumor types. Dual therapy was also able to
restore the function of anergic tumor-reactive CD8 T cells in mice with long-term
well-established (>5 wks) tumors, leading to increased survival of the
tumor-bearing hosts. Together, these data reveal the ability of TCR/common gamma 
chain cytokine signaling to regulate OX40 expression and demonstrate a novel
means of augmenting cancer immunotherapy by providing dual anti-OX40/common gamma
chain cytokine-directed therapy.

PMCID: PMC3319580
PMID: 22496812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Immunol. 2012 May 1;188(9):4644-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100272. Epub 2012
Mar 28.

Type 1 diabetes-associated IL2RA variation lowers IL-2 signaling and contributes 
to diminished CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell function.

Garg G(1), Tyler JR, Yang JH, Cutler AJ, Downes K, Pekalski M, Bell GL, Nutland
S, Peakman M, Todd JA, Wicker LS, Tree TI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, School of Medicine, King's College London, London
SE1 9RT, United Kingdom.

Numerous reports have demonstrated that CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) 
from individuals with a range of human autoimmune diseases, including type 1
diabetes, are deficient in their ability to control autologous proinflammatory
responses when compared with nondiseased, control individuals. Treg dysfunction
could be a primary, causal event or may result from perturbations in the immune
system during disease development. Polymorphisms in genes associated with Treg
function, such as IL2RA, confer a higher risk of autoimmune disease. Although
this suggests a primary role for defective Tregs in autoimmunity, a link between 
IL2RA gene polymorphisms and Treg function has not been examined. We addressed
this by examining the impact of an IL2RA haplotype associated with type 1
diabetes on Treg fitness and suppressive function. Studies were conducted using
healthy human subjects to avoid any confounding effects of disease. We
demonstrated that the presence of an autoimmune disease-associated IL2RA
haplotype correlates with diminished IL-2 responsiveness in Ag-experienced CD4(+)
T cells, as measured by phosphorylation of STAT5a, and is associated with lower
levels of FOXP3 expression by Tregs and a reduction in their ability to suppress 
proliferation of autologous effector T cells. These data offer a rationale that
contributes to the molecular and cellular mechanisms through which polymorphisms 
in the IL-2RA gene affect immune regulation, and consequently upon susceptibility
to autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC3378653
PMID: 22461703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2012 Jan;35(1):50-4.

[Effect of STAT5 gene silencing on the proliferation of T lymphocytes in a mouse 
model of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiu C(1), Zhang T, Qi H, Peng WK, Shi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan
University, Shenzhen 518020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of silencing STAT5 gene on the proliferation of T 
lymphocytes in a mouse model of asthma.
METHODS: Spleen T-lymphocytes of normal and asthmatic mice were selected by
immunomagnetic beads, and the STAT5a/b genes of these T-lymphocytes were silenced
by siRNA. The mRNA of STAT5a/b was detected by fluorescence quantitative PCR, and
the protein by Western blot. The proliferation rates of T-lymphocytes was
evaluated by CCK-8, and the cell cycle and the cell apoptosis was measured by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: (1) Significant inflammatory cell infiltration was present in asthmatic 
mouse airways, as compared to the normal control mice. (2) The STAT5a/b mRNA
expression of the asthmatic group was significantly higher compared with the
normal control group. (3) Compared to the blank control group, the mRNA
expression of STAT5a/b was reduced in the siRNA-specific intervention (T: 35.014 
vs 14.553, P < 0.01). The protein expression of STAT5a/b was also reduced after
siRNA-specific intervention (T: -10.958 vs -14.706, P < 0.01). The proliferation 
rates of T lymphocytes was reduced after siRNA-specific intervention (T: 8.692 vs
10.540, P < 0.01), and the number of T-lymphocytes in proliferative phase was all
significantly reduced after siRNA-specific intervention (T: 6.975 vs -5.567, P < 
0.05). The apoptosis rates of T lymphocytes were significantly increased after
siRNA-specific intervention (T: -6.404 vs -6.038, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: RNA interference specifically reduced the expression of STAT5a/b,
inhibited the proliferation of T lymphocytes, and promoted the apoptosis of T
lymphocytes in a mouse model of asthma.

PMID: 22455944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 May;1823(5):987-96. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.02.016.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Prolactin and epidermal growth factor stimulate adipophilin synthesis in HC11
mouse mammary epithelial cells via the PI3-kinase/Akt/mTOR pathway.

Pauloin A(1), Chanat E.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR1196 Génomique et Physiologie de la Lactation, R-78350 Jouy-en-Josas, 
France. alain.pauloin@jouy.inra.fr

The aim of the present study is to estimate the role played by cortisol,
prolactin (PRL) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) in the synthesis of adipocyte
differentiation-related protein (ADRP) as compared to the well-studied regulation
of<U+F020> ß-casein synthesis by these hormones in the mammary epithelial cell line
HC11. This comparison between a cytoplasmic lipid droplet-associated protein,
which is strictly specific to both lipid accumulation and secretion by lactating 
mammary epithelial cells, and an archetypal milk protein is useful for evaluating
the extent to which a mechanistic relationship exists between biosynthesis,
transport and secretion of these two major milk components. We found that
cortisol inhibits PRL-stimulated ADRP synthesis, as opposed to its known
stimulating effect on ß-casein synthesis. The involvement of PRL and EGF in ADRP 
synthesis was explored by means of a battery of inhibitors. The Jak2 inhibitor
AG490 provoked a stimulation of ADRP synthesis whereas it totally suppressed that
of ß-casein. The use of AG1478, a specific inhibitor of EGF receptor
phosphorylation, or of PD98059, a specific MEK inhibitor, revealed that the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK1/2 pathway has no significant influence on ADRP levels.
Inhibition of JNK was also ineffective. In contrast, incubation of the cells with
SB 203580, a specific inhibitor of p38, slightly stimulated ADRP synthesis and
induced a proportional dose-response inhibition of PRL-induced ß-casein
synthesis. Finally, cell treatment with wortmannin or LY294002 revealed that both
PRL and EGF positively regulate ADRP and ß-casein synthesis through PI3-kinase
signaling. Because both the Akt inhibitor MK-2206 and the mTOR inhibitor
rapamycin provoked a strong diminution of PRL-induced synthesis of the two
proteins, and because oleate induced phosphorylation of Akt, we concluded that,
in the mammary epithelial cell line HC11, the PI3-kinase/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathway strongly participates in ß-casein synthesis and is a main regulator of
ADRP expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22426621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Genes Cancer. 2011 Aug;2(8):805-17. doi: 10.1177/1947601911428224.

Identification of c-Myb Target Genes in K562 Cells Reveals a Role for c-Myb as a 
Master Regulator.

Lorenzo PI(1), Brendeford EM, Gilfillan S, Gavrilov AA, Leedsak M, Razin SV,
Eskeland R, Sæther T, Gabrielsen OS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The c-Myb transcription factor is an important regulator of hematopoietic cell
development. c-Myb is expressed in immature hematopoietic cells and plays a
direct role in lineage fate selection, cell cycle progression, and
differentiation of myeloid as well as B- and T-lymphoid progenitor cells. As a
DNA-binding transcription factor, c-Myb regulates specific gene programs through 
activation of target genes. Still, our understanding of these programs is
incomplete. Here, we report a set of novel c-Myb target genes, identified using a
combined approach: specific c-Myb knockdown by 2 different siRNAs and subsequent 
global expression profiling, combined with the confirmation of direct binding of 
c-Myb to the target promoters by ChIP assays. The combination of these 2
approaches, as well as additional validation such as cloning and testing the
promoters in reporter assays, confirmed that MYADM, LMO2, GATA2, STAT5A, and
IKZF1 are target genes of c-Myb. Additional studies, using chromosome
conformation capture, demonstrated that c-Myb target genes may directly interact 
with each other, indicating that these genes may be coordinately regulated. Of
the 5 novel target genes identified, 3 are transcription factors, and one is a
transcriptional co-regulator, supporting a role of c-Myb as a master regulator
controlling the expression of other transcriptional regulators in the
hematopoietic system.

PMCID: PMC3278898
PMID: 22393465  [PubMed]


233. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16835-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.302166. Epub
2012 Feb 29.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 mediates neuronal apoptosis
induced by inhibition of Rac GTPase activity.

Stankiewicz TR(1), Loucks FA, Schroeder EK, Nevalainen MT, Tyler KL, Aktories K, 
Bouchard RJ, Linseman DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, University 
of Denver, Denver, Colorado 80208, USA.

In several neuronal cell types, the small GTPase Rac is essential for survival.
We have shown previously that the Rho family GTPase inhibitor Clostridium
difficile toxin B (ToxB) induces apoptosis in primary rat cerebellar granule
neurons (CGNs) principally via inhibition of Rac GTPase function. In the present 
study, incubation with ToxB activated a proapoptotic Janus kinase (JAK)/signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway, and a pan-JAK inhibitor
protected CGNs from Rac inhibition. STAT1 expression was induced by ToxB;
however, CGNs from STAT1 knock-out mice succumbed to ToxB-induced apoptosis as
readily as wild-type CGNs. STAT3 displayed enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation
following treatment with ToxB, and a reputed inhibitor of STAT3, cucurbitacin
(JSI-124), reduced CGN apoptosis. Unexpectedly, JSI-124 failed to block STAT3
phosphorylation, and CGNs were not protected from ToxB by other known STAT3
inhibitors. In contrast, STAT5A tyrosine phosphorylation induced by ToxB was
suppressed by JSI-124. In addition, roscovitine similarly inhibited STAT5A
phosphorylation and protected CGNs from ToxB-induced apoptosis. Consistent with
these results, adenoviral infection with a dominant negative STAT5 mutant, but
not wild-type STAT5, significantly decreased ToxB-induced apoptosis of CGNs.
Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation with a STAT5 antibody revealed increased
STAT5 binding to the promoter region of prosurvival Bcl-xL. STAT5 was recruited
to the Bcl-xL promoter region in a ToxB-dependent manner, and this DNA binding
preceded Bcl-xL down-regulation, suggesting transcriptional repression. These
data indicate that a novel JAK/STAT5 proapoptotic pathway significantly
contributes to neuronal apoptosis induced by the inhibition of Rac GTPase.

PMCID: PMC3351344
PMID: 22378792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Med Rep. 2012 May;5(5):1215-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.801. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

STAT5a-targeting miRNA enhances chemosensitivity to cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil 
in human colorectal cancer cells.

Hong X(1), Chen G, Wang M, Lou C, Mao Y, Li Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medical Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, PR China.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) has been shown to be
involved in a variety of cellular processes, including survival, proliferation,
invasion, angiogenesis and immune evasion and is frequently overexpressed in
human solid tumors and blood malignancies. The aim of this study was to
investigate the role of STAT5a in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression. We
inhibited the expression of STAT5a using lentivirus-mediated artificial microRNA 
(miRNA) interference in vitro and investigated the viability of CRC cells by
CCK-8 assay. We observed the cell viability after treatment with cisplatin (CDDP)
or 5-fluorouracil (5-Fu) by CCK-8 assay, and the apoptosis induced by
chemotherapy using flow cytometric analysis and Annexin V RFP staining assay. We 
inhibited the mRNA expression by 54% and the protein expression by 60% of STAT5
by RNA interference targeting STAT5a. Cell viability assays showed that
inhibition of STAT5a did not affect the viability of SW1116 cells. However, we
found that inhibition of STAT5a restored the sensitivity of SW1116 cells to CDDP 
and 5-Fu. In additional experiments, we found that inhibition of STAT5a
significantly promoted CRC cell apoptosis by CDDP and 5-Fu. In the present study,
we found that inhibition of STAT5a promotes apoptosis of CRC cells induced by
chemotherapy drugs, such as CDDP or 5-Fu. These results suggest that inhibition
of STAT5a may serve as a potential new target for CRC treatment.

PMID: 22367509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Jun;33(3):390-400. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.02.002. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Perinatal exposure to xenoestrogens impairs mammary gland differentiation and
modifies milk composition in Wistar rats.

Kass L(1), Altamirano GA, Bosquiazzo VL, Luque EH, Muñoz-de-Toro M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, Universidad
Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina.

The current study examined the consequences of perinatal (gestation+lactation)
exposure to Bisphenol A (BPA) or diethylstilbestrol (DES) on F1 mammary gland
(MG) differentiation. BPA (0, 0.7 or 64 µg/kg bw/day) or DES (6 µg/kg bw/day) was
administered in the drinking water of F0 rats from gestational day 9 (GD9) until 
weaning. F1 females were bred, MG samples obtained on GD18 and GD21, and, during 
lactation, milk yield and milk protein composition were assessed. On GD18, there 
was a decrease in a-lactalbumin and ß-casein levels that was accompanied by
reduced prolactin receptor and Stat5a/b expression. On GD21, delayed histological
MG differentiation was observed. ß-Casein levels remained decreased on GD21 and
in milk samples. Moreover, the BPA- and DES-exposed groups had an altered milk
yield pattern during lactation. The long-lasting effects of perinatal exposure to
low doses of xenoestrogens included delayed MG differentiation, altered milk
yield and modified milk composition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22349186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031533. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

In vitro murine leukemia retroviral integration and structure fluctuation of
target DNA.

Tsuruyama T(1), Liu W, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
tsuruyam@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Integration of the retroviral genome into host DNA is a critical step in the life
cycle of a retrovirus. Although assays for in vitro integration have been
developed, the actual DNA sequences targeted by murine leukemia retrovirus (MLV) 
during in vitro reproduction are unknown. While previous studies used artificial 
target sequences, we developed an assay using target DNA sequences from common
MLV integration sites in Stat5a and c-myc in the genome of murine lymphomas and
successfully integrated MLV into the target DNA in vitro. We calculated the free 
energy change during folding of the target sequence DNA and found a close
correlation between the calculated free energy change and the number of
integrations. Indeed, the integrations closely correlated with fluctuation of the
structure of the target DNA segment. These data suggest that the fluctuation may 
generate a DNA structure favorable for in vitro integration into the target DNA. 
The approach described here can provide data on the biochemical properties of the
integration reaction to which the target DNA structure may contribute.

PMCID: PMC3279379
PMID: 22348097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012 Jun;11(6):M112.017764. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.017764.
Epub 2012 Feb 16.

TSLP signaling network revealed by SILAC-based phosphoproteomics.

Zhong J(1), Kim MS, Chaerkady R, Wu X, Huang TC, Getnet D, Mitchell CJ, Palapetta
SM, Sharma J, O'Meally RN, Cole RN, Yoda A, Moritz A, Loriaux MM, Rush J,
Weinstock DM, Tyner JW, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Biological
Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 733 N Broadway,
Baltimore, 21205 Maryland, USA.

Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) is a cytokine that plays diverse roles in the
regulation of immune responses. TSLP requires a heterodimeric receptor complex
consisting of IL-7 receptor a subunit and its unique TSLP receptor (gene symbol
CRLF2) to transmit signals in cells. Abnormal TSLP signaling (e.g. overexpression
of TSLP or its unique receptor TSLPR) contributes to the development of a number 
of diseases including asthma and leukemia. However, a detailed understanding of
the signaling pathways activated by TSLP remains elusive. In this study, we
performed a global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of the TSLP signaling
network using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture. By
employing titanium dioxide in addition to antiphosphotyrosine antibodies as
enrichment methods, we identified 4164 phosphopeptides on 1670 phosphoproteins.
Using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture-based quantitation, 
we determined that the phosphorylation status of 226 proteins was modulated by
TSLP stimulation. Our analysis identified activation of several members of the
Src and Tec families of kinases including Btk, Lyn, and Tec by TSLP for the first
time. In addition, we report TSLP-induced phosphorylation of protein phosphatases
such as Ptpn6 (SHP-1) and Ptpn11 (Shp2), which has also not been reported
previously. Co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that Shp2 binds to the adapter
protein Gab2 in a TSLP-dependent manner. This is the first demonstration of an
inducible protein complex in TSLP signaling. A kinase inhibitor screen revealed
that pharmacological inhibition of PI-3 kinase, Jak family kinases, Src family
kinases or Btk suppressed TSLP-dependent cellular proliferation making them
candidate therapeutic targets in diseases resulting from aberrant TSLP signaling.
Our study is the first phosphoproteomic analysis of the TSLP signaling pathway
that greatly expands our understanding of TSLP signaling and provides novel
therapeutic targets for TSLP/TSLPR-associated diseases in humans.

PMCID: PMC3433886
PMID: 22345495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Inflamm Res. 2012 May;61(5):511-20. doi: 10.1007/s00011-012-0441-y. Epub 2012 Feb
10.

Effects of 1,25-(OH)(2)D (3) on the expressions of vitamin D receptor, STAT5 and 
cytoskeletal rearrangement in human monocytes incubated with sera from type 2
diabetes patients and diabetic nephropathy patients with uremia.

Yang M(1), Shen Z, Chen D, Gan H, Shen Q, Yang B, Du X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of ChongQing Medical
University, ChongQing, China. yangmengxue02@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) plus human recombinant interleukin-15 (IL-15) on expression of vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and STAT5, and cytoskeletal rearrangement in human monocytes
incubated with sera from type 2 diabetes (T2DM) patients and diabetic nephropathy
(DN) patients with uremia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Peripheral sera were isolated from healthy volunteers
(control group, T2DM patients and DN uremic non-dialysis patients). After
incubation with or without 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), THP-1 monocytes were treated with LPS
plus IL-15 prior to the collection of cells and supernatants. VDR mRNA
transcription was examined by RT-PCR, whilst THP-1 monocytic VDR, STAT5 and
p-STAT5 expressions were investigated by Western blotting. Concentrations of IL-6
and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in supernatants were assessed by
ELISA. Immunofluorescence and a laser confocal microscopy was used to examine the
expression of VDR and cytoskeletal proteins.
RESULTS: Compared to the normal control, LPS and IL-15 down-regulate monocytic
VDR expression in T2DM patients and DN uremic patients, whilst with cytoskeletal 
rearrangement, they up-regulate p-STAT5 expression as well as IL-6 and MCP-1
activity. Such effects could be in part blocked by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3).
CONCLUSION: The above results suggest that the anti-inflammatory mechanism of
1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) may be related to cytoskeletal proteins, VDR and STAT5 signaling
pathway.

PMID: 22322482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 May;40(10):4461-72. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks056. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

Genome-wide analyses reveal the extent of opportunistic STAT5 binding that does
not yield transcriptional activation of neighboring genes.

Zhu BM(1), Kang K, Yu JH, Chen W, Smith HE, Lee D, Sun HW, Wei L, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STAT) 5A/B regulate
cytokine-inducible genes upon binding to GAS motifs. It is not known what
percentage of genes with GAS motifs bind to and are regulated by STAT5. Moreover,
it is not clear whether genome-wide STAT5 binding is modulated by its
concentration. To clarify these issues we established genome-wide STAT5 binding
upon growth hormone (GH) stimulation of wild-type (WT) mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) and MEFs overexpressing STAT5A more than 20-fold. Upon GH
stimulation, 23<U+2009>827 and 111<U+2009>939 STAT5A binding sites were detected in WT and
STAT5A overexpressing MEFs, respectively. 13<U+2009>278 and 71<U+2009>561 peaks contained at
least one GAS motif. 1586 and 8613 binding sites were located within 2.5<U+2009>kb of
promoter sequences, respectively. Stringent filtering revealed 78 genes in which 
the promoter/upstream region (-10<U+2009>kb to +0.5<U+2009>kb) was recognized by STAT5 both in 
WT and STAT5 overexpressing MEFs and 347 genes that bound STAT5 only in
overexpressing cells. Genome-wide expression analyses identified that the
majority of STAT5-bound genes was not under GH control. Up to 40% of STAT5-bound 
genes were not expressed. For the first time we demonstrate the magnitude of
opportunistic genomic STAT5 binding that does not translate into transcriptional 
activation of neighboring genes.

PMCID: PMC3378893
PMID: 22319210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Apr;126(2):554-68. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs024. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) regulates silica-induced inflammation but not
fibrosis.

Beamer CA(1), Seaver BP, Shepherd DM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, Department of Biomedical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Montana, Missoula, Montana 59812, USA.
celine.beamer@umontana.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated transcription factor, is 
responsible for mediating a variety of pharmacological and toxicological effects 
caused by halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). However, recent evidence has revealed
that the AhR also has numerous physiological roles aside from xenobiotic
metabolism, including regulation of immune and inflammatory signaling as well as 
normal development and homeostasis of several organs. To investigate the role of 
the AhR in crystalline silica (SiO(2))-induced inflammation and fibrosis, C57Bl/6
and AhR(-/)(-) mice were exposed to SiO(2) or vehicle. Similarly, C57Bl/6 mice
were exposed to SiO(2) and TCDD either simultaneously or sequentially to assess
whether AhR activation alters inflammation and fibrosis. SiO(2)-induced acute
lung inflammation was more severe in AhR(-)(/-) mice; however, the fibrotic
response of AhR(-)(/-) mice was attenuated compared with C57Bl/6 mice. In a model
of chronic SiO(2) exposure, AhR activation by TCDD in C57Bl/6 mice resulted in
reduced inflammation; however, the fibrotic response was not affected. Bone
marrow-derived macrophages (BMM) from AhR(-)(/-) mice also produced higher levels
of cytokines and chemokines in response to SiO(2). Analysis of gene expression
revealed that BMM derived from AhR(-)(/-) mice exhibit increased levels of
pro-interleukin (IL)-1ß, IL-6, and Bcl-2, yet decreased levels of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)2, STAT5a, and serpin B2
(Pai-2) in response to SiO(2).

PMCID: PMC3307612
PMID: 22273745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030113. Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Cell hierarchy and lineage commitment in the bovine mammary gland.

Rauner G(1), Barash I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet-Dagan, Israel.

The bovine mammary gland is a favorable organ for studying mammary cell hierarchy
due to its robust milk-production capabilities that reflect the adaptation of its
cell populations to extensive expansion and differentiation. It also shares basic
characteristics with the human breast, and identification of its cell composition
may broaden our understanding of the diversity in cell hierarchy among mammals.
Here, Lin<U+207B> epithelial cells were sorted according to expression of CD24 and CD49f
into four populations: CD24(med)CD49f(pos) (putative stem cells, puStm),
CD24(neg)CD49f(pos) (Basal), CD24(high)CD49f(neg) (putative progenitors, puPgt)
and CD24(med)CD49f(neg) (luminal, Lum). These populations maintained differential
gene expression of lineage markers and markers of stem cells and luminal
progenitors. Of note was the high expression of Stat5a in the puPgt cells, and of
Notch1, Delta1, Jagged1 and Hey1 in the puStm and Basal populations. Cultured
puStm and Basal cells formed lineage-restricted basal or luminal clones and after
re-sorting, colonies that preserved a duct-like alignment of epithelial layers.
In contrast, puPgt and Lum cells generated only luminal clones and unorganized
colonies. Under non-adherent culture conditions, the puPgt and puStm populations 
generated significantly more floating colonies. The increase in cell number
during culture provides a measure of propagation potential, which was highest for
the puStm cells. Taken together, these analyses position puStm cells at the top
of the cell hierarchy and denote the presence of both bi-potent and luminally
restricted progenitors. In addition, a population of differentiated luminal cells
was marked. Finally, combining ALDH activity with cell-surface marker analyses
defined a small subpopulation that is potentially stem cell-enriched.

PMCID: PMC3258259
PMID: 22253899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3550-60. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-397554. Epub 2012 
Jan 10.

Essential role for Stat5a/b in myeloproliferative neoplasms induced by BCR-ABL1
and JAK2(V617F) in mice.

Walz C(1), Ahmed W, Lazarides K, Betancur M, Patel N, Hennighausen L, Zaleskas
VM, Van Etten RA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3374-6.

STAT5 proteins are constitutively activated in malignant cells from many patients
with leukemia, including the myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) chronic myeloid 
leukemia (CML) and polycythemia vera (PV), but whether STAT5 is essential for the
pathogenesis of these diseases is not known. In the present study, we used mice
with a conditional null mutation in the Stat5a/b gene locus to determine the
requirement for STAT5 in MPNs induced by BCR-ABL1 and JAK2(V617F) in retroviral
transplantation models of CML and PV. Loss of one Stat5a/b allele resulted in a
decrease in BCR-ABL1-induced CML-like MPN and the appearance of B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, whereas complete deletion of Stat5a/b prevented the
development of leukemia in primary recipients. However, BCR-ABL1 was expressed
and active in Stat5-null leukemic stem cells, and Stat5 deletion did not prevent 
progression to lymphoid blast crisis or abolish established B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. JAK2(V617F) failed to induce polycythemia in recipients
after deletion of Stat5a/b, although the loss of STAT5 did not prevent the
development of myelofibrosis. These results demonstrate that STAT5a/b is
essential for the induction of CML-like leukemia by BCR-ABL1 and of polycythemia 
by JAK2(V617F), and validate STAT5a/b and the genes they regulate as targets for 
therapy in these MPNs.

PMCID: PMC3325042
PMID: 22234689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 24;287(9):6490-502. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.254631. Epub 2011
Dec 23.

Angiogenesis induced by signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A
(STAT5A) is dependent on autocrine activity of proliferin.

Yang X(1), Qiao D, Meyer K, Pier T, Keles S, Friedl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

Multiple secreted factors induce the formation of new blood vessels
(angiogenesis). The signal transduction events that orchestrate the numerous
cellular activities required for angiogenesis remain incompletely understood. We 
have shown previously that STAT5 plays a pivotal role in angiogenesis induced by 
FGF2 and FGF8b. To delineate the signaling pathway downstream of STAT5, we
expressed constitutively active (CA) or dominant-negative (DN) mutant STAT5A in
mouse brain endothelial cells (EC). We found that the conditioned medium from
CA-STAT5A but not from dominant-negative STAT5A overexpressing EC is sufficient
to induce EC invasion and tube formation, indicating that STAT5A regulates the
secretion of autocrine proangiogenic factors. Conversely, CA-STAT5A-induced
conditioned medium had no effect on EC proliferation. Using a comparative
genome-wide transcription array screen, we identified the prolactin family member
proliferin (PLF1 and PLF4) as a candidate autocrine factor. The
CA-STAT5A-dependent transcription and secretion of PLF by EC was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. CA-STAT5A binds to the
PLF1 promoter region, suggesting a direct transcriptional regulation. Knockdown
of PLF expression by shRNA or by blocking of PLF activity with neutralizing
antibodies removed the CA-STAT5A-dependent proangiogenic activity from the
conditioned medium of EC. Similarly, the ability of concentrated conditioned
medium from CA-STAT5A transfected EC to induce angiogenesis in Matrigel plugs in 
vivo was abolished when PLF was depleted from the medium. These observations
demonstrate a FGF/STAT5/PLF signaling cascade in EC and implicate PLF as
autocrine regulator of EC invasion and tube formation.

PMCID: PMC3307309
PMID: 22199350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 24;287(9):6668-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.271346. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Heparanase induces signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
protein phosphorylation: preclinical and clinical significance in head and neck
cancer.

Cohen-Kaplan V(1), Jrbashyan J, Yanir Y, Naroditsky I, Ben-Izhak O, Ilan N,
Doweck I, Vlodavsky I.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Vascular Biology Research Center, Bruce Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine, Technion, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Activity of heparanase is implicated strongly in dissemination of metastatic
tumor cells and cells of the immune system. In addition, heparanase enhances the 
phosphorylation of selected signaling molecules, including SRC and EGFR, in a
manner that requires secretion but not enzymatic activity of heparanase and is
mediated by its C-terminal domain. Clinically, heparanase staining is associated 
with larger tumors and increased EGFR phosphorylation in head and neck carcinoma.
We hypothesized that signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins mediate the protumorigenic function of heparanase downstream of the
EGFR. We provide evidence that heparanase enhances the phosphorylation of STAT3
and STAT5b but not STAT5a. Moreover, enhanced proliferation of heparanase
transfected cells was attenuated by STAT3 and STAT5b siRNA, but not STAT5a or
STAT1 siRNA. Clinically, STAT3 phosphorylation was associated with head and neck 
cancer progression, EGFR phosphorylation, and heparanase expression and cellular 
localization. Notably, cytoplasmic rather than nuclear phospho-STAT3 correlated
with increased tumor size (T-stage; p = 0.007), number of metastatic neck lymph
nodes (p = 0.05), and reduced survival of patients (p = 0.04).

PMCID: PMC3307274
PMID: 22194600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Mar 1;302(5):C804-20. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00379.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Nongenomic STAT5-dependent effects on Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum
structure and function.

Lee JE(1), Yang YM, Liang FX, Gough DJ, Levy DE, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595,
USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 May;302(10):C1568.

We report unexpected nongenomic functions of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 5 species in the cytoplasm aimed at preserving the structure
and function of the Golgi apparatus and rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in
vascular cells. Immunoimaging and green fluorescent protein-tagged-STAT5a protein
localization studies showed the constitutive association of nonphosphorylated
STAT5a, and to a lesser extent STAT5b, with the Golgi apparatus and of STAT5a
with centrosomes in human pulmonary arterial endothelial and smooth muscle cells.
Acute knockdown of STAT5a/b species using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs),
including in the presence of an mRNA synthesis inhibitor
(5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole), produced a dramatic phenotype
within 1 day, consisting of dilatation and fragmentation of Golgi cisternae, a
marked tubule-to-cyst change in the ER, increased accumulation of reticulon-4
(RTN4)/Nogo-B and atlastin-3 (ATL3) at cyst-zone boundaries, cystic separation of
the outer and inner nuclear membranes, accompanied by scalloped/lunate distortion
of the nucleus, with accumulation of RTN4 on convex sides of distorted nuclei.
These cells showed inhibition of vesicular stomatitis virus G protein
glycoprotein trafficking, mitochondrial fragmentation, and reduced mitochondrial 
function. STAT5a/b(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts also showed altered ER/Golgi
dynamics. RTN4 knockdown using siRNA did not affect development of the cystic
phenotype; ATL3 siRNA led to effacement of cyst-zone boundaries. In magnetic-bead
cross-immunopanning assays, ATL3 bound both STAT5a and STAT5b. Remarkably, this
novel cystic ER/lunate nucleus phenotype was characteristic of vascular cells in 
arterial lesions of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension, an unrelentingly fatal
human disease. These data provide evidence of a STAT-family protein regulating
the structure of a cytoplasmic organelle and implicate this mechanism in the
pathogenesis of a human disease.

PMCID: PMC3311300
PMID: 22159083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. BMC Cancer. 2011 Dec 9;11:512. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-512.

Regulation of hTERT by BCR-ABL at multiple levels in K562 cells.

Chai JH(1), Zhang Y, Tan WH, Chng WJ, Li B, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, 117597 Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: The cytogenetic characteristic of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is
the formation of the Philadelphia chromosome gene product, BCR-ABL. Given that
BCR-ABL is the specific target of Gleevec in CML treatment, we investigated the
regulation of the catalytic component of telomerase, hTERT, by BCR-ABL at
multiple levels in K562 cells.
METHODS: Molecular techniques such as over expression, knockdown, real-time PCR, 
immunoprecipitation, western blotting, reporter assay, confocal microscopy,
telomerase assays and microarray were used to suggest that hTERT expression and
activity is modulated by BCR-ABL at multiple levels.
RESULTS: Our results suggest that BCR-ABL plays an important role in regulating
hTERT in K562 (BCR-ABL positive human leukemia) cells. When Gleevec inhibited the
tyrosine kinase activity of BCR-ABL, phosphorylation of hTERT was downregulated, 
therefore suggesting a positive correlation between BCR-ABL and hTERT. Gleevec
treatment inhibited hTERT at mRNA level and significantly reduced telomerase
activity (TA) in K562 cells, but not in HL60 or Jurkat cells (BCR-ABL negative
cells). We also demonstrated that the transcription factor STAT5a plays a
critical role in hTERT gene regulation in K562 cells. Knockdown of STAT5a, but
not STAT5b, resulted in a marked downregulation of hTERT mRNA level, TA and hTERT
protein level in K562 cells. Furthermore, translocation of hTERT from nucleoli to
nucleoplasm was observed in K562 cells induced by Gleevec.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal that BCR-ABL can regulate TA at multiple levels,
including transcription, post-translational level, and proper localization. Thus,
suppression of cell growth and induction of apoptosis by Gleevec treatment may be
partially due to TA inhibition. Additionally, we have identified STAT5a as
critical mediator of the hTERT gene expression in BCR-ABL positive CML cells,
suggesting that targeting STAT5a may be a promising therapeutic strategy for
BCR-ABL positive CML patients.

PMCID: PMC3259104
PMID: 22151181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Commun Adhes. 2011 Oct;18(5):104-16. doi: 10.3109/15419061.2011.639468. Epub
2011 Dec 5.

Gap junctions mediate STAT5-independent ß-casein expression in CID-9 mammary
epithelial cells.

Talhouk RS(1), Khalil AA, Bajjani R, Rahme GJ, El-Sabban ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
rtalhouk@aub.edu.lb

Crosstalk between gap junction intracellular communication (GJIC), STAT5 and
OCT-1 in gap junction (GJ)-dependent ß-casein expression was investigated. CID-9 
mammary cells plated with prolactin on non-adherent substratum (poly-HEMA)
expressed ß-casein independent of STAT5 only in the presence of the GJIC inducer,
cAMP. Nuclear STAT5 levels were not detectable. By contrast, cells on EHS-drip
expressed ß-casein in a STAT5-dependent manner and nuclear STAT5 levels were
up-regulated. A 75 kDa OCT-1 isoform was detected in conditions that induced
ß-casein expression regardless of substratum. Interestingly, 40 and 28 kDa OCT-1 
isoforms were induced in cells on polyHEMA with cAMP. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) for OCT-1 revealed two band shifts in cells on polyHEMA with 
cAMP and on EHS-drip, which were repressed by the GJIC inhibitor, 18a-GA. These
studies demonstrated that mammary cells on polyHEMA expressed ß-casein in
response to prolactin in a pathway that involves GJIC and OCT-1 and is
independent of STAT5 nuclear translocation.

PMID: 22142338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 13;287(3):2045-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.311142. Epub 2011 
Nov 30.

Novel mechanism for Fc{epsilon}RI-mediated signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) tyrosine phosphorylation and the selective influence of
STAT5B over mast cell cytokine production.

Pullen NA(1), Barnstein BO, Falanga YT, Wang Z, Suzuki R, Tamang TD, Khurana MC, 
Harry EA, Draber P, Bunting KD, Mizuno K, Wilson BS, Ryan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
23284, USA.

Previous studies indicate that STAT5 expression is required for mast cell
development, survival, and IgE-mediated function. STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation 
is swiftly and transiently induced by activation of the high affinity IgE
receptor, FceRI. However, the mechanism for this mode of activation remains
unknown. In this study we observed that STAT5 co-localizes with FceRI in
antigen-stimulated mast cells. This localization was supported by cholesterol
depletion of membranes, which ablated STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation. Through the
use of various pharmacological inhibitors and murine knock-out models, we found
that IgE-mediated STAT5 activation is dependent upon Fyn kinase, independent of
Syk, PI3K, Akt, Bruton's tyrosine kinase, and JAK2, and enhanced in the context
of Lyn kinase deficiency. STAT5 immunoprecipitation revealed that
unphosphorylated protein preassociates with Fyn and that this association
diminishes significantly during mast cell activation. SHP-1 tyrosine phosphatase 
deficiency modestly enhanced STAT5 phosphorylation. This effect was more apparent
in the absence of Gab2, a scaffolding protein that docks with multiple negative
regulators, including SHP-1, SHP-2, and Lyn. Targeting of STAT5A or B with
specific siRNA pools revealed that IgE-mediated mast cell cytokine production is 
selectively dependent upon the STAT5B isoform. Altogether, these data implicate
Fyn as the major positive mediator of STAT5 after FceRI engagement and
demonstrate importantly distinct roles for STAT5A and STAT5B in mast cell
function.

PMCID: PMC3265884
PMID: 22130676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026674. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Suppressor of cytokine signalling-6 promotes neurite outgrowth via
JAK2/STAT5-mediated signalling pathway, involving negative feedback inhibition.

Gupta S(1), Mishra K, Surolia A, Banerjee K.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New
Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS) protein family are key
regulators of cellular responses to cytokines and play an important role in the
nervous system. The SOCS6 protein, a less extensively studied SOCS family member,
has been shown to induce insulin resistance in the retina and promote survival of
the retinal neurons. But no reports are available about the role of SOCS6 in
neuritogenesis. In this study, we examined the role of SOCS6 in neurite outgrowth
and neuronal cell signalling.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The effect of SOCS6 in neural stem cells
differentiation was studied in neural stem cells and PC12 cell line. Highly
elevated levels of SOCS6 were found upon neural cell differentiation both at the 
mRNA and protein level. Furthermore, SOCS6 over-expression lead to increase in
neurite outgrowth and degree of branching, whereas SOCS6 knockdown with specific 
siRNAs, lead to a significant decrease in neurite initiation and extension.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) stimulation which enhanced neurite outgrowth
of neural cells resulted in further enhancement of SOCS6 expression. Jak/Stat
(Janus Kinase/Signal Transducer And Activator Of Transcription) pathway was found
to be involved in the SOCS6 mediated neurite outgrowth. Bioinformatics study
revealed presence of putative Stat binding sites in the SOCS6 promoter region.
Transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b were involved in SOCS6 gene upregulation 
leading to neuronal differentiation. Following differentiation, SOCS6 was found
to form a ternary complex with IGFR (Insulin Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor) and
JAK2 which acted in a negative feedback loop to inhibit pStat5 activation.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The current paradigm for the first time states that
SOCS6, a SOCS family member, plays an important role in the process of neuronal
differentiation. These findings define a novel molecular mechanism for Jak2/Stat5
mediated SOCS6 signalling.

PMCID: PMC3219632
PMID: 22125600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Feb;52(2):155-66. doi: 10.1002/mc.21841. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

JAK/STAT/SOCS-signaling pathway and colon and rectal cancer.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Kadlubar SA, Bondurant KL, Wolff RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway is involved in immune function and cell growth. We evaluated
the association between genetic variation in JAK1 (10 SNPs), JAK2 (9 SNPs), TYK2 
(5 SNPs), suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 (2 SNPs), SOCS2 (2 SNPs),
STAT1 (16 SNPs), STAT2 (2 SNPs), STAT3 (6 SNPs), STAT4 (21 SNPs), STAT5A (2
SNPs), STAT5B (3 SNPs), STAT6 (4 SNPs) with risk of colorectal cancer. We used
data from population-based case-control studies (colon cancer n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1555 cases,
1,956 controls; rectal cancer n<U+2009>=<U+2009>754 cases, 959 controls). JAK2, SOCS2, STAT1,
STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6 were associated with colon cancer; STAT3, STAT4,
STAT6, and TYK2 were associated with rectal cancer. Given the biological role of 
the JAK/STAT-signaling pathway and cytokines, we evaluated interaction with IFNG,
TNF, and IL6; numerous statistically significant associations after adjustment
for multiple comparisons were observed. The following statistically significant
interactions were observed: TYK2 with aspirin/NSAID use; STAT1, STAT4, and TYK2
with estrogen status; and JAK2, STAT2, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6 with
smoking status and colon cancer risk; JAK2, STAT6, and TYK2 with aspirin/NSAID
use; JAK1 with estrogen status; STAT2 with cigarette smoking and rectal cancer.
JAK2, SOCS1, STAT3, STAT5, and TYK2 were associated with colon cancer survival
(hazard rate ratio (HRR) of 3.3 95% CI 2.01,5.42 for high mutational load). JAK2,
SOCS1, STAT1, STAT4, and TYK2 were associated with rectal cancer survival (HRR
2.80 95% CI 1.63,4.80). These data support the importance of the
JAK/STAT-signaling pathway in colorectal cancer and suggest targets for
intervention.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3430812
PMID: 22121102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;18(1):127-39. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1889.
Epub 2011 Nov 16.

STAT5A-mediated SOCS2 expression regulates Jak2 and STAT3 activity following
c-Src inhibition in head and neck squamous carcinoma.

Sen B(1), Peng S, Woods DM, Wistuba I, Bell D, El-Naggar AK, Lai SY, Johnson FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: The inhibition of c-Src results in a striking reduction in cancer cell
invasion, but the effect on cell survival is modest. Defining mechanisms that
limit apoptosis following c-Src inhibition could result in an ideal therapeutic
approach that both inhibits invasion and leads to apoptosis. In this regard, we
discovered a novel feedback loop that results in STAT3 reactivation following
sustained c-Src inhibition. Here we define the mechanism underlying this feedback
loop and examine the effect of inhibiting it in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We measured levels and activity of pathway components using 
PCR, Western blotting, and kinase assays following their manipulation using both 
molecular and pharmacologic approaches. We used a heterotransplant animal model
in which human oral squamous cancer is maintained exclusively in vivo.
RESULTS: Following c-Src inhibition, STAT5 is durably inhibited. The inhibition
of STAT5A, but not STAT5B, subsequently reduces the expression of suppressors of 
cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2). SOCS2 inhibits Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) activity and
Jak2-STAT3 binding. SOCS2 expression is necessary for STAT3 inhibition by c-Src
inhibitors. Overexpression of SOCS2 is adequate to prevent STAT3 reactivation and
to enhance the cytotoxic effects of c-Src inhibition. Likewise, the combination
of Jak and c-Src inhibitors led to significantly more apoptosis than either agent
alone in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, ours is the first study that fully defines the
mechanism underlying this feedback loop, in which sustained c-Src inhibition
leads to diminished SOCS2 expression via sustained inhibition of STAT5A, allowing
activation of Jak2 and STAT3, Jak2-STAT3 binding, and survival signals.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3251692
PMID: 22090359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Hum Immunol. 2011 Dec;72(12):1204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.10.002. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The CREM gene is involved in genetic predisposition to inflammatory bowel disease
in the Tunisian population.

Bouzid D(1), Fourati H, Amouri A, Marques I, Abida O, Haddouk S, Ben Ayed M,
Tahri N, Penha-Gonçalves C, Masmoudi H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Medicine School and Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia. dorra-ing@voila.fr

The identification of susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is key to understanding pathogenic mechanisms. Recently, the results of genetic
association studies have highlighted many loci that are shared among several
autoimmune diseases. We aimed to study the genetic epidemiology of polymorphisms 
in specific genes previously associated with other autoimmune diseases, namely
the CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes. Twelve polymorphisms in the
CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes were genotyped in a cohort of 107 IBD
patients (39 Crohn's disease [CD] and 68 ulcerative colitis [UC]) and 162
controls from southern Tunisia. One CREM single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
displayed evidence for genetic association with IBD (p=8.7×10(-4), odds ratio
[OR]=2.84 [1.58; 5.09]). One STAT4 SNP (p=0.026; OR=1.65 [1.06; 2.58]) exhibited 
a marginal association with UC but not with CD. No significant association was
observed with the SNPs in STAT5a, IRF5, and STAT5b. These results suggest that
common variants of the CREM gene are involved in the genetic component conferring
general susceptibility to IBD, whereas STAT4 appears to be more specifically
associated with UC. This work provides motivation for studies aiming to replicate
these findings in larger populations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22019623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 12;13(5):220. doi: 10.1186/bcr2921.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 as a key signaling pathway in 
normal mammary gland developmental biology and breast cancer.

Furth PA(1), Nakles RE, Millman S, Diaz-Cruz ES, Cabrera MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd NW, Research Building, Room 520A, Washington DC
20057, USA. paf3@georgetown.edu

STAT5 consists of two proteins, STAT5A/B, that impact mammary cell
differentiation, proliferation, and survival. In normal development, STAT5
expression and activity are regulated by prolactin signaling with JAK2/ELF5, EGF 
signaling networks that include c-Src, and growth hormone, insulin growth factor,
estrogen, and progesterone signaling pathways. In cancer, erythropoietin
signaling can also regulate STAT5. Activation levels are influenced by AKT,
caveolin, PIKE-A, Pak1, c-Myb, Brk, beta-integrin, dystroglycan, other STATs, and
STAT pathway molecules JAK1, Shp2, and SOCS. TGF-ß and PTPN9 can downregulate
prolactin- and EGF-mediated STAT5 activation, respectively. IGF, AKT, RANKL,
cyclin D1, BCL6, and HSP90A lie downstream of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC3262193
PMID: 22018398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nat Rev Urol. 2011 Oct 4;8(11):597-607. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2011.143.

Prolactin regulation of the prostate gland: a female player in a male game.

Goffin V(1), Hoang DT, Bogorad RL, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unit 845, Research Center Growth and Signaling, Prolactin/GH
Pathophysiology Laboratory, University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Faculty of Medicine, Necker site, Paris F-75015, France. vincent.goffin@inserm.fr

Prolactin is best known for its actions on the mammary gland. However,
circulating prolactin is also detected in males and its receptor (PRLR) is
expressed in the prostate, suggesting that the prostate is a target of prolactin.
Germline knockout of prolactin or its receptor has failed to reveal a key role
for prolactin signaling in mouse prostate physiology. However, several studies
involving rodent models and human prostate cell lines and specimens have
supported the contribution of the canonical PRLR-Jak2-Stat5a/b pathway to
prostate cancer tumorigenesis and progression. Increased expression of prolactin 
in the prostate itself (rather than changes in circulating prolactin levels) and 
crosstalk with androgen receptor (AR) signaling are potential mechanisms for
increased Stat5a/b signaling in prostate cancer. In the mouse prostate, prolactin
overexpression results in disorganized expansion of the basal/stem cell
compartment, which has been proposed to house putative prostate tumor-initiating 
cells. These findings provide new insight into the molecular and cellular targets
by which locally produced prolactin could contribute to prostate cancer
initiation and progression. A number of pharmacological inhibitors targeting
various levels of the PRLR-Jak2-Stat5a/b pathway have been developed and are
entering clinical trials for advanced prostate cancer.

PMID: 21971318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Dec;25(12):2054-64. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1141. Epub 2011 Sep
29.

Negative cross talk between NFAT1 and Stat5 signaling in breast cancer.

Zheng J(1), Fang F, Zeng X, Medler TR, Fiorillo AA, Clevenger CV.

Author information: 
(1)Womens Cancer Research Program, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center &
Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The molecular mechanisms that modulate the activity of the signal transducers and
activators of transcription 5 (Stat5) during the progression of breast cancer
remain elusive. Here, we present evidence that the calcineurin/nuclear factor of 
activated T cells (NFAT) pathway negatively regulates the activation of Stat5,
and vice versa in breast cancer. NFAT1 interacts with Stat5 in breast cancer
cells, and their physical association is mediated by the DNA binding and
transactivation domains of Stat5. Ectopically expressed NFAT1 is capable of
inhibiting Stat5-dependent functions, including Stat5 transactivation,
Stat5-mediated transcription of the downstream target gene expression, and
binding of Stat5a to the Stat5 target promoter. By contrast, overexpression of a 
selective NFAT inhibitor VIVIT reversed NFAT1-mediated suppression of
Stat5-dependent gene expression, whereas silencing of NFAT1 through RNA
interference enhanced prolactin-induced, Stat5-mediated gene transcription, and
breast cancer cell proliferation. A reciprocal inhibitory effect of Stat5
activity on NFAT1 signaling was also observed, implying these two signaling
cascades antagonize each other in breast cancer. Importantly, analysis of a
matched breast cancer progression tissue microarray revealed a negative
correlation between levels of NFAT1 and Stat5 (pY694) during the progression of
breast cancer. Taken together, these studies highlight a novel negative cross
talk between the NFAT1- and Stat5-signaling cascades that may affect breast tumor
formation, growth, and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3231824
PMID: 21964595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):442-56. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.004. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

The role of stat1b in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Song H(1), Yan YL, Titus T, He X, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, 1425 E. 13th Avenue, Eugene, 
OR 97403, USA. hsong@uoregon.edu

STAT1 mediates response to interferons and regulates immunity, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and sensitivity of Fanconi Anemia cells to apoptosis
after interferon signaling; the roles of STAT1 in embryos, however, are not
understood. To explore embryonic functions of STAT1, we investigated stat1b, an
unstudied zebrafish co-ortholog of human STAT1. Zebrafish stat1a encodes all five
domains of the human STAT1-alpha splice form but, like the human STAT1-beta
splice variant, stat1b lacks a complete transactivation domain; thus, two
unlinked zebrafish paralogs encode protein forms translated from two splice
variants of a single human gene, as expected by sub-functionalization after
genome duplication. Phylogenetic and conserved synteny studies showed that stat1b
and stat1a arose as duplicates in the teleost genome duplication (TGD) and
clarified the evolutionary origin of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B
and STAT6 by tandem and genome duplication. RT-PCR revealed maternal expression
of stat1a and stat1b. In situ hybridization detected stat1b but not stat1a
expression in embryonic hematopoietic tissues. Morpholino knockdown of stat1b,
but not stat1a, decreased expression of the myeloid and granulocyte markers spi
and mpo and increased expression of the hematopoietic progenitor marker scl, the 
erythrocyte marker gata1, and hemoglobin. These results suggest that zebrafish
Stat1b promotes myeloid development at the expense of erythroid development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3223297
PMID: 21914475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Clin Bioinforma. 2011 Aug 2;1(1):21. doi: 10.1186/2043-9113-1-21.

Microenvironmental genomic alterations reveal signaling networks for head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Bebek G(1), Orloff M, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Mailstop
NE-50 Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. engc@ccf.org.

BACKGROUND: Advanced stage head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an
aggressive cancer with low survival rates. Loss-of-heterozygosity/allelic
imbalance (LOH/AI) analysis has been widely used to identify genomic alterations 
in solid tumors and the tumor microenvironment (stroma). We hypothesize that
these identified alterations can point to signaling networks functioning in HNSCC
epithelial-tumor and surrounding stroma (tumor microenvironment).
RESULTS: Under the assumption that genes in proximity to identified LOH/AI
regions are correlated with the tumorigenic phenotype, we mined publicly
available biological information to identify pathway segments (signaling proteins
connected to each other in a network) and identify the role of tumor
microenvironment in HNSCC. Across both neoplastic epithelial cells and the
surrounding stromal cells, genetic alterations in HNSCC were successfully
identified, and 75 markers were observed to have significantly different LOH/AI
frequencies in these compartments (p < 0.026). We applied a network
identification approach to the genes in proximity to these 75 markers in cancer
epithelium and stroma in order to identify biological networks that can describe 
functional associations amongst these marker-associated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We verified the involvement of T-cell receptor signaling pathways in
HNSCC as well as associated oncogenes such as LCK and PLCB1, and tumor
suppressors such as STAT5A, PTPN6, PARK2. We identified expression levels of
genes within significant LOH/AI regions specific to stroma networks that
correlate with better outcome in radiation therapy. By integrating various levels
of high-throughput data, we were able to precisely focus on specific proteins and
genes that are germane to HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC3170587
PMID: 21884569  [PubMed]


258. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2012 Feb;34(1):74-8. doi:
10.3109/08923973.2011.577782. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

rhPLD2 suppresses chronic inflammation reactions in a guinea pig asthma model.

Cai LQ(1), Zhang JY, Yu CX, Zhu L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Dept. and Center of Neuroscience, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350004, China.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a complex inflammatory disorder of the airways, and
research on alternative therapeutic strategies has attracted attention. This
study aimed at hypersusceptibility and toxicity of recombinant human
phospholipase D2 (rhPLD2) in guinea pigs. We determined the behavioral responses 
in the model of immediate hypersensitivity animals and changes of eosinophil
levels following use of the drugs. Special attention was given to the effects of 
rhPLD2 in vivo on the guinea pig with chronic persistent asthma and the mechanism
involved.
METHODS: To investigate the effect of rhPLD2 on the expression of protein kinase 
C (PKC), and to examine the activity of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 and 5a in the lung of the guinea pig with chronic asthma. Guinea 
pigs with chronic asthma were divided into five groups: a saline group, a
dexamethasone 5.0<U+2009>mg group, and rhPLD2 (1.5, 2, or 3<U+2009>mg) groups. Non-sensitized
animals were as normal control group. PKC expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry, alterations of STAT1 and STAT5a were detected by TransAM
transcription factor assay kits.
RESULTS: rhPLD2 (3.0<U+2009>mg) decreased PKC expression to baseline and inhibited STAT1
activity compared with that of the saline group (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
CONCLUSION: The rhPLD2 may suppress the chronic inflammatory reaction through
down-regulating PKC expression and STAT1/STAT5a activity in the lung. The rhPLD2 
may be a suitable therapeutic target for asthma.

PMID: 21854185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jun;227(6):2421-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22977.

STAT5 isoforms regulate colorectal cancer cell apoptosis via reduction of
mitochondrial membrane potential and generation of reactive oxygen species.

Du W(1), Wang YC, Hong J, Su WY, Lin YW, Lu R, Xiong H, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School 
of Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Although the two isoforms of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(STAT5) protein, STAT5a and STAT5b, have 94% sequence identity, they are encoded 
by different genes. Previous studies have been unable to define clearly the roles
of the STAT5 genes in colorectal cancer (CRC). To investigate the role of STAT5
isoforms in CRC oncogenesis, immunohistochemical staining was performed.
Colorectal adenocarcinomas showed higher expression of STAT5a/5b than normal
colonic mucosa (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), and STAT5b expression was significantly higher than
that of STAT5a in colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Furthermore,
STAT5b expression was significantly associated with TNM stage. To delineate the
roles of STAT5a/5b in CRC carcinogenesis, we studied CRC cells depleted of each
isoform by treating the cells with small interfering RNA. Both STAT5a and STAT5b 
were found to be involved in cell growth, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis
of CRC cells, and exerted their effects via the regulation of downstream targets 
of the STAT genes. However, STAT5b influenced CRC cell apoptosis more than STAT5a
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), reducing mitochondrial membrane potential and generating reactive
oxygen species. In conclusion, both isoforms of STAT5 are involved in the growth 
and cell cycle progression of CRC cells, STAT5b could play a more important role 
than STAT5a in the clinicopathological characteristics of CRC and CRC cell
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21826656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Sep;25(9):1550-64. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0106. Epub 2011 Aug 
4.

HMGN2 inducibly binds a novel transactivation domain in nuclear PRLr to
coordinate Stat5a-mediated transcription.

Fiorillo AA(1), Medler TR, Feeney YB, Liu Y, Tommerdahl KL, Clevenger CV.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Pathology,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The direct actions of transmembrane receptors within the nucleus remain
enigmatic. In this report, we demonstrate that the prolactin receptor (PRLr)
localizes to the nucleus where it functions as a coactivator through its
interactions with the latent transcription factor signal transducer and activator
of transcription 5a (Stat5a) and the high-mobility group N2 protein (HMGN2). We
identify a novel transactivation domain within the PRLr that is activated by
ligand-induced phosphorylation, an event coupled to HMGN2 binding. The
association of the PRLr with HMGN2 enables Stat5a-responsive promoter binding,
thus facilitating transcriptional activation and promoting anchorage-independent 
growth. We propose that HMGN2 serves as a critical regulatory factor in
Stat5a-driven gene expression by facilitating the assembly of PRLr/Stat5a onto
chromatin and that these events may serve to promote biological events that
contribute to a tumorigenic phenotype. Our data imply that phosphorylation may be
the molecular switch that activates a cell surface receptor transactivation
domain, enabling it to tether chromatin-modifying factors, such as HMGN2, to
target promoter regions in a sequence-specific manner.

PMID: 21816901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Leukemia. 2012 Jan;26(1):139-48. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.179. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Monocytes and T cells cooperate to favor normal and follicular lymphoma B-cell
growth: role of IL-15 and CD40L signaling.

Epron G(1), Ame-Thomas P, Le Priol J, Pangault C, Dulong J, Lamy T, Fest T, Tarte
K.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U917, Université Rennes 1, Institut Fédératif de Recherche 140
Génomique Fonctionnelle Agronomie Santé, Rennes, France.

Interleukin-15 (IL-15) has been extensively studied for its role in the survival 
and proliferation of NK and T cells through a unique mechanism of
trans-presentation by producer cells. Conversely, whereas activated B cells have 
been described as IL-15-responding cells, the cellular and molecular context
sustaining this effect remains unexplored. In this study, we found that, whereas 
human B cells could not respond to soluble IL-15, monocytes and lymphoid
tissue-derived macrophages but not stromal cells efficiently trans-present IL-15 
to normal B cells and cooperate with T-cell-derived CD40L to promote
IL-15-dependent B-cell proliferation. Furthermore, CD40L signaling triggers a
Src-independent upregulation of STAT5 expression and favors a Src-dependent
phosphorylation of STAT5 in response to IL-15. In follicular lymphoma (FL),
immunohistochemical studies reported a strong relationship between malignant B
cells, infiltrating macrophages and T cells. We show here an overexpression of
IL-15 in purified tumor-associated macrophages, and STAT5A in purified tumor B
cells. Moreover, FL B cells respond to IL-15 trans-presented by
monocytes/macrophages, in particular, in the presence of CD40L-mediated
signaling. This cooperation between IL-15 and CD40L reinforces the importance of 
tumor microenvironment and unravels a mechanism of FL growth that should be
considered if using IL-15 as a drug in this disease.

PMID: 21788945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Aug;94(8):4220-3. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4144.

Short communication: expression and alternative splicing of POU1F1 pathway genes 
in preimplantation bovine embryos.

Laporta J(1), Driver A, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA.

Early embryo loss is a major contributing factor to cow infertility and that 70
to 80% of this loss occurs between d 8 and 16 postfertilization. However, little 
is known about the molecular mechanisms and the nature of genes involved in
normal and abnormal embryonic development. Moreover, information is limited on
the contributions of the genomes of dams and of embryos to the development and
survival of preimplantation embryos. We hypothesized that proper gene expression 
level in the developing embryo is essential for embryo survival and pregnancy
success. As such, the characterization of expression profiles in early embryos
could lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in normal and
abnormal embryo development. To test this hypothesis, 2 d-8 embryo populations
(degenerate embryos and blastocysts) that differed in morphology and
developmental status were investigated. Expression levels of POU1F1 pathway genes
were estimated in 4 sets of biological replicate pools of degenerate embryos and 
blastocysts. The OPN and STAT5A genes were found to be upregulated in degenerate 
embryos compared with blastocysts, whereas STAT5B showed similar expression
levels in both embryo groups. Analysis of splice variants of OPN and STAT5A
revealed expression patterns different from the total expression values of these 
genes. As such, measuring expression of individual transcripts should be
considered in gene expression studies.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21787958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Clin Invest. 2011 Aug;121(8):3042-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI46276. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Prolactin increases SMN expression and survival in a mouse model of severe spinal
muscular atrophy via the STAT5 pathway.

Farooq F(1), Molina FA, Hadwen J, MacKenzie D, Witherspoon L, Osmond M, Holcik M,
MacKenzie A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Sep 1;121(9):3763.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Aug;121(8):2978-81.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease
that is characterized by the loss of motor neurons, resulting in progressive
muscle atrophy. It is caused by the loss of functional survival motor neuron
(SMN) protein due to mutations or deletion in the SMN1 gene. A potential
treatment strategy for SMA is to upregulate levels of SMN protein. Several agents
that activate STAT5 in human and mouse cell lines enhance SMN expression from the
SMN2 gene and can compensate, at least in part, for the loss of production of a
functional protein from SMN1. Here, we have shown that prolactin (PRL) increases 
SMN levels via activation of the STAT5 pathway. PRL increased SMN mRNA and
protein levels in cultured human and mouse neuronal cells. Administration of
STAT5-specific siRNA blocked the effects of PRL, indicating that the PRL-induced 
transcriptional upregulation of the SMN-encoding gene was mediated by activation 
of STAT5. Furthermore, systemic administration of PRL to WT mice induced SMN
expression in the brain and spinal cord. Critically, PRL treatment increased SMN 
levels, improved motor function, and enhanced survival in a mouse model of severe
SMA. Our results confirm earlier work suggesting STAT5 pathway activators as
potential therapeutic compounds for the treatment of SMA and identify PRL as one 
such promising agent.

PMCID: PMC3148738
PMID: 21785216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(3):347-55.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 and breast cancer prognosis.

Sato T(1), Neilson LM, Peck AR, Liu C, Tran TH, Witkiewicz A, Hyslop T,
Nevalainen MT, Sauter G, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) is frequently
activated in breast cancer and multiple lines of evidence suggest that Stat3
promotes tumor progression. However, the prognostic value of Stat3 in human
breast cancer remains controversial and associations range from favorable to
unfavorable based on four outcome studies of 62, 102, 255 and 517 patients.
Cellular Stat3 protein expression was measured in three studies whereas nuclear
localized, tyrosine phosphorylated Stat3 (Nuc-pYStat3) was used as the readout in
only one study. We therefore retrospectively analyzed the prognostic value of
Nuc-pYStat3 in a larger material of 721 breast cancer specimens. Overall,
patients whose tumors were positive for Nuc-pYStat3 tended to have improved
survival, but the trend did not reach statistical significance (P=0.08). When
specimens were stratified by tumor grade, patients with low grade but not high
grade tumors that were positive for Nuc-pYStat3 had significantly prolonged
overall survival in univariate analysis (P=0.014) but not in multivariate
analyses. Unexpectedly, quantitative immunofluoresence detection revealed highest
levels of Nuc-pYStat3 in normal breast epithelia and gradual loss of Nuc-pYStat3 
during progression from DCIS, invasive ductal carcinoma, and lymph node
metastases. Levels of Nuc-pYStat3 correlated positively with levels of
Nuc-pYStat5, a favorable prognostic marker, in invasive ductal carcinomas.
Furthermore, NucpYStat3 levels correlated strongly with protein levels of nuclear
localized Stat5a (r=0.633, P<0.001) but not Stat5b. Our data does not support the
notion that Nuc-pYStat3 is an independent marker of prognosis in breast cancer,
although future studies may reveal prognostic utility within molecularly
characterized subtypes of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3138712
PMID: 21776434  [PubMed]


265. J Cell Sci. 2011 Aug 15;124(Pt 16):2692-701. doi: 10.1242/jcs.081232. Epub 2011
Jul 19.

p62/SQSTM1 in autophagic clearance of a non-ubiquitylated substrate.

Watanabe Y(1), Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Geriatrics, Research Institute for Neurological Diseases
and Geriatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji,
Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Proteolytic systems and the aggresome pathway contribute to preventing
accumulation of cytotoxic aggregation-prone proteins. Although polyubiquitylation
is usually required for degradation or aggresome formation, several substrates
are processed independently of ubiquitin through a poorly understood mechanism.
Here, we found that p62/SQSTM1, a multifunctional adaptor protein, was involved
in the selective autophagic clearance of a non-ubiquitylated substrate, namely an
aggregation-prone isoform of STAT5A (STAT5A_<U+0394>E18). By using a cell line that
stably expressed STAT5A_<U+0394>E18, we investigated the properties of its aggregation
and degradation. We found that STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 formed non-ubiquitylated aggresomes
and/or aggregates by impairment of proteasome functioning or autophagy. Transport
of these aggregates to the perinuclear region was inhibited by trichostatin A or 
tubacin, inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC), indicating that the
non-ubiquitylated aggregates of STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 were sequestered into aggresomes in
an HDAC6-dependent manner. Moreover, p62 was bound to STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 through its PB1
domain, and the oligomerization of p62 was required for this interaction. In
p62-knockdown experiments, we found that p62 was required for autophagic
clearance of STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 but not for its aggregate formation, suggesting that the
binding of p62 to non-ubiquitylated substrates might trigger their autophagic
clearance.

© 2011. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd

PMID: 21771882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Surg Res. 2012 Jul;176(1):321-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.05.041. Epub 2011 Jun 
22.

Local and systemic alterations in signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) associated with human abdominal aortic aneurysms.

Liao M(1), Xu J, Clair AJ, Ehrman B, Graham LM, Eagleton MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of
Medicine-CWRU, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins
are transcription factors that, when activated by phosphorylation, regulate gene 
expression and cellular activity. The aim of this study was to evaluate the local
and systemic expression and activation of STAT proteins associated with abdominal
aortic aneurysms (AAA).
METHODS: Expression and activation of STAT proteins were assessed in aortic wall 
samples obtained from patients undergoing repair of AAA (n = 9) and from
non-aneurysmal (NA) donors (n = 17). Aortic samples were evaluated for mRNA and
protein expression for STAT1, 2, 3, 4, 5a, and 5b using RT-PCR and immunoblot
(WB) assays and normalized to ß-actin (expressed as arbitrary units). STAT
activation was assessed with WB assays using phosphorylated (p)-STAT-specific
antibodies. Alterations in STAT activation were calculated by normalizing pSTAT
proteins to corresponding total STAT levels. Immunohistochemistry was performed
on AAA and NA samples using the total and pSTAT antibodies. Systemic alterations 
in STAT activation were assessed by evaluating circulating leukocytes for the
presence of pSTAT from patients with AAA (AAA, n = 8), repaired aneurysm (RA, n =
8), or age/gender matched controls with no AAA (CT, n = 8). Flow cytometry was
performed to assess for circulating levels of STAT1 (pY701), STAT3 (pY705), and
STAT5a (pY694) in monocytes, granulocytes, and lymphocytes. Assessments were made
at baseline and in response to in vitro stimulation with IFN-<U+03B3> (50 ng/mL) or IL-6
(100 ng/mL). Results were analyzed using Student's t-test and are expressed as
mean ± SEM.
RESULTS: In AAA tissue compared with NA, STAT-1 (1.08 ± 0.09 versus 0.62 ± 0.07),
-2 (0.98 ± 0.07 versus 0.55 ± 0.08), and -4 (0.89 ± 0.12 versus 0.35 ± 0.11) mRNA
levels were elevated (P < 0.01, all). Corresponding increases in STAT protein
were only observed for STAT1 (2.77 ± 0.93 versus 0.93 ± 0.08, P < 0.05).
Increases in activation were observed in AAA compared with NA in pSTAT2 (0.77 ±
0.1 versus 0.1 ± 0.02, P < 0.01), pSTAT3 (1.6 ± 0.3 versus 0.2 ± 0.06, P < 0.02) 
and pSTAT5 (0.57 ± 0.03 versus 0.2 ± 0.03, P < 0.05) levels. Phosphorylated
STAT1, 2, 3, and 5 were observed in inflammatory cells invading the AAA
adventitia. In addition, STAT3 was observed in the media of AAA and NA, but
pSTAT3 was only observed in the media of AAA. There were no differences in
baseline levels of pSTAT-positive circulating leukocytes. IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation
decreased STAT-5a (pY694)-positive CT lymphocytes to 40% ± 13% of baseline, but
had no effect on AAA or RA lymphocytes (116% ± 35%, 102% ± 19%, respectively; P =
0.01). STAT-5a (pY694)-positive CT granulocytes also decreased to 62% ± 18% of
baseline compared with AAA or RA granulocytes (122% ± 25%, 126% ± 17%,
respectively; P = 0.01). Alterations in STAT1 (pY701) and STAT3 (pY705) were not 
observed in leukocytes following cytokine stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT proteins are important regulators of transcriptional activity
and have been linked to cardiovascular disease. The present data suggest that
altered levels of phosphorylated STATs are associated with AAA. Understanding
their role may provide further insight into the mechanisms of AAA formation and
allow for the development of medical treatment options.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3197955
PMID: 21764069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;96(9):E1496-501. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0322.
Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Variants in STAT5B associate with serum TC and LDL-C levels.

Kornfeld JW(1), Isaacs A, Vitart V, Pospisilik JA, Meitinger T, Gyllensten U,
Wilson JF, Rudan I, Campbell H, Penninger JM, Sexl V, Moriggl R, van Duijn C,
Pramstaller PP, Hicks AA.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
jkornfel@uni-koeln.de

CONTEXT: Known genetic variants influencing serum lipid levels do not adequately 
account for the observed population variability of these phenotypes. The
GH/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway is
an evolutionary conserved system that exerts strong effects on metabolism,
including that of lipids.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the association of 11 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) spanning the STAT5B/STAT5A/STAT3 locus with serum lipid
levels in six European populations (n = 5162 nondiabetic individuals).
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, sex, alcohol use, smoking, and body mass
index, we identified STAT5B variants (rs8082391 and rs8064638) in novel
association with total cholesterol (TC; P = 0.001 and P = 0.002) and low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (P = 0.002 and P = 0.004) levels. The minor alleles of
these single-nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly enriched in
hyperlipidemic individuals across the six discovery populations (P = 0.004 and P 
= 0.006). In transgenic mice deficient for hepatic STAT5A and STAT5B, reduced
serum TC levels coincided with reduced hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis as
demonstrated using gene expression profiling and pathway enrichment analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in STAT5B are associated with TC and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels among six populations. Mechanistically, STAT5B
transcriptionally regulates hepatic cholesterol homeostasis.

PMID: 21752895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;43(10):1417-21. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.06.007. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a/b: biomarker and therapeutic 
target in prostate and breast cancer.

Koptyra M(1), Gupta S, Talati P, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, United States.

The search for new therapeutic strategies for prostate and breast cancer is of
significant interest. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a/b
(Stat5a/b) controls viability and growth of prostate cancer. Nuclear active
Stat5a/b expression is clustered to high grade prostate cancers, predicts early
disease recurrence and promotes metastatic dissemination of prostate cancer. In
breast cancer, the role of Stat5a/b is more complex. In rodent model systems,
Stat5a/b may promote malignant transformation and enhance growth of the breast
tumors. In contrast, Stat5a/b activation in established human breast cancer
positively correlates with tumor differentiation, prevents metastatic
dissemination, and predicts favorable clinical outcome of node-negative breast
cancer. Here we review the molecular structure and biological functions of
Stat5a/b and discuss the potential applications of Stat5a/b for therapy
development and as a prognostic marker for prostate and breast cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3163765
PMID: 21704724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002088. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002088. Epub 2011
Jun 16.

Productive parvovirus B19 infection of primary human erythroid progenitor cells
at hypoxia is regulated by STAT5A and MEK signaling but not HIFa.

Chen AY(1), Kleiboeker S, Qiu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America.

Human parvovirus B19 (B19V) causes a variety of human diseases. Disease outcomes 
of bone marrow failure in patients with high turnover of red blood cells and
immunocompromised conditions, and fetal hydrops in pregnant women are resulted
from the targeting and destruction of specifically erythroid progenitors of the
human bone marrow by B19V. Although the ex vivo expanded erythroid progenitor
cells recently used for studies of B19V infection are highly permissive, they
produce progeny viruses inefficiently. In the current study, we aimed to identify
the mechanism that underlies productive B19V infection of erythroid progenitor
cells cultured in a physiologically relevant environment. Here, we demonstrate an
effective reverse genetic system of B19V, and that B19V infection of ex vivo
expanded erythroid progenitor cells at 1% O(2) (hypoxia) produces progeny viruses
continuously and efficiently at a level of approximately 10 times higher than
that seen in the context of normoxia. With regard to mechanism, we show that
hypoxia promotes replication of the B19V genome within the nucleus, and that this
is independent of the canonical PHD/HIFa pathway, but dependent on STAT5A and
MEK/ERK signaling. We further show that simultaneous upregulation of STAT5A
signaling and down-regulation of MEK/ERK signaling boosts the level of B19V
infection in erythroid progenitor cells under normoxia to that in cells under
hypoxia. We conclude that B19V infection of ex vivo expanded erythroid progenitor
cells at hypoxia closely mimics native infection of erythroid progenitors in
human bone marrow, maintains erythroid progenitors at a stage conducive to
efficient production of progeny viruses, and is regulated by the STAT5A and
MEK/ERK pathways.

PMCID: PMC3116823
PMID: 21698228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Aug;78(8):585-96. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21345. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Conditional repression of STAT5 expression during lactation reveals its exclusive
roles in mammary gland morphology, milk-protein gene expression, and neonate
growth.

Reichenstein M(1), Rauner G, Barash I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, ARO, the Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.

The role of Stat5 in maintaining adequate lactation was studied in Stat5a(-/-)
mice expressing a conditionally suppressed transgenic STAT5 in their mammary
glands. This system enables distinguishing STAT5's effects on lactation from its 
contribution to mammary development during gestation. Females were allowed to
express STAT5 during their first pregnancy. After delivery, STAT5 levels were
manipulated by doxycycline administration and withdrawal. In two lines of
genetically modified mice, the absence of STAT5 expression during the first 10
days of lactation resulted in a decrease of 29% or 41% in newborn weight gain.
The STAT5-dependent decrease in growth was recoverable, but not completely
reversible, particularly when STAT5 expression was omitted for the first 4 days
of lactation. Within the first 10 days of STAT5-omitted lactation, alveolar
occupancy regressed by 50% compared to that measured at delivery. By Day 10, only
18% of the fat-pad area was involved in milk production. The alveolar regression 
caused by 4 days of STAT5 deficiency was reversible, but neonate growth remained 
delayed. STAT5 deficiency resulted in reduced estrogen receptor a and connexin 32
gene expression, accompanied by delayed induction of both anti- and pro-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members. An increase in Gata-3 expression may reflect an attempt to 
maintain alveolar progenitors. A decrease of 39% and 23% in WAP and a-lactalbumin
expression, respectively, with no associated effects on ß-casein, also resulted
from lack of STAT5 expression in the first 10 days of lactation. This deficiency 
enhances the major effect of alveolar regression on delayed weight gain in
newborns.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21688337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Mar;39(3):2901-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1051-4. Epub 2011
Jun 17.

Polymorphisms of STAT5A gene and their association with milk production traits in
Holstein cows.

He X(1), Chu MX, Qiao L, He JN, Wang PQ, Feng T, Di R, Cao GL, Fang L, An YF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China.

The STAT5A gene was studied as a candidate gene for five milk production traits
(milk yield at 305 days, protein percentage, fat percentage, lactose percentage
and dry matter percentage) in Holstein cows. According to the sequence of bovine 
STAT5A gene, two pairs of primers (P1 and P2) were designed to detect
polymorphisms of STAT5A gene in 401 Holstein cows by PCR-RFLP and PCR-SSCP. The
results showed that the products amplified by primers P1 and P2 displayed
polymorphisms. For P1, three genotypes (AA, AG, and GG) were detected, and the
frequency of AA/AG/GG was 0.252/0.486/0.262, respectively. Sequence analysis
revealed a single nucleotide substitution A-G at 14217 bp (GenBank NC_007317) of 
bovine STAT5A gene while compared GG genotype with AA genotype. The differences
of the least squares means for the four milk production traits (milk yield at 305
days, fat percentage, lactose percentage and dry matter percentage) between AA,
AG and GG were not significant (P > 0.05). Least squares mean of protein
percentage for AG or GG was significantly higher than that for AA (P < 0.05); the
difference of the least squares mean for protein percentage was not significant
between AG and GG (P > 0.05). For P2, three genotypes (CC, CT, and TT) were
detected in Holstein cows, and the frequency of CC/CT/TT was 0.751/0.234/0.015,
respectively. Sequencing revealed an insertion CCT at 17266 (NC_007317) of bovine
STAT5A gene while compared CC genotype with TT genotype. The differences of the
least squares means for the three milk production traits (protein percentage,
lactose percentage and dry matter percentage) between CC, CT and TT were not
significant (P > 0.05). Least squares mean of milk yield at 305 days for TT or CT
was significantly higher than that for CC (P < 0.05); the difference of the least
squares mean for milk yield at 305 days was not significant between TT and CT (P 
> 0.05). Least squares mean of fat percentage for CC or CT was significantly
higher than that for TT (P < 0.05); the difference of the least squares mean for 
fat percentage was not significant between CC and CT (P > 0.05). The results
preliminarily indicated that allele G of A14217G polymorphic site of STAT5A gene 
is a potential DNA marker for improving protein percentage in dairy cattle,
17266indelCCT polymorphic site of STAT5A gene is a potential DNA marker for
improving milk yield at 305 days and fat percentage in dairy cattle.

PMID: 21681425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Neuroendocrinology. 2011;94(2):148-57. doi: 10.1159/000328280. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Effect of progesterone withdrawal on hypothalamic mechanisms related to prolactin
release in late pregnant rats.

Bonafede MM(1), Valdez SR, Arboccó FC, Pennacchio GE, Soaje M, Jahn GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Reproducción y Lactancia, IMBECU, CRICYT-CONICET, Mendoza,
Argentina. mbonafede@mendoza-conicet.gov.ar

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Progesterone (P(4)) fall provoked by spontaneous or
prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a)-induced luteolysis in late pregnant rats triggers a
prolactin (PRL) surge 12-24 h later.
METHODS: To investigate the hypothalamic mechanism mediating this response, we
determined expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), PRL receptors (long form,
PRLR(long)), estrogen-a (ERa) and ERß, P(4) (PR) A and B receptors, and STAT5a,
STAT5b, suppressors of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), SOCS3 and CIS at mRNA (by
semiquantitative and real-time RT-PCR) and protein (by Western blot only for TH, 
ERa and PRs) levels, and dopamine and DOPAC (by high-performance liquid
chromatography) contents in the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) 24 h after
luteolysis induced by a PGF2a analogue (cloprostenol, 25 µg/rat s.c. at 8 and 12 
h on day 19 of pregnancy).
RESULTS: PGF2a treatment decreased circulating P(4) and estradiol and increased
PRL and the estradiol/P(4) ratio. MBH DOPAC and DOPAC/dopamine ratio fell,
indicating decreased dopaminergic transmission. PRLR(long), PRB and ERa mRNA
increased. ERa and PR proteins were not modified. However, TH protein and mRNA
did not change. PRA, the small PR isoform, was much more abundant than PRB, the
isoform considered to mediate P(4) genomic actions. STAT5a, SOCS1 and SOCS3 mRNA 
were also increased.
CONCLUSION: The P(4) fall induced by PGF2a treatment induces PRL release through 
diminution in MBH dopaminergic transmission without change in TH expression. The 
increased PRLR along with elevated circulating PRL may be responsible for
maintaining high TH expression through activation of short-loop feedback
mechanisms, counteracting the effect of the fall in circulating P(4). In
parallel, SOCS expression contributes to limit PRL signaling.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21654155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 Oct;73(10):1295-302. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Screening of therapeutic targets for canine mast cell tumors from a variety of
kinase molecules.

Takeuchi Y(1), Fujino Y, Watanabe M, Nakagawa T, Ohno K, Sasaki N, Sugano S,
Tsujimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Options of systemic treatment for canine MCT have been still limited and most
canine cases with MCTs eventually undergo relapses even after achievement of a
remission. Thus additional therapies are required to establish for the tumor. To 
identify the novel candidate therapeutic targets for canine MCT, the mRNA
expression and phosphorylation statuses of several receptor or non-receptor
kinases as well as the inhibitory effect of 95 specific inhibitors on the growth 
were assessed in three canine MCT cell lines (HRMC, VIMC1 and CMMC1). Among the
14 targets, the mRNAs of 11, 7 and 7 kinases were amplified in HRMC, VIMC1 and
CMMC1, respectively. The mRNAs of VEGFR3, PDGFRa, SRC, YES, LCK and FYN were
detected in all cell lines. The phosphorylation of 12, 8 and 7 kinases was
observed by using specific antibody arrays in HRMC, VIMC1 and CMMC1,
respectively. DTK, EPHB6, AMPKa1, CREB, STAT5a and STAT5b were phosphorylated in 
all cell lines. The 10, 9 and 17 inhibitors exhibited the biological activity
against the growth of HRMC, VIMC1 and CMMC1, respectively. Only three inhibitors 
such as SB218078 (for Chk1), PDGF RTK inhibitor IV (for PDGFR) and radicicol (for
Hsp90) suppressed the growth of all three cell lines. The present study indicated
that several kinases, such as Chk1, PDGFR and Hsp90, could be used as therapeutic
targets in the treatment for canine MCT. Further studies and clinical trials are 
warranted to apply the inhibitors for the treatment of the tumor.

PMID: 21646751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19861. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019861. Epub 2011 May 20.

A novel requirement for Janus kinases as mediators of drug resistance induced by 
fibroblast growth factor-2 in human cancer cells.

Carmo CR(1), Lyons-Lewis J, Seckl MJ, Costa-Pereira AP.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.

The development of resistance to chemotherapy is a major cause of cancer-related 
death. Elucidating the mechanisms of drug resistance should thus lead to novel
therapeutic strategies. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 signaling induces the
assembly of a multi-protein complex that provides tumor cells with the molecular 
machinery necessary for drug resistance. This complex, which involves protein
kinase C (PKC) e, v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (B-RAF) and p70 
S6 kinase ß (S6K2), enhances the selective translation of anti-apoptotic proteins
such as B-cell leukaemia/lymphoma-2 (BCL-2) and inhibitors of apoptosis protein
(IAP) family members and these are able to protect multiple cancer cell types
from chemotherapy-induced cell death. The Janus kinases (JAKs) are most noted for
their critical roles in mediating cytokine signaling and immune responses. Here, 
we show that JAKs have novel functions that support their consideration as new
targets in therapies aimed at reducing drug resistance. As an example, we show
that the Janus kinase TYK2 is phosphorylated downstream of FGF-2 signaling and
required for the full phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) 1/2. Moreover, TYK2 is necessary for the induction of key anti-apoptotic
proteins, such as BCL-2 and myeloid cell leukemia sequence (MCL) 1, and for the
promotion of cell survival upon FGF-2. Silencing JAK1, JAK2 or TYK2 using RNA
interference (RNAi) inhibits FGF2-mediated proliferation and results in the
sensitization of tumor cells to chemotherapy-induced killing. These effects are
independent of activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) 1, STAT3 and STAT5A/B, the normal targets of JAK signaling. Instead, TYK2 
associates with the other kinases previously implicated in FGF-2-mediated drug
resistance. In light of these findings we hypothesize that TYK2 and other JAKs
are important modulators of FGF-2-driven cell survival and that inhibitors of
these kinases will likely improve the effectiveness of other cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3098828
PMID: 21625473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2011 Jun 1;16:3043-56.

Serine phosphorylation of the Stat5a C-terminus is a driving force for
transformation.

Friedbichler K(1), Hoelbl A, Li G, Bunting KD, Sexl V, Gouilleux F, Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna, Austria.

Persistent tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat3 and Stat5 is associated with
oncogenic activity. Phosphorylation of the conserved tyrosine residue (pTyr) was 
long believed to be the only essential prerequisite to promote activation and
nuclear translocation of Stat proteins. It has become evident, however, that
post-translational protein modifications like serine phosphorylation,
acetylation, glycosylation as well as protein splicing and processing constitute 
further regulatory mechanisms to modulate Stat transcriptional activity and to
provide an additional layer of specificity to Jak-Stat signal transduction.
Significantly, most vertebrate Stat proteins contain one conserved serine
phosphorylation site within their transactivation domains. This phosphorylation
motif is located within a P(M)SP sequence. Stat transcription factor activity is 
negatively influenced by mutation of the serine to alanine. Moreover, it was
shown for both Stat3 and Stat5 that their capacity to transform cells was
diminished. This review addresses recent advances in understanding the regulation
and the biochemical and biological consequences of Stat serine phosphorylation.
In particular, we discuss their role in persistently activated Stat proteins for 
cancer research.

PMID: 21622220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Toxicology. 2011 Aug 15;286(1-3):28-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.05.002. Epub 2011
May 12.

Dysregulation of immune responses in an allergic mouse model following low-level 
toluene exposure.

Fujimaki H(1), Win-Shwe TT, Yoshida Y, Kunugita N, Arashidani K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8506, Japan. fujimaki@nies.go.jp

To investigate the effect of low-level toluene inhalation on immune regulation in
an allergic mouse model, C3H/HeN mice were exposed to 0, 5, 50, or 500ppm of
toluene for 6h/day, 5 days/week for 3 or 6 weeks. For allergic mouse model, half 
of the mice in each group were immunized with ovalbumin (OVA). Allergic mice
exposed to toluene for 3 weeks did not exhibit any changes in their plasma, lung 
or spleen samples. Although exposure to toluene alone for 6 weeks did not
increase the number of inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, 
coexposure to 50ppm toluene and OVA increased the number of BAL cells.
Histological changes and increased amounts of fibronectin were observed in the
lungs of OVA-immunized, 50-ppm-toluene-exposed mice. Exposure to 500ppm
significantly increased the expressions of transcription factors STAT3, STAT4 and
STAT5a mRNAs in spleen. In spleens from the allergic mouse model, the expressions
of STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT6, GATA3 and Foxp3 mRNAs were significantly enhanced
following exposure to 50ppm toluene for 6 weeks, but the expression of T-bet mRNA
was not increased. Regarding the Th1/Th2 balance, the expressions of IL-4 and
IL-12 mRNAs were enhanced in the spleens of toluene-exposed mice. Total IgG1
antibody production in the plasma was significantly increased in the
50-ppm-toluene-exposed allergic mouse model. These results indicate that
low-level toluene exposure might dysregulate the allergic responses to OVA in
C3H/HeN mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2443-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.34.2014. Epub 2011
May 16.

Stat5: from breast development to cancer prognosis, prediction, and progression.

Tweardy D, Chang JC.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2448-58.

PMID: 21576641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2448-58. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.30.3552. Epub
2011 May 16.

Loss of nuclear localized and tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5 in breast cancer
predicts poor clinical outcome and increased risk of antiestrogen therapy
failure.

Peck AR(1), Witkiewicz AK, Liu C, Stringer GA, Klimowicz AC, Pequignot E, Freydin
B, Tran TH, Yang N, Rosenberg AL, Hooke JA, Kovatich AJ, Nevalainen MT, Shriver
CD, Hyslop T, Sauter G, Rimm DL, Magliocco AM, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S 10th St,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2443-4.
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Dec 10;29(35):4718; author reply 4718-9.

PURPOSE: To investigate nuclear localized and tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5
(Nuc-pYStat5) as a marker of prognosis in node-negative breast cancer and as a
predictor of response to antiestrogen therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Levels of Nuc-pYStat5 were analyzed in five archival
cohorts of breast cancer by traditional diaminobenzidine-chromogen immunostaining
and pathologist scoring of whole tissue sections or by immunofluorescence and
automated quantitative analysis (AQUA) of tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: Nuc-pYStat5 was an independent prognostic marker as measured by
cancer-specific survival (CSS) in patients with node-negative breast cancer who
did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy, when adjusted for common pathology
parameters in multivariate analyses both by standard chromogen detection with
pathologist scoring of whole tissue sections (cohort I; n = 233) and quantitative
immunofluorescence of a tissue microarray (cohort II; n = 291). Two distinct
monoclonal antibodies gave concordant results. A progression array (cohort III; n
= 180) revealed frequent loss of Nuc-pYStat5 in invasive carcinoma compared to
normal breast epithelia or ductal carcinoma in situ, and general loss of
Nuc-pYStat5 in lymph node metastases. In cohort IV (n = 221), loss of Nuc-pYStat5
was associated with increased risk of antiestrogen therapy failure as measured by
univariate CSS and time to recurrence (TTR). More sensitive AQUA quantification
of Nuc-pYStat5 in antiestrogen-treated patients (cohort V; n = 97) identified by 
multivariate analysis patients with low Nuc-pYStat5 at elevated risk for therapy 
failure (CSS hazard ratio [HR], 21.55; 95% CI, 5.61 to 82.77; P < .001; TTR HR,
7.30; 95% CI, 2.34 to 22.78; P = .001). CONCLUSION Nuc-pYStat5 is an independent 
prognostic marker in node-negative breast cancer. If confirmed in prospective
studies, Nuc-pYStat5 may become a useful predictive marker of response to
adjuvant hormone therapy.

PMCID: PMC3675698
PMID: 21576635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. BMC Genet. 2011 May 11;12:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-43.

Genome-wide association of milk fatty acids in Dutch dairy cattle.

Bouwman AC(1), Bovenhuis H, Visker MH, van Arendonk JA.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. aniek.bouwman@wur.nl

BACKGROUND: Identifying genomic regions, and preferably individual genes,
responsible for genetic variation in milk fat composition of bovine milk will
enhance the understanding of biological pathways involved in fatty acid synthesis
and may point to opportunities for changing milk fat composition via selective
breeding. An association study of 50,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
was performed for even-chain saturated fatty acids (C4:0-C18:0), even-chain
monounsaturated fatty acids (C10:1-C18:1), and the polyunsaturated
C18:2cis9,trans11 (CLA) to identify genomic regions associated with individual
fatty acids in bovine milk.
RESULTS: The two-step single SNP association analysis found a total of 54 regions
on 29 chromosomes that were significantly associated with one or more fatty
acids. Bos taurus autosomes (BTA) 14, 19, and 26 showed highly significant
associations with seven to ten traits, explaining a relatively large percentage
of the total additive genetic variation. Many additional regions were
significantly associated with the fatty acids. Some of the regions harbor genes
that are known to be involved in fat synthesis or were previously identified as
underlying quantitative trait loci for fat yield or content, such as ABCG2 and
PPARGC1A on BTA 6; ACSS2 on BTA 13; DGAT1 on BTA 14; ACLY, SREBF1, STAT5A, GH,
and FASN on BTA 19; SCD1 on BTA26; and AGPAT6 on BTA 27.
CONCLUSIONS: Medium chain and unsaturated fatty acids are strongly influenced by 
polymorphisms in DGAT1 and SCD1. Other regions also showed significant
associations with the fatty acids studied. These additional regions explain a
relatively small percentage of the total additive genetic variance, but they are 
relevant to the total genetic merit of an individual and in unraveling the
genetic background of milk fat composition. Regions identified in this study can 
be fine mapped to find causal mutations. The results also create opportunities
for changing milk fat composition through breeding by selecting individuals based
on their genetic merit for milk fat composition.

PMCID: PMC3120725
PMID: 21569316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2011 May;21(4):616-24. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e3182150e98.

Tissue factor-factor VIIa complex induces epithelial ovarian cancer cell invasion
and metastasis through a monocytes-dependent mechanism.

Ma Z(1), Zhang T, Wang R, Cheng Z, Xu H, Li W, Wang Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Tumor-associated macrophage infiltration and up-regulation of tissue
factor-factor VII (TF-FVIIa) complex have been observed in the peritoneum and
stroma of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). However, it is not clear how
tumor-associated macrophage and TF-FVIIa complex promotes EOC invasion. In the
present study, we aimed to determine the mechanism by which interaction of
TF-FVIIa and monocytes (MOs) promotes EOC metastasis.
METHOD: Matrigel invasion assay was used to analyze the potential of EOC
metastasis. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and real-time polymerase chain
reaction were used to detect expressions of cytokines and chemokines.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting was used to count the percentage of CD14,
CD68, and CD163 of MOs.
RESULTS: We found that the TF-FVIIa complex caused dynamic changes in MOs
cytokine and chemokine expression. CD14 and CD163 were also upregulated on MOs by
TF-FVIIa. Epithelial ovarian cancer cells were cocultured with
TF-FVIIa-stimulated MOs, demonstrating increased invasion potential. Interleukin 
8 (IL-8) was proposed as the major chemoattractant mediating EOC invasion based
on MOs messenger RNA and protein expression profiles. Anti-IL-8 monoclonal
neutralizing antibody attenuated EOC cell invasion in a concentration-dependent
manner, and tumor necrosis factor a from TF-FVIIa-stimulated MOs was observed to 
amplify IL-8 production. The following transcription factors in MOs were
activated by TF-FVIIa and inhibited by the tissue factor pathway inhibitor:
oncogenes HIF-1a, HIF-1ß, Oct I, Oct II, and Egr-1; inflammatory mediators c-Fos 
and c-Rel; and STAT family members STAT5A and STAT5B.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that the interaction between the TF-FVIIa
complex might play a role in mediating EOC invasion and metastasis depending on
MOs mechanism.

PMID: 21543928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Feb 10;21(3):465-75. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0591. Epub 2011
Jun 15.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma/signal transducers and
activators of transcription 5A pathway plays a key factor in adipogenesis of
human bone marrow-derived stromal cells and 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.

Jung HS(1), Lee YJ, Kim YH, Paik S, Kim JW, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Adipogenesis is largely dependent on the signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) pathway. However, the molecular mechanism of the STAT
pathway in the adipogenesis of human bone marrow-derived stromal cells (hBMSCs)
remains not well understood. The purpose of this research was to characterize the
transcriptional regulation involved in expression of STAT5A and STAT5B during
adipogenesis in hBMSCs and 3T3-L1 cells. The expression of STAT5A and STAT5B
increases with the onset of adipogenesis in hBMSCs and 3T3-L1 cells. The PPAR
response elements regulatory element of STAT5A exists at a promoter region
ranging from -346 to -101, and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
regulatory element is located at -196 to -118 of the STAT5B promoter. C/EBPß and 
C/EBPa bound to the STAT5B promoter region, whereas peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) bound to STAT5A. RNA interference of
STAT5A completely blocked differentiation, whereas the inhibition of STAT5B only 
partially blocked differentiation. We propose that C/EBPa, C/EBPß, and PPAR<U+03B3>
control adipogenesis by regulating STAT5B and STAT5A and that STAT5A is
necessary, whereas STAT5B plays a supplementary role during adipogenesis.
Further, the regulation of PPAR<U+03B3>-STAT5 by C/EBPß signaling seems to be the
crucial adipogenesis pathway-initiating cascade of the various adipogenic genes.

PMCID: PMC3272248
PMID: 21542777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jun;25(6):955-68. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0064. Epub 2011 Apr
28.

Progesterone receptor directly inhibits ß-casein gene transcription in mammary
epithelial cells through promoting promoter and enhancer repressive chromatin
modifications.

Buser AC(1), Obr AE, Kabotyanski EB, Grimm SL, Rosen JM, Edwards DP.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Differentiated HC-11 cells ectopically expressing progesterone receptor (PR) were
used to explore the molecular mechanisms by which progesterone suppresses
ß-casein gene transcription induced by prolactin (PRL) and glucocorticoids in the
mammary gland. As detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, treatment of 
cells with the progestin agonist R5020 induced a rapid recruitment (5 min) of PR 
to the proximal promoter (-235 bp) and distal enhancer (-6 kb upstream of
transcription start site) of ß-casein. PR remained bound for 4 h and was
dissociated by 24 h after treatment. Despite efficient binding, the hormone
agonist-occupied PR did not stimulate transcription of the ß-casein gene.
Recruitment of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a,
glucocorticoid receptor, and the CCAAT enhancer binding protein ß to the enhancer
and proximal promoter of ß-casein induced by PRL and glucocorticoids was blocked 
by progestin cotreatment, whereas PR binding was induced under these conditions. 
PRL/glucocorticoid-induced histone acetylation and the recruitment of the
coactivator p300 and RNA polymerase II required for gene activation were also
inhibited by progestin. In addition, progestin prevented dissociation of the
corepressors Yin and Yang 1 and histone deacetylase 3 from the promoter, and
demethylation of lysine 9 of histone 3 induced by PRL and glucocorticoids. These 
studies are consistent with the conclusion that progesterone interferes with
PRL/glucocorticoid induction of ß-casein transcription by a physical interaction 
of PR with the promoter and enhancer that blocks assembly of a transcriptional
activation complex and dissociation of corepressors and promotes repressive
chromatin modifications. These studies define a novel mechanism of steroid
receptor-mediated transcriptional repression of a physiologically important gene 
in mammary gland development and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3386529
PMID: 21527503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):551-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2030. Epub 2011 Apr 24.

Modulation of cytokine receptors by IL-2 broadly regulates differentiation into
helper T cell lineages.

Liao W(1), Lin JX, Wang L, Li P, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6): 2 p following 559.

Helper T cells control host defense against pathogens. The receptors for
interleukin 12 (IL-12), IL-4 and IL-6 are required for differentiation into the
T(H)1, T(H)2 and T(H)17 subsets of helper T cells, respectively. IL-2 signaling
via the transcription factor STAT5 controls T(H)2 differentiation by regulating
both the T(H)2 cytokine gene cluster and expression of Il4ra, the gene encoding
the IL-4 receptor a-chain. Here we show that IL-2 regulated T(H)1
differentiation, inducing STAT5-dependent expression of the IL-12 receptor
ß2-chain (IL-12Rß2) and the transcription factor T-bet, with impaired human T(H)1
differentiation when IL-2 was blocked. T(H)1 differentiation was also impaired in
mouse Il2(-/-) T cells but was restored by IL-12Rß2 expression. Consistent with
the inhibition of T(H)17 differentiation by IL-2, treatment with IL-2 resulted in
lower expression of the genes encoding the IL-6 receptor a-chain (Il6ra) and the 
IL-6 signal transducer gp130 (encoded by Il6st), and retroviral transduction of
Il6st augmented T(H)17 differentiation even when IL-2 was present. Thus, IL-2
influences helper T cell differentiation by modulating the expression of cytokine
receptors to help specify and maintain differentiated states.

PMCID: PMC3304099
PMID: 21516110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Sep;19(9):1731-4. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.66. Epub
2011 Apr 14.

STAT5A expression in Swiss 3T3 cells promotes adipogenesis in vivo in an athymic 
mice model system.

Stewart WC(1), Pearcy LA, Floyd ZE, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro,
Tennessee, USA.

Many studies from our laboratories and others have shown that STAT5 expression
and activity are increased during adipogenesis of murine and human adipocytes.
Ectopic expression of STAT5A in fibroblasts or preadipocytes can confer or
enhance adipogenesis. To determine whether STAT5A also plays a role in
adipogenesis in vivo, we injected athymic mice with Swiss 3T3 cells expressing an
empty pBABE retrovirus, Swiss cells expressing a pBABE retrovirus-containing
STAT5A, or 3T3-F442A preadipocytes. Athymic mice injected with either 3T3-F442A
cells or Swiss 3T3 cells expressing STAT5A resulted in fat pad formation at the
site of injection. However, mice injected with Swiss cells containing the parent 
retroviral vector did not have any observable fat pads. An analysis of the
ectopic fat pads obtained from the Swiss 3T3 STAT5A mice revealed abundant
expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR-<U+03B3>) and
adiponectin. The protein levels of both of these fat cell markers were comparable
to expression levels in epididymal fat pads. These results demonstrate that
STAT5A can promote adipogenesis in vivo in this model system which supports a
role of this transcription factor in adipocyte development in the whole animal.

PMCID: PMC3163817
PMID: 21494231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Jul;31(7):1653-60. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.227652. Epub 2011 Apr 14.

Role of complement cascade in abdominal aortic aneurysms.

Hinterseher I(1), Erdman R, Donoso LA, Vrabec TR, Schworer CM, Lillvis JH, Boddy 
AM, Derr K, Golden A, Bowen WD, Gatalica Z, Tapinos N, Elmore JR, Franklin DP,
Gray JL, Garvin RP, Gerhard GS, Carey DJ, Tromp G, Kuivaniemi H.

Author information: 
(1)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, PA 17822-2610, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to investigate the role of complement
cascade genes in the pathobiology of human abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Results of a genome-wide microarray expression profiling
revealed 3274 differentially expressed genes between aneurysmal and control
aortic tissue. Interestingly, 13 genes in the complement cascade were
significantly differentially expressed between AAA and the controls. In silico
analysis of the promoters of the 13 complement cascade genes showed enrichment
for transcription factor binding sites for signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)5A. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated
binding of transcription factor STAT5A to the promoters of the majority of the
complement cascade genes. Immunohistochemical analysis showed strong staining for
C2 in AAA tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide strong evidence that the complement cascade
plays a role in human AAA. Based on our microarray studies, the pathway is
activated in AAA, particularly via the lectin and classical pathways. The
overrepresented binding sites of transcription factor STAT5A in the complement
cascade gene promoters suggest a role for STAT5A in the coordinated regulation of
complement cascade gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3712630
PMID: 21493888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 May;74(5):611-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.03980.x.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B gene polymorphism
contributes to the cholesterol metabolism in Japanese children with growth
hormone deficiency.

Makimura M(1), Ihara K, Kojima-Ishii K, Nozaki T, Ohkubo K, Kohno H, Kishimoto J,
Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: GH plays a significant role in the lipid metabolism. In this
study, we focused on the JAK2 - signal transducer and activator of the
transcription 5 (STAT5) pathway, which transmit the signals from the GH receptor,
and selected the STAT5A/B gene as a candidate for the regulation of lipid
metabolism in GH deficiency (GHD).
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: The study population comprised 83 children with
idiopathic GHD. The serum total cholesterol (TC), high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C) and the non-HDL cholesterol (non-HDL-C) levels were monitored
before and at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months after starting GH treatment. The height,
weight, body mass index, and serum insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) level
were also measured before and 12 months after starting the GH treatment. For the 
genetic analysis of the STAT5A/B gene, five tag SNPs were selected using the tag 
SNP picker programme on the homepage of the HapMap project. The evaluation of
promoter activity of the -44816A/G SNP in the STAT5B gene was performed by a
luciferase assay in vitro.
RESULTS: The TC and non-HDL-C levels were gradually decreased during the GH
treatment. Five tag SNPs (rs4029774, rs6503691, rs9900213, rs16967637 and
rs2272087) were picked up for the STAT5A/B gene, and the genetic study
demonstrated that the paediatric GHD patients who were heterozygotes or
homozygotes of minor alleles of the analysed SNPs in the same block of the STAT5B
gene showed significantly higher serum TC or non-HDL-C levels both before and
after GH treatment for 12 months. Most of the SNPs also demonstrated significant 
differences among genotypes in the decreases in serum TC or non-HDL-C levels
during the 12 months of GH treatment. A luciferase assay showed that the
-44816A/G SNP (rs4029774) in the STAT5B gene functionally affected the expression
level in vitro.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that STAT5B may therefore play a role in
regulating the cholesterol metabolism in children with GHD.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21470284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 22;407(4):801-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.103. Epub 2011 Apr 2.

Curcumin blocks interleukin (IL)-2 signaling in T-lymphocytes by inhibiting IL-2 
synthesis, CD25 expression, and IL-2 receptor signaling.

Forward NA(1), Conrad DM, Power Coombs MR, Doucette CD, Furlong SJ, Lin TJ,
Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Curcumin (diferulomethane) is the principal curcuminoid in the spice tumeric and 
a potent inhibitor of activation-induced T-lymphocyte proliferation; however, the
molecular basis of this immunosuppressive effect has not been well studied. Here 
we show that micromolar concentrations of curcumin inhibited DNA synthesis by
mouse CD4(+) T-lymphocytes, as well as interleukin-2 (IL-2) and CD25 (a chain of 
the high affinity IL-2 receptor) expression in response to antibody-mediated
cross-linking of CD3 and CD28. Curcumin acted downstream of protein kinase C
activation and intracellular Ca(2+) release to inhibit I<U+03BA>B phosphorylation, which
is required for nuclear translocation of the transcription factor NF<U+03BA>B. In
addition, IL-2-dependent DNA synthesis by mouse CTLL-2 cells, but not
constitutive CD25 expression, was impaired in the presence of curcumin, which
demonstrated an inhibitory effect on IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) signaling.
IL-2-induced phosphorylation of STAT5A and JAK3, but not JAK1, was diminished in 
the presence of curcumin, indicating inhibition of critical proximal events in
IL-2R signaling. In line with the inhibitory action of curcumin on IL-2R
signaling, pretreatment of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T-cells with curcumin
downregulated suppressor function, as well as forkhead box p3 (Foxp3) expression.
We conclude that curcumin inhibits IL-2 signaling by reducing available IL-2 and 
high affinity IL-2R, as well as interfering with IL-2R signaling.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21443863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Br J Pharmacol. 2011 Sep;164(1):106-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01353.x.

Inhibition of the signalling kinase JAK3 alleviates inflammation in monoarthritic
rats.

Kim BH(1), Kim M, Yin CH, Jee JG, Sandoval C, Lee H, Bach EA, Hahm DH, Baeg GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Many cytokines associated with autoimmune disorders and
inflammation have been shown to activate the signalling kinase JAK3, implying
that JAK3 plays key roles in the pathogenesis of these diseases. Therefore,
investigating the alterations of JAK3 activity and the efficacy of selective JAK3
antagonists in animal models of such disorders is essential to a better
understanding of the biology of JAK3 and to assess the potential clinical
benefits of JAK3 inhibitors.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Through high-throughput cell-based screening using the NCI
compound library, we identified NSC163088 (berberine chloride) as a novel
inhibitor of JAK3. Specificity and efficacy of this compound were investigated in
both cellular and animal models.
KEY RESULTS: We show that berberine chloride has selectivity for JAK3 over other 
JAK kinase members, as well as over other oncogenic kinases such as Src, in
various cellular assays. Biochemical and modelling studies strongly suggested
that berberine chloride bound directly to the kinase domain of JAK3. Also
phospho-JAK3 levels were significantly increased in the synovial tissues of rat
joints with acute inflammation, and the treatment of these rats with berberine
chloride decreased JAK3 phosphorylation and suppressed the inflammatory
responses.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The up-regulation of JAK3/STATs was closely
correlated with acute arthritic inflammation and that inhibition of JAK3 activity
by JAK3 antagonists, such as berberine chloride, alleviated the inflammation in
vivo.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3171864
PMID: 21434883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Environ Health Prev Med. 2011 Jul;16(4):247-52. doi: 10.1007/s12199-010-0193-7.
Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Constitutively active Stat5A and Stat5B promote adipogenesis.

Wakao H(1), Wakao R, Oda A, Fujita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, 
North 15 West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan. hwakao@med.hokudai.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The metabolic syndrome is an important social problem affecting many
people in developed countries. Obesity is a leading cause of this syndrome, hence
understanding molecular mechanisms underlying obesity is of prime importance for 
preventive medicine to develop novel methods to alleviate the corresponding
social cost as well as for pharmaceutical companies to develop antimetabolic
drugs.
METHODS: Since adipocytes play an important role in obesity, we explored the
signaling pathways leading to differentiation of adipocytes. We used a
preadipocyte cell line to monitor the differentiation of adipocytes, and
virus-mediated gene transfer to assess the role of the transcription factor Stat5
in adipogenesis. Adipocyte differentiation was assessed by Northern blot and
Western blot analyses as well as accumulation of fat droplets in cells. Promoter 
activity of the proadipogenic transcription factor peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) was evaluated by luciferase assay.
RESULTS: Virus-mediated gene transfer of the constitutively active form of both
Stat5A and Stat5B resulted in enhanced adipocyte differentiation in the absence
of fetal bovine serum (FBS) as judged by expression of proadipogenic factors as
well as accumulation of fat droplets in cells. Such a proadipogenic effect of
Stat5 is, in part, mediated by its ability to enhance transcription of PPAR<U+03B3>, a
master transcriptional regulator in adipogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The constitutively active form of Stat5A and Stat5B promoted
adipocyte differentiation in the absence of FBS via induction of PPAR<U+03B3>.

PMCID: PMC3117211
PMID: 21431790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. EMBO J. 2011 Apr 20;30(8):1459-72. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.65. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

Extensive chromatin remodelling and establishment of transcription factor
'hotspots' during early adipogenesis.

Siersbæk R(1), Nielsen R, John S, Sung MH, Baek S, Loft A, Hager GL, Mandrup S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Apr 20;30(8):1418-9.

Adipogenesis is tightly controlled by a complex network of transcription factors 
acting at different stages of differentiation. Peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family members are 
key regulators of this process. We have employed DNase I hypersensitive site
analysis to investigate the genome-wide changes in chromatin structure that
accompany the binding of adipogenic transcription factors. These analyses
revealed a dramatic and dynamic modulation of the chromatin landscape during the 
first hours of adipocyte differentiation that coincides with cooperative binding 
of multiple early transcription factors (including glucocorticoid receptor,
retinoid X receptor, Stat5a, C/EBPß and -d) to transcription factor 'hotspots'.
Our results demonstrate that C/EBPß marks a large number of these transcription
factor 'hotspots' before induction of differentiation and chromatin remodelling
and is required for their establishment. Furthermore, a subset of early
remodelled C/EBP-binding sites persists throughout differentiation and is later
occupied by PPAR<U+03B3>, indicating that early C/EBP family members, in addition to
their well-established role in activation of PPAR<U+03B3> transcription, may act as
pioneering factors for PPAR<U+03B3> binding.

PMCID: PMC3102274
PMID: 21427703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Br J Haematol. 2011 May;153(3):318-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08632.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Association of JAK-STAT pathway related genes with lymphoma risk: results of a
European case-control study (EpiLymph).

Butterbach K(1), Beckmann L, de Sanjosé S, Benavente Y, Becker N, Foretova L,
Maynadie M, Cocco P, Staines A, Boffetta P, Brennan P, Nieters A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Previous studies have suggested an important role for the Janus kinase-signal
transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) signalling pathway in tumour
development. Therefore, we explored genetic variants in JAK-STAT pathway
associated genes with lymphoma risk. In samples of the EpiLymph case-control
study we genotyped 1536 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using GoldenGate
BeadArray Technology (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Here, we report the
associations between selected SNPs and haplotypes of the JAK-STAT pathway and
risk of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) and most
frequent B-NHL subtypes. Among 210 relevant JAK-STAT pathway-related SNPs,
polymorphisms in nine genes (BMF, IFNG, IL12A, SOCS1, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A,
STAT6, TP63) were significantly associated with lymphoma risk. At a study-wise
significance level, we obtained a risk reduction of 28% among carriers of the
heterozygous genotype of the STAT3 variant (rs1053023) for B-NHL. For six other
variants within the STAT3 gene we observed an inverse association with different 
lymphoma subtypes. A reduced risk for HL was observed for the heterozygous
genotype of the STAT6 SNP (rs324011). This is an explorative investigation to
examine associations between JAK-STAT signalling related genes and lymphoma risk.
The results implicate a relevant role of certain pathway-related genes in
lymphomagenesis, but still need to be approved by independent studies.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21418178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Am J Transl Res. 2011 Feb;3(2):133-8. Epub 2010 Nov 21.

Targeting transcription factor Stat5a/b as a therapeutic strategy for prostate
cancer.

Liao Z, Nevalainen MT.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) is critical for the
viability and growth of human prostate cancer cells in culture and for prostate
xenograft tumors in nude mice. The expression of nuclear active Stat5a/b is
associated with high histological grades of clinical prostate cancers, and the
presence of active Stat5a/b in prostate cancer predicts early disease recurrence.
Stat5a/b and androgen receptor signaling pathways functionally synergize in
prostate cancer cells, and recent work suggests that Stat5a/b may be involved in 
the progression of prostate cancer to metastatic disease. Here, we review the
biological functions of Stat5a/b in prostate cancer and potential strategies to
target the prolactin receptor (PrlR)/Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway for therapy
development for prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3056559
PMID: 21416055  [PubMed]


293. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;25(1):61-75. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2010.09.003.

STAT5b deficiency: lessons from STAT5b gene mutations.

Hwa V(1), Nadeau K, Wit JM, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR
97239, USA. hwav@ohsu.edu

Growth hormone (GH) regulates insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production
primarily through activation of the GH receptor (GHR)-signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)-5b signaling cascade. One of four STAT proteins
(STAT1, -3, -5a and -5b) activated by the GH-GHR system, the critical importance 
of STAT5b in IGF-I production became evident with the identification of
homozygous, autosomal recessive STAT5b mutations in patients who presented with
severe postnatal growth failure, growth hormone insensitivity syndrome (GHIS) and
marked IGF-I deficiency. Unlike GHIS due to GHR mutations, patients carrying
STAT5b mutations also presented with chronic pulmonary disease and evidence of
perturbations of T-cell homeostasis. At present, no single treatment(s) is
available to improve both poor statural growth and immune deficiency. Continued
clinical evaluations of patients with STAT5b mutations and elucidating the impact
of the mutation on STAT5b structure and function, are important to understanding 
the pathophysiology of this rare, complex, disease (MIM 245590).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Nov;38(8):5387-92. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0691-8. Epub 2011
Mar 9.

Study on the STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism in Jersey cows and association with milk
production traits.

Dario C(1), Selvaggi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Welfare of Animals, University of Studies of Bari
Italy, Strada Prov. le per Casamassima Km 3, 70010 Valenzano (Ba), Italy.
c.dario@veterinaria.uniba.it

In mammals, the STAT proteins (signal transducers and activators of
transcription) are a group of cytoplasmic transcription factors that mediate the 
actions of many peptide hormones and cytokines within target cells. In this
study, the STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism was investigated with the PCR-RFLP technique 
in a sample of 191 Jersey cows reared in southern Italy. This polymorphism is
localized in the coding region of the bovine STAT5A gene. It is a substitution C 
<U+2192> T at position 6853 within the exon 7. All the possible genotypes for the C/T
polymorphism were identified. The overall frequencies of alleles C and T were
0.75 and 0.25 respectively. In order to study the relationship between this SNP
and milk production traits, data for 305-day milk production were used.
Significant differences between CC and CT genotypes were found in milk yield
(MY), fat yield (FY), solids not fat (SNF) yield, total solids (TS) yield (P <
0.01) and protein yield (PY) (P < 0.05). In particular the CC cows produced more 
milk than CT ones (6196.07 vs. 5744.66 kg) without differences in protein and fat
content. As a consequence, CC cows yielded more fat, protein, solids not fat and 
total solids than CT. As far as concerns lactose and ash contents and the
fat/protein ratio, no significant difference was found between the two genotypes.
Even if further studies should be carry out to assess the role of this SNP on
production traits, it is possible to conclude that STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism seems
to be a promising indirect marker to improve milk production traits in cattle.

PMID: 21390501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):1374-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.12.012.

Murine leukemia retrovirus integration induces the formation of transcription
factor complexes on palindromic sequences in the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription factor 5a gene during the development of pre-B lymphomagenesis.

Tsuruyama T(1), Hiratsuka T, Jin G, Imai Y, Takeuchi H, Maruyama Y, Kanaya K,
Ozeki M, Takakuwa T, Haga H, Tamaki K, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. tsuruyam@fp.med-u.ac.jp

Murine leukemia retrovirus (MLV) vectors are highly effective tools for
introducing a foreign gene into a target host genome. However, it remains unclear
how integrated retroviral promoter activity is influenced by the upstream or
downstream sequences and how the host cell phenotype is influenced by the
integrated promoter activity. Herein, we analyzed a set of pre-B lymphoma clones 
in which the MLV genome was integrated into the signal transducer and activator
of transcription factor 5a (Stat5a) gene. Among the clones, the lymphoma clones
with a provirus integrating into the middle position of the palindromic target
sequences showed significantly higher transcription of the Stat5a gene; and p300 
and other transcriptional factors formed complexes, with binding to the
proviral-host junctional DNA segment. By using a luciferase assay, the upstream
and downstream sequences of the provirus contributed to the up-regulation of
proviral promoter activity. In concomitance with the higher Stat5a transcription,
the immunoglobulin gene recombination was arrested. Antiapoptotic activity was
significantly higher, with an increase in Bcl-xL, one of the targets of STAT5A,
when IL-7 was supplied. Thus, a minute difference between MLV integration sites
can lead to large differences in the host phenotype through the formation of
transcription factor complexes on the proviral-host junctional DNA segment,
suggesting that caution is necessary in monitoring integration sites when working
with MLV vectors.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3070561
PMID: 21356387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2011 Jul;108(7):1651-61. doi: 10.1002/bit.23092. Epub 2011 Mar
11.

A novel microRNA mmu-miR-466h affects apoptosis regulation in mammalian cells.

Druz A(1), Chu C, Majors B, Santuary R, Betenbaugh M, Shiloach J.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Core Laboratory National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike Bldg 14A Rm
176, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

This study determined the changes in microRNA (miRs) expression in mammalian
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells undergoing apoptosis induced by exposing the
cells to nutrient-depleted media. The apoptosis onset was confirmed by reduced
cell viability and Caspase-3/7 activation. Microarray comparison of known mouse
and rat miRs in CHO cells exposed to fresh or depleted media revealed
up-regulation of the mouse miR-297-669 cluster in CHO cells subjected to depleted
media. The mmu-miR-466h was chosen for further analysis as the member of this
cluster with the highest overexpression and its up-regulation in depleted media
was confirmed with qRT-PCR. Since miRs suppress mRNA translation, we hypothesized
that up-regulated mmu-miR-466h inhibits anti-apoptotic genes and induces
apoptosis. A combination of bioinformatics and experimental tools was used to
predict and verify mmu-miR-466h anti-apoptotic targets. 8708 predicted targets
were obtained from miRecords database and narrowed to 38 anti-apoptotic genes
with DAVID NCBI annotation tool. Several genes were selected from this
anti-apoptotic subset based on nucleotide pairing complimentarity between the
mmu-miR-466h seed region and 3' UTR of the target mRNAs. The qRT-PCR analysis
revealed reduced mRNA levels of bcl2l2, dad1, birc6, stat5a, and smo genes in CHO
cells exposed to depleted media. The inhibition of the mmu-miR-466h increased the
expression levels of those genes and resulted in increased cell viability and
decreased Caspase-3/7 activation. The up-regulation of mmu-miR-466h in response
to nutrients depletion causes the inhibition of several anti-apoptotic genes in
unison. This suggests the pro-apoptotic role of mmu-miR-466h and its capability
to modulate the apoptotic pathway in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3099433
PMID: 21337326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Endocrinol. 2011 May;209(2):175-84. doi: 10.1530/JOE-11-0033. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

STAT genes display differential evolutionary rates that correlate with their
roles in the endocrine and immune system.

Gorissen M(1), de Vrieze E, Flik G, Huising MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Animal Physiology, Faculty of Science, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.gorissen@science.ru.nl

We identified orthologues of all mammalian Janus kinase (JAK) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) genes in teleostean fishes,
indicating that these protein families were already largely complete before the
teleost tetrapod split, 450 million years ago. In mammals, the STAT repertoire
consists of seven genes (STAT1, -2, -3, -4, -5a, -5b, and -6). Our phylogenetic
analyses show that STAT proteins that are recruited downstream of endocrine
hormones (STAT3 and STAT5a and -5b) show a markedly higher primary sequence
conservation compared with STATs that convey immune signals (STAT1-2, STAT4, and 
STAT6). A similar dichotomy in evolutionary conservation is observed for the JAK 
family of protein kinases, which activate STATs. The ligands to activate the
JAK/STAT-signalling pathway include hormones and cytokines such as GH, prolactin,
interleukin 6 (IL6) and IL12. In this paper, we examine the evolutionary forces
that have acted on JAK/STAT signalling in the endocrine and immune systems and
discuss the reasons why the JAK/STAT cascade that conveys classical immune
signals has diverged much faster compared with endocrine JAK/STAT paralogues.

PMID: 21330334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Anim Biotechnol. 2011 Jan;22(1):37-43. doi: 10.1080/10495398.2011.544205.

PCR-SSCP variation of GH and STAT5A genes and their association with estimated
breeding values of growth traits in Baluchi sheep.

Tahmoorespur M(1), Taheri A, Gholami H, Ansary M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Iran.

Growth hormone (GH) selected for its important role in economically relevant
traits and signal transducers and activators of transcription 5A (STAT5A) is also
known as a main mediator of growth hormone action on target genes. A total number
of 190 lambs of Iranian purebred Baluchi sheep were genotyped at exon 5 of GH and
exons 7 and 8 of STAT5A genes by using PCR-SSCP analysis. GH gene revealed three 
(G1, G2, and G3) conformational patterns; however, STAT5A loci were not
polymorphic. Breeding values of growth traits including birth weight, weaning
weight, 6 months weight, 9 months weight, and yearling weight were estimated by
using the Best Linear Unbiased Prediction based on an animal model with a
relationship matrix. Studied growth traits were examined for association
analysis. Our findings suggest that animals with G2 genotype have highest
breeding value for six month weight, while these animals have lowest breeding
value for pre-weaning traits. Higher performance of G2 animals in adult ages may 
be related to the growth hormone role in puberty ages. The other traits showed no
relationship to the genotypes examined.

PMID: 21328104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Oct;45(4):761-7. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0179OC.
Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Neuregulin receptor ErbB4 functions as a transcriptional cofactor for the
expression of surfactant protein B in the fetal lung.

Zscheppang K(1), Dörk T, Schmiedl A, Jones FE, Dammann CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Sufficient pulmonary surfactant production is required for the fetal-neonatal
transition, especially in preterm infants. Neuregulin (NRG) and its transmembrane
receptor ErbB4 positively regulate the onset of fetal surfactant synthesis.
Details of this signaling process remain to be elucidated. ErbB4 is known to
regulate gene expression in the mammary gland, where the receptor associates with
the signal transducer and activator of transcription Stat5a to transactivate the 
ß-casein gene promoter. We hypothesized that in the fetal lung, ErbB4 functions
as a transcriptional regulator for surfactant protein B (Sftpb), the most
critical surfactant protein gene. Re-expressing full-length ErbB4 in primary
fetal ErbB4-depleted Type II epithelial cells led to an increased expression of
Sftpb mRNA. This stimulatory effect required the nuclear translocation of ErbB4
and association with Stat5a, with the resultant binding to and activation of the 
Sftpb promoter. We conclude that ErbB4 directly regulates important aspects of
fetal lung maturation that help prepare for the fetal-neonatal transition.

PMCID: PMC3208619
PMID: 21317380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Strength Cond Res. 2011 Mar;25(3):767-77. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e318202e449.

Recovery after heavy resistance exercise and skeletal muscle androgen receptor
and insulin-like growth factor-I isoform expression in strength trained men.

Ahtiainen JP(1), Lehti M, Hulmi JJ, Kraemer WJ, Alen M, Nyman K, Selänne H,
Pakarinen A, Komulainen J, Kovanen V, Mero AA, Häkkinen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology of Physical Activity and Neuromuscular Research Center, 
University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. juha.ahtiainen@jyu.fi

The effects of heavy resistance exercise on skeletal muscle androgen receptor
(AR) protein concentration and mRNAs of AR, insulin-like growth factor-I
(IGF)-IEa, and mechano growth factor (MGF) expression were examined from biopsies
of vastus lateralis (VL) muscle before and 48 hours after heavy resistance
exercise (5 × 10 repetition maximum [RM] leg press and 4 × 10RM squats) in 8
adult strength trained men. The present exercise induced an acute decrease in
maximal isometric force and increased serum total testosterone (T) and free
testosterone (FT) concentrations. During 2 recovery days, maximal isometric force
and subjective perception of physical fitness remained significantly lowered,
whereas serum creatine kinase activity, subjective muscle soreness, and muscle
swelling (i.e., thickness of VL by ultrasound) were significantly increased
compared to pre-exercise values. Subjective perception of physical fitness was
followed up to 7 days, and by 6 days postexercise, it was elevated above the
pre-exercise level. Basal T and FT concentrations remained unaltered after the
exercise. No statistically significant changes were observed in AR protein or
mRNA expression, but IGF-IEa (p < 0.05) and MGF (p < 0.05) mRNA expression were
increased compared to pre-exercise levels. These findings indicate that IGF-IEa
and MGF responses may be related to acute regenerative processes in muscle
because of exercise and may contribute to muscular adaptation to resistance
exercise. Subjective perception of physical fitness suggests that recovery over a
pre-exercise level of the present type of heavy resistance exercise can take
approximately 6 days.

PMID: 21311349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Res Vet Sci. 2011 Oct;91(2):235-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2011.01.009. Epub 2011 Feb
9.

Effect of polymorphisms at the STAT5A and FGF2 gene loci on reproduction, milk
yield and lameness of Holstein cows.

Oikonomou G(1), Michailidis G, Kougioumtzis A, Avdi M, Banos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Production, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, PO Box 
393, GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. goikon@vet.auth.gr

The objective of this study was to investigate the association of polymorphisms
at the STAT5A and FGF2 gene loci with fertility, lactation milk yield and
lameness in dairy cattle. Five hundred and eighteen primiparous Holstein cows
were included in the study. Several reproductive traits were considered including
conception rate (0/1) at first insemination, conception rate (0/1) in a 305-day
lactation, number of inseminations per conception, interval (days) from calving
to conception for cows that conceived in the first 305 days of lactation and age 
at first calving. Milk yield and lameness incidence were also recorded.
Genotyping was performed using PCR-RFLP. The effect of allele substitution at
each gene locus on reproductive traits, milk yield and lameness was assessed with
single-trait mixed linear models. No significant associations were found between 
reproduction traits and any of the studied polymorphisms, apart from age at first
calving, for which STAT5A polymorphism had a suggestive effect (P = 0.077). In
addition, no significant effect of any polymorphism on lameness was found.
Replacement of the C by G allele at the STAT5A locus was associated with a
significant (P<0.05) increase in lactation milk yield, suggesting that this locus
could be considered in gene assisted selection for the genetic improvement of
milk production.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21310447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Feb 1;82(2):658-66. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.043. Epub 2011 Feb 6.

Constitutive STAT5 activation correlates with better survival in cervical cancer 
patients treated with radiation therapy.

Chen HH(1), Chou CY, Wu YH, Hsueh WT, Hsu CH, Guo HR, Lee WY, Su WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, National Cheng Kung University, Medical
College and Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Constitutively activated signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) factors, in particular STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5, have been
detected in a wide variety of human primary tumors and have been demonstrated to 
directly contribute to oncogenesis. However, the expression pattern of these
STATs in cervical carcinoma is still unknown, as is whether or not they have
prognostic significance. This study investigated the expression patterns of
STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5 in cervical cancer and their associations with clinical
outcomes in patients treated with radical radiation therapy.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: A total of 165 consecutive patients with International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) Stages IB to IVA cervical cancer
underwent radical radiation therapy, including external beam and/or
high-dose-rate brachytherapy between 1989 and 2002. Immunohistochemical studies
of their formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were performed. Univariate and
multivariate analyses were performed to identify and to evaluate the effects of
these factors affecting patient survival.
RESULTS: Constitutive activations of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5 were observed in
11%, 22%, and 61% of the participants, respectively. While STAT5 activation was
associated with significantly better metastasis-free survival (p < 0.01) and
overall survival (p = 0.04), STAT1 and STAT3 activation were not. Multivariate
analyses showed that STAT5 activation, bulky tumor (= 4 cm), advanced stage (FIGO
Stages III and IV), and brachytherapy (yes vs. no) were independent prognostic
factors for cause-specific overall survival. None of the STATs was associated
with local relapse. STAT5 activation (odds ratio = 0.29, 95% confidence interval 
= 0.13-0.63) and advanced stage (odds ratio = 2.54; 95% confidence interval =
1.03-6.26) were independent predictors of distant metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report to provide the overall expression patterns 
and prognostic significance of specific STATs in cervical carcinoma. Our results 
indicate that constitutive STAT5 activation correlates with better
metastasis-free survival and overall survival in cervical cancer patients who
have received radiation therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21300446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Transl Oncol. 2011 Feb 1;4(1):47-58.

STAT-Related Profiles Are Associated with Patient Response to Targeted Treatments
in Locally Advanced SCCHN.

Kotoula V(1), Lambaki S, Televantou D, Kalogera-Fountzila A, Nikolaou A, Markou
K, Misailidou D, Syrigos KN, Fountzilas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.

The anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody cetuximab (Erbitux, CTX) is
currently used for the treatment of locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck (LA-SCCHN), as yet with modest effectiveness, prompting for the
identification of response predictors to this treatment and for the targeting of 
additional pathways implicated in this disease. Within this scope, we
investigated the effect of SRC/STAT pathway components on LA-SCCHN patient
outcome. SRC, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, ANXA1, CAV1, IGFBP2, EPHA2, EPHB2,
and MSN relative gene expression, as well as Stat protein activation, were
assessed on LA-SCCHN tumor tissues from 35 patients treated with combined
radiotherapy (RT) and CTX-based regimens. Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5 proteins were
usually found activated in neoplastic nuclei (70.4%, 85.7%, and 70.8%,
respectively). Activated Stat3 and Stat5 were associated with each other (P =
.017) and with a CAV1(high)/MSN(high)/IGFBP2(low) profile. All patients with
tumors expressing high STAT5A/EPHA2 experienced a complete response on
RT-CTX-based treatments (12/15 complete responders, P < .0001) and a longer
progression-free survival (P = .024). Few tumors expressed high ANXA1/CAV1/EPHA2 
and low IGFBP2, a putative dasatinib response-related profile, whereas high ANXA1
was associated with shorter overall survival (P = .003). In conclusion, Stat
activation is common in LA-SCCHN, where overexpression of STAT5A and EPHA2 may
predict for response to RT-CTX treatments. The STAT5A/EPHA2 profile seems of
particular interest for validation in larger cohorts and in multiple tumor types 
because markers for the positive selection of patients to benefit from
CTX-containing treatments are currently lacking.

PMCID: PMC3026408
PMID: 21286377  [PubMed]


304. Proteomics. 2011 Feb;11(3):490-4. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000569. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

One-source peptide/phosphopeptide standards for accurate phosphorylation degree
determination.

Hahn B(1), Böhm M, Raia V, Zinn N, Möller P, Klingmüller U, Lehmann WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure Analysis, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

Reversible protein phosphorylation is a key mediator for intracellular signal
transduction. Here we report an innovative method for accurate, site-specific
protein phosphorylation degree determination by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. A stable
isotope-labeled pair of peptide/phosphopeptide standards with volumetrically
defined molar ratio is used as reference, providing an internal standard for both
the analyte peptide and the phosphopeptide. For the preparation of one-source
peptide/phosphopeptide standards, an aliquot of the labeled phosphopeptide
standard is quantitatively dephosphorylated, yielding an equimolar solution of
the peptide standard. Subsequently, the two solutions are mixed at a 1:1 or other
volumetric ratio, which equals the molar ratio. This procedure assures a defined 
concentration ratio of both components that is independent from their absolute
concentration. We demonstrate the applicability of the one-source
peptide/phosphopeptide standard method by determining the phosphorylation degree 
of the signalling proteins STAT5A/B and STAT6.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21268278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2010 Sep;71 Suppl 1:S25-32. doi:
10.1016/S0003-4266(10)70004-4.

[New insights in growth hormone physiology and pathophysiology].

[Article in French]

Kamenicky P(1), Lombès M, Chanson P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie et des Maladies de la Reproduction, Hôpital Bicêtre, 
APHP, 70 avenue du Général Leclerc 94275 Le Kremlin Bicêtre cedex, France.
peter.kamenicky@bct.aphp.fr

This review focuses on new aspects in growth hormone (GH) biology and
pathophysiology presented at the Endocrine Society's meeting, in San Diego, in
June 2010. First, we will describe recent advances in the understanding of
cytokine hormone signaling via STAT5 in mammary gland development, highlighting
the primary role of miR193b for differentiation of mammary stem cells into
alveolar progenitor cells. We will examine the potential implication of endocrine
and autocrine GH for mammary gland carcinogenesis. Three novel murine models
bearing tissue-specific inactivation of GH receptor or JAK2 bring new insights
into the large spectrum of GH effects on energy homeostasis. We will also report 
new data supporting a paracrine regulation of GH secretion in women by estrogen's
action in the brain. Thereafter we will question the reasons for GH abuse for
doping by assessing the hormonal impact on body composition and physical
performance in recreational athletes. Finally, we will discuss the controversial 
issue of GH replacement in acromegalic patients presenting GH deficiency after
treatment of acromegaly.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Dec 14;11:99. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-99.

3D nuclear organization of telomeres in the Hodgkin cell lines U-HO1 and
U-HO1-PTPN1: PTPN1 expression prevents the formation of very short telomeres
including "t-stumps".

Knecht H(1), Brüderlein S, Wegener S, Lichtensztejn D, Lichtensztejn Z, Lemieux
B, Möller P, Mai S.

Author information: 
(1)CHUS, Université de Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada. hans.knecht@USherbrooke.ca

BACKGROUND: In cancer cells the three-dimensional (3D) telomere organization of
interphase nuclei into a telomeric disk is heavily distorted and aggregates are
found. In Hodgkin's lymphoma quantitative FISH (3D Q-FISH) reveals a major impact
of nuclear telomere dynamics during the transition form mononuclear Hodgkin (H)
to diagnostic multinuclear Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells. In vitro and in vivo
formation of RS-cells is associated with the increase of very short telomeres
including "t-stumps", telomere loss, telomeric aggregate formation and the
generation of "ghost nuclei".
RESULTS: Here we analyze the 3D telomere dynamics by Q-FISH in the novel Hodgkin 
cell line U-HO1 and its non-receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatase N1 (PTPN1)
stable transfectant U-HO1-PTPN1, derived from a primary refractory Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Both cell lines show equally high telomerase activity but U-HO1-PTPN
differs from U-HO1 by a three times longer doubling time, low STAT5A expression, 
accumulation of RS-cells (p < 0.0001) and a fourfold increased number of
apoptotic cells.As expected, multinuclear U-HO1-RS-cells and multinuclear
U-HO1-PTPN1-RS-cells differ from their mononuclear H-precursors by their nuclear 
volume (p < 0.0001), the number of telomeres (p < 0.0001) and the increase in
telomere aggregates (p < 0.003). Surprisingly, U-HO1-RS cells differ from
U-HO1-PTPN1-RS-cells by a highly significant increase of very short telomeres
including "t-stumps" (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Abundant RS-cells without additional very short telomeres including
"t-stumps", high rate of apoptosis, but low STAT5A expression, are hallmarks of
the U-HO1-PTPN1 cell line. These characteristics are independent of telomerase
activity. Thus, PTPN1 induced dephosphorylation of STAT5 with consecutive lack of
Akt/PKB activation and cellular arrest in G2, promoting induction of apoptosis,
appears as a possible pathogenetic mechanism deserving further experimental
investigation.

PMCID: PMC3018409
PMID: 21144060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5034-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.155903. Epub 2010 
Nov 24.

The tumor suppressor hTid1 inhibits STAT5b activity via functional interaction.

Dhennin-Duthille I(1), Nyga R, Yahiaoui S, Gouilleux-Gruart V, Régnier A,
Lassoued K, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U925, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, UFR de Médecine, 3 Rue des
Louvels, 80036 Amiens, France.

STAT5a and -5b (signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a and 5b)
proteins play an essential role in hematopoietic cell proliferation and survival 
and are frequently constitutively active in hematologic neoplasms and solid
tumors. Because STAT5a and STAT5b differ mainly in the carboxyl-terminal
transactivation domain, we sought to identify new proteins that bind specifically
to this domain by using a bacterial two-hybrid screening. We isolated hTid1, a
human DnaJ protein that acts as a tumor suppressor in various solid tumors. hTid1
interacts specifically with STAT5b but not with STAT5a in hematopoietic cell
lines. This interaction involves the cysteine-rich region of the hTid1 DnaJ
domain. We also demonstrated that hTid1 negatively regulates the expression and
transcriptional activity of STAT5b and suppresses the growth of hematopoietic
cells transformed by an oncogenic form of STAT5b. Our findings define hTid1 as a 
novel partner and negative regulator of STAT5b.

PMCID: PMC3037615
PMID: 21106534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Endocrinology. 2011 Jan;152(1):181-92. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0537. Epub 2010 Nov
17.

GH-dependent STAT5 signaling plays an important role in hepatic lipid metabolism.

Barclay JL(1), Nelson CN, Ishikawa M, Murray LA, Kerr LM, McPhee TR, Powell EE,
Waters MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Woolloongabba
4102, Australia.

GH deficiency is known to be clinically associated with a high incidence of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and this can be reversed by GH administration. 
Here we investigated the mechanistic basis for this phenomenon using engineered
male mice lacking different signaling elements of the GH receptor, hepatic
stat5a/b(-/-) mice and a mouse hepatoma line. We found deficient GH-dependent
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5 signaling correlates
with steatosis, and through microarray analysis, quantitative PCR, and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation, identified putative targets of STAT5 signaling responsible
for the steatosis seen on a normal diet. These targets were verified with
liver-specific stat5a/b deletion in vivo, and in vitro we show that
dominant-negative (DN) STAT5 increases lipid uptake in a mouse hepatoma line.
Because loss of STAT5 signaling results in elevated STAT1 and STAT3 activity and 
intracellular lipid accumulation, we have used DN-STAT5a/b, DN-STAT1,
constitutively active (CA)-STAT3, or addition of oleate/palmitate in the hepatoma
line to assign which of these apply to individual targets in STAT5 signaling
deficiency. These findings and published mouse models of steatosis enable us to
propose elevated cd36, ppar<U+03B3>, and pgc1a/ß expression as primary instigators of
the steatosis along with elevated fatty acid synthase, lipoprotein lipase, and
very low-density lipoprotein receptor expression. Decreased fgf21 and insig2
expression may also contribute. In conclusion, despite normal plasma free fatty
acids and minimal obesity, absent GH activation leads to steatosis because
activated STAT5 prevents hepatic steatosis. These results raise the possibility
of low-dose GH treatment for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

PMID: 21084450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2011 Jan;26(1):29-35. doi: 10.1007/s00384-010-1090-7. Epub 
2010 Nov 16.

Expression of phosphorylated Stat5 predicts expression of cyclin D1 and
correlates with poor prognosis of colonic adenocarcinoma.

Mao Y(1), Li Z, Lou C, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital
of Harbin Medical University, No. 150, Haping Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province
150040, China.

PURPOSE: Constitutive activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription-5 (Stat5) was recently found to be associated with tumor
progression through stimulating cell proliferation and preventing apoptosis.
However, it is not clear how activated Stat5 is expressed in colon cancer. We
aimed to investigate the correlation between phosphorylated Stat5 (p-Stat5)
expression and cell cycle regulators (cyclin D1) expression in colonic
adenocarcinoma and the relationship between expression of these two proteins and 
various clinicopathological parameters, including overall survival.
METHODS: P-Stat5 and cyclin D1 expression were determined by immunohistochemical 
staining from 169 cases of resected colonic adenocarcinoma specimens.
RESULTS: P-Stat5 expression correlated with cyclin D1 expression (r = 0.250, P = 
0.001). P-Stat5-positive staining was associated with the depth of tumor invasion
(P = 0.002). Univariate survival analysis showed that lymph node metastasis,
distant metastasis, TNM stage (all P < 0.0001), T stage (P = 0.024),
p-Stat5-positive expression (P = 0.002), and cyclin D1-positive expression (P =
0.039) were associated with shorter survival in patients with colonic
adenocarcinoma. Multivariate survival analysis showed that only distant
metastasis (P < 0.001; hazard ratio [HR] = 4.96), TNM stage (P < 0.001; HR =
9.80), and p-Stat5 overexpression (P = 0.020; HR = 1.84) were independent
predictors of poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first evidence that p-Stat5 may play an
important role in cyclin D1 overexpression and contribute to colonic
adenocarcinoma progression.

PMID: 21079973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Methods Enzymol. 2010;485:583-96. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381296-4.00030-0.

Design and use of constitutively active STAT5 constructs.

Farrar MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, USA.

The transcription factor Signal Tranducer and Activator of Transcription 5
(STAT5) plays an important role in numerous biological processes including, but
not limited to, (i) homeostasis of hematopoietic stem cells, (ii) development of 
essentially all blood cell lineages, (iii) growth hormone effects, (iv)
differentiation of mammary epithelium, and (v) central nervous system control of 
metabolism. Two key tools for deciphering STAT5 biology have involved the use of 
mice in which the Stat5a and Stat5b genes can be conditionally deleted
(Stat5(FL/FL) mice) and the development of systems in which STAT5a or STAT5b is
rendered constitutively active. In this chapter, the distinct mechanisms that
have been developed to render STAT5 constitutively active and their use in
probing biological processes are discussed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21050937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Hepatology. 2010 Nov;52(5):1808-18. doi: 10.1002/hep.23882.

The transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A
(STAT5A) and STAT5B negatively regulate cell proliferation through the activation
of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2b (Cdkn2b) and Cdkn1a expression.

Yu JH(1), Zhu BM, Wickre M, Riedlinger G, Chen W, Hosui A, Robinson GW,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Although the cytokine-inducible transcription factor signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) promotes proliferation of a wide range of
cell types, there are cell-specific and context-specific cases in which loss of
STAT5 results in enhanced cell proliferation. Here, we report that loss of STAT5 
from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) leads to enhanced proliferation, which
was linked to reduced levels of the cell cycle inhibitors p15(INK4B) and
p21(CIP1). We further demonstrate that growth hormone, through the transcription 
factor STAT5, enhances expression of the Cdkn2b (cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2B) gene and that STAT5A binds to interferon-gamma-activated sequence
sites within the promoter. We recently demonstrated that ablation of STAT5 from
liver results in hepatocellular carcinoma upon CCl4 treatment. We now establish
that STAT5, like in MEFs, activates expression of the Cdkn2b gene in liver
tissue. Loss of STAT5 led to diminished p15(INK4B) and increased hepatocyte
proliferation.CONCLUSION: This study for the first time demonstrates that
cytokines, through STAT5, induce the expression of a key cell cycle inhibitor.
These experiments therefore shed mechanistic light on the context-specific role
of STAT5 as tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3152209
PMID: 21038417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(2):55-9. doi: 10.3233/ACP-CLO-2010-0534.

Activating mutation (V617F) in the tyrosine kinase JAK2 is absent in
locally-confined or castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Gu L(1), Zhu XH, Visakorpi T, Alanen K, Mirtti T, Edmonston TB, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor Stat5a/b is highly critical for the viability of
human prostate cancer cells in vitro and for prostate tumor growth in vivo. Stat5
is constitutively active in clinical prostate cancers but not in the normal human
prostate epithelium. Moreover, Stat5a/b activation in prostate cancer is
associated with high histological grade of prostate cancer. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying constitutive activation of Stat5a/b in prostate
cancer are unclear. The receptor-associated tyrosine kinase Jak2 is a known key
activator of Stat5a/b in prostate cancer cells in response to ligand stimulation.
Recently, a single gain-of-function point mutation of JAK2 was described in
myeloproliferative diseases leading to constitutive Jak2 kinase activity,
subsequent Stat5a/b activation and involvement of V617F Jak2 in the pathogenesis 
of myeloproliferative disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We determined whether JAK2 undergoes the V617F activating 
mutation during clinical progression of human prostate cancer using a highly
sensitive assay (amplification refractory mutation system) and a unique material 
of fresh specimens from organ-confined or castration-resistant prostate cancers.
RESULTS: The JAK2 V617F mutation was not found in any of the normal or malignant 
prostate samples analyzed in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: Future work should focus on determining the molecular mechanisms
other than V617F mutation of Jak2 resulting in continuous Stat5 activation in
clinical prostate cancers.

PMCID: PMC4605774
PMID: 20966544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 1;185(9):5074-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001725. Epub 2010
Oct 1.

Granulysin production and anticryptococcal activity is dependent upon a far
upstream enhancer that binds STAT5 in human peripheral blood CD4+ T cells.

Xing J(1), Wu F, Wang S, Krensky AM, Mody CH, Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Previous studies have demonstrated that STAT5 is critical for expression of
granulysin and antimicrobial activity. Because the signaling pathway and the
resultant microbicidal activity are defective in HIV-infected patients, the
mechanism by which STAT5 leads to granulysin expression is of great interest. In 
the current study, IL-2-stimulated CRL-2105 CD4(+) T cells expressed granulysin
and killed Cryptococcus neoformans similar to primary CD4(+) T cells. The
enhancer activity of the upstream element of the granulysin promoter was analyzed
in primary CD4(+) T cells and CRL-2105 T cells with a luciferase reporter assay, 
and a STAT5 binding site, 18,302 to 18,177 bp upstream of the transcription start
site, was identified as an enhancer. Additionally, the enhancer functioned in the
context of heterologous SV40 promoter irrespective of its transcriptional
orientation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and EMSAs demonstrated that the
enhancer element bound STAT5 both in vivo and in vitro, and mutation of the STAT5
binding site abrogated its enhancer activity. Furthermore, overexpression of a
dominant negative STAT5a abolished the enhancer activity of the STAT5 binding
site and abrogated the anticryptococcal activity of IL-2-stimulated primary
CD4(+) T cells. Taken together, these data provide details about the complex
regulation leading to granulysin expression and anticryptococcal activity in
primary CD4(+) T cells.

PMID: 20889547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5730-40. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0517. Epub 2010 Sep
29.

Glucocorticoid-induced impairment of mammary gland involution is associated with 
STAT5 and STAT3 signaling modulation.

Bertucci PY(1), Quaglino A, Pozzi AG, Kordon EC, Pecci A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Biología y Neurociencias-Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The mammary epithelium undergoes cyclical periods of cellular proliferation,
differentiation, and regression. During lactation, the signal transducer and
activator of transcription factor (STAT)-5A and the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) 
synergize to induce milk protein expression and also act as survival factors.
During involution, STAT3 activation mediates epithelial cell apoptosis and
mammary gland remodeling. It has been shown that the administration of
glucocorticoids at weaning prevents epithelial cell death, probably by
extracellular matrix breakdown prevention. Our results show that the synthetic
glucocorticoid dexamethasone (DEX) modulates STAT5A and STAT3 signaling and
inhibits apoptosis induction in postlactating mouse mammary glands, only when
administered within the first 48 h upon cessation of suckling. DEX administration
right after weaning delayed STAT5A inactivation and degradation, preserving gene 
expression of target genes as ß-casein (bcas) and prolactin induced protein
(pip). Weaning-triggered GR down-regulation is also delayed by the hormone
treatment. Moreover, DEX administration delayed STAT3 activation and
translocation into epithelial cells nuclei. In particular, DEX treatment impaired
the increment in gene expression of signal transducer subunit gp130, normally
up-regulated from lactation to involution and responsible for STAT3 activation.
Therefore, the data shown herein indicate that glucocorticoids are able to
modulate early involution by controlling the strong cross talk that GR, STAT5,
and STAT3 pathways maintains in the mammary epithelium.

PMID: 20881248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;42(12):2037-46. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.09.008. Epub 2010 Sep 18.

N-terminal truncation of Stat5a/b circumvents PIAS3-mediated transcriptional
inhibition of Stat5 in prostate cancer cells.

Dagvadorj A(1), Tan SH, Liao Z, Xie J, Nurmi M, Alanen K, Rui H, Mirtti T,
Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Transcription factor Stat5a/b is critical for prostate cancer cell survival and
for prostate xenograft tumor growth. In addition, the Stat5a/b signaling pathway 
may contribute to progression of organ-confined prostate cancer to
castration-resistant and/or metastatic disease. Expression of nuclear Stat5a/b is
clustered to high grade human prostate cancers, and nuclear Stat5a/b in primary
prostate cancer predicts early disease recurrence after initial treatment. Here, 
we show by Western blotting and electromobility shift assay that Stat5a/b protein
in human prostate cancer is N-terminally truncated. This short form of Stat5a/b
is generated post-translationally in vivo in prostate cancer cells and is the
predominant form of Stat5a/b that binds to DNA. We further demonstrate by
mutagenesis and co-immunoprecipitations that the N-domain of Stat5a/b is required
for binding to PIAS3, and that PIAS3 inhibits transcriptional activity of
Stat5a/b in breast cancer cells but not in prostate cancer cells. Thus, the
proteolytic cleavage of the N-terminus of Stat5a/b may be a mechanism by which
Stat5 evades the transcriptional repression by PIAS3 in prostate cancer cells,
and results in increased Stat5-driven gene expression and prostate cancer
progression.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2982800
PMID: 20854925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Oct;51(10):1895-901. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.507830.

Suppression of STAT5A increases chemotherapeutic sensitivity in
imatinib-resistant and imatinib-sensitive K562 cells.

Kosova B(1), Tezcanli B, Ekiz HA, Cakir Z, Selvi N, Dalmizrak A, Kartal M, Gunduz
U, Baran Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Medical School, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.

STAT proteins are cytoplasmic transcription factors that are involved in the
regulation of numerous cellular activities such as cell growth, differentiation, 
and survival. In this study, we aimed to identify the expression pattern of STAT 
genes in imatinib-sensitive and -resistant K562 cells, and further, to reveal the
effects of STAT5A siRNA knockdown on cell growth and apoptosis induction. The XTT
cell proliferation assay showed that both sensitive and resistant K562 cells were
sensitized to imatinib upon transfection with STAT5A siRNA. Caspase-3 enzyme
activity was increased significantly in both cells. These results may open up new
opportunities to overcome chemotherapeutic resistance in leukemia.

PMID: 20849385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int Immunopharmacol. 2010 Nov;10(11):1361-73. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2010.08.002. 
Epub 2010 Aug 20.

Study of anti-inflammatory activities of the pure compounds from Andrographis
paniculata (burm.f.) Nees and their effects on gene expression.

Parichatikanond W(1), Suthisisang C, Dhepakson P, Herunsalee A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.

In inflammation, the responses to noxious stimuli are controlled by the highly
modulated interactions between various immune cells and chemical mediators. The
purpose of this study is to evaluate and compare the anti-inflammatory effect of 
diterpenoids isolated from Andrographis paniculata, including
dehydroandrographolide (AP1), andrographolide (AP2) and neoandrographolide (AP3),
on the production of inflammatory cytokines and COX activities. Furthermore, the 
alteration of gene expression involved in this activity was investigated in the
most potent compound to elucidate the other possible molecular mechanisms. AP1
(30.1 µM; 10 µg/ml) and AP2 (28.5 µM; 10 µg/ml) markedly inhibited COX-1 in
ionophore A23187-induced human platelets. AP2 (28.5 µM) and AP3 (20.8 µM; 10
µg/ml) strongly suppressed the LPS-stimulated COX-2 activity in human blood. In
addition, AP2 modulated the level of LPS-induced TNF-a, IL-6, IL-1ß and IL-10
secretion in human blood in a concentration-dependent manner. The results
revealed that AP2 exhibited the highest efficacy. Therefore, changes in the
levels of mRNA transcripts by AP2 were further measured using human cDNA
microarrays. The molecular response to AP2 was complex and mediated by various
processes. Among the altered gene expressions, the genes involved in immune and
inflammation processes were selectively down-regulated, such as cytokines and
cytokine receptors (TNFSF14, TNF, TNFRSF6, and IL1A), chemokines (CCL8 and
CXCL11), JAK/STAT signaling (JAK3 and STAT5A), TLRs family (TLR4 and TLR8) and
NF-<U+03BA>B (NFKB1). Expression of some genes was validated using RT-PCR. The results
demonstrated that AP1, AP2 and AP3 exhibited the anti-inflammatory effect by
interfering COX and inflammatory cytokines and the underlying mechanisms of AP2
may be related to down-expression of genes involved in inflammatory cascade.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20728594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):32704-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141804. Epub 2010
Aug 18.

The gene encoding the hematopoietic stem cell regulator CCN3/NOV is under direct 
cytokine control through the transcription factors STAT5A/B.

Kimura A(1), Martin C, Robinson GW, Simone JM, Chen W, Wickre MC, O'Shea JJ,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. kimuraa@mail.nih.gov

Cytokines control the biology of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor
cells in part through the transcription factors STAT5A/B. To investigate the
target genes of STAT5A/B activated by cytokines in HSCs and progenitors, we
performed microarray analyses using Lineage(-) Sca-1(+) c-Kit(+) (KSL) cells in
the presence and absence of STAT5A/B. Stimulation with a mixture containing IL-3,
IL-6, stem cell factor, thrombopoietin, and Flt3 ligand induced Ccn3/Nov mRNA
over 100-fold in WT (control) but not Stat5a/b-null KSL cells. CCN3/NOV is a
positive regulator of human HSC self-renewal and development of committed blood
cells. Without stimulation, the Ccn3/Nov signal level was low in control KSL
cells similar to Stat5a/b-null KSL cells. To determine which cytokine activates
the Ccn3/Nov gene, we analyzed Lineage(-) c-Kit(+) (KL) and 32D cells using
quantitative PCR and ChIP assays. Although stimulation with a mixture lacking
IL-3 prevented the induction of Ccn3/Nov in control KL cells, IL-3 alone could
induce Ccn3/Nov mRNA in control KL and 32D cells. ChIP assays using 32D cells
revealed IL-3-induced binding of STAT5A/B to a <U+03B3>-interferon-activated sequences
site in the Ccn3/Nov gene promoter. This is the first report that Ccn3/Nov is
directly induced by cytokines through STAT5A/B.

PMCID: PMC2963365
PMID: 20720003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Mar;226(3):616-26. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22381.

Forced activation of Stat5 subjects mammary epithelial cells to DNA damage and
preferential induction of the cellular response mechanism during proliferation.

Eilon T(1), Barash I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet-Dagan, Israel.

Parity-dependent adenocarcinoma tumors developed in postestropausal transgenic
mice expressing a constitutively active Stat5 variant (STAT5ca) in their mammary 
gland. These tumors maintained elevated expression levels of genes regulating the
cellular DNA damage response (DDR) mechanism, compared to the intact gland. No
correlation with STAT5ca expression was observed for these genes in the
established tumors. However, activated Stat5a in individual cells of the rarely
and earlier developed hyperplasia was associated with induced Chk2 activity.
Deregulated Stat5 may already cause DNA damage during the fertile period. This
hypothesis and the specific vulnerable stage were further studied in mammary
epithelial cells that were stably transfected with ß-lactoglobulin (BLG)/STAT5ca 
and exposed to a reproduced reproductive cycle. During the pregnancy-like
proliferative state, STAT5ca expression was induced by the added lactogenic
hormones. Production of reactive oxygen species, rather than proliferation,
served as the primary mediator of DNA damage and cellular DDR. Differentiated
cells expressed higher levels of STAT5ca and retained the DNA nicks. However, the
elevated expression of the genes involved in DDR was downregulated. Higher levels
of DNA damage were also detected in the mammary gland of transgenic mice
expressing the BLG/STAT5ca during pregnancy and lactation. However, the relative 
number of damaged cells was much lower than that in the reproduced in vitro
stages and the insults were generally associated with apoptosis and DDR. This
study implicates pregnancy as the vulnerable stage for deregulated Stat5
activity, and demonstrates that DNA insults in viable differentiated mammary
epithelial cells are ignored by the DDR mechanism.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20717961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 15;346(2):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.027. Epub 2010
Aug 4.

Genetic manipulation of individual somatic mammary cells in vivo reveals a master
role of STAT5a in inducing alveolar fate commitment and lactogenesis even in the 
absence of ovarian hormones.

Dong J(1), Tong T, Reynado AM, Rosen JM, Huang S, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Assessing the molecular control of development and cell fate in individual cells 
in the intact mammary epithelium has not been possible to date. By exploiting an 
intraductal retrovirus (RCAS)-mediated gene delivery method to introduce a marker
gene, we found that ductal epithelial cells are turned over with a half time of
approximately 1month in adult virgin mice. However, following RCAS-mediated
introduction of a constitutively activated STAT5a (caSTAT5a), caSTAT5a-activated 
ductal epithelial cells expand and replace other cells in the epithelium,
eventually forming a mammary gland resembling that in a late pregnant mouse,
suggesting that STAT5a activation alone is sufficient to mediate
pregnancy-induced mammary cell expansion, alveolar cell fate commitment, and
lactogenesis. Furthermore, such caSTAT5a-induced alveolar differentiation does
not require ovarian functions, although caSTAT5a-induced cell proliferation is
partly reduced in ovariectomized mice. In conclusion, in this first report of
studying the developmental role of a gene in a few cells in a normally developed 
virgin mammary ductal tree, STAT5a activation causes alveolar fate commitment and
lactogenesis, and with the help of ovarian hormones, drives alveolar expansion.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3020144
PMID: 20691178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Phytother Res. 2011 Mar;25(3):329-37. doi: 10.1002/ptr.3257.

JAK2/STAT5 signaling pathway mediates Bojungbangdocktang enhanced hematopoiesis.

Lim J(1), Jeong SJ, Koh W, Han I, Lee HJ, Kwon TR, Jung JH, Kim JH, Lee HJ, Lee
EO, Kim SH, Lee MH, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Bojungbangdocktang (BJBDT) is a medicinal herbal cocktail that has been used for 
cancer prevention and treatment in traditional Korean medicine. In the current
study, BJBDT was demonstrated to regulate hematopoiesis. BJBDT significantly
increased the expression of hematopoietic cytokines interleukin (IL)-3, stem cell
factor (SCF), granulocyte-macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF),
thrombopoietin (TPO) and erythropoietin (EPO) at the level of mRNA and secretion 
in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Additionally, BJBDT enhanced the
phosphorylation of Janus activated kinase 2 (JAK2) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) and STAT binding to gamma interferon
activated sites (GAS) in HSCs. Furthermore, BJBDT significantly enhanced the
growth rate of granulocyte erythrocyte monocyte macrophage colony-forming units
(CFU-GEMM) and erythroid burst forming units (BFU-E) in vitro. Moreover, BJBDT
increased the level of EPO at mRNA in kidney and plasma, and the numbers of
erythroid-specific antigen Ter-119(+) erythroid cells in mice with aplastic
anemia induced by 20% benzene. Consistently, histochemical staining revealed
BJBDT increased the bone marrow and stromal cells as well as decreased
macrophages and adipocytes in bone marrow tissues of mice with aplastic anemia.
Taken together, the results suggest that BJBDT can enhance hematopoiesis via
hematopoietic cytokine-mediated JAK2/STAT5 pathway as a potent hematopoietic
candidate. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20669261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Jul;128(1):31-40. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1025-6.
Epub 2010 Jul 24.

Amplification of the prolactin receptor gene in mammary lobular neoplasia.

Tran-Thanh D(1), Arneson NC, Pintilie M, Deliallisi A, Warren KS, Bane A, Done
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Institute for Breast Cancer Research, University Health
Network, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Jul;128(1):41-3.

The identification of lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) in a patient's specimen
confers an appreciable increased risk of development of future invasive mammary
carcinoma. However, the study of LCIS presents a challenge as it is usually only 
recognized in fixed specimens. Recent advances in high throughput genomics have
made possible comprehensive copy number analysis of lesions such as this. Using
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we characterized eight cases of
lobular carcinoma (four invasive and four non-invasive) from microdissected
samples of archival specimens and validated our results by quantitative real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on an independent set of 
80 in situ ductal (DCIS) and lobular breast lesions to confirm our results.
Amplification of the prolactin receptor gene (PRLr) was identified in 4/4 cases
of LCIS by aCGH. We confirmed this amplification by qRT-PCR and demonstrated PRLr
expression in 29/40 (73%) cases of lobular neoplasia by IHC. Amplification of
PRLr was neither detected in 10 cases of DCIS nor in 5 areas of normal breast
tissue by qRT-PCR and only 14/40 (35%) cases of DCIS showed PRLr expression by
IHC (P = 0.0008). Our study suggests the prolactin receptor gene is a molecular
target that may be important in the pathogenesis and progression of lobular
neoplasia. Investigation of the status of this gene in cases of DCIS has
indicated that it may not be as important in the progression of this type of
breast cancer, supporting the view that lobular and ductal carcinomas may evolve 
along separate pathways.

PMID: 20658264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1500-1. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.209551.

Microregulation of plaque neovascularization.

Suárez Y.

Comment on
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1562-8.

PMID: 20631347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Genome Inform. 2010;24:139-53.

Robust gene network analysis reveals alteration of the STAT5a network as a
hallmark of prostate cancer.

Reddy A(1), Huang CC, Liu H, Delisi C, Nevalainen MT, Szalma S, Bhanot G.

Author information: 
(1)BioMaPS Institute, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
anupamar@gmail.com.

We develop a general method to identify gene networks from pair-wise correlations
between genes in a microarray data set and apply it to a public prostate cancer
gene expression data from 69 primary prostate tumors. We define the degree of a
node as the number of genes significantly associated with the node and identify
hub genes as those with the highest degree. The correlation network was pruned
using transcription factor binding information in VisANT (http://visant.bu.edu/) 
as a biological filter. The reliability of hub genes was determined using a
strict permutation test. Separate networks for normal prostate samples, and
prostate cancer samples from African Americans (AA) and European Americans (EA)
were generated and compared. We found that the same hubs control disease
progression in AA and EA networks. Combining AA and EA samples, we generated
networks for low low (<7) and high (=7) Gleason grade tumors. A comparison of
their major hubs with those of the network for normal samples identified two
types of changes associated with disease: (i) Some hub genes increased their
degree in the tumor network compared to their degree in the normal network,
suggesting that these genes are associated with gain of regulatory control in
cancer (e.g. possible turning on of oncogenes). (ii) Some hubs reduced their
degree in the tumor network compared to their degree in the normal network,
suggesting that these genes are associated with loss of regulatory control in
cancer (e.g. possible loss of tumor suppressor genes). A striking result was that
for both AA and EA tumor samples, STAT5a, CEBPB and EGR1 are major hubs that gain
neighbors compared to the normal prostate network. Conversely, HIF-la is a major 
hub that loses connections in the prostate cancer network compared to the normal 
prostate network. We also find that the degree of these hubs changes
progressively from normal to low grade to high grade disease, suggesting that
these hubs are master regulators of prostate cancer and marks disease
progression. STAT5a was identified as a central hub, with ~120 neighbors in the
prostate cancer network and only 81 neighbors in the normal prostate network. Of 
the 120 neighbors of STAT5a, 57 are known cancer related genes, known to be
involved in functional pathways associated with tumorigenesis. Our method is
general and can easily be extended to identify and study networks associated with
any two phenotypes.

PMID: 22081596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Gut. 2010 Aug;59(8):1066-78. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.203893. Epub 2010 Jun 28.

Loss of GM-CSF signalling in non-haematopoietic cells increases NSAID ileal
injury.

Han X(1), Gilbert S, Groschwitz K, Hogan S, Jurickova I, Trapnell B, Samson C,
Gully J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, MLC 2010, 3333 Burnet
Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. xiaonan.han@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: Administration of granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) relieves symptoms in Crohn's disease (CD). It has been reported that
reduced GM-CSF bioactivity is associated with more aggressive ileal behaviour and
that GM-CSF-null mice exhibit ileal barrier dysfunction and develop a transmural 
ileitis following exposure to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
STAT5 signalling is central to GM-CSF action. It was therefore hypothesised that 
GM-CSF signalling in non-haematopoietic cells is required for ileal homeostasis.
METHODS: Bone marrow (BM) chimeras were generated by reconstituting irradiated
GM-CSF receptor (gm-csfr) beta chain or GM-CSF (gm-csf) deficient mice with wild 
type BM (WTBM-->GMRKO and WTBM-->GMKO). Intestinal barrier function and the
response to NSAID-induced ileal injury were examined. Expression of gm-csf,
gm-csfr or stat5 in Caco-2 and HT-29 intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) lines was
knocked down and the effect of GM-CSF signalling on IEC survival and
proliferation was determined.
RESULTS: Elevated levels of GM-CSF autoantibodies in ileal CD were found to be
associated with dysregulation of IEC survival and proliferation. GM-CSF
receptor-deficient mice and WTBM-->GMRKO chimeras exhibited ileal
hyperpermeability. NSAID exposure induced a transmural ileitis in GM-CSF
receptor-deficient mice and WTBM-->GMRKO chimeras. Transplantation of wild type
BM into GM-CSF-deficient mice prevented NSAID ileal injury and restored ileal
barrier function. Ileal crypt IEC proliferation was reduced in WTBM-->GMRKO
chimeras, while STAT5 activation in ileal IEC following NSAID exposure was
abrogated in WTBM-->GMRKO chimeras. Following knock down of gm-csf, gm-csfr alpha
or beta chain or stat5a/b expression in Caco-2 cells, basal proliferation was
suppressed. GM-CSF normalised proliferation of Caco-2 cells exposed to NSAID,
which was blocked by stat5a/b RNA interference.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of GM-CSF signalling in non-haematopoietic cells increases
NSAID ileal injury; furthermore, GM-CSF signalling in non-haematopoietic cells
regulates ileal epithelial homeostasis via the STAT5 pathway. The therapeutic use
of GM-CSF may therefore be beneficial in chronic ileitis associated with CD.

PMCID: PMC4296557
PMID: 20584783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Aug 30;325(1-2):143-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.05.010. 
Epub 2010 May 26.

Prolactin-induced Jak2 phosphorylation of RUSH: a key element in Jak/RUSH
signaling.

Helmer RA(1), Panchoo M, Dertien JS, Bhakta SM, Hewetson A, Chilton BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, United States.

Jak2/Stat-mediated prolactin signaling culminates in Stat5a-DNA-binding. However,
not all Jak2-dependent genes have Stat5 sites. Western analysis with inhibitors
showed Jak2 is a proximal intermediate in prolactin-induced RUSH phosphorylation.
Transfection assays with HRE-H9 cells showed the RUSH-binding site mediated the
ability of prolactin to augment progesterone-dependent transcription of the RUSH 
gene. Jak2 inhibitors or targeted RUSH-site mutation blocked the prolactin
effect. RUSH co-immunoprecipitated with phospho-Jak2 from nuclear extracts. Jak2 
inhibitors abolished the nuclear pool of phospho-RUSH not the nuclear content of 
RUSH in HRE-H9 cells. Nucleolar-affiliated partners, e.g. nucleolin, were
identified by microLC/MS/MS analysis of nuclear proteins that
co-immunoprecipitated with RUSH/GST-RING. RUSH did not exclusively co-localize
with fibrillarin to the nucleolus. MG-132 (proteasomal inhibitor) failed to block
Tyrene CR4-mediated decrease in phospho-RUSH, and did not promote RUSH
accumulation in the nucleolus. These studies authenticate prolactin-dependent
Jak2 phosphorylation of RUSH, and provide functional implications on the RUSH
network of nuclear interactions.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2902710
PMID: 20562009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Leukemia. 2010 Aug;24(8):1397-405. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.131. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Effective targeting of STAT5-mediated survival in myeloproliferative neoplasms
using ABT-737 combined with rapamycin.

Li G(1), Miskimen KL, Wang Z, Xie XY, Tse W, Gouilleux F, Moriggl R, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 (STAT5) is a critical
transcription factor for normal hematopoiesis and its sustained activation is
associated with hematologic malignancy. A persistently active mutant of STAT5
(STAT5a(S711F)) associates with Grb2-associated binding protein 2 (Gab2) in
myeloid leukemias and promotes growth in vitro through AKT activation. Here we
have retrovirally transduced wild-type or Gab2(-/-) mouse bone marrow cells
expressing STAT5a(S711F) and transplanted into irradiated recipient mice to test 
an in vivo myeloproliferative disease model. To target Gab2-independent AKT/mTOR 
activation, we treated wild-type mice separately with rapamycin. In either case, 
mice lacking Gab2 or treated with rapamycin showed attenuated myeloid hyperplasia
and modestly improved survival, but the effects were not cytotoxic and were
reversible. To improve on this approach, we combined in vitro targeting of
STAT5-mediated AKT/mTOR using rapamycin with inhibition of the STAT5 direct
target genes bcl-2 and bcl-X(L) using ABT-737. Striking synergy with both drugs
was observed in mouse BaF3 cells expressing STAT5a(S711F), TEL-JAK2 or BCR-ABL
and in the relatively single agent-resistant human BCR-ABL-positive K562 cell
line. Therefore, targeting distinct STAT5-mediated survival signals, for example,
bcl-2/bcl-X(L) and AKT/mTOR may be an effective therapeutic approach for human
myeloproliferative neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2921023
PMID: 20535152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Crit Care Med. 2010 Aug;38(8):1702-8. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181e7161c.

Patients with acute pancreatitis complicated by organ failure show highly
aberrant monocyte signaling profiles assessed by phospho-specific flow cytometry.

Oiva J(1), Mustonen H, Kylänpää ML, Kyhälä L, Alanärä T, Aittomäki S, Siitonen S,
Kemppainen E, Puolakkainen P, Repo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Helsinki University Central Hospital, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2010 Aug;38(8):1751-2.

OBJECTIVES: To outline signaling profiles and transmigration capacity of
monocytes of patients with severe acute pancreatitis.
DESIGN: Prospective study.
SETTING: University hospital intensive care unit.
PATIENTS: Thirteen patients with severe acute pancreatitis. All patients had
organ dysfunction (acute respiratory distress syndrome in 12, renal dysfunction
in eight). Healthy volunteers served as reference subjects.
INTERVENTIONS: Blood samples were collected after admission to the intensive care
unit.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Phosphorylation of nuclear factor-kappaB and p38, 
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) 1, 3, 5, and
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 in appropriately stimulated and
nonstimulated samples were studied using phospho-specific whole-blood flow
cytometry. Monocyte chemotactic protein-1-induced transmigration of monocytes
among mononuclear cells obtained by density gradient centrifugation was studied
using Transwell cell culture inserts covered with confluent layer of endothelial 
EA-HY cells. Phosphorylation levels of nuclear factor-kappaB induced by tumor
necrosis factor, bacterial lipopolysaccharide, muramyl dipeptide, Escherichia
coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Staphylococcus epidermidis were significantly
lower in patients' monocytes than monocytes of healthy reference subjects,
whereas mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 phosphorylation levels were normal. 
Phosphorylation levels induced by interleukin-6 in STAT1 and STAT3 and by
combination of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and calcium ionophore A23187 in
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2, members of a mitogen-activated
protein kinase family, were depressed in patients' monocytes, whereas
phosphorylation levels induced by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor in STAT5 was normal. In nonstimulated samples, phosphorylation levels were
normal. The transmigration percentage of patients' monocytes was significantly
lower than that of reference monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: In severe acute pancreatitis, monocytes show impaired nuclear factor
kappaB and STAT1 activation, which may increase susceptibility to secondary
infections. p38 activation is normal and STAT3 activation is depressed, which may
contribute to maintenance of systemic inflammation. Extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1/2 activation is impaired, which may depress monocytes'
transmigration and may consequently increase risk of infection. Monitoring of
monocyte signaling profiles may aid in finding new therapeutic approaches and
predictors of outcome of severe acute pancreatitis.

PMID: 20512034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Blood. 2010 Sep 2;116(9):1548-58. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-258913. Epub 2010
May 27.

Stat5a serine 725 and 779 phosphorylation is a prerequisite for hematopoietic
transformation.

Friedbichler K(1), Kerenyi MA, Kovacic B, Li G, Hoelbl A, Yahiaoui S, Sexl V,
Müllner EW, Fajmann S, Cerny-Reiterer S, Valent P, Beug H, Gouilleux F, Bunting
KD, Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.

Stat5 transcription factors are essential gene regulators promoting
proliferation, survival, and differentiation of all hematopoietic cell types.
Mutations or fusions of oncogenic tyrosine kinases often result in constitutive
Stat5 activation. We have modeled persistent Stat5 activity by using an oncogenic
Stat5a variant (cS5). To analyze the hitherto unrecognized role of Stat5 serine
phosphorylation in this context, we have generated cS5 constructs with mutated
C-terminal serines 725 and 779, either alone or in combination. Genetic
complementation assays in primary Stat5(null/null) mast cells and Stat5(DeltaN) T
cells demonstrated reconstitution of proliferation with these mutants. Similarly,
an in vivo reconstitution experiment of transduced Stat5(null/null) fetal liver
cells transplanted into irradiated wild-type recipients revealed that these
mutants exhibit biologic activity in lineage differentiation. By contrast, the
leukemogenic potential of cS5 in bone marrow transplants decreased dramatically
in cS5 single-serine mutants or was completely absent upon loss of both serine
phosphorylation sites. Our data suggest that Stat5a serine phosphorylation is a
prerequisite for cS5-mediated leukemogenesis. Hence, interference with Stat5a
serine phosphorylation might provide a new therapeutic option for leukemia and
myeloid dysplasias without affecting major functions of Stat5 in normal
hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2938843
PMID: 20508164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 16;285(29):22050-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.093088. Epub 2010
May 21.

Ectodomain shedding of interleukin-2 receptor beta and generation of an
intracellular functional fragment.

Montes de Oca P(1), Malardé V, Proust R, Dautry-Varsat A, Gesbert F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Biologie des Interactions Cellulaires, CNRS URA2582, 25 rue 
du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France. pavel73@hotmail.com

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) regulates different functions of various lymphoid cell
subsets. These are mediated by its binding to the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) composed 
of three subunits (IL2-Ralpha, -beta, and -gamma(c)). IL-2Rbeta is responsible
for the activation of several signaling pathways. Ectodomain shedding of membrane
receptors is thought to be an important mechanism for down-regulation of cell
surface receptor abundance but is also emerging as a mechanism that cell
membrane-associated molecules require for proper action in vivo. Here, we
demonstrate that IL-2Rbeta is cleaved in cell lines of different origin,
including T cells, generating an intracellular 37-kDa fragment (37beta ic) that
comprises the full intracellular C-terminal and transmembrane domains. Ectodomain
shedding of IL-2Rbeta decreases in a mutant deleted of the juxtamembrane region, 
where cleavage is predicted to occur, and is inhibited by tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteases-3. 37Beta ic is tyrosine-phosphorylated and associates with
STAT-5, a canonic signal transducer of IL-2R. Finally, lymphoid cell transfection
with a truncated form of IL-2Rbeta mimicking 37beta ic increases their
proliferation. These data indicate that IL-2Rbeta is subject to ectodomain
shedding generating an intracellular fragment biologically functional, because
(i) it is phosphorylated, (ii) it associates with STAT5A, and (iii) it increases 
cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2903380
PMID: 20495002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1562-8. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.206201. Epub 2010 May 20.

microRNA-222 controls neovascularization by regulating signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5A expression.

Dentelli P(1), Rosso A, Orso F, Olgasi C, Taverna D, Brizzi MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1500-1.

OBJECTIVE: Inflammatory stimuli released into atherosclerotic plaque
microenvironment regulate vessel formation by modulating gene expression and
translation. microRNAs are a class of short noncoding RNAs, acting as
posttranscriptional regulators of protein-coding genes involved in various
biological processes, including vascular cell biology. Among them,
microRNA-221/222 (miR-221/222) seem to negatively modulate vascular remodeling by
targeting different target genes. Here, we investigated their potential
contribution to inflammation-mediated neovessel formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used quantitative real-time RT-PCR amplification to
analyze expression of 7 microRNAs previously linked to vascular biology, such as 
miR-17-5p, miR-21, miR-126, miR-210, miR-221, miR-222, and miR-296 and found high
levels of expression for all of them in quiescent endothelial cells. However,
miR-126, miR-221, miR-222, and miR-296 turned out to be down-modulated in
endothelial cells exposed to inflammatory stimuli. Applying a gain-of-function
approach, we demonstrated that, among them, only miR-222 was involved in
inflammation-mediated vascular remodeling. In addition, we identified signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) as a bona fide target of
miR-222 and observed that miR-222 negatively correlated with STAT5A expression in
human endothelial cells from advanced neovascularized atherosclerotic lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified STAT5A as a novel miR-222 target, and this finding
opens up new perspectives for treatment of vascular diseases.

PMID: 20489169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Neuropharmacology. 2010 Sep;59(3):139-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.04.010. 
Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Multi-component signaling complexes of the delta-opioid receptor with STAT5B and 
G proteins.

Georganta EM(1), Agalou A, Georgoussi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Signaling and Molecular Pharmacology, Institute of
Biology, National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, 15310 Ag.
Paraskevi-Attikis, Athens, Greece.

Besides mediating opioid responses in the nervous system and the peripheral
tissues, opioid receptors are implicated in signaling mechanisms shared by
cytokine receptors. Recent observations have shown that the Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription 5A (STAT5A) interacts with the mu-opioid receptor
(mu-OR) and is phosphorylated upon mu-OR stimulation (Mazarakou and Georgoussi,
2005). In the present study we demonstrate that another member of the STAT
family, STAT5B, associates constitutively with the C-terminal tail of the
delta-opioid receptor (delta-CT). [D-Ser(2), Leu(5), Thr(6)]-enkephalin-exposure 
of HEK293 cells, expressing stably the delta-opioid receptor (delta-OR), leads to
receptor-dependent STAT5B tyrosine phosphorylation and transcriptional
activation. This phosphorylation occurs in a G protein-dependent manner and is
carried out by a c-Src kinase. Co-immunoprecipitation studies indicate that
STAT5B forms pairs with selective Galpha and Gbetagamma subunits of G proteins
and activated c-Src kinase in HEK293 cells. These interactions are formed either 
constitutively, or upon receptor stimulation. We also demonstrate that the
delta-CT serves as a platform for the formation of a multi-component signaling
complex (signalosome), consisting of STAT5B, c-Src and selective G protein
members. We can thus conclude that STAT5B signaling can be modulated by its
coupling with a specific subset of G protein subunits, revealing a novel
signaling mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of STAT5B-dependent genes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20433855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2010 Jun;30(3):178-88. doi:
10.3109/10799891003786218.

Deregulation of STAT-5 isoforms in the development of HPV-mediated cervical
carcinogenesis.

Sobti RC(1), Singh N, Hussain S, Suri V, Bharadwaj M, Das BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Panjab University, Sector-14, Chandigarh, India. 
rcsobti@pu.ac.in

BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer and is leading cause
of cancer related deaths in women worldwide. High Risk-Human papillomavirus (HPV)
types play an important role in cervical carcinogenesis. Considering the
important role of signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 (STAT-5), an
important member of JAK/STAT family which plays a crucial role in various cancers
and HPV as a key mediator in the development of cervical carcinogenesis, the
purpose of the current study was to examine the possible relationship between HPV
infection and expression of STAT-5 gene isoforms in cervical cancer.
METHODS: A total of 120 fresh cervical tissue specimens comprising precancer (n =
12), cancer (n = 78) and normal controls (n = 30) were analyzed for HPV infection
and expression pattern of STAT-5 mRNA (both isoforms STAT-5a and STAT-5b) and
protein in different stages of cervical carcinoma biopsies by
reverse-transcriptase-PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: A significantly increased expression of STAT-5 was detected in most of
the cervical tumors (P < 0.001), whereas it was almost undetectable in normal
controls. Also the study of relative contribution of STAT-5 isoforms revealed a
higher expression pattern of STAT-5b and was associated with severity of the
disease. On the contrary, STAT-5a was found to be significantly downregulated in 
cervical tumor tissues (P < 0.001). HPV infection was found in 90% of the
cervical cancer cases and was significantly associated with STAT-5 overexpression
(P = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We observed for the first time the differential expression pattern
of STAT-5 isoforms in cervical cancer and that STAT-5 may play an important role 
in the progression of HPV-mediated cervical cancer.

PMID: 20415542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Dairy Sci. 2010 May;93(5):2244-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2009-2805.

Short communication: Validation of in vitro fertility genes in a Holstein bull
population.

Khatib H(1), Monson RL, Huang W, Khatib R, Schutzkus V, Khateeb H, Parrish JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA. hkhatib@wisc.edu

Previously, we constructed an in vitro fertilization system for the
identification of genes affecting fertility traits in dairy cattle. The
efficiency of this system has been demonstrated by the identification of several 
genes affecting fertilization rate and early embryonic survival. However, to
employ these genetic markers in marker- and gene-assisted selection programs,
there is a need to validate in vitro results in phenotypic data sets collected in
vivo. Thus, the objective of this study was to validate, in a population of
Holstein bulls, the fertility trait genes we previously identified in an in vitro
system. Estimated relative conception rate (ERCR) data from 222 Holstein bulls
were obtained from 5 different artificial insemination companies in the United
States. Bulls were genotyped for the genes FGF2, POU1F1, PRL, PRLR, GH, GHR,
STAT5A, OPN, and UTMP, and the data were analyzed for association with ERCR using
a mixed effects sire model. A stepwise model selection procedure revealed
evidence of association with ERCR for FGF2 and STAT5A polymorphisms. The in vivo 
validation suggests that these genes can be used in gene-assisted selection
programs for reproductive performance in dairy cattle. The genotypes found to be 
associated with low bull fertility in this study have been reported to be
associated with high milk composition in previous studies. These findings provide
molecular evidence for the antagonistic relationship between milk production and 
fertility observed for many years in different breeds of dairy cattle.

Copyright 2010 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20412940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 May;34(5):599-608. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d9efcc.

Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma of salivary glands, containing the
ETV6-NTRK3 fusion gene: a hitherto undescribed salivary gland tumor entity.

Skálová A(1), Vanecek T, Sima R, Laco J, Weinreb I, Perez-Ordonez B, Starek I,
Geierova M, Simpson RH, Passador-Santos F, Ryska A, Leivo I, Kinkor Z, Michal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charles University, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
skalova@fnplzen.cz

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Oct;35(10):1600-2.

We present a series of 16 salivary gland tumors with histomorphologic and
immunohistochemical features reminiscent of secretory carcinoma of the breast.
This is a hitherto undescribed and distinctive salivary gland neoplasm, with
features resembling both salivary acinic cell carcinoma (AciCC) and low-grade
cystadenocarcinoma, and displaying strong similarities to breast secretory
carcinoma. Microscopically, the tumors have a lobulated growth pattern and are
composed of microcystic and glandular spaces with abundant eosinophilic
homogenous or bubbly secretory material positive for periodic acid-Schiff,
mucicarmine, MUC1, MUC4, and mammaglobin. The neoplasms also show strong
vimentin, S-100 protein, and STAT5a positivity. For this tumor, we propose a
designation mammary analogue secretory carcinoma of salivary glands (MASC). The
16 patients comprised 9 men and 7 women, with a mean age of 46 years (range 21 to
75). Thirteen cases occurred in the parotid gland, and one each in the minor
salivary glands of the buccal mucosa, upper lip, and palate. The mean size of the
tumors was 2.1 cm (range 0.7 to 5.5 cm). The duration of symptoms was recorded in
11 cases and ranged from 2 months to 30 years. Clinical follow-up was available
in 13 cases, and ranged from 3 months to 10 years. Four patients suffered local
recurrences. Two patients died, 1 of them owing to multiple local recurrences
with extension to the temporal bone, and another owing to metastatic
dissemination to cervical lymph nodes, pleura, pericardium, and lungs. We have
shown a t(12;15) (p13;q25) ETV6-NTRK3 translocation in all but one case of MASC
suitable for analysis. One case was not analyzable and another was not available 
for testing. This translocation was not found in any conventional salivary AciCC 
(12 cases), nor in other tumor types including pleomorphic adenoma (1 case) and
low-grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma (1 case), whereas ETV6-NTRK3 gene
rearrangements were proven in all 3 tested cases of mammary secretory carcinoma. 
Thus, our results strongly support the concept that MASC and AciCC are different 
entities.

PMID: 20410810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Endocrinology. 2010 Jun;151(6):2876-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1282. Epub 2010 Apr 
14.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a mediates mammary ductal
branching and proliferation in the nulliparous mouse.

Santos SJ(1), Haslam SZ, Conrad SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 2209 Biomedical and
Physical Sciences Building, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48824, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a is a critical regulator
of mammary gland development. Previous studies have focused on Stat5a's role in
the late pregnant and lactating gland, and although active Stat5a is detectable
in mammary epithelial cells in virgin mice, little is known about its role during
early mammary gland development. In this report, we compare mammary gland
morphology in pubertal and adult nulliparous wild-type and Stat5a-/- mice. The
Stat5a-null mammary glands exhibited defects in secondary and side branching,
providing evidence that Stat5a regulates these processes. In addition, Stat5a-/- 
mammary glands displayed an attenuated proliferative response to pregnancy levels
of estrogen plus progesterone (E+P), suggesting that it plays an important role
in early pregnancy. Finally, we examined one potential mediator of Stat5a's
effects, receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL). Stat5a-/-
mammary glands were defective in inducing RANKL in response to E+P treatment. In 
addition, regulation of several reported RANKL targets, including inhibitor of
DNA binding 2 (Id2), cyclin D1, and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21(Waf1/Cip1), was altered in Stat5a-/- mammary cells, suggesting that one or
more of these proteins mediate the effects of Stat5a in E+P-treated mammary
epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC2875824
PMID: 20392833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 May 1;16(9):2615-23. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3269.
Epub 2010 Apr 13.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a-dependent cross-talk
between follicular lymphoma cells and tumor microenvironment characterizes a
group of patients with improved outcome after R-CHOP.

Taskinen M(1), Valo E, Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML, Hautaniemi S, Meri S, Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland.

PURPOSE: Tumor microenvironment has a strong effect on the survival of follicular
lymphoma (FL) patients. The aim of this study was to determine what are the
signaling pathways that mediate the cross-talk between lymphoma cells and
tumor-infiltrating inflammatory cells and contribute to the clinical outcome of
FL patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression profiling and pathway impact analyses were
done from pretreatment lymphoma tissue of 24 patients. The findings were
validated immunohistochemically in an independent cohort of 81 patients. All
patients were treated with the combination of rituximab and
cyclophoshamide-doxorubicin-vincristine-prednisone chemotherapy. In addition,
microarray was used to screen the genes differentially expressed between control 
and rituximab-stimulated B-cell lymphoma cells in culture.
RESULTS: Among the transcripts differentially expressed in the FL tissues between
the patients with favorable or adverse outcomes, an overrepresentation of genes
associated with the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)5a
pathway was observed. In a validation set, a better progression-free survival was
observed among the patients with high STAT5a protein expression. In the FL
tissue, STAT5a positivity was barely detectable in the neoplastic B cells, but a 
subpopulation of follicular dendritic cells and T lymphocytes showed prominent
STAT5a expression. Rituximab was found to induce the expression of
STAT5a-associated interleukin-15 in B-lymphoma cells in culture, thereby
providing a possible explanation for the cross-talk between rituximab-stimulated 
FL cells and their microenvironment.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that STAT5a activity in immunologically active
nonmalignant cells acts as molecular predictor for rituximab and
cyclophoshamide-doxorubicin-vincristine-prednisone-treated FL patients.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20388848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Jul;88(1):107-16. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1109748. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Dual retrovirus integration tagging: identification of new signaling molecules
Fiz1 and Hipk2 that are involved in the IL-7 signaling pathway in B lymphoblastic
lymphomas.

Tsuruyama T(1), Imai Y, Takeuchi H, Hiratsuka T, Maruyama Y, Kanaya K, Kaszynski 
R, Jin G, Okuno T, Ozeki M, Nakamura T, Takakuwa T, Manabe T, Tamaki K, Hiai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. tsuruyam@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

IL-7R, FLT3, and CD43 are surface antigens expressed during the transition from
pro-B to pre-B cells in BM. To understand interactions between their signaling
pathways, we analyzed spontaneous mouse B-LBLs with dual MLV integration into
Stat5a and Fiz1 or Stat5a and Hipk2. MLV integration resulted in up-regulation of
these genes in lymphoma cells compared with normal pro-B cells from the BM. In
lymphomas with both integrations into Stat5a and Fiz1, increases in
phosphorylated STAT5A and expression of c-Myc, a target gene of STAT5A, were
observed following stimulation of the FLT3. Clones with the dual integrations
grew faster in IL-7 and FLT3L-supplemented medium than clones with Stat5a
integration alone. On the other hand, in lymphomas with integrations into Stat5a 
and Hipk2, increases in phosphorylated STAT5A and expression of c-Myc were
observed following cross-linking of CD43. In conclusion, FLT3 and CD43 signaling 
pathways involve STAT5A via Fiz1 and Hipk2 in B-LBLs. Identification of the dual 
MLV integration sites in B-LBLs, therefore, will provide an excellent tool for
identification of the signaling pathways in B-LBLs.

PMID: 20360400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010 Oct;42(10):1861-9. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181da8a29.

Effects of preexercise feeding on markers of satellite cell activation.

Roberts MD(1), Dalbo VJ, Hassell SE, Brown R, Kerksick CM.

Author information: 
(1)Health and Exercise Science Department, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019-6081, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine if consuming isoenergetic (25
g) doses of carbohydrate or protein versus a noncaloric placebo before
conventional resistance training affected the myogenic expression of cell
cycle-regulating genes as well as the muscle [DNA] acutely after exercise.
METHODS: Ten untrained men (mean +/- SD: age = 22 +/- 4 yr, body mass = 77.8 +/- 
8.3 kg, percent body fat = 17.8 +/- 4.0) participated in three resistance
exercise sessions (three sets of 10 repetitions at 80% one-repetition maximum for
the bilateral hack squat, leg press, and leg extension exercises) in a crossover 
fashion, which were preceded by carbohydrate, protein, or placebo ingestion 30
min before training. Presupplement/preexercise and 2- and 6-h postexercise muscle
biopsies were obtained during each session and analyzed for fold changes in CDK4,
CYCLIN D1, MGF, MYOD, P21(CIP1), and P27(KIP1) messenger RNA expression using
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction as well as muscle [DNA]
using cuvette-based fluorometric methods.
RESULTS: Nonparametric statistics were completed, and no conditions x time
interaction effects were revealed. Several exercise-mediated responses were found
to occur independent of condition: 1) muscle [DNA] increased at 6 h (+40%, P <
0.05), 2) CDK4 expression increased at 6 h (+86%, P < 0.05), 3) MYOD expression
increased at 6 h (+98%, P < 0.05), 4) P27(KIP1) expression decreased at 2 h
(j35%, P < 0.05) and 6 h (-59%, P < 0.001), and 5) P21(CIP1) expression
substantially increased 2 and 6 h postexercise (+1.250% and +4.670%,
respectively, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The tandem DNA and cell cycle regulator gene expression analyses
provide preliminary evidence to suggest that satellite cell activation and
proliferation may be occurring at early post-exercise time points after a
conventional resistance exercise bout, a phenomenon that may seemingly be
independent of preexercise macronutrient ingestion.

PMID: 20216467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Protein Pept Lett. 2010 Jan;17(1):104-8.

Cells with minimal expression of the JAK/STAT pathway related proteins STAT5a and
the prolactin receptor: evidence of an alternate prolactin receptor isoform in
breast disease.

Bratthauer GL(1), Stamatakos MD, Vinh TN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000, USA. Bratthauer@afip.osd.mil

Usually, wherever breast STAT5a is present, PRLR is reduced; without STAT5a PRLR 
becomes abundant. Five breast lesions essentially lacking both were tested
immunohistochemically for PRLR isoforms. The intermediate isoform was essentially
only detected in these lesions. In some breast lesions PRLR isoforms may be
involved in JAK/STAT pathway disturbances.

PMID: 20214633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. EMBO Mol Med. 2010 Mar;2(3):98-110. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201000062.

Stat5 is indispensable for the maintenance of bcr/abl-positive leukaemia.

Hoelbl A(1), Schuster C, Kovacic B, Zhu B, Wickre M, Hoelzl MA, Fajmann S,
Grebien F, Warsch W, Stengl G, Hennighausen L, Poli V, Beug H, Moriggl R, Sexl V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Centre of Biomolecular Medicine and Pharmacology,
Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

Tumourigenesis caused by the Bcr/Abl oncoprotein is a multi-step process
proceeding from initial to tumour-maintaining events and finally results in a
complex tumour-supporting network. A key to successful cancer therapy is the
identification of critical functional nodes in an oncogenic network required for 
disease maintenance. So far, the transcription factors Stat3 and Stat5a/b have
been implicated in bcr/abl-induced initial transformation. However, to qualify as
a potential drug target, a signalling pathway must be required for the
maintenance of the leukaemic state. Data on the roles of Stat3 or Stat5a/b in
leukaemia maintenance are elusive. Here, we show that both, Stat3 and Stat5 are
necessary for initial transformation. However, Stat5- but not Stat3-deletion
induces G(0)/G(1) cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of imatinib-sensitive and
imatinib-resistant stable leukaemic cells in vitro. Accordingly, Stat5-abrogation
led to effective elimination of myeloid and lymphoid leukaemia maintenance in
vivo. Hence, we identified Stat5 as a vulnerable point in the oncogenic network
downstream of Bcr/Abl representing a case of non-oncogene addiction (NOA).

PMCID: PMC2906698
PMID: 20201032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Genetika. 2010 Jan;46(1):92-6.

STAT5A/AvaI restriction polymorphism in cows of Polish red-and-white variety of
Holstein Friesian breed.

Kmiec M(1), Kowalewska-Luczak I, Wojdak-Maksymiec K, Kulig H, Grzelak T.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural University of Szczecin, Department of Genetics and Animal
Breeding, Szczeci 71-466 Poland. marek.kmiec@biot.ar.szczecin.pl

The study on polymorphism within the STAT5A gene (transition C6853T) was
conducted using the PCR-RFLP method and AvaI restrictase. The study covered a
herd of 723 cows of the Polish Red-and-White variety of Holstein Friesian breed, 
kept for dairy purposes in the Opole region, Poland. Two alleles (C and 7) of the
analyzed STAT5A polymorphism were found in the studied herd. The alleles
determined the occurrence of two genotypes: CC and CT. The homozygous TT genotype
was not found. The STAT5A/AvaI allele frequencies were as follows: C--88.31% and 
T--11.69%, whereas the genotype frequencies were 76.6% for CC and 23.4% for CT.
The analysis of associations between the STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism and milk
utility traits considered in the study showed that these traits were different in
animals with different STAT5A/AvaI genotypes.

PMID: 20198884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Jun;31(6):1124-31. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq048. Epub 2010 Feb
24.

Role of ERalpha in the differential response of Stat5a loss in susceptibility to 
mammary preneoplasia and DMBA-induced carcinogenesis.

Miermont AM(1), Parrish AR, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20007, USA.
miermona@georgetown.edu

Deregulated estrogen signaling is evidently linked to breast cancer
pathophysiology, although the role of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)5a, integral to normal mammary gland development, is less
clear. A mouse model of mammary epithelial cell-targeted deregulated estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha) expression [conditional ERalpha in mammary epithelium
(CERM)] was crossed with mice carrying a germ line deletion of Stat5a [Stat5a-/-]
to investigate interactions between ERalpha and Stat5a in mammary tissue. CERM,
CERM/Stat5a+/-, CERM/Stat5a-/-, Stat5a+/-, Stat5a-/- and wild-type (WT) mice were
generated to test the roles of ERalpha and Stat5a on pubertal differentiation and
cancer progression with and without exposure to the chemical carcinogen
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA). Only CERM/Stat5a-/- mice demonstrated
delayed pubertal terminal end bud differentiation. Without DMBA exposure, Stat5a 
loss abrogated ERalpha-initiated hyperplastic alveolar nodule (HAN) development
and, similarly, Stat5a-/- mice did not develop HANs. However, although Stat5a
loss still reduced ERalpha-initiated HAN prevalence following DMBA exposure,
Stat5a loss without deregulated ERalpha was associated with an increased HAN
prevalence compared with WT. Progression to ERalpha(+) and ERalpha(-)
adenocarcinoma was found in all CERM-containing genotypes (CERM, CERM/Stat5a+/-, 
CERM/Stat5a-/-) and ERalpha(+) adenocarcinoma in the Stat5a-/- genotype. The
mammary epithelial cell proliferative index was increased only in CERM mice
independent of Stat5a loss. No differences in apoptotic indices were found. In
summary, Stat5a cooperated with deregulated ERalpha in retarding pubertal mammary
differentiation and contributed to ERalpha-initiated preneoplasia, but its loss
did not prevent development of invasive cancer. Moreover, in the absence of
deregulated ERalpha, Stat5a loss was associated with development of both HANs and
invasive cancer following DMBA exposure.

PMCID: PMC2878361
PMID: 20181624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Am J Pathol. 2010 Apr;176(4):1959-72. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090653. Epub 2010 
Feb 18.

Transcription factor Stat3 stimulates metastatic behavior of human prostate
cancer cells in vivo, whereas Stat5b has a preferential role in the promotion of 
prostate cancer cell viability and tumor growth.

Gu L(1), Dagvadorj A, Lutz J, Leiby B, Bonuccelli G, Lisanti MP, Addya S, Fortina
P, Dasgupta A, Hyslop T, Bubendorf L, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Medical Oncology, Urology, Kimmel Cancer Center,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Identification of the molecular changes that promote viability and metastatic
behavior of prostate cancer is critical for the development of improved
therapeutic interventions. Stat5a/b and Stat3 are both constitutively active in
locally-confined and advanced prostate cancer, and both transcription factors
have been reported to be critical for the viability of prostate cancer cells. We 
recently showed that Stat3 promotes metastatic behavior of human prostate cancer 
cells not only in vitro but also in an in vivo experimental metastases model. In 
this work, we compare side-by-side Stat5a/b versus Stat3 in the promotion of
prostate cancer cell viability, tumor growth, and induction of metastatic
colonization in vivo. Inhibition of Stat5a/b induced massive death of prostate
cancer cells in culture and reduced both subcutaneous and orthotopic prostate
tumor growth, whereas Stat3 had a predominant role over Stat5a/b in promoting
metastases formation of prostate cancer cells in vivo in nude mice. The molecular
mechanisms underlying the differential biological effects induced by these two
transcription factors involve largely different sets of genes regulated by
Stat5a/b versus Stat3 in human prostate cancer model systems. Of the two Stat5
homologs, Stat5b was more important for supporting growth of prostate cancer
cells than Stat5a. This work provides the first mechanistic comparison of the
biological effects induced by transcription factors Stat5a/b versus Stat3 in
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2843484
PMID: 20167868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Hepatology. 2010 Apr;51(4):1319-26. doi: 10.1002/hep.23469.

Disruption of the growth hormone--signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5--insulinlike growth factor 1 axis severely aggravates liver
fibrosis in a mouse model of cholestasis.

Blaas L(1), Kornfeld JW, Schramek D, Musteanu M, Zollner G, Gumhold J, van Zijl
F, Schneller D, Esterbauer H, Egger G, Mair M, Kenner L, Mikulits W, Eferl R,
Moriggl R, Penninger J, Trauner M, Casanova E.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.

Growth hormone (GH) resistance and low serum levels of insulinlike growth factor 
1 (IGF-1) are common features in human liver fibrosis and cirrhosis. Signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) controls several vital
functions in the liver, including GH-mediated transcription of IGF-1. To
investigate the role of STAT5 in liver fibrogenesis, we specifically deleted the 
Stat5a/b locus both in hepatocytes and cholangiocytes in the multidrug resistance
gene 2 knockout (Mdr2(-/-)) mouse model of cholestasis. Double knockout mice
develop an early and severe liver fibrosis phenotype, accompanied by perturbed
expression of key regulators of bile acid homeostasis. Deletion of Stat5 resulted
in GH resistance, and IGF-1 levels in serum were undetectable. We could observe
reduced expression of important hepatoprotective genes, such as epidermal growth 
factor receptor (Egfr), hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (Hnf6), prolactin receptor
(Prlr), and leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (Lifr) as well as increased
numbers of apoptotic hepatocytes.CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that loss of STAT5 
sensitizes hepatocytes to bile acid-induced damage and apoptosis caused by
disruption of GH-induced transcription of Igf-1 and down-regulation of
hepatoprotective genes. These findings could contribute to the understanding of
liver fibrosis and future treatment strategies for liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC2976853
PMID: 20162728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochimie. 2010 May;92(5):425-44. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.02.009. Epub 2010
Feb 13.

STAT1 and pathogens, not a friendly relationship.

Najjar I(1), Fagard R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 978, SMBH, 74 rue Marcel Cachin, Bobigny-cedex 93017, France.
imen.najjar@inserm.fr

STAT1 belongs to the STAT family of transcription factors, which comprises seven 
factors: STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6. STAT1 is a 91 kDa 
protein originally identified as the mediator of the cellular response to
interferon (IFN) alpha, and thereafter found to be a major component of the
cellular response to IFNgamma. STAT1 is, in fact, involved in the response to
several cytokines and to growth factors. It is activated by cytokine receptors
via kinases of the JAK family. STAT1 becomes phosphorylated and forms a dimer
which enters the nucleus and triggers the transcription of its targets. Although 
not lethal at birth, selective gene deletion of STAT1 in mice leads to rapid
death from severe infections, demonstrating its major role in the response to
pathogens. Similarly, in humans who do not express STAT1, there is a lack of
resistance to pathogens leading to premature death. This indicates a key,
non-redundant function of STAT1 in the defence against pathogens. Thus, to
successfully infect organisms, bacterial, viral or parasitic pathogens must
overcome the activity of STAT1, and almost all the steps of this pathway can be
blocked or inhibited by proteins produced in infected cells. Interestingly, some 
pathogens, like the oncogenic Epstein-Barr virus, have evolved a strategy which
uses STAT1 activation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20159032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Virology. 2010 Apr 25;400(1):32-43. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.01.018. Epub 2010
Feb 6.

Differential expression and interaction of host factors augment HIV-1 gene
expression in neonatal mononuclear cells.

Sundaravaradan V(1), Mehta R, Harris DT, Zack JA, Ahmad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

We have previously shown a higher level of HIV-1 replication and gene expression 
in neonatal (cord) blood mononuclear cells (CBMC) compared with adult blood cells
(PBMC), which could be due to differential expression of host factors. We
performed the gene expression profile of CBMC and PBMC and found that 8013 genes 
were expressed at higher levels in CBMC than PBMC and 8028 genes in PBMC than
CBMC, including 1181 and 1414 genes upregulated after HIV-1 infection in CBMC and
PBMC, respectively. Several transcription factors (NF-kappaB, E2F, HAT-1, TFIIE, 
Cdk9, Cyclin T1), signal transducers (STAT3, STAT5A) and cytokines (IL-1beta,
IL-6, IL-10) were upregulated in CBMC than PBMC, which are known to influence
HIV-1 replication. In addition, a repressor of HIV-1 transcription, YY1, was down
regulated in CBMC than PBMC and several matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-7, -12,
-14) were significantly upregulated in HIV-1 infected CBMC than PBMC.
Furthermore, we show that CBMC nuclear extracts interacted with a higher extent
to HIV-1 LTR cis-acting sequences, including NF-kappaB, NFAT, AP1 and NF-IL6
compared with PBMC nuclear extracts and retroviral based short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) for STAT3 and IL-6 down regulated their own and HIV-1 gene expression,
signifying that these factors influenced differential HIV-1 gene expression in
CBMC than PBMC.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20138641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1711-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2314. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Prolactin inhibits BCL6 expression in breast cancer through a Stat5a-dependent
mechanism.

Tran TH(1), Utama FE, Lin J, Yang N, Sjolund AB, Ryder A, Johnson KJ, Neilson LM,
Liu C, Brill KL, Rosenberg AL, Witkiewicz AK, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor that recognizes DNA target sequences similar 
to those recognized by signal transducer and activator of transcriptions 5
(Stat5). BCL6 disrupts differentiation of breast epithelia, is downregulated
during lactation, and is upregulated in poorly differentiated breast cancer. In
contrast, Stat5a mediates prolactin-induced differentiation of mammary epithelia,
and loss of Stat5 signaling in human breast cancer is associated with
undifferentiated histology and poor prognosis. Here, we identify the mammary cell
growth factor prolactin as a potent suppressor of BCL6 protein expression in
human breast cancer through a mechanism that requires Stat5a, but not
prolactin-activated Stat5b, MEK-ERK, or PI3K-AKT pathways. Prolactin rapidly
suppressed BCL6 mRNA in T47D, MCF7, ZR75.1, and SKBr3 breast cancer cell lines,
followed by prolonged reduction of BCL6 protein levels within 3 hours. Prolactin 
suppression of BCL6 was enhanced by overexpression of Stat5a but not Stat5b, was 
mimicked by constitutively active Stat5a, but did not require the transactivation
domain of Stat5a. Stat5 chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated physical
interaction with a BCL6 gene regulatory region, and BCL6 transcript repression
required histone deacetylase activity based on sensitivity to trichostatin A.
Functionally, BCL6 overexpression disrupted prolactin induction of Stat5 reporter
genes. Prolactin suppression of BCL6 was extended to xenotransplant tumors in
nude mice in vivo and to freshly isolated human breast cancer explants ex vivo.
Quantitative immunohistochemistry revealed elevated BCL6 in high-grade and
metastatic breast cancer compared with ductal carcinoma in situ and nonmalignant 
breast, and cellular BCL6 protein levels correlated negatively with nuclear
Stat5a (r = -0.52; P < 0.001) but not with Stat5b. Loss of prolactin-Stat5a
signaling and concomitant upregulation of BCL6 may represent a regulatory switch 
facilitating undifferentiated histology and poor prognosis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2822876
PMID: 20124477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. EMBO J. 2010 Mar 3;29(5):956-68. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.406. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

PIKE-A is required for prolactin-mediated STAT5a activation in mammary gland
development.

Chan CB(1), Liu X, Ensslin MA, Dillehay DL, Ormandy CJ, Sohn P, Serra R, Ye K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

PI 3-kinase enhancer A (PIKE-A) is critical for the activation of Akt signalling,
and has an essential function in promoting cancer cell survival. However, its
physiological functions are poorly understood. Here, we show that PIKE-A directly
associates with both signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a)
and prolactin (PRL) receptor, which is essential for PRL-provoked STAT5a
activation and the subsequent gene transcription. Depletion of PIKE-A in HC11
epithelial cells diminished PRL-induced STAT5 activation and cyclin D1
expression, resulting in profoundly impaired cell proliferation in vitro. To
confirm the function of PIKE-A in PRL signalling in vivo, we generated PIKE
knockout (PIKE-/-) mice. PIKE-/- mice displayed a severe lactation defect that
was characterized by enhanced apoptosis and impaired proliferation of mammary
epithelial cells. At parturition, STAT5 activation and cyclin D1 expression were 
substantially reduced in the mammary epithelium of PIKE-/- mice. The defective
mammary gland development in PIKE-/- mice was rescued by overexpression of a
mammary-specific cyclin D1 transgene. These data establish a critical function
for PIKE-A in mediating PRL functions.

PMCID: PMC2837170
PMID: 20075866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jan 14;11:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-30.

Variable structure motifs for transcription factor binding sites.

Reid JE(1), Evans KJ, Dyer N, Wernisch L, Ott S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Biostatistics Unit, Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Cambridge,
CB2 0SR, UK. john.reid@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Classically, models of DNA-transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs)
have been based on relatively few known instances and have treated them as sites 
of fixed length using position weight matrices (PWMs). Various extensions to this
model have been proposed, most of which take account of dependencies between the 
bases in the binding sites. However, some transcription factors are known to
exhibit some flexibility and bind to DNA in more than one possible physical
configuration. In some cases this variation is known to affect the function of
binding sites. With the increasing volume of ChIP-seq data available it is now
possible to investigate models that incorporate this flexibility. Previous work
on variable length models has been constrained by: a focus on specific zinc
finger proteins in yeast using restrictive models; a reliance on hand-crafted
models for just one transcription factor at a time; and a lack of evaluation on
realistically sized data sets.
RESULTS: We re-analysed binding sites from the TRANSFAC database and found
motivating examples where our new variable length model provides a better fit. We
analysed several ChIP-seq data sets with a novel motif search algorithm and
compared the results to one of the best standard PWM finders and a recently
developed alternative method for finding motifs of variable structure. All the
methods performed comparably in held-out cross validation tests. Known motifs of 
variable structure were recovered for p53, Stat5a and Stat5b. In addition our
method recovered a novel generalised version of an existing PWM for Sp1 that
allows for variable length binding. This motif improved classification
performance.
CONCLUSIONS: We have presented a new gapped PWM model for variable length DNA
binding sites that is not too restrictive nor over-parameterised. Our comparison 
with existing tools shows that on average it does not have better predictive
accuracy than existing methods. However, it does provide more interpretable
models of motifs of variable structure that are suitable for follow-up structural
studies. To our knowledge, we are the first to apply variable length motif models
to eukaryotic ChIP-seq data sets and consequently the first to show their value
in this domain. The results include a novel motif for the ubiquitous
transcription factor Sp1.

PMCID: PMC2824720
PMID: 20074339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):148-52. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.011510.

A polymorphism associated with STAT3 expression and response of chronic myeloid
leukemia to interferon a.

Kreil S(1), Waghorn K, Ernst T, Chase A, White H, Hehlmann R, Reiter A, Hochhaus 
A, Cross NC; German CML Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
UK.

Interferon alpha (IFN) induces variable responses in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML), with 8-30% of early chronic phase cases achieving a complete cytogenetic
response. We hypothesized that polymorphic differences in genes encoding IFN
signal transduction components might account for different patient responses. We 
studied 174 IFN-treated patients, of whom 79 achieved less than 35%
Philadelphia-chromosome (Ph) positive metaphases (responders) and 95 failed to
show any cytogenetic response (more than 95% Ph-positive metaphases;
non-responders). We compared 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at IFNAR1,
IFNAR2, JAK1, TYK2, STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5a/b between the two groups and found a 
significant difference for rs6503691, a SNP tightly linked to STAT5a, STAT5b and 
STAT3 (minor allele frequency 0.16 for non-responders; 0.06 for responders,
P=0.007). Levels of STAT3 mRNA correlated with rs6503691 genotype (P<0.001) as
assessed by real time quantitative PCR and therefore we conclude that rs6503691
is associated with the STAT3 expression levels and response of CML patients to
IFN.

PMCID: PMC2805737
PMID: 20065083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Exp Hematol. 2010 Mar;38(3):180-90. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.12.003. Epub 2009 
Dec 24.

Impact of CXCR4 inhibition on FLT3-ITD-positive human AML blasts.

Jacobi A(1), Thieme S, Lehmann R, Ugarte F, Malech HL, Koch S, Thiede C, Müller
K, Bornhäuser M, Ryser M, Brenner S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Clinic Carl Gustav Carus Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations of the FLT3 receptor are
associated with a high incidence of relapse in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Expression of the CXCR4 receptor in FLT3-ITD-positive AML is correlated with poor
outcome, and inhibition of CXCR4 was shown to sensitize AML blasts toward
chemotherapy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of FLT3-ITD on
cell proliferation and CXCR4-dependent migration in human hematopoietic
progenitor cells and to investigate their response to CXCR4 inhibition.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used primary blasts from patients with FLT3-ITD or FLT3
wild-type AML. In addition, human CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells were
transduced to >70% with retroviral vectors containing human FLT3-ITD.
RESULTS: We found that FLT3-ITD transgene overexpressing human hematopoietic
progenitor cells show strongly reduced migration toward stromal-derived factor-1 
in vitro and display significantly reduced bone marrow homing in nonobese
diabetic severe combined immunodeficient mice. Cocultivation of FLT3-ITD-positive
AML blasts or hematopoietic progenitor cells on bone marrow stromal cells
resulted in a strong proliferation advantage and increased early cobblestone
area-forming cells compared to FLT3-wild-type AML blasts. Addition of the CXCR4
inhibitor AMD3100 to the coculture significantly reduced both cobblestone
area-forming cells and proliferation of FLT3-ITD-positive cells, but did not
affect FLT3-wild-type cells-highlighting the critical interaction between CXCR4
and FLT3-ITD.
CONCLUSION: CXCR4 inhibition to decrease cell proliferation and to control the
leukemic burden may provide a novel therapeutic strategy in patients with
advanced FLT3-ITD-positive AML.

Copyright 2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4777334
PMID: 20035824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Blood. 2010 Feb 18;115(7):1416-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-234963. Epub 2009
Dec 14.

STAT5 requires the N-domain for suppression of miR15/16, induction of bcl-2, and 
survival signaling in myeloproliferative disease.

Li G(1), Miskimen KL, Wang Z, Xie XY, Brenzovich J, Ryan JJ, Tse W, Moriggl R,
Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH 44106-7284, USA.

Phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a
biomarker and potential molecular target for hematologic malignancies. We have
shown previously that lethal myeloproliferative disease (MPD) in mice mediated by
persistently activated STAT5 (STAT5a(S711F)) requires the N-domain, but the
mechanism was not defined. We now demonstrate by retrovirally complementing
STAT5ab(null/null) primary mast cells that relative to wild-type STAT5a, STAT5a
lacking the N-domain (STAT5aDeltaN) ineffectively protected against cytokine
withdrawal-induced cell death. Both STAT5a and STAT5aDeltaN bound to a site in
the bcl-2 gene and both bound near the microRNA 15b/16 cluster. However, only
STAT5a could effectively induce bcl-2 mRNA and reciprocally suppress miR15b/16
leading to maintained bcl-2 protein levels. After retroviral complementation of
STAT5ab(null/null) fetal liver cells and transplantation, persistently active
STAT5a(S711F) lacking the N-domain (STAT5aDeltaN(S711F)) was insufficient to
protect c-Kit(+)Lin(-)Sca-1(+) (KLS) cells from apoptosis and unable to induce
bcl-2 expression, whereas STAT5a(S711F) caused robust KLS cell expansion,
induction of bcl-2, and lethal MPD. Severe attenuation of MPD by
STAT5aDeltaN(S711F) was reversed by H2k/bcl-2 transgenic expression. Overall,
these studies define N-domain-dependent survival signaling as an Achilles heel of
persistent STAT5 activation and highlight the potential therapeutic importance of
targeting STAT5 N-domain-mediated regulation of bcl-2 family members.

PMCID: PMC2826763
PMID: 20008792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cell. 2009 Dec 11;36(5):754-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.09.044.

SOCS1 links cytokine signaling to p53 and senescence.

Calabrese V(1), Mallette FA, Deschênes-Simard X, Ramanathan S, Gagnon J, Moores
A, Ilangumaran S, Ferbeyre G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7,
Canada.

SOCS1 is lost in many human tumors, but its tumor suppression activities are not 
well understood. We report that SOCS1 is required for transcriptional activity,
DNA binding, and serine 15 phosphorylation of p53 in the context of STAT5
signaling. In agreement, inactivation of SOCS1 disabled p53-dependent senescence 
in response to oncogenic STAT5A and radiation-induced apoptosis in T cells. In
addition, SOCS1 was sufficient to induce p53-dependent senescence in fibroblasts.
The mechanism of activation of p53 by SOCS1 involved a direct interaction between
the SH2 domain of SOCS1 and the N-terminal transactivation domain of p53, while
the C-terminal domain of SOCS1 containing the SOCS Box mediated interaction with 
the DNA damage-regulated kinases ATM/ATR. Also, SOCS1 colocalized with ATM at DNA
damage foci induced by oncogenic STAT5A. Collectively, these results add another 
component to the p53 and DNA damage networks and reveal a mechanism by which
SOCS1 functions as a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 20005840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Endocrinology. 2010 Jan;151(1):43-55. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0651. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5A and STAT5B
differentially regulate human mammary carcinoma cell behavior.

Tang JZ(1), Zuo ZH, Kong XJ, Steiner M, Yin Z, Perry JK, Zhu T, Liu DX, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, 2-6 Park Avenue, Private Bag
92019, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

Increased activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5
has been reported in various malignancies including mammary carcinoma. However,
it is only recently that potentially distinct roles of STAT5A and STAT5B in
neoplasia have begun to emerge. Herein we systematically delineate the functions 
of STAT5A and STAT5B in human mammary carcinoma cell lines MCF-7 and T47D. Forced
expression of constitutively active (CA) STAT5A enhanced both survival and
anchorage-independent growth of human mammary carcinoma cells but concordantly
suppressed cell motility as revealed in colony scattering, cell migration, and
invasion assays. In contrast, forced expression of CA STAT5B exhibited lower
potency than CA STAT5A in enhancing survival and anchorage-independent growth of 
mammary carcinoma cells and exerted no effects on cell motility. Differential
expression of genes that regulate cellular survival and motility was
concomitantly observed on forced expression of CA STAT5A or CA STAT5B. Small
interfering RNA-mediated depletion of STAT5A significantly impaired
anchorage-independent growth of human mammary carcinoma cells, whereas a smaller 
reduction was observed upon small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of STAT5B.
Depletion of endogenous STAT5A also significantly enhanced cell motility, whereas
depletion of endogenous STAT5B exhibited no effect. Xenograft studies provided
data concordant with the in vitro effects of the two STAT5 isoforms. We therefore
demonstrate that STAT5A and STAT5B differentially regulate behavior of human
mammary carcinoma cells.

PMID: 19966185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;88(2):213-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2009.95. Epub 2009 Dec 
1.

Evidence of STAT5-dependent and -independent routes to CD8 memory formation and a
preferential role for IL-7 over IL-15 in STAT5 activation.

Kemp RA(1), Pearson CF, Cornish GH, Seddon BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immune Cell Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, 
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Interleukin (IL)-7 and IL-15 have non-redundant roles in promoting development of
memory CD8(+) T cells. STAT5 is activated by receptors of both cytokines and has 
also been implicated as a requirement for generation of memory. To determine
whether STAT5 activity was required for IL-7 and IL-15-mediated generation of
memory, we expressed either wild type (WT) or constitutively active (CA) forms of
STAT5a in normal effector cells and then observed their ability to form memory in
cytokine replete or deficient hosts. Receptor-independent CA-STAT5a significantly
enhanced memory formation in the absence of either cytokine but did not mediate
complete rescue. Interestingly, WT-STAT5a expression enhanced memory formation in
a strictly IL-7-dependent manner, suggesting that IL-7 is a more potent activator
of STAT5 than IL-15 in vivo. These data suggest that the non-redundant
requirement for IL-7 and IL-15 is mediated through differential activation of
both STAT5-dependent and STAT5-independent pathways.

PMCID: PMC2842934
PMID: 19949423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):3582-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.053843. Epub 2009
Nov 18.

Protein phosphatase 2A regulates interleukin-2 receptor complex formation and
JAK3/STAT5 activation.

Ross JA(1), Cheng H, Nagy ZS, Frost JA, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas, El Paso, Texas 79968, 
USA.

Reversible protein phosphorylation plays a key role in interleukin-2 (IL-2)
receptor-mediated activation of Janus tyrosine kinase 3 (JAK3) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) in lymphocytes. Although the 
mechanisms governing IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of
JAK3/STAT5 have been extensively studied, the role of serine/threonine
phosphorylation in controlling these effectors remains to be elucidated. Using
phosphoamino acid analysis, JAK3 and STAT5 were determined to be serine and
tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to IL-2 stimulation of the human natural
killer-like cell line, YT. IL-2 stimulation also induced serine/threonine
phosphorylation of IL-2Rbeta, but not IL-2Rgamma. To investigate the regulation
of serine/threonine phosphorylation in IL-2 signaling, the roles of protein
phosphatase 1 (PP1) and 2A (PP2A) were examined. Inhibition of phosphatase
activity by calyculin A treatment of YT cells resulted in a significant induction
of serine phosphorylation of JAK3 and STAT5, and serine/threonine phosphorylation
of IL-2Rbeta. Moreover, inhibition of PP2A, but not PP1, diminished IL-2-induced 
tyrosine phosphorylation of IL-2Rbeta, JAK3, and STAT5, and abolished STAT5 DNA
binding activity. Serine/threonine phosphorylation of IL-2Rbeta by a
staurosporine-sensitive kinase also blocked its association with JAK3 and
IL-2Rgamma in YT cells. Taken together, these data indicate that serine/threonine
phosphorylation negatively regulates IL-2 signaling at multiple levels, including
receptor complex formation and JAK3/STAT5 activation, and that this regulation is
counteracted by PP2A. These findings also suggest that PP2A may serve as a
therapeutic target for modulating JAK3/STAT5 activation in human disease.

PMCID: PMC2823499
PMID: 19923221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 22;285(4):2676-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.043471. Epub 2009 
Nov 17.

Estrogen-mediated regulation of Igf1 transcription and uterine growth involves
direct binding of estrogen receptor alpha to estrogen-responsive elements.

Hewitt SC(1), Li Y, Li L, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA. curtiss@niehs.nih.gov

Estrogen enables uterine proliferation, which depends on synthesis of the IGF1
growth factor. This proliferation and IGF1 synthesis requires the estrogen
receptor (ER), which binds directly to target DNA sequences (estrogen-responsive 
elements or EREs), or interacts with other transcription factors, such as AP1, to
impact transcription. We observe neither uterine growth nor an increase in Igf1
transcript in a mouse with a DNA-binding mutated ER alpha (KIKO), indicating that
both Igf1 regulation and uterine proliferation require the DNA binding function
of the ER. We identified several potential EREs in the Igf1 gene, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed ER alpha binding to these EREs in wild type
but not KIKO chromatin. STAT5 is also reported to regulate Igf1; uterine Stat5a
transcript is increased by estradiol (E(2)), but not in KIKO or alpha ERKO uteri,
indicating ER alpha- and ERE-dependent regulation. ER alpha binds to a potential 
Stat5a ERE. We hypothesize that E(2) increases Stat5a transcript through ERE
binding; that ER alpha, either alone or together with STAT5, then acts to
increase Igf1 transcription; and that the resulting lack of IGF1 impairs KIKO
uterine growth. Treatment with exogenous IGF1, alone or in combination with E(2),
induces proliferation in wild type but not KIKO uteri, indicating that IGF1
replacement does not rescue the KIKO proliferative response. Together, these
observations suggest in contrast to previous in vitro studies of IGF-1 regulation
involving AP1 motifs that direct ER alpha-DNA interaction is required to increase
Igf1 transcription. Additionally, full ER alpha function is needed to mediate
other cellular signals of the growth factor for uterine growth.

PMCID: PMC2807324
PMID: 19920132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;42(2):186-92. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.11.001. Epub 2009 Nov 13.

Transcription factor Stat5a/b as a therapeutic target protein for prostate
cancer.

Liao Z(1), Lutz J, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, 233 S. 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous cancer in Western males. The
majority of prostate cancer fatalities are caused by development of
castration-resistant growth and metastatic spread of the primary tumor. The
average duration of the response of primary prostate cancer to hormonal ablation 
is less than 3 years, and 75% of prostate cancers in the United States progress
to castration-resistant disease. The existing pharmacological therapies for
metastatic and/or castration-resistant prostate cancer do not provide significant
survival benefit. This review summarizes the importance of transcription factor
Stat5 signaling in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer and discusses the
molecular basis of Stat5a/b inhibition as a therapeutic strategy for prostate
cancer.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2818495
PMID: 19914392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jan;24(1):204-17. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0233. Epub 2009 Nov
2.

In vivo targeting of the growth hormone receptor (GHR) Box1 sequence demonstrates
that the GHR does not signal exclusively through JAK2.

Barclay JL(1), Kerr LM, Arthur L, Rowland JE, Nelson CN, Ishikawa M, d'Aniello
EM, White M, Noakes PG, Waters MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. Lucia 4072, 
Australia. j.barclay@uq.edu.au

GH is generally believed to signal exclusively through Janus tyrosine kinases
(JAK), particularly JAK2, leading to activation of signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT), ERK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
pathways, resulting in transcriptional regulation of target genes. Here we report
the creation of targeted knock-in mice wherein the Box1 motif required for JAK2
activation by the GH receptor (GHR) has been disabled by four Pro/Ala mutations. 
These mice are unable to activate hepatic JAK2, STAT3, STAT5, or Akt in response 
to GH injection but can activate Src and ERK1/2. Their phenotype is identical to 
that of the GHR(-/-) mouse, emphasizing the key role of JAK2 in postnatal growth 
and the minimization of obesity in older males. In particular, they show
dysregulation of the IGF-I/IGF-binding protein axis at transcript and protein
levels and decreased bone length. Because no gross phenotypic differences were
evident between GHR(-/-) and Box1 mutants, we undertook transcript profiling in
liver from 4-month-old males. We compared their transcript profiles with our
391-GHR truncated mice, which activate JAK2, ERK1/2, and STAT3 in response to GH 
but not STAT5a/b. This has allowed us for the first time to identify in vivo
Src/ERK-regulated transcripts, JAK2-regulated transcripts, and those regulated by
the distal part of the GHR, particularly by STAT5.

PMID: 19884384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Dec;23(12):2095-110. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0209. Epub 2009
Oct 30.

A novel distal enhancer mediates cytokine induction of mouse RANKl gene
expression.

Bishop KA(1), Meyer MB, Pike JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.

Chronic inflammatory states are associated with increased bone loss. This
increase is often linked to an elevation in receptor activator of nuclear
factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL), a TNFalpha-like factor essential to osteoclast
formation. In this study, we document the ability of IL-6 in combination with
IL-6 soluble receptor (IL-6/IL-6sR) and oncostatin M to induce Rankl expression
in stromal cells via signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). 
We used chromatin immunoprecipitation-tiled DNA microarray analysis to determine 
sites of action of STAT3 at the Rankl locus and to assess the consequences of
binding on histone H4 acetylation and RNA polymerase II recruitment. Both
IL-6/IL-6 soluble receptor and oncostatin M stimulated STAT3 binding upstream of 
the Rankl transcriptional start site. Although previously identified enhancers
bound STAT3, a more distal enhancer termed mRLD6 was a particular focus of STAT3 
binding. When fused to a heterologous promoter, this enhancer was highly active, 
containing two functionally active STAT response elements. Importantly, small
interfering RNA knockdown of Stat3 mRNA and protein, but not that of Stat1 or
Stat5a, was effective in limiting Rankl mRNA up-regulation. Interestingly,
although RNA polymerase II and histone H4 acetylation marked many of the
enhancers under basal conditions, the levels of both were strongly increased
after cytokine treatment, particularly at mRLD6. Finally, mRLD6 was also a target
for forskolin-induced cellular response element-binding protein (CREB)
recruitment, which potentiated cytokine activity. Our studies provide new insight
into mechanisms by which glycoprotein 130 activating cytokines induce RANKL
expression.

PMCID: PMC2796147
PMID: 19880655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Nov;7(11):1835-44. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0244. Epub 
2009 Oct 20.

Repeated treatment with subtoxic doses of TRAIL induces resistance to apoptosis
through its death receptors in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Yoshida T(1), Zhang Y, Rivera Rosado LA, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Therapeutic Proteins, Office of Biotechnology Products, Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(rhTRAIL) is being evaluated clinically in treating various malignancies.
Previous studies have shown that repeated application of high doses of rhTRAIL
results in a subpopulation of parental cells that is unresponsive to the death
ligand. However, it is not clear whether TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells could
acquire resistance to TRAIL treatment. Here, we found that MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells, which are highly sensitive to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, became
resistant to TRAIL killing after a prolonged exposure to subtoxic doses of
rhTRAIL. The resulting TRAIL-resistant cells were cross-resistant to antibodies
against its death receptors (DR4 and DR5); however, they retained sensitivity to 
several clinically relevant chemotherapies. Surface expression of DR4 and DR5 was
significantly reduced in the selected cells, resulting in failure in
death-inducing signaling complex formation and caspase activation. In addition,
real-time PCR analysis revealed an upregulation in multiple apoptosis-regulator
genes, including c-FLIP, Stat5a, and Stat5b. Inhibition of Janus-activated
kinase, an upstream activator of signal transducer and activator of transcription
5 (Stat5), or knockdown of Stat5 itself partially restored cellular sensitivity
to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, suggesting that Stat5 signaling is also involved in
the development of TRAIL resistance. Furthermore, we showed that acquired TRAIL
resistance was effectively eliminated by combination with etoposide, doxorubicin,
or paclitaxel. These results suggest that tumor cells could acquire resistance to
TRAIL therapy especially when they are repeatedly exposed to low levels of the
death ligand, highlighting the necessity of combination with therapies that
target the resistance mechanisms.

PMID: 19843632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genes Dev. 2009 Oct 15;23(20):2382-7. doi: 10.1101/gad.1840109.

Development of mammary luminal progenitor cells is controlled by the
transcription factor STAT5A.

Yamaji D(1), Na R, Feuermann Y, Pechhold S, Chen W, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

Mammary alveologenesis is abrogated in the absence of the transcription factors
STAT5A/5B, which mediate cytokine signaling. To reveal the underlying causes for 
this developmental block, we studied mammary stem and progenitor cells. While
loss of STAT5A/5B did not affect the stem cell population and its ability to form
mammary ducts, luminal progenitors were greatly reduced and unable to form
alveoli during pregnancy. Temporally controlled expression of transgenic STAT5A
in mammary epithelium lacking STAT5A/5B restored the luminal progenitor
population and rescued alveologenesis in a reversible fashion in vivo. Thus,
STAT5A is necessary and sufficient for the establishment of luminal progenitor
cells.

PMCID: PMC2764497
PMID: 19833766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Funct Integr Genomics. 2010 Mar;10(1):87-95. doi: 10.1007/s10142-009-0140-0. Epub
2009 Oct 15.

Insulin, a key regulator of hormone responsive milk protein synthesis during
lactogenesis in murine mammary explants.

Menzies KK(1), Lee HJ, Lefèvre C, Ormandy CJ, Macmillan KL, Nicholas KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
karensa.menzies@deakin.edu.au

Murine milk protein gene expression requires insulin, hydrocortisone, and
prolactin; however, the role of insulin is not well understood. This study,
therefore, examined the requirement of insulin for milk protein synthesis.
Mammary explants were cultured in various combinations of the lactogenic hormones
and global changes in gene expression analysed using Affymetrix microarray. The
expression of 164 genes was responsive to insulin, and 18 were involved in
protein synthesis at the level of transcription and posttranscription, as well as
amino acid uptake and metabolism. The folate receptor gene was increased by
fivefold, highlighting a potentially important role for the hormone in folate
metabolism, a process that is emerging to be central for protein synthesis.
Interestingly, gene expression of two milk protein transcription factors, Stat5a 
and Elf5, previously identified as key components of prolactin signalling, both
showed an essential requirement for insulin. Subsequent experiments in HCll cells
confirmed that Stat5a and Elf5 gene expression could be induced in the absence of
prolactin but in the presence of insulin. Whereas prolactin plays an essential
role in phosphorylating and activating Stat5a, gene expression is only induced
when insulin is present. This indicates insulin plays a crucial role in the
transcription of the milk protein genes.

PMID: 19830464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 8;4(10):e7382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007382.

Tumor-shed PGE(2) impairs IL2Rgammac-signaling to inhibit CD4 T cell survival:
regulation by theaflavins.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Bhattacharyya S, Saha B, Chakraborty J, Mohanty S, Sakib
Hossain DM, Banerjee S, Das K, Sa G, Das T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P-1/12 CIT Scheme VIIM,
Kolkata, India.

BACKGROUND: Many tumors are associated with decreased cellular immunity and
elevated levels of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), a known inhibitor of CD4+ T cell
activation and inducer of type-2 cytokine bias. However, the role of this
immunomodulator in the survival of T helper cells remained unclear. Since CD4+ T 
cells play critical roles in cell-mediated immunity, detail knowledge of the
effect tumor-derived PGE2 might have on CD4+ T cell survival and the underlying
mechanism may, therefore, help to overcome the overall immune deviation in
cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By culturing purified human peripheral CD4+ T
cells or Jurkat cells with spent media of theaflavin- or celecoxib-pre-treated
MCF-7 cells, we show that tumor-shed PGE2 severely impairs interleukin 2 receptor
gammac (IL2Rgammac)-mediated survival signaling in CD4+ T cells. Indeed,
tumor-shed PGE2 down-regulates IL2Rgammac expression, reduces phosphorylation as 
well as activation of Janus kinase 3 (Jak-3)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (Stat-5) and decreases Bcl-2/Bax ratio thereby leading to
activation of intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Constitutively active Stat-5A
(Stat-5A1 6) over-expression efficiently elevates Bcl-2 levels in CD4+ T cells
and protects them from tumor-induced death while dominant-negative Stat-5A
over-expression fails to do so, indicating the importance of Stat-5A-signaling in
CD4+ T cell survival. Further support towards the involvement of PGE2 comes from 
the results that (a) purified synthetic PGE2 induces CD4+ T cell apoptosis, and
(b) when knocked out by small interfering RNA, cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2)-defective
tumor cells fail to initiate death. Interestingly, the entire phenomena could be 
reverted back by theaflavins that restore cytokine-dependent
IL2Rgammac/Jak-3/Stat-5A signaling in CD4+ T cells thereby protecting them from
tumor-shed PGE2-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data strongly suggest that tumor-shed PGE2 is an 
important factor leading to CD4+ T cell apoptosis during cancer and raise the
possibility that theaflavins may have the potential as an effective
immunorestorer in cancer-bearer.

PMCID: PMC2753647
PMID: 19812686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. FEBS J. 2009 Nov;276(21):6312-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07339.x. Epub
2009 Sep 28.

A novel splicing variant form suppresses the activity of full-length signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5A.

Watanabe Y(1), Ikegawa M, Naruse Y, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Research Institute for Neurological Diseases and
Geriatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) regulate a variety of 
cellular functions, including differentiation and proliferation. STAT3 and STAT5 
are known to play important roles in brain processes, such as energy homeostasis 
and neuronal development. We isolated a novel splicing variant of STAT5A from a
cDNA library of the mouse brainstem. This variant, STAT5A_DeltaE18, lacked exon
18 and caused a frameshift in the C-terminus, resulting in deletion of a tyrosine
phosphorylation site and a transactivation domain. Although the frameshift region
had no characteristic motifs, it was highly serine/threonine-rich and contained a
short proline-rich sequence. Expression of STAT5A_DeltaE18 was detected in the
mouse brainstem, lung and thymus, but not in the mouse cerebrum or cerebellum. We
developed a specific antibody against STAT5A_DeltaE18 and investigated the
intracellular localization of this variant. STAT5A_DeltaE18 showed dot-like
structures in the cytoplasm and could not translocate into the nucleus after
prolactin treatment. STAT5A_DeltaE18 showed a strong tendency to aggregate, which
led to coaggregation with STAT5A_full-length. This coaggregation inhibited the
nuclear transport of STAT5A and suppressed prolactin-induced activation of
STAT5A.

PMID: 19788420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Blood. 2009 Nov 19;114(21):4721-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216390. Epub 2009
Sep 24.

The transcription factors STAT5A/B regulate GM-CSF-mediated granulopoiesis.

Kimura A(1), Rieger MA, Simone JM, Chen W, Wickre MC, Zhu BM, Hoppe PS, O'Shea
JJ, Schroeder T, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Neutrophils play a vital role in the immune defense, which is evident by the
severity of neutropenia causing life-threatening infections. Granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) controls homeostatic and emergency 
development of granulocytes. However, little is known about the contribution of
the downstream mediating transcription factors signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5A and 5B (STAT5A/B). To elucidate the function of this pathway, we
generated mice with complete deletion of both Stat5a/b genes in hematopoietic
cells. In homeostasis, peripheral neutrophils were markedly decreased in these
animals. Moreover, during emergency situations, such as myelosuppression,
Stat5a/b-mutant mice failed to produce enhanced levels of neutrophils and were
unable to respond to GM-CSF. Both the GM-CSF-permitted survival of mature
neutrophils and the generation of granulocytes from granulocyte-macrophage
progenitors (GMPs) were markedly reduced in Stat5a/b mutants. GMPs showed
impaired colony-formation ability with reduced number and size of colonies on
GM-CSF stimulation. Moreover, continuous cell fate analyses by time-lapse
microscopy and single cell tracking revealed that Stat5a/b-null GMPs showed both 
delayed cell-cycle progression and increased cell death. Finally, transcriptome
analysis indicated that STAT5A/B directs GM-CSF signaling through the regulation 
of proliferation and survival genes.

PMCID: PMC2780307
PMID: 19779039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Clin Exp Immunol. 2009 Oct;158(1):45-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.03985.x.

Impaired activation of Stat1 and c-Jun as a possible defect in macrophages of
patients with active tuberculosis.

Esquivel-Solís H(1), Quiñones-Falconi F, Zarain-Herzberg A, Amieva-Fernández RI, 
López-Vidal Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

Studies of patients with active tuberculosis (TB) and infected healthy
individuals have shown that interferon (IFN)-gamma is present in sites of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in comparable levels. This suggests that
there is a deficiency in the macrophage response to IFN-gamma in TB patients. We 
used recombinant human IFN-gamma to stimulate adherent monocyte-derived
macrophages from three groups of people: patients with active tuberculosis (TBP),
their healthy household contacts (HHC) and healthy uninfected controls from the
community (CC). We then evaluated the ability of the macrophages to inhibit the
growth of M. tuberculosis H37Rv as well as their cytokine profile at early in
infection (48 h). After IFN-gamma treatment, macrophages of healthy individuals
(HHC and CC) controlled M. tuberculosis growth and produced mainly nitric oxide
(NO) and interleukin (IL)-12p70, whereas TBP macrophages did not kill M.
tuberculosis. Additionally, TBP macrophages produced low levels of NO and
IL-12p70 and high levels of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and IL-10.
Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta levels were similar among all three groups.
M. tuberculosis infection had little effect on the cytokine response after
IFN-gamma stimulus, but infection alone induced more IL-10 and TGF-beta in TBP
macrophages. There were no differences in Stat1 nuclear translocation and DNA
binding between the groups. However, the phosphorylated Stat1 and c-Jun (AP-1) in
nuclear protein extracts was diminished in TBP macrophages compared to
macrophages of healthy individuals. These results indicate an impairment of
Stat1-dependent and Stat1-independent IFN-gamma signalling in macrophages of
people with active tuberculosis, suggesting a different molecular regulation that
could impact macrophage functionality and disease outcome.

PMCID: PMC2759058
PMID: 19737230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Exp Neurol. 2009 Dec;220(2):255-66. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.08.029. Epub
2009 Sep 6.

C-terminal mechano growth factor protects dopamine neurons: a novel peptide that 
induces heme oxygenase-1.

Quesada A(1), Micevych P, Handforth A.

Author information: 
(1)Research, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA 90073,
USA. aquesada@mednet.ucla.edu

To assess potential efficacy of mechano growth factor (MGF) for chronic
neurodegenerative disorders, we studied whether MGF protects dopamine (DA)
neurons subjected to neurotoxic stress. We show that a short 24-amino acid
C-terminal peptide of MGF (MGF24) upregulates heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression 
and protects SH-SY5Y cells against apoptosis and cell loss induced by three DA
cell-specific neurotoxins: 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA),
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)), and rotenone. MGF24 maintains the
mitochondrial membrane potential and blocks the release of mitochondrial
apoptotic-inducing factor into the cytoplasm induced by 6-OHDA, MPP(+), and
rotenone. Chemical inhibition of HO-1 with zinc protoporphyrin-IX prevents
neuroprotection by MGF24 against the three neurotoxins. MGF24 does not activate
Akt signaling nor does Akt inhibition block MGF24 protection of SH-SY5Y cells. In
6-OHDA-lesioned rats, central or peripheral MGF24 administration protects against
the development of contralateral forelimb under-utilization, reduces ipsilateral 
nigral DA cell body loss, and attenuates tyrosine hydroxylase fiber loss in the
ipsilateral striatum, independent of IGF-1 receptor activation. Peripheral MGF24 
administration upregulates HO-1 expression in striatal and midbrain tissue. This 
report is the first to demonstrate that a small peptide, MGF24, upregulates HO-1,
an important cell defense mediator, and protects DA cells, suggesting new
strategies for neuroprotection in Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 19735655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Anim Genet. 2009 Dec;40(6):909-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2009.01940.x. Epub
2009 Aug 31.

Effect of polymorphisms in the FASN, OLR1, PPARGC1A, PRL and STAT5A genes on
bovine milk-fat composition.

Schennink A(1), Bovenhuis H, Léon-Kloosterziel KM, van Arendonk JA, Visker MH.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University, PO Box 338, 6700
AH Wageningen, The Netherlands. aschennink@ucdavis.edu

The aim of our study was to estimate effects of polymorphisms in the ATP-binding 
cassette G2 (ABCG2), fatty acid synthase (FASN), oxidized low-density lipoprotein
receptor 1 (OLR1), peroxysome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PPARGC1A), prolactin (PRL) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) genes on milk production traits and
detailed milk-fat composition. Milk-fat composition phenotypes were available for
1905 Dutch Holstein-Friesian cows. First, the presence of each SNP in the Dutch
Holstein-Friesian population was evaluated by direct sequencing of the PCR
product surrounding the SNP in 22 proven Dutch Holstein-Friesian bulls. The ABCG2
SNP did not segregate in the bull population. Second, we genotyped the cows for
the FASN(g.16024G>A), FASN(g.17924A>G), OLR1(g.8232C>A), PPARGC1A(c.1790+514G>A),
PPARGC1A(c.1892+19G>A), PRL(g.8398G>A) and STAT5A(g.9501G>A) polymorphisms, and
estimated genotype effects on milk production traits and milk-fat composition.
FASN(g.17924A>G) and OLR(g.8232C>A) had a significant effect (P < 0.05) on
milk-fat percentage. However, we were not able to confirm results reported in the
literature that showed effects of all evaluated polymorphisms on milk-fat
percentage or milk-fat yield. All polymorphisms showed significant effects (P <
0.05) on milk-fat composition. The polymorphisms in FASN and STAT5A, which had an
effect on C14:0 and were located on chromosome 19, could not fully explain the
quantitative trait locus for C14:0 that was previously detected on chromosome 19 
in a genome-wide scan using linkage analysis.

PMID: 19719788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 Nov;331(2):710-6. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.155986. Epub
2009 Aug 26.

A novel indole-3-propanamide exerts its immunosuppressive activity by inhibiting 
JAK3 in T cells.

Carbonnelle D(1), Duflos M, Marchand P, Chauvet C, Petit JY, Lang F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunopharmacology, Unité Propre de Recherche et de
l'Enseignement Supérieur, Equipe d'Accueil, Nantes-Atlantique University, Unité
de Formation et de Recherche of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nantes, France.

We previously identified an indole-3-propanamide derivative,
3-[1-(4-chlorobenzyl)indol-3-yl]-N-(pyridin-4-yl)propanamide (AD412), as a
potential immunosuppressive agent. Here, we document that AD412 inhibited the
proliferative response of CD3/CD28-stimulated human T cells without inhibiting
their interleukin 2 (IL-2) production and also inhibited the proliferation of
CTL-L2 cells in response to IL-2. These results prompted us to analyze the effect
of our compound on the three main signaling pathways coupled to the IL-2
receptor. We provide evidence that AD412 inhibited the JAK1/3-dependent
phosphorylations of Akt, STAT5a/b, and ERK1/2 in IL-2-stimulated CTL-L2 cells. In
contrast, AD412 had little effect on the JAK1/2-dependent INF-gamma-induced
phosphorylation of STAT1 in U266 cells. This suggested a preferential inhibition 
of JAK3 over JAK1 or JAK 2 activities by AD412 that was confirmed by in vitro
kinase assays with purified JAK2 and JAK3 kinases. In addition, we provide
evidence that the inhibition of IL-2 response by AD412 was not due to inhibition 
of IL-2Ralpha up-regulation because neither AD412 nor JAK3 inhibitors described
previously [4-[(3-bromo-4-hydroxyphenyl)amino]-6,7-dimethoxyquinazoline
(WHI-P154) and alpha-cyano-(3,4-dihydroxy)-N-benzylcinnamid (AG-490)]
significantly inhibited IL-2-induced IL-2Ralpha overexpression. Finally, we
further document the immunosuppressive activity of AD412 in vivo by showing that 
its administration per os significantly prolonged heart allograft graft survival.
This molecule may thus represent an interesting lead compound to develop new
immunosuppressive agents in the field of transplantation and autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 19710367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2009 Sep;10(9):928-37.

Signaling networks regulating cardiac myocyte survival and death.

Wagner M(1), Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Center for
Cardiovascular and Muscle Research, Department of Cell Biology, 450 Clarkson
Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA. michael.wagner@downstate.edu

In conditions of stress, cardiomyocytes mount an adaptive response that attempts 
to normalize ventricular wall stress and maintain cardiac output. Prolonged
stress overwhelms this protective response and leads to the apoptosis of
cardiomyocytes and heart failure. The balance between the protective and
apoptotic mechanisms is determined by a network of signaling pathways that can
interact with the JAK/STAT pathway to effect the expression of either
cardioprotective or pro-apoptotic genes. The activation of STAT3 affords
cardioprotection, whereas activation of STAT1 is associated with apoptosis. Full 
and sustained activation of either pathway benefits from the cross-activation of 
the STATs by serine/threonine kinases in collateral signaling pathways. These
pathways are activated by cytokines such as TNFalpha, Fas ligand and
G-protein-coupled receptor ligands released by the ischemic myocardium. The
interaction of these ligands with their respective signal transduction pathways
and the nature of their interaction with the JAK/STAT pathway can influence the
fate of stressed cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 19705335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2009 Aug;29(4):445-50. doi:
10.1007/s11596-009-0411-y. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

Microarray study of mechanism of trichostatin a inducing apoptosis of Molt-4
cells.

Hong Z(1), Han Z, Xiao M, Yang Y, Xia X, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China. hongzhenya@eyou.com

Histone deacetylase was overexpressed in a variety of cancers and was closely
correlated with oncogenic factors. The histone deacetylase inhibitor,
trichostatin A (TSA) was shown to induce apoptosis in many cancer cells. However,
the mechanism of TSA on induction of cancer cells apoptosis is poorly understood.
This study was designed to characterize the global gene expression profiles
before and after treatment of human leukemia cell line Molt-4 with TSA. Flow
cytometry, MTT and DNA ladder were used to observe the effect of TSA on the
apoptosis of MOLT-4 cells and normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC). Microarray, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 
Western blotting were used to detect the difference of gene and protein
expressions of Molt-4 cells after incubation of the cells with TSA. The results
showed that TSA could induce Molt-4 apoptosis in dose- and time-dependent manners
but spared PBMCs. Microarray analysis showed that after incubation with TSA for 9
h, 310 genes were upregulated and 313 genes were deregulated. These genes
regulate the growth, differentiation and survival of cells. Among these genes,
STAT5A was down-regulated by 80.4% and MYC was down-regulated by 77.3%. It was
concluded that TSA has definite growth-inhibiting and apoptosis-inducing effects 
on Molt-4 cells in time- and dose-dependent manners, with weak cytotoxic effects 
on PBMCs at the same time. The mechanism of TSA selectively inducing apoptosis
and inhibiting growth may be ascribed to the changes of pro-proliferation genes
and anti-apoptosis genes.

PMID: 19662360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Int Immunol. 2009 Sep;21(9):1079-88. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp073. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Activation of the mouse TCRgamma enhancers by STAT5.

Tani-ichi S(1), Satake M, Ikuta K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Protection, Department of Biological Responses,
Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The IL-7R controls local accessibility of joining (J) gamma gene segments in the 
mouse TCRgamma locus by recruiting signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) 5 and transcriptional coactivators to the Jgamma germ line
promoters and inducing histone acetylation and germ line transcription. Because
STAT consensus motifs are conserved not only in the Jgamma promoters but also in 
the TCRgamma 3' enhancer (Egamma) elements, it is possible that STAT5 interacts
with and activates Egamma. To address this question, we first showed that the
lysine 4 residue of histone H3 is substantially methylated at Egamma1 and Egamma4
elements in wild-type early thymocytes and that the levels of the methylation are
reduced in IL-7R alpha chain-deficient mice. We also showed that STAT5 has
potential to elevate histone acetylation of the Egamma elements in a
cytokine-dependent cell line by cytokine stimulation. Next, we demonstrated that 
STAT5 is recruited to the STAT consensus motifs in the Egamma elements after
cytokine stimulation and that transcription factors Runt-related (Runx) and c-Myb
are constitutively recruited to Egamma. Furthermore, we showed that STAT5
augments basal Egamma activity controlled by Runx and c-Myb. These results
suggest that STAT5 is recruited to the consensus motifs in the Egamma elements by
cytokine stimulation and augments basal Egamma activity independent of Runx and
c-Myb. Therefore, this study implies that the Egamma elements might be activated 
in two successive steps, first by Runx and c-Myb and next by STAT5.

PMID: 19651644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Haematologica. 2009 Aug;94(8):1075-84. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2008.000471.

Ectopic expression of C/EBPalpha and ID1 is sufficient to restore defective
neutrophil development in low-risk myelodysplasia.

Geest CR(1), Buitenhuis M, Vellenga E, Coffer PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: In patients with myelodysplasia, a general defect in the multipotent 
stem-cell compartment results in disturbed proliferation and differentiation of
the erythroid, megakaryocytic and myeloid lineages. Although a number of genetic 
defects in myelodysplastic progenitor cells have been described, the
intracellular signaling pathways underlying aberrant regulation of myelopoiesis
remain relatively undefined.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Here, an ex vivo differentiation system was used to
selectively screen for molecules improving defective hematopoiesis in
myelodysplastic CD34(+) progenitor cells.
RESULTS: Bone marrow-derived CD34(+) cells isolated from patients with low-risk
myelodysplastic syndrome showed impaired capacity to proliferate and
differentiate as well as increased levels of apoptosis. In an attempt to improve 
the expansion and differentiation of the myelodysplastic CD34(+) progenitors,
cells were treated with the p38MAPK pharmacological inhibitor SB203580, or
retrovirally transduced to ectopically express active protein kinase B
(PKB/c-akt), or the transcriptional regulators STAT5, C/EBPalpha or ID1. Whereas 
treatment of progenitors with SB203580, PKB or STAT5 did not enhance neutrophil
development, ID1- and C/EBPalpha-transduced cells exhibited increased
granulocyte/macrophage colony formation. Furthermore, ectopic expression of
C/EBPalpha resulted in improved neutrophil maturation.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that targeting the ID1 and C/EBPalpha
transcriptional regulators may be of benefit in the design of novel therapies for
low-risk myelodysplasia.

PMCID: PMC2719030
PMID: 19644139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Dairy Res. 2009 Nov;76(4):441-5. doi: 10.1017/S0022029909990070. Epub 2009 Jul 
29.

Genetic polymorphism of STAT5A protein: relationships with production traits and 
milk composition in Italian Brown cattle.

Selvaggi M(1), Dario C, Normanno G, Celano GV, Dario M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Welfare, University of Study of Bari, strada
prov. le per Casamassima Km 3-70010 Valenzano, Italy.

STATs are a group of transcription factors that mediate actions of a variety of
peptide hormones and cytokines within target cells (for example, prolactin and
growth hormone). Therefore, STAT5A gene is a candidate marker for quantitative
traits in farm animals with respect to milk production traits. In this study the 
STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism was investigated with PCR-RFLP in a sample of 233
Italian Brown cattle. This polymorphism is localized in the coding region of the 
bovine STAT5A gene. It is a substitution C-->T at position 6853 within exon 7.
All three possible genotypes for the C/T polymorphism were identified. The
overall frequencies of alleles C and T were 0.83 and 0.17 respectively; the
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was verified. In order to study the relationship
between STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism and milk performance traits, the data for a
305-d milk production that included milk yield, protein and fat yield, fat and
protein percentage were used. Significant differences between the two genotypes
were found in yields of milk, fat and protein and protein percentage (P<0.01). CC
cows produced more milk than CT (5418.68 v. 5149.54 kg). Protein content was
higher in milk from CC compared with CT genotypes (3.40 v. 3.21%). No significant
difference was found in fat content. Owing to the low number of TT cows in the
studied population, this genotype was not included in the statistical analysis;
in fact the number of TT cows was not enough to provide an accurate statistical
analysis. Although more studies are needed to better clarify the role of this SNP
on production traits, STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism appears to be a promising indirect
marker to improve milk production traits in cattle.

PMID: 19638264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Reproduction. 2009 Nov;138(5):813-25. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0208. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Progesterone and interferon tau-regulated genes in the ovine uterine endometrium:
identification of periostin as a potential mediator of conceptus elongation.

Ahn HW(1), Farmer JL, Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA.

During early pregnancy in ruminants, progesterone (P(4)) and interferon tau
(IFNT) act on the endometrium to regulate genes hypothesized to be important for 
conceptus development and implantation. The present study was conducted to verify
several candidate genes (actin alpha-2, smooth muscle, aorta (ACTA2), collagen,
type III, alpha-1 (COL3A1), periostin (POSTN), secreted protein acidic
cysteine-rich (SPARC), S100 calcium-binding protein A2 (S100A2), STAT5A and
transgelin (TAGLN)) regulated by pregnancy, P(4), and/or IFNT in the endometrium 
determined using a custom ovine cDNA array. S100A2 mRNA was detected primarily in
endometrial epithelia and conceptuses. S100A2 mRNA increased in endometrial
epithelia from days 10 to 16 in cyclic ewes and from days 10 to 14 in pregnant
ewes and declined thereafter. The abundance of S100A2 mRNA was less in
endometrial luminal epithelium of IFNT-infused ewes receiving P(4). Expression of
COL3A1, SPARC, ACTA2, and TAGLN was independent of pregnancy, P(4), or IFNT.
POSTN mRNA was detected primarily in compact stroma of intercaruncular and
caruncular endometria, but not in the conceptus. Endometrial POSTN mRNA increased
between days 12 and 14 in pregnant but not cyclic ewes, and POSTN mRNA was more
abundant in uterine stroma of ewes treated with P(4). POSTN protein was detected 
in uterine flushings of pregnant ewes and found to mediate attachment and
stimulate migration of ovine trophectoderm cells in vitro. These results support 
the ideas that POSTN and S100A2 are regulated by P(4) and IFNT respectively, and 
that POSTN is involved in conceptus elongation during early pregnancy.

PMID: 19635739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R52. doi: 10.1186/bcr2341. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

A novel role for signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) in 
beta1-integrin-mediated human breast cancer cell migration.

Bernaciak TM(1), Zareno J, Parsons JT, Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, 1300 Jefferson Park
Avenue, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. tmb5d@virginia.edu

INTRODUCTION: Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b is a
transcription factor involved in pro-proliferative and pro-survival signaling in 
a number of solid tumors, including breast cancer. The contribution of STAT5b to 
breast cancer cell motility has not been explored. This work aims to elucidate
the role of STAT5b in breast cancer cell migration.
METHODS: STAT5b was knocked down by using siRNA in two aggressive, highly
migratory breast cancer cell lines (BT-549 and MDA-MB-231), and transwell
migration assays were performed to determine the importance of STAT5b for their
migration. Knockdown-rescue experiments were used to validate the specificity of 
STAT5b knockdown and to determine which regions/functions of STAT5b are necessary
for its role in migration. Live-cell imaging of wound healing and spreading was
carried out to examine cell morphology and motility after STAT5b knockdown.
RESULTS: Knockdown of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, inhibited migration of BT-549 and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells to serum by 60% to 80%, and inhibited migration
equally over a range of serum concentrations (0.1% to 10% serum). Migratory
inhibition upon STAT5b knockdown could be rescued by reintroduction of wild-type 
STAT5b, as well as Y699F- and dominant-negative STAT5b mutants, but not an SH2
domain defective R618K-STAT5b mutant. beta1- integrin-mediated migration of
breast cancer cells to fibronectin was inhibited with STAT5b knockdown, and loss 
of STAT5b correlated with loss of directional migration and formation of
multiple, highly contractile protrusions upon attachment to fibronectin.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented here demonstrate that STAT5b is integral to
breast cancer cell migration and identify a novel, SH2-dependent function of
STAT5b in regulating beta1-integrin-mediated migration of highly aggressive
breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2750113
PMID: 19630967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 15;183(4):2356-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901131. Epub 2009
Jul 15.

Telomere shortening and oxidative stress in aged macrophages results in impaired 
STAT5a phosphorylation.

Sebastián C(1), Herrero C, Serra M, Lloberas J, Blasco MA, Celada A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine and University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.

Macrophages are an essential component of both innate and adaptive immunity, and 
altered function of these cells with aging may play a key role in
immunosenescence. To determine the effect of aging on macrophages, we produced
bone marrow-derived macrophages in vitro. In these conditions, we analyzed the
effect of aging on macrophages without the influence of other cell types that may
be affected by aging. We showed that telomeres shorten with age in macrophages
leading to a decreased GM-CSF but not M-CSF-dependent proliferation of these
cells as a result of decreased phosphorylation of STAT5a. Macrophages from aged
mice showed increased susceptibility to oxidants and an accumulation of
intracellular reactive oxygen species. In these macrophages STAT5a oxidation was 
reduced, which led to the decreased phosphorylation observed. Interestingly, the 
same cellular defects were found in macrophages from telomerase knockout
(Terc(-/-)) mice suggesting that telomere loss is the cause for the enhanced
oxidative stress, the reduced Stat5a oxidation and phosphorylation and,
ultimately, for the impaired GM-CSF-dependent macrophage proliferation.

PMID: 19605693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):4935-48. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01705-08. Epub 2009 Jul 
13.

ErbB4 splice variants Cyt1 and Cyt2 differ by 16 amino acids and exert opposing
effects on the mammary epithelium in vivo.

Muraoka-Cook RS(1), Sandahl MA, Strunk KE, Miraglia LC, Husted C, Hunter DM,
Elenius K, Chodosh LA, Earp HS 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Data concerning the prognostic value of ErbB4 in breast cancer and effects on
cell growth have varied in published reports, perhaps due to the unknown
signaling consequences of expression of the intracellular proteolytic ErbB4
s80(HER4) fragment or due to differing signaling capabilities of alternatively
spliced ErbB4 isoforms. One isoform (Cyt1) contains a 16-residue intracellular
sequence that is absent from the other (Cyt2). We expressed s80(Cyt1) and
s80(Cyt2) in HC11 mammary epithelial cells, finding diametrically opposed effects
on the growth and organization of colonies in three-dimensional matrices. Whereas
expression of s80(Cyt1) decreased growth and increased the rate of
three-dimensional lumen formation, that of s80(Cyt2) increased proliferation
without promoting lumen formation. These results were recapitulated in vivo,
using doxycycline-inducible, mouse breast-transgenic expression of s80(Cyt1) amd 
s80(Cyt2). Expression of s80(Cyt1) decreased growth of the mammary ductal
epithelium, caused precocious STAT5a activation and lactogenic differentiation,
and increased cell surface E-cadherin levels. Remarkably, ductal growth
inhibition by s80(Cyt1) occurred simultaneously with lobuloalveolar growth that
was unimpeded by s80(Cyt1), suggesting that the response to ErbB4 may be
influenced by the epithelial subtype. In contrast, expression of s80(Cyt2) caused
epithelial hyperplasia, increased Wnt and nuclear beta-catenin expression, and
elevated expression of c-myc and cyclin D1 in the mammary epithelium. These
results demonstrate that the Cyt1 and Cyt2 ErbB4 isoforms, differing by only 16
amino acids, exhibit markedly opposing effects on mammary epithelium growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2738276
PMID: 19596786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Blood. 2009 Aug 27;114(9):1768-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213371. Epub 2009
Jun 30.

Rap signaling is crucial for the competence of IL-7 response and the development 
of B-lineage cells.

Katayama Y(1), Sekai M, Hattori M, Miyoshi I, Hamazaki Y, Minato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Rap family GTPases consist of multiple members with substantial functional
redundancy. With the use of transgenic mice conditionally expressing a bona fide 
dominant-negative Rap1 mutant, Rap1A17, capable of inhibiting the activation of
all Rap family members in B-lineage cells (mb.1-Rap1A17 Tg), we demonstrate that 
these mice show a defective generation of pre-B cells in bone marrow, resulting
in a significant diminution of peripheral mainstream B cells. The effect is
attributed to the impaired survival and expansion of B-lineage progenitors in
response to IL-7, despite normal IL-7Ralpha expression. The pre-B cells from
mb.1-Rap1A17 Tg mice showed a significantly reduced expression of c-myc and E2A, 
and the competence of IL-7 response was restored by the transduction of c-myc,
but not by constitutively active (CA) Stat5a, CA PI3K-p100, or bcl-2. The
residual follicular B cells with complete Cre-mediated recombination proliferated
normally in response to B-cell receptor stimulation and showed efficient germinal
center reaction in vivo. These results show that endogenous Rap signaling plays a
crucial role selectively in B-lineage cell development by sustaining the
competence for IL-7 response, whereas it is dispensable for mature B-cell
function.

PMID: 19567880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biochem Genet. 2009 Oct;47(9-10):671-9. doi: 10.1007/s10528-009-9263-1. Epub 2009
Jun 21.

Analysis of STAT5A/AvaI gene polymorphism in four Italian cattle breeds.

Dario C(1), Dario M, Ciotola F, Peretti V, Carnicella D, Selvaggi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Welfare of Animals, University of Studies of Bari,
Prov le per Casamassima Km 3, 70010 Valenzano, Italy.
c.dario@veterinaria.uniba.it

The STAT5A/AvaI polymorphism was investigated with PCR-RFLP in a sample of 339
cattle belonging to four breeds: Italian Friesian, Jersey, Italian Brown, and
Podolica reared in south Italy. All three possible genotypes for the C/T
polymorphism were identified. In these breeds, PCR-RFLP showed the predominance
of the TT genotype in Italian Brown and Jersey cows; in Podolica and Italian
Friesian CT is the most frequent genotype. The frequency of the T allele ranged
from 0.55 to 0.81 in the analyzed populations. The distribution of genotypic and 
allelic frequencies at this locus was significantly different among the four
populations based on a chi2 test (P < 0.001), suggesting that the molecular
characteristics of the STAT5A gene could be significantly affected by the breed
selection. Gene heterozygosity, gene homozygosity, effective allele number,
fixation index, and polymorphism information content (PIC) were calculated. The
observed heterozygosity, as well as the Ne and PIC values, indicates high genetic
variability in the Podolica breed. Podolica could be considered an interesting
reservoir of genetic diversity for a species under high selective pressure
elsewhere.

PMID: 19544092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Semin Oncol. 2009 Apr;36(2 Suppl 1):S27-35. doi:
10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.02.007.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-induced malignancies: novel mechanisms of cell
transformation and potential therapeutic approaches.

Wasik MA(1), Zhang Q, Marzec M, Kasprzycka M, Wang HY, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. wasik@mail.med.upenn.edu

Among the many oncogenic variants of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK),
nucleophosmin 1 (NPM)/ALK fusion protein expressed in the subset of T-cell
lymphoma (ALK(+)TCL) is currently the best characterized. NPM/ALK activates
several signal transduction pathways, including PI3K/AKT, MEK/ERK, mTORC1, STAT3,
and STAT5b. In turn, the pathways modulate expression and function of many genes 
and proteins involved in the key cellular functions such as proliferation,
growth, survival, metabolism, and angiogenesis. Recent data indicate that NPM/ALK
also promotes immune evasion of the ALK(+)TCL by inducing through STAT3
activation the expression of immunosuppressive cytokines interleukin-10 (IL-10)
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGFss) and cell surface protein CD274
(PD-L1, B7-H1). In addition, NPM/ALK protects its own expression by mediating via
STAT3 and at least one member of the DNA methyltransferase family DNMT1
epigenetic silencing of the SHP-1 and STAT5a genes. In ALK+TCL cells, SHP-1 and
STAT5a proteins act as potent tumor suppressors by promoting degradation of the
NPM/ALK protein and inhibiting expression of the NPM/ALK gene, respectively.
These findings provide further rationale to therapeutically target ALK and its
effector proteins, foremost STAT3. They also suggest that immunotherapeutic
approaches to ALK(+)TCL and, possibly, other ALK-driven malignancies may require 
inhibition of ALK and STAT3 to achieve the optimal clinical efficacy.

PMID: 19393833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Clin Nephrol. 2009 Jun;71(6):608-16.

GATA-3 is upregulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with
minimal change nephrotic syndrome.

Komatsuda A(1), Wakui H, Iwamoto K, Togashi M, Masai R, Maki N, Sawada K.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Akita, Japan. komatsud@med.akita-u-ac-jp

BACKGROUND: An imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cytokines has been reported in MCNS.
Interleukin-13 (IL-13: Th2 cytokine) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
MCNS, but Th1/Th2 regulators such as T-bet (Th1-specific transcription factor)
and GATA-3 (Th2-specific transcription factor) have not been examined.
METHODS: We isolated PBMC from 25 patients with MCNS during nephrosis and
remission phases, from 17 nephrotic patients with membranous nephropathy (MN),
and from 25 healthy subjects. We measured mRNA expression levels of T-bet,
GATA-3, Stat5A (regulator of Th2 priming), IFN-gamma (Th1 cytokine), IL-2 (Th1
cytokine and activator of Stat5), IL-4 (Th2 cytokine), and IL-13 in PBMC, using
real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: GATA-3, Stat5A, and IL-13 mRNA expression levels were higher in the
nephrotic MCNS group compared to the others. IL-2 mRNA expression levels were
higher in nephrotic patients with MCNS and MN than in MCNS patients in remission 
and healthy controls. There were no differences in mRNA expression levels of
T-bet, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 between MCNS and MN patients and healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to reveal increased mRNA expression levels
of GATA-3 and Stat5A in PBMC from MCNS patients in nephrosis. This study also
supports recent findings suggesting the role of IL-13 in the development of MCNS.
A predominant Th2 type of T cell activation may be involved in the pathogenesis
of MCNS.

PMID: 19473628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Endocrinology. 2009 Aug;150(8):3620-6. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1703. Epub 2009 May
14.

Endotoxin-induced growth hormone resistance in skeletal muscle.

Chen Y(1), Sood S, Krishnamurthy VM, Rotwein P, Rabkin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Inflammation-induced skeletal muscle wasting is a serious clinical problem and
arises in part because of resistance to GH-stimulated IGF-I expression. Although 
it is established that in the liver, resistance develops because of impaired
signaling through the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) transduction pathway, together with a more distal defect 
in STAT5 DNA-binding activity, the situation in skeletal muscle is unclear.
Accordingly, we set out to characterize the mechanisms behind the skeletal muscle
resistance to GH in rats with acute inflammation induced by endotoxin. Endotoxin 
caused significant declines in GH-stimulated STAT5a/b phosphorylation and IGF-I
gene expression, and this occurred despite a lack of change in signaling protein 
levels or phosphorylation of JAK2. In whole muscle, GH-stimulated
phospho-STAT5a/b levels were reduced by half, and in the nucleus, phospho-STAT5b 
levels were similarly reduced. Furthermore, the binding of phosphorylated STAT5b 
to DNA was reduced and to a similar extent to the reduction in nuclear
phosphorylated STAT5b. Interestingly, GH-induced androgen receptor gene
expression was also suppressed. Thus, it appears that skeletal muscle resistance 
to GH-stimulated IGF-I expression in acute endotoxemia arises from a defect in
STAT5b signaling, with a proportionate reduction in STAT5b DNA binding. Finally, 
it appears that resistance to GH-induced androgen receptor expression also
develops and, together with the attenuated GH-induced IGF-I expression, likely
plays an important role in the muscle wasting that arises in endotoxin-induced
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2717874
PMID: 19443577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 May 1;77(9):1553-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.02.007. Epub
2009 Feb 27.

Involvement of STAT5a signaling in morphine-induced up-regulation of the cyclin
D1.

Guo L(1), Li H, Liu H, Li C, Li M, Jiang W, He P, Wang S, McNutt MA, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Peking University, Beijing 100083, China.

Opioid receptors and cytokine receptor have been verified to have a functional
link and interaction. However, the pathway by which opioid receptor in
lymphocytes is linked to cytokine signaling is not well defined. Using confocal
microscopy and Western blotting this study showed that morphine treatment was
able to activate cytoplasmic STAT5a in CEM x174 cells, which then translocated
into the nucleus and bound to elements of the cyclin D1 promoter. As a
consequence the expression of the cyclin D1 was apparently up-regulated. The data
from EMSA-superEMSA and ChIP-qPCR further confirmed that morphine was capable of 
promoting the binding of STAT5a to its elements (proximal and distal), and this
was abolished by the antagonist naloxone. As shown by transient transfection
assay, activity of the cyclin D1 promoter was significantly reduced by 82%
(distal) and 65% (proximal) after two STAT5a elements were mutated in comparison 
with wild type STAT5a elements. Moreover, knockdown of STAT5a was associated with
a concurrent silencing of morphine-induced expression of cyclin D1, demonstrating
involvement of STAT5a in morphine-triggered signaling in the regulation of cyclin
D1 expression. The finding provides evidence which demonstrates that there is
cross-talk between the mu opioid receptor and cytokine signaling in lymphocytes. 
Thus, we conclude that morphine may modulate cyclin D1 gene expression via signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) signaling, which will be
beneficial for further understanding of the pharmacological effect of morphine on
immune regulation.

PMID: 19426693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. FASEB J. 2009 Sep;23(9):3140-8. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-128215. Epub 2009 May 5.

Skeletal muscle growth and fiber composition in mice are regulated through the
transcription factors STAT5a/b: linking growth hormone to the androgen receptor.

Klover P(1), Chen W, Zhu BM, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. kloverp@niddk.nih.gov

In skeletal muscle, STAT5a/b transcription factors are critical for normal
postnatal growth, whole-animal glucose homeostasis, and local IGF-1 production.
These observations have led us to hypothesize that STAT5a/b are critical for
maintenance of normal muscle mass and function. To investigate this, mice with a 
skeletal muscle-specific deletion of the Stat5a/b genes (Stat5MKO) were used.
Stat5MKO mice displayed reduced muscle mass, altered fiber-type distribution and 
reduced activity. On a molecular level, gene expression in skeletal muscle of
Stat5MKO and control mice was analyzed by microarrays and real-time PCR, both in 
the presence and absence of growth hormone (GH) stimulation. Expression of
several genes involved in muscle growth and fiber type were significantly
changed. Specifically, in the quadriceps, a muscle almost exclusively composed of
type II fibers, the absence of STAT5a/b led to increased expression of several
genes associated with type I fibers and the de novo appearance of type I fibers. 
In addition, it is shown here that expression of the androgen receptor gene (Ar) 
is controlled by GH through STAT5a/b. The link between STAT5a/b and Ar gene is
likely through direct transcriptional regulation, as chromatin immunoprecipitaion
of the Ar promoter region in C2C12 myoblasts was accomplished by antibodies
against STAT5a. These experiments demonstrate an important role for STAT5a/b in
skeletal muscle physiology, and they provide a direct link to androgen signaling.

PMCID: PMC2735360
PMID: 19417088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Dairy Sci. 2009 May;92(5):2238-47. doi: 10.3168/jds.2008-1767.

Single gene and gene interaction effects on fertilization and embryonic survival 
rates in cattle.

Khatib H(1), Huang W, Wang X, Tran AH, Bindrim AB, Schutzkus V, Monson RL,
Yandell BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison 53706,
USA. hkhatib@wisc.edu

Decrease in fertility and conception rates is a major cause of economic loss and 
cow culling in dairy herds. Conception rate is the product of fertilization rate 
and embryonic survival rate. Identification of genetic factors that cause the
death of embryos is the first step in eliminating this problem from the
population and thereby increasing reproductive efficiency. A candidate pathway
approach was used to identify candidate genes affecting fertilization and embryo 
survival rates using an in vitro fertilization experimental system. A total of
7,413 in vitro fertilizations were performed using oocytes from 504 ovaries and
semen samples from 10 different bulls. Fertilization rate was calculated as the
number of cleaved embryos 48 h postfertilization out of the total number of
oocytes exposed to sperm. Survival rate of embryos was calculated as the number
of blastocysts on d 7 of development out of the number of total embryos cultured.
All ovaries were genotyped for 8 genes in the POU1F1 signaling pathway.
Single-gene analysis revealed significant associations of GHR, PRLR, STAT5A, and 
UTMP with survival rate and of POU1F1, GHR, STAT5A, and OPN with fertilization
rate. To further characterize the contribution of the entire integrated POU1F1
pathway to fertilization and early embryonic survival, a model selection
procedure was applied. Comparisons among the different models showed that
interactions between adjacent genes in the pathway revealed a significant
contribution to the variation in fertility traits compared with other models that
analyzed only bull information or only genes without interactions. Moreover, some
genes that were not significant in the single-gene analysis showed significant
effects in the interaction analysis. Thus, we propose that single genes as well
as an entire pathway can be used in selection programs to improve reproduction
performance in dairy cattle.

PMID: 19389983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Endocrine. 2009 Aug;36(1):126-34. doi: 10.1007/s12020-009-9190-2. Epub 2009 Apr
23.

Increased renal Akt/mTOR and MAPK signaling in type I diabetes in the absence of 
IGF type 1 receptor activation.

Landau D(1), Eshet R, Troib A, Gurman Y, Chen Y, Rabkin R, Segev Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Soroka Medical Center, Ben Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beer Sheva, 84101, Israel. ldaniel@bgu.ac.il.

Growth hormone (GH) and IGF-I have been implicated in the pathogenesis of type I 
diabetic (DM) nephropathy. We investigated renal GH receptor (GHR) and IGF-type 1
receptor (IGF1R) signaling in an animal model of type I DM. Kidney tissue was
examined for GHR and IGF1R key signaling molecules. GHR levels were unchanged and
IGF-I mRNA levels were decreased in the diabetic group (D). Basal and GH
stimulated phosphorylated (p-) JAK2 and STAT5 levels were similar in controls (C)
and D. The levels of p-IGF1R were similar in the two groups at baseline, while
pAkt, pGSK3, p-mTOR, p-rpS6, p-erk1/2 (Mapk), and pSTAT-3 were increased in D.
Following IGF-I administration p-Akt, p-rpS6, p-Mapk, and p-GSK levels increased 
more pronouncedly in D versus C. In conclusion, the lack of JAK2-STAT5 activation
and the decrease in kidney IGF-I mRNA levels in D argue against a role for the GH
activated JAK2-STAT5 pathway in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. On the 
other hand while IGF1R phosphorylation was unchanged, Akt/mTOR and MAPK signaling
were hyperactivate in DM, suggesting their involvement. The increase in baseline 
activated Akt, mTOR, rpS6, and MAPK cannot be explained by activation of the
IGF1R, but may be triggered by other growth factors and nutrients.

PMID: 19387875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jun 5;383(3):308-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.157. Epub 2009 Apr 5.

The juxtamembrane domain in ETV6/FLT3 is critical for PIM-1 up-regulation and
cell proliferation.

Vu HA(1), Xinh PT, Kano Y, Tokunaga K, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Consolidated Research Institute for Advanced Science and Medical Care, Waseda 
University, Tokyo, Japan.

We recently reported that the ETV6/FLT3 fusion protein conferred
interleukin-3-independent growth on Ba/F3 cells. The present study has been
conducted to assess role of the juxtamembrane domain of FLT3 for signal
transduction and cell transformation. The wild-type ETV6/FLT3 fusion protein in
transfected cells was a constitutively activated tyrosine kinase that led to
up-regulation of PIM-1 and activations of STAT5, AKT, and MAPK. Deletion of the
juxtamembrane domain abrogated interleukin-3-independent growth of the
transfected cells and PIM-1 up-regulation, whereas it retained compatible levels 
of phosphorylations of STAT5, AKT, and MAPK. Further deletion of N-terminal
region of the tyrosine kinase I domain of FLT3 completely abolished these
phosphorylations. Our data indicate that the juxtamembrane domain of FLT3 in
ETV6/FLT3 fusion protein is critical for cell proliferation and PIM-1
up-regulation that might be independent of a requirement for signaling through
STAT5, MAPK, and AKT pathways.

PMID: 19345670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Tissue Cell. 2009 Oct;41(5):326-33. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2009.02.004. Epub 2009
Mar 27.

Cell turnover and gene activities in sheep mammary glands prior to lambing to
involution.

Colitti M(1), Farinacci M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Animali, University of Udine, via delle Scienze, Udine
208-33100, Italy. Monica.Colitti@uniud.it

Mammary glands are special tissue characterized by proliferation of the
epithelium, during puberty and pregnancy and by programmed cell death, during
involution. In this study, apoptosis was identified by TUNEL staining and then
related to cell proliferation, as determined by Ki-67 staining. The apoptotic
index was at its highest at 8 days of involution, whereas the proliferation index
was at its highest during lactation. Caspase-3 was immunolocalised only in mast
cells and along the basal membrane in the mammary tissue at -10 days from
lambing, 150 days of lactation and at 8 days of involution. This finding could
indicate that caspase-3 is not involved in sheep mammary gland apoptosis, but
that other proteins - such as apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) - can trigger
apoptosis, through the mitochondrial pathway, in a caspase-independent manner.
The expression of genes involved in the regulation of lactation and apoptosis was
also investigated and determined relatively to -10 days from lambing. The
relative expression level of LALBA, reached its maximum during lactation, whereas
the expressions of BCL2, BCL2L1, BAX, STAT5A, STAT3, IGFBP5 and FOXO3A, increased
significantly during involution in correlation with apoptotic index. This work
shows for the first time the turnover of mammary cells and the interaction of
their signals during the complete lactation cycle in sheep. The data on gene
expression can contribute to elucidate the mechanisms controlling milk production
and cell turnover in this species.

PMID: 19328511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Protein Sci. 2009 Apr;18(4):716-26. doi: 10.1002/pro.83.

Structural characterization of unphosphorylated STAT5a oligomerization
equilibrium in solution by small-angle X-ray scattering.

Bernadó P(1), Pérez Y, Blobel J, Fernández-Recio J, Svergun DI, Pons M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomolecular NMR, Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Parc
Científic de Barcelona, Baldiri Reixac, 10-12, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
pau.bernado@irbbarcelona.org

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins play a crucial
role in the activation of gene transcription in response to extracellular
stimuli. The regulation and activity of these proteins require a complex
rearrangement of the domains. According to the established models, based on
crystallographic data, STATs convert from a basal antiparallel inactive dimer
into a parallel active one following phosphorylation. The simultaneous analysis
of small-angle X-ray scattering data measured at different concentrations of
unphosphorylated human STAT5a core domain unambiguously identifies the
simultaneous presence of a monomer and a dimer. The dimer is the minor species
but could be structurally characterized by SAXS in the presence of the monomer
using appropriate computational tools and shown to correspond to the antiparallel
assembly. The equilibrium is governed by a moderate dissociation constant of K(d)
approximately 90 microM. Integration of these results with previous knowledge of 
the N-terminal domain structure and dissociation constants allows the modeling of
the full-length protein. A complex network of intermolecular interactions of low 
or medium affinity is suggested. These contacts can be eventually formed or
broken to trigger the dramatic modifications in the dimeric arrangement needed
for STAT regulation and activity.

PMCID: PMC2762584
PMID: 19309697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. BMC Genet. 2009 Mar 10;10:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-10-13.

Monoallelic maternal expression of STAT5A affects embryonic survival in cattle.

Khatib H(1), Maltecca C, Monson RL, Schutzkus V, Rutledge JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA. hkhatib@wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Reproductive disorders and infertility are surprisingly common in the
human population as well as in other species. The decrease in fertility is a
major cause of cow culling and economic loss in the dairy herd. The conception
rate has been declining for the past 30-50 years. Conception rate is the product 
of fertilization and embryonic survival rates. In a previous study, we have
identified associations of several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 
signal transducer and activator 5A (STAT5A) with fertilization and survival rates
in an in vitro experimental system. The objectives of this study are to fine map 
the STAT5A region in a search for causative mutations and to investigate the
parent of origin expression of this gene.
RESULTS: We have performed a total of 5,222 fertilizations and produced a total
of 3,696 in vitro fertilized embryos using gametes from 440 cows and eight bulls.
A total of 37 SNPs were developed in a 63.4-kb region of genomic sequence that
includes STAT5A, STAT3, and upstream and downstream sequences of these genes.
SNP153137 (G/C) in exon 8 of STAT5A was associated with a significant variability
in embryonic survival and fertilization rate compared to all other examined SNPs.
Expression analysis revealed that STAT5A is primarily monoallelically expressed
in early embryonic stages but biallelically expressed in later fetal stages.
Furthermore, the occurrence of monoallelic maternal expression of STAT5A was
significantly higher in blastocysts, while paternal expression was more frequent 
in degenerative embryos.
CONCLUSION: Our results imply that STAT5A affects embryonic survival in a manner 
influenced by developmental stage and allele parent of origin.

PMCID: PMC2662876
PMID: 19284551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 May;29(10):2505-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00034-09. Epub 2009 Mar 
9.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of Grb2: role in prolactin/epidermal growth factor cross
talk in mammary epithelial cell growth and differentiation.

Haines E(1), Minoo P, Feng Z, Resalatpanah N, Nie XM, Campiglio M, Alvarez L,
Cocolakis E, Ridha M, Di Fulvio M, Gomez-Cambronero J, Lebrun JJ, Ali S.

Author information: 
(1)Hormones and Cancer Research Unit, Department of Medicine, McGill University, 
Royal Victoria Hospital, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.

Characterizing mechanisms regulating mammary cell growth and differentiation is
vital, as they may contribute to breast carcinogenesis. Here, we examine a cross 
talk mechanism(s) downstream of prolactin (PRL), a primary differentiation
hormone, and epidermal growth factor (EGF), an important proliferative factor, in
mammary epithelial cell growth and differentiation. Our data indicate that EGF
exerts inhibitory effects on PRL-induced cellular differentiation by interfering 
with Stat5a-mediated gene expression independent of the PRL-proximal signaling
cascade. Additionally, our data show that PRL is a potent inhibitor of
EGF-induced cell proliferation. We identify tyrosine phosphorylation of the
growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) as a critical mechanism by which
PRL antagonizes EGF-induced cell proliferation by attenuating the activation of
the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Together, our results
define a novel negative cross-regulation between PRL and EGF involving the
Jak2/Stat5a and Ras/MAPK pathways through tyrosine phosphorylation of Grb2.

PMCID: PMC2682022
PMID: 19273609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Dev Biol. 2009 May 15;329(2):227-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.032. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Elf5 conditional knockout mice reveal its role as a master regulator in mammary
alveolar development: failure of Stat5 activation and functional differentiation 
in the absence of Elf5.

Choi YS(1), Chakrabarti R, Escamilla-Hernandez R, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Center of
Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, 701 Ellicott Street, Buffalo, NY 
14203, USA.

The transcription factor Elf5 plays an important role in mammary gland
development. However, because of the embryonic lethality of Elf5 straight
knockout mice, prior studies have been limited to experiments with Elf5
haploinsufficient animals, overexpression systems or transplants. Here, we have
utilized K14-Cre to generate mammary-gland specific Elf5 conditional knockout
mice. During pregnancy, Elf5-null mammary epithelium completely failed to
initiate alveologenesis, and a characteristic of virgin ductal epithelial cells
persisted postpartum. We demonstrate that the loss of Elf5 leads to the absence
of alveolar secretory markers confirming previous published data. Interestingly, 
the developmental block due to a lack of Elf5 could not be restored by multiple
gestations. Elf5-null mammary epithelial cells also display disorganized cell
structures as evident by altered cell polarities, which might be the cause for
collapsed lumina. We observe reduced levels of Stat5 and attenuated Stat5
activity as measured by p-Stat5 levels both in Elf5-null mammary glands as well
as cultured mammary epithelial cells. This data suggests that the failure of
alveolar and lactogenic differentiation due to the loss of Elf5 is mediated in
part due to impaired Stat5 activity. In support of this hypothesis, we show by
ChIP experiments that Stat5a promoter contains a conserved Elf5-binding site that
is occupied by Elf5 in mammary glands. Mammary epithelia lacking Elf5 exhibited
downregulation of several other critical genes involved in alveologenesis,
suggesting Elf5 as a master regulator in alveolar development. We propose a model
for Elf5-mediated alveolar development, in which Elf5 regulates the expression of
key mediators of the PrlR/Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway.

PMID: 19269284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Neurosci. 2009 Feb 18;29(7):2022-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2621-08.2009.

STAT5 mediates antiapoptotic effects of methylprednisolone on oligodendrocytes.

Xu J(1), Chen S, Chen H, Xiao Q, Hsu CY, Michael D, Bao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Aging, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Methylprednisolone (MP), a synthetic glucocorticoid agonist, is widely used for
the clinical therapy of white matter diseases in the nervous system, such as
spinal cord injury and multiple sclerosis. In addition to its potent
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, we recently discovered a selective 
antiapoptotic effect of MP on oligodendrocytes via the activation of the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the upregulation of bcl-X(L), a splicing isoform
of the bcl-x gene. Based on published findings of the functional interactions
between GR and STAT5, a transcription factor from the family of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT), we examined whether the
glucocorticoid signaling pathway interacts with STAT5 to upregulate bcl-X(L) and 
protect oligodendrocytes. We show herein that (1) the GR and STAT5 complex is
present on the STAT5-binding site of the bcl-x promoter region in
oligodendrocytes; (2) the overexpression of an activated form of STAT5 prevents
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid-induced oligodendrocyte 
cell death; and (3) this prevention is lost when the STAT5 gene is knocked down. 
Thus, our results provide one molecular mechanism underlying the postinjury
protective effects of oligodendrocytes by stress hormones.

PMCID: PMC2662324
PMID: 19228956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;69(4):1668-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6385. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription mediate fibroblast growth
factor-induced vascular endothelial morphogenesis.

Yang X(1), Qiao D, Meyer K, Friedl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

The fibroblast growth factors (FGF) play diverse roles in development, wound
healing, and angiogenesis. The intracellular signal transduction pathways, which 
mediate these pleiotropic activities, remain incompletely understood. We show
here that the proangiogenic factors FGF2 and FGF8b can activate signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) in mouse microvascular
endothelial cells (EC). Both FGF2 and FGF8b activate STAT5 and to a lesser extent
STAT1, but not STAT3. The FGF2-dependent activation of endothelial STAT5 was
confirmed in vivo with the Matrigel plug angiogenesis assay. In tissue samples of
human gliomas, a tumor type wherein FGF-induced angiogenesis is important, STAT5 
is detected in tumor vessel EC nuclei, consistent with STAT5 activation. By
forced expression of constitutively active or dominant-negative mutant STAT5A in 
mouse brain ECs, we further show that STAT5 activation is both necessary and
sufficient for FGF-induced cell migration, invasion, and tube formation, which
are key events in vascular endothelial morphogenesis and angiogenesis. In
contrast, STAT5 is not required for brain EC mitogenesis. The cytoplasmic
tyrosine kinases Src and Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) both seem to be involved in the
activation of STAT5, as their inhibition reduces FGF2- and FGF8b-induced STAT5
phosphorylation and EC tube formation. Constitutively active STAT5A partially
restores tube formation in the presence of Src or Jak2 inhibitors. These
observations show that FGFs use distinct signaling pathways to induce angiogenic 
phenotypes. Together, our findings implicate the FGF-Jak2/Src-STAT5 cascade as a 
critical angiogenic FGF signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2650265
PMID: 19176400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Am J Pathol. 2009 Feb;174(2):613-29. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080653.

Loss of caveolin-3 induces a lactogenic microenvironment that is protective
against mammary tumor formation.

Sotgia F(1), Casimiro MC, Bonuccelli G, Liu M, Whitaker-Menezes D, Er O, Daumer
KM, Mercier I, Witkiewicz AK, Minetti C, Capozza F, Gormley M, Quong AA, Rui H,
Frank PG, Milliman JN, Knudsen ES, Zhou J, Wang C, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, 19107, USA. federica.sotgia@jefferson.edu

Here, we show that functional loss of a single gene is sufficient to confer
constitutive milk protein production and protection against mammary tumor
formation. Caveolin-3 (Cav-3), a muscle-specific caveolin-related gene, is highly
expressed in muscle cells. We demonstrate that Cav-3 is also expressed in
myoepithelial cells within the mammary gland. To determine whether genetic
ablation of Cav-3 expression affects adult mammary gland development, we studied 
the phenotype(s) of Cav-3(-/-)-null mice. Interestingly, Cav-3(-/-) virgin
mammary glands developed lobulo-alveolar hyperplasia, akin to the changes
normally observed during pregnancy and lactation. Genome-wide expression
profiling revealed up-regulation of gene transcripts associated with
pregnancy/lactation, mammary stem cells, and human breast cancers, consistent
with a constitutive lactogenic phenotype. Expression levels of three key
transcriptional regulators of lactation, namely Elf5, Stat5a, and c-Myc, were
also significantly elevated. Experiments with pregnant mice directly showed that 
Cav-3(-/-) mice underwent precocious lactation. Finally, using orthotopic tumor
cell implantation, we demonstrated that virgin Cav-3(-/-) mice were dramatically 
protected against mammary tumor formation. Thus, Cav-3(-/-) mice are a novel
preclinical model to study the protective effects of a lactogenic
microenvironment on mammary tumor onset and progression. Our current studies have
broad implications for using the lactogenic microenvironment as a paradigm to
discover new therapies for the prevention and/or treatment of human breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2630569
PMID: 19164602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):763-74. doi: 10.1002/hep.22729.

Early gene expression profiles of patients with chronic hepatitis C treated with 
pegylated interferon-alfa and ribavirin.

Younossi ZM(1), Baranova A, Afendy A, Collantes R, Stepanova M, Manyam G, Bakshi 
A, Sigua CL, Chan JP, Iverson AA, Santini CD, Chang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Liver Diseases at Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, VA 22042,
USA. zobair.younossi@inova.org

Responsiveness to hepatitis C virus (HCV) therapy depends on viral and host
factors. Our aim was to assess sustained virologic response (SVR)-associated
early gene expression in patients with HCV receiving pegylated interferon-alpha2a
(PEG-IFN-alpha2a) or PEG-IFN-alpha2b and ribavirin with the duration based on
genotypes. Blood samples were collected into PAXgene tubes prior to treatment as 
well as 1, 7, 28, and 56 days after treatment. From the peripheral blood cells,
total RNA was extracted, quantified, and used for one-step reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction to profile 154 messenger RNAs. Expression levels of
messenger RNAs were normalized with six "housekeeping" genes and a reference RNA.
Multiple regression and stepwise selection were performed to assess differences
in gene expression at different time points, and predictive performance was
evaluated for each model. A total of 68 patients were enrolled in the study and
treated with combination therapy. The results of gene expression showed that SVR 
could be predicted by the gene expression of signal transducer and activator of
transcription-6 (STAT-6) and suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 in the
pretreatment samples. After 24 hours, SVR was predicted by the expression of
interferon-dependent genes, and this dependence continued to be prominent
throughout the treatment.CONCLUSION: Early gene expression during anti-HCV
therapy may elucidate important molecular pathways that may be influencing the
probability of achieving virologic response.

PMID: 19140155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Endocrinology. 2009 Apr;150(4):1597-606. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1079. Epub 2008 Nov
26.

Role of c-Myb during prolactin-induced signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a signaling in breast cancer cells.

Fang F(1), Rycyzyn MA, Clevenger CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Implicated in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, prolactin (PRL) mediates its
function in part through the prolactin receptor (PRLr)-associated Janus kinase 2 
(Jak2)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) signaling
complex. To delineate the mechanisms of Stat5a regulation in breast cancer,
transcription factor-transcription factor (TF-TF) array analysis was employed to 
identify associated transcriptional regulators. These analyses revealed a
PRL-inducible association of Stat5a with the transcription factor and
protooncogene c-Myb. Confirmatory co-immunoprecipitation studies using lysates
from both T47D and MCF7 breast cancer cells revealed a PRL-inducible association 
between these transcription factors. Ectopic expression of c-Myb enhanced the
PRL-induced expression from both composite and synthetic Stat5a-responsive
luciferase reporters. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays also revealed a
PRL-inducible association between c-Myb and endogenous Stat5a-responsive CISH
promoter, which was associated with an enhanced expression of CISH gene product
at the RNA and protein levels. Small interfering RNA-mediated c-Myb knockdown
impaired the PRL-induced mRNA expression of five Stat5-responsive genes. DNA
binding-defective mutants of c-Myb, incapable of activating expression from a
c-Myb-responsive reporter, maintained their ability to enhance a
Stat5a-responsive reporter. At a cellular level, ectopic expression of c-Myb
resulted in an increase in T47D proliferation. Taken together, these results
indicate that c-Myb potentiates Stat5a-driven gene expression, possibly
functioning as a Stat5a coactivator, in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2659289
PMID: 19036881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Blood. 2009 Jan 29;113(5):1027-36. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-133405. Epub 2008
Oct 6.

SHD1 is a novel cytokine-inducible, negative feedback regulator of
STAT5-dependent transcription.

Nakajima H(1), Tamura T, Ito M, Shibata F, Kuroda K, Fukuchi Y, Watanabe N,
Kitamura T, Ikeda Y, Handa M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. hnakajim@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

STAT5 is a critical mediator of a variety of cytokine signaling whose
transcriptional activity is regulated by associating with various proteins.
During a search for STAT5-interacting proteins, we identified SHD1, a mammalian
homologue of yeast gene Sac3, as a potential interacter. SHD1 was localized in
the nucleus, and induced by cytokines that activate STAT5, such as
erythropoietin, interleukin-2 (IL-2), or IL-3. SHD1 interacted specifically with 
STAT5A and STAT5B, and interestingly, it specifically repressed STAT5-dependent
transcription in vitro without affecting the stability or phosphorylation of
STAT5 protein. Gene disruption study revealed that T, B, or bone marrow cells
from mice lacking SHD1 were hyperresponsive to T-cell-receptor engagement, or
stimulation with various STAT5-activating cytokines. These results suggest that
SHD1 is a novel cytokine-inducible negative feedback regulator of STAT5.

PMID: 18838617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2008 Jul;24(7):1180-5.

[Expression of mechano-growth factor in Escherichia coli and activity analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang B(1), Jiang P, Xian C, Li Y, Li D, Tang L, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering College, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400030, China.

Mechano-growth factor (MGF) is one of IGF-1 isoforms. MGF is mechanosensitive and
has important functions in muscle hypertrophy, regeneration and nerve injury
recovery. In this study, MGF cDNA (330 bp) was cloned from stretched osteoblasts 
by RT-PCR. In order to avoid prolin residue inhibiting enterokinase cleavage, 9bp
of MGF cDNA 5' end sequence was truncated by primer, then the obtained truncated 
MGF (des(1-3)MGF) cDNA (321 bp) was subcloned in pET32a(+) vector to construct a 
prokaryotic recombination expression plasmid. Trx/des(1-3)MGF fusion protein,
existing in forms of solution, was expressed in transformed Escherichia coli
strain BL21(DE3) by IPTG induction at 30 degres C. The supernatant of cell
lysates was subjected to ion exchange chromatography and Ni2+ metal affinity
chromatography, and the fusion protein was obtained with the purity over 95%.
After the fusion protein was cleaved by enterokinase, Trx and des(1-3)MGF was
isolated by reverse-phase HPLC. Through these procedures, des(1-3) MGF was
obtained with the purity of 98%. The protein molecular mass was conformity to the
theoretical value by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry analysis. The purified
des(1-3)MGF was incubated with MC3T3-E1 for cell proliferation and migration
assays. The results show that des(1-3)MGF exhibited more facilitative effects on 
proliferation and migration of MC3T3-E1 than that of des(1-3)IGF-1.

PMID: 18837392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;14(19):6062-72. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0979.

Androgen-regulated and highly tumorigenic human prostate cancer cell line
established from a transplantable primary CWR22 tumor.

Dagvadorj A(1), Tan SH, Liao Z, Cavalli LR, Haddad BR, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

PURPOSE: One of the major obstacles in understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying the transition of prostate cancer growth from androgen dependency to a
hormone-refractory state is the lack of androgen-regulated and tumorigenic human 
prostate cancer cell lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have established and characterized a new human prostate
cancer cell line, CWR22Pc, derived from the primary CWR22 human prostate
xenograft tumors.
RESULTS: The growth of CWR22Pc cells is induced markedly by dihydrotestosterone, 
and CWR22Pc cells express high levels of androgen receptor (AR) and
prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Importantly, PSA expression in CWR22Pc cells is 
regulated by androgens. Stat5a/b, Stat3, Akt, and mitogen-activated protein
kinase were constitutively active or cytokine inducible in CWR22Pc cells. The AR 
in CWR22Pc cells contains the H874Y mutation, but not the exon 3 duplication or
other mutations. When inoculated subcutaneously into
dihydrotestosterone-supplemented castrated nude mice, large tumors formed rapidly
in 20 of 20 mice, whereas no tumors developed in mice without circulating
dihydrotestosterone. Moreover, the serum PSA levels correlated with the tumor
volumes. When androgens were withdrawn from the CWR22Pc tumors grown in nude
mice, the tumors initially shrank but regrew back as androgen-independent tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: This androgen-regulated and tumorigenic human prostate cancer cell
line provides a valuable tool for studies on androgen regulation of prostate
cancer cells and on the molecular mechanisms taking place in growth promotion of 
prostate cancer when androgens are withdrawn from the growth environment. CWR22Pc
cells also provide a model system for studies on the regulation of
transcriptional activity of mutated H874YAR in a prostate cancer cell context.

PMCID: PMC2570751
PMID: 18829484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Nat Immunol. 2008 Nov;9(11):1288-96. doi: 10.1038/ni.1656. Epub 2008 Sep 28.

Priming for T helper type 2 differentiation by interleukin 2-mediated induction
of interleukin 4 receptor alpha-chain expression.

Liao W(1), Schones DE, Oh J, Cui Y, Cui K, Roh TY, Zhao K, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

T helper type 2 (T(H)2) cells are essential for humoral immunity and host
defense. Interleukin 4 (IL-4) drives T(H)2 differentiation and IL-2 augments the 
accessibility of Il4 chromatin. Here we demonstrate that IL-2, by inducing
binding of STAT5 to the Il4ra locus, which encodes IL-4 receptor alpha-chain
(IL-4Ralpha), was essential for inducing and maintaining IL-4Ralpha expression.
Although IL-4 induced IL-4Ralpha expression, T cell receptor-induced IL-4Ralpha
expression was normal in Il4(-/-) cells but was much lower in Il2(-/-) cells.
Notably, forced IL-4Ralpha expression restored the T(H)2 differentiation of
Il2(-/-) cells. Moreover, genome-wide mapping by chromatin immunoprecipitation
coupled with sequencing showed broad interaction of the transcription factors
STAT5A and STAT5B with genes associated with T(H)2 differentiation. Our results
identify a previously unappreciated function for IL-2 in 'priming' T cells for
T(H)2 differentiation and in maintaining the expression of Il4ra and other genes 
in T(H)2-committed cells.

PMCID: PMC2762127
PMID: 18820682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. EMBO Rep. 2008 Nov;9(11):1114-20. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.170. Epub 2008 Sep 19.

Plasticity of Drosophila Stat DNA binding shows an evolutionary basis for Stat
transcription factor preferences.

Rivas ML(1), Cobreros L, Zeidler MP, Hombría JC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC/UPO, Universidad Pablo de
Olavide, Carretera de Utrera km 1, 41013 Seville, Spain.

In vertebrates, seven signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins bind to palindromic sites separated by spacers of two or three
nucleotides (STAT1), four nucleotides (STAT6) or three nucleotides (STAT2 to
STAT5a/b). This diversity of binding sites provides specificity to counter
semiredundancy and was thought to be a recent evolutionary acquisition. Here, we 
examine the natural DNA-binding sites of the single Drosophila Stat and show that
this is not the case. Rather, Drosophila Stat92E is able to bind to and activate 
target gene expression through both 3n and 4n spaced sites. Our experiments
indicate that Stat92E has a higher binding affinity for 3n sites than for 4n
sites and suggest that the levels of target gene expression can be modulated by
insertion and/or deletion of single bases. Our results indicate that the
ancestral STAT protein had the capacity to bind to 3n and 4n sites and that
specific STAT binding preferences evolved with the radiation of the vertebrate
STAT family.

PMCID: PMC2556238
PMID: 18802449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Lett. 2009 Jan 8;273(1):164-71. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.08.011. Epub
2008 Sep 14.

Inhibition of transcription factor STAT5b suppresses proliferation, induces G1
cell cycle arrest and reduces tumor cell invasion in human glioblastoma
multiforme cells.

Liang QC(1), Xiong H, Zhao ZW, Jia D, Li WX, Qin HZ, Deng JP, Gao L, Zhang H, Gao
GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tang-Du Hospital, Institute for Functional
Neurosurgery of P.L.A., Fourth Military Medical University, Xin-Si Road, Xi'an
710038, China.

Abnormalities in the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5)
signaling are involved in the oncogenesis of several cancers. However, previous
studies have not elucidated clear and distinct roles for each STAT5 gene in
cancers. To investigate the role of STAT5a, -5b isoforms in human glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) progression, we depleted each STAT5 isoforms with siRNA. Our
results demonstrate that STAT5b is involved in GBM cell growth, cell cycle
progression, invasion and migration through regulation of gene expression, such
as Bcl-2, p21(waf1/cip1), p27(kip1), FAK and VEGF. Moreover, immunohistochemical 
staining reveals that cytoplasm staining of STAT5b is markedly increased in GBM
(57.1%) compared with that in normal cortex (22.2%) and diffuse astrocytoma
(27.3%), suggesting that STAT5b could have important implications in astrocytoma 
biology. Therefore, our findings illustrate the biological significance of STAT5b
in GBM progression, and provide novel evidence that STAT5b may serve as a
therapeutic target in the prevention of human glioblastoma multiforme.

PMID: 18793823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(21):6668-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01025-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
8.

Maximal STAT5-induced proliferation and self-renewal at intermediate STAT5
activity levels.

Wierenga AT(1), Vellenga E, Schuringa JJ.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Department of
Hematology, Groningen, The Netherlands.

The level of transcription factor activity critically regulates cell fate
decisions, such as hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) self-renewal and
differentiation. We introduced STAT5A transcriptional activity into human
HSCs/progenitor cells in a dose-dependent manner by overexpression of a
tamoxifen-inducible STAT5A(1*6)-estrogen receptor fusion protein. Induction of
STAT5A activity in CD34(+) cells resulted in impaired myelopoiesis and induction 
of erythropoiesis, which was most pronounced at the highest STAT5A
transactivation levels. In contrast, intermediate STAT5A activity levels resulted
in the most pronounced proliferative advantage of CD34(+) cells. This coincided
with increased cobblestone area-forming cell and long-term-culture-initiating
cell frequencies, which were predominantly elevated at intermediate STAT5A
activity levels but not at high STAT5A levels. Self-renewal of progenitors was
addressed by serial replating of CFU, and only progenitors containing
intermediate STAT5A activity levels contained self-renewal capacity. By extensive
gene expression profiling we could identify gene expression patterns of STAT5
target genes that predominantly associated with a self-renewal and long-term
expansion phenotype versus those that identified a predominant differentiation
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2573230
PMID: 18779318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Cell Mol Bioeng. 2008 Sep;1(2-3). doi: 10.1007/s12195-008-0015-9.

Combinatorial Signal Transduction Responses Mediated by Interleukin-2 and -4
Receptors in a Helper TH2 Cell Line.

Comfort KK(1), Haugh JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State
University, Box 7905, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

The cytokines interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-4 are important regulators of the
adaptive immune response, due in part to their effects on clonal expansion and
differentiation of T cells. When IL-2 and IL-4 are administered together, both
antagonistic and synergistic effects have been reported, but little is known in
general concerning the mechanisms underlying such combinatorial effects. We found
evidence for both effects in the proliferation responses of the IL-2 and IL-4
responsive T cell line, HT-2; IL-4 delays the onset of cell growth yet ultimately
allows a higher cell density to be achieved in static culture. At the level of
signal transduction pathways, we found that IL-4 partially inhibits IL-2
receptor-mediated pathways (PI3K/Akt, Ras/Erk, and STAT5a/b) and does not prolong
their transient kinetics. This mode of antagonism, but not the effects on cell
proliferation, is overcome at higher concentrations of IL-2 that are sufficient
to saturate the signaling responses. By comparison, IL-4-stimulated activation of
STAT6 is unaffected by IL-2 and shows sustained kinetics, and we speculate that
this or another IL-4 receptor-specific pathway is responsible for the effects of 
IL-4 on IL-2-stimulated proliferation. A possibly related observation is that
IL-4 induces a dramatic cell adhesion phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3830900
PMID: 24255693  [PubMed]


409. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2008 Aug;19(4):401-6. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2008.07.021.
Epub 2008 Aug 5.

The Stat family of transcription factors have diverse roles in mammary gland
development.

Watson CJ(1), Neoh K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Pathology, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, United Kingdom. cjw53@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

The Stat family of transcription factors have diverse roles in mammary gland
development. Genetic studies in mice have revealed an essential requirement for
Stat5a in development of secretory alveolar cells during pregnancy while Stat6,
which is normally associated with differentiation of T helper cells, is important
in the commitment of luminal cells to this alveolar lineage. In contrast, Stat3
is specifically activated at the initiation of post-lactational regression when
it has an essential function in the regulation of cell death and tissue
remodelling. Stat1 and Stat4 have been shown to be regulated during a mammary
developmental cycle although whether they have specific, non-redundant roles is
not clear. Thus, the adult mammary gland is somewhat unusual in that it is a
tissue where different Stats are sequentially activated to orchestrate the
processes of functional differentiation, cell death and tissue remodelling.

PMID: 18723104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Anal Biochem. 2008 Nov 15;382(2):122-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2008.08.004. Epub 2008 
Aug 8.

Image-based evaluation of the molecular events underlying HC11 mammary epithelial
cell differentiation.

Shan L(1), Zhang R, Zhang W, Lee E, Sridhar R, Snyderwine EG, Wang PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Howard University, Washington, DC 20060, USA.

We have developed an image-based technique for signal pathway analysis, target
validation, and compound screening related to mammary epithelial cell
differentiation. This technique used the advantages of optical imaging and the
HC11-Lux model system. The HC11-Lux cell line is a subclone of HC11 mammary
epithelial cells transfected stably with a luciferase construct of the
beta-casein gene promoter (p-344/-1betac-Lux). The promoter activity was imaged
optically in real time following lactogenic induction. The imaging signal
intensity was closely correlated with that measured using a luminometer following
protein extraction (R=0.99, P<0.0001) and consistent with the messenger RNA
(mRNA) level of the endogenous beta -casein gene. Using this technique, we
examined the roles of JAK2/Stat5A, Raf-1/MEK/MAKP, and PI3K/Akt signal pathways
with respect to differentiation. The imaging studies showed that treatment of the
cells with epidermal growth factor (EGF), AG490 (JAK2-specific inhibitor), and
LY294002 (PI3K-specific inhibitor) blocked lactogenic differentiation in a
dose-dependent manner. PD98059 (MEK-specific inhibitor) could reverse
EGF-mediated differentiation arrest. These results indicate that these pathways
are essential in cell differentiation. This simple, sensitive, and reproducible
technique permits visualization and real-time evaluation of the molecular events 
related to milk protein production. It can be adopted for high-throughput
screening of small molecules for their effects on mammary epithelial cell growth,
differentiation, and carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2575343
PMID: 18722992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 2008 Nov 15;112(10):4098-108. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-148726. Epub 2008
Aug 20.

PTP1B is a negative regulator of interleukin 4-induced STAT6 signaling.

Lu X(1), Malumbres R, Shields B, Jiang X, Sarosiek KA, Natkunam Y, Tiganis T,
Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is a ubiquitously expressed enzyme shown 
to negatively regulate multiple tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent signaling
pathways. PTP1B can modulate cytokine signaling pathways by dephosphorylating
JAK2, TYK2, and STAT5a/b. Herein, we report that phosphorylated STAT6 may serve
as a cytoplasmic substrate for PTP1B. Overexpression of PTP1B led to STAT6
dephosphorylation and the suppression of STAT6 transcriptional activity, whereas 
PTP1B knockdown or deficiency augmented IL-4-induced STAT6 signaling.
Pretreatment of these cells with the PTK inhibitor staurosporine led to sustained
STAT6 phosphorylation consistent with STAT6 serving as a direct substrate of
PTP1B. Furthermore, PTP1B-D181A "substrate-trapping" mutants formed stable
complexes with phosphorylated STAT6 in a cellular context and endogenous PTP1B
and STAT6 interacted in an interleukin 4 (IL-4)-inducible manner. We delineate a 
new negative regulatory loop of IL-4-JAK-STAT6 signaling. We demonstrate that
IL-4 induces PTP1B mRNA expression in a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent
manner and enhances PTP1B protein stability to suppress IL-4-induced STAT6
signaling. Finally, we show that PTP1B expression may be preferentially elevated 
in activated B cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. These observations
identify a novel regulatory loop for the regulation of IL-4-induced STAT6
signaling that may have important implications in both neoplastic and
inflammatory processes.

PMCID: PMC2582009
PMID: 18716132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2008 Aug;19(4):394-400. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2008.07.011.
Epub 2008 Jul 30.

New insights into the roles of Stat5a/b and Stat3 in T cell development and
differentiation.

Wei L(1), Laurence A, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA.

T cell development and differentiation is carefully orchestrated by a series of
cytokines. The importance of STAT family proteins in mediating signals by these
cytokines is well-known, but new information on the role of STATs in novel
aspects of T cell function and T cell subsets continues to accumulate. Recent
studies have placed Stat5a/b and Stat3 center stage in T cell development and
differentiation. Stat5a/b are indispensable in T regulatory (Treg) cell
development and maintenance, and negatively regulate T helper 17 (Th17) cell
differentiation. Conversely, Stat3 is essential for Th17 differentiation and
inhibits Treg cells. The balance of Treg and Th17 cells is thought to be critical
in maintaining immune tolerance, while preserving effective host defense.
Therefore, Stat5a/b and Stat3 are emerging to be key players in T cell
differentiation and homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2657870
PMID: 18708155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;22(10):2307-21. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0055. Epub 2008 Jul
24.

Prolactin and ErbB4/HER4 signaling interact via Janus kinase 2 to induce mammary 
epithelial cell gene expression differentiation.

Muraoka-Cook RS(1), Sandahl M, Hunter D, Miraglia L, Earp HS 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, 102 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

Differentiation of mammary epithelium in vivo requires signaling through
prolactin and ErbB4/HER4-dependent mechanisms. Although stimulation of either the
prolactin receptor or ErbB4/HER4 results in activation of the transcription
factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) and induction
of lactogenic differentiation, how these pathways intersect is unknown. We show
herein that prolactin signaling in breast cells cooperates with and is
substantially enhanced by the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4/HER4. Prolactin and 
the ErbB4/HER4 ligand heparin-binding epidermal growth factor each induced STAT5A
tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation; each pathway required the
intracellular tyrosine kinase Janus kinase 2 (JAK2). We found that full
prolactin-mediated STAT5A activation and binding to the endogenous beta-casein
promoter required ErbB4/HER4 but did not require ErbB1/epidermal growth factor
receptor. For example, prolactin-induced STAT5A activity was markedly diminished 
in cells overexpressing kinase inactive HER4, in cells transfected with small
interfering RNAs to specifically knock down endogenous ErbB4/HER4 expression and 
in cells treated with a small molecule inhibitor that targets ErbB4 kinase.
Interestingly, prolactin caused ErbB4/HER4 tyrosine phosphorylation in a JAK2
kinase-dependent manner. Finally, prolactin receptor, ErbB4/HER4, and JAK2 were
coimmunoprecipitated from prolactin-treated but not untreated cells. These
results suggest that prolactin signaling engages the ErbB4 pathway via JAK2 and
that ErbB4 provides an important component of STAT5A-dependent lactogenic
differentiation; this pathway integration may help explain the similar deficit in
mammary development observed in gene-targeted mice deficient in prolactin
receptor, JAK2, ErbB4, or STAT5A.

PMCID: PMC2582536
PMID: 18653779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Med. 2008 Sep-Oct;14(9-10):599-607. doi: 10.2119/2007-00059.Saiki.

Identification of marker genes for differential diagnosis of chronic fatigue
syndrome.

Saiki T(1), Kawai T, Morita K, Ohta M, Saito T, Rokutan K, Ban N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a clinically defined condition characterized by
long-lasting disabling fatigue. Because of the unknown mechanism underlying this 
syndrome, there still is no specific biomarker for objective assessment of the
pathological fatigue. We have compared gene expression profiles in peripheral
blood between 11 drug-free patients with CFS and age- and sex-matched healthy
subjects using a custom microarray carrying complementary DNA probes for 1,467
stress-responsive genes. We identified 12 genes whose mRNA levels were changed
significantly in CFS patients. Of these 12 genes, quantitative real-time PCR
validated the changes in 9 genes encoding granzyme in activated T or natural
killer cells (GZMA), energy regulators (ATP5J2, COX5B, and DBI), proteasome
subunits (PSMA3 and PSMA4), putative protein kinase c inhibitor (HINT ), GTPase
(ARHC), and signal transducers and activators of transcription 5A (STAT5A). Next,
we performed the same microarray analysis on 3 additional CFS patients and 20
other patients with the chief complaint of long-lasting fatigue related to other 
disorders (non-CFS patients) and found that the relative mRNA expression of 9
genes classified 79% (11/14) of CFS and 85% (17/20) of the non-CFS patients.
Finally, real-time PCR measurements of the levels of the 9 involved mRNAs were
done in another group of 18 CFS and 12 non-CFS patients. The expression pattern
correctly classified 94% (17/18) of CFS and 92% (11/12) of non-CFS patients. Our 
results suggest that the defined gene cluster (9 genes) may be useful for
detecting pathological responses in CFS patients and for differential diagnosis
of this syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2442021
PMID: 18596870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Nov;217(2):468-77. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21518.

Distinct roles of the three Akt isoforms in lactogenic differentiation and
involution.

Maroulakou IG(1), Oemler W, Naber SP, Klebba I, Kuperwasser C, Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. imaroulakou@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

The three Akt isoforms differ in their ability to transduce oncogenic signals
initiated by the Neu and PyMT oncogenes in mammary epithelia. As a result,
ablation of Akt1 inhibits and ablation of Akt2 accelerates mammary tumor
development by both oncogenes, while ablation of Akt3 is phenotypically almost
neutral. Since the risk of breast cancer development in humans correlates with
multiple late pregnancies, we embarked on a study to determine whether individual
Akt isoforms also differ in their ability to transduce hormonal and growth factor
signals during pregnancy, lactation and post-lactation involution. The results
showed that the ablation of Akt1 delays the differentiation of the mammary
epithelia during pregnancy and lactation, and that the ablation of Akt2 has the
opposite effect. Finally, ablation of Akt3 results in minor defects, but its
phenotype is closer to that of the wild type mice. Whereas the phenotype of the
Akt1 ablation is cell autonomous, that of Akt2 is not. The ablation of Akt1
promotes apoptosis and accelerates involution, whereas the ablation of Akt2
inhibits apoptosis and delays involution. Mammary gland differentiation during
pregnancy depends on the phosphorylation of Stat5a, which is induced by
prolactin, a hormone that generates signals transduced via Akt. Here we show that
the ablation of Akt1, but not the ablation of Akt2 or Akt3 interferes with the
phosphorylation of Stat5a during late pregnancy and lactation. We conclude that
the three Akt isoforms have different roles in mammary gland differentiation
during pregnancy and this may reflect differences in hormonal signaling.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMCID: PMC2871282
PMID: 18561256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):2071-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-12-127480. Epub 2008
Jun 13.

Hematopoietic-specific Stat5-null mice display microcytic hypochromic anemia
associated with reduced transferrin receptor gene expression.

Zhu BM(1), McLaughlin SK, Na R, Liu J, Cui Y, Martin C, Kimura A, Robinson GW,
Andrews NC, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDKD), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. bingmei@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1553-4.

Iron is essential for all cells but is toxic in excess, so iron absorption and
distribution are tightly regulated. Serum iron is bound to transferrin and enters
erythroid cells primarily via receptor-mediated endocytosis of the transferrin
receptor (Tfr1). Tfr1 is essential for developing erythrocytes and reduced Tfr1
expression is associated with anemia. The transcription factors STAT5A/B are
activated by many cytokines, including erythropoietin. Stat5a/b(-/-) mice are
severely anemic and die perinatally, but no link has been made to iron
homeostasis. To study the function of STAT5A/B in vivo, we deleted the floxed
Stat5a/b locus in hematopoietic cells with a Tie2-Cre transgene. These mice
exhibited microcytic, hypochromic anemia, as did lethally irradiated mice that
received a transplant of Stat5a/b(-/-) fetal liver cells. Flow cytometry and RNA 
analyses of erythroid cells from mutant mice revealed a 50% reduction in Tfr1
mRNA and protein. We detected STAT5A/B binding sites in the first intron of the
Tfr1 gene and found that expression of constitutively active STAT5A in an
erythroid cell line increased Tfr1 levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments confirmed the binding of STAT5A/B to these sites. We conclude that
STAT5A/B is an important regulator of iron update in erythroid progenitor cells
via its control of Tfr1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2518907
PMID: 18552213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Jun;15(2):367-90. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0013.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A/B in prostate and breast
cancers.

Tan SH(1), Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, 233 South 10th Street, BLSB 309, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107,
USA.

Protein kinase signaling pathways, such as Janus kinase 2-Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5A/B (JAK2-STAT5A/B), are of significant interest in
the search for new therapeutic strategies in both breast and prostate cancers. In
prostate cancer, the components of the JAK2-STAT5A/B signaling pathway provide
molecular targets for small-molecule inhibition of survival and growth signals of
the cells. At the same time, new evidence suggests that the STAT5A/B signaling
pathway is involved in the transition of organ-confined prostate cancer to
hormone-refractory disease. This implies that the active JAK2-STAT5A/B signaling 
pathway potentially provides the means for pharmacological intervention of
clinical prostate cancer progression. In addition, active STAT5A/B may serve as a
prognostic marker for identification of those primary prostate cancers that are
likely to progress to aggressive disease. In breast cancer, the role of STAT5A/B 
is more complex. STAT5A/B may have a dual role in the regulation of malignant
mammary epithelium. Data accumulated from mouse models of breast cancer suggest
that in early stages of breast cancer STAT5A/B may promote malignant
transformation and enhance growth of the tumor. This is in contrast to
established breast cancer, where STAT5A/B may mediate the critical cues for
maintaining the differentiation of mammary epithelium. In addition, present data 
suggest that activation of STAT5A/B in breast cancer predicts favorable clinical 
outcome. The dual nature of STAT5A/B action in breast cancer makes the
therapeutic use of STAT5 A/B more complex.

PMID: 18508994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Front Biosci. 2008 May 1;13:6237-54.

The different functions of Stat5 and chromatin alteration through Stat5 proteins.

Kornfeld JW(1), Grebien F, Kerenyi MA, Friedbichler K, Kovacic B, Zankl B, Hoelbl
A, Nivarti H, Beug H, Sexl V, Muller M, Kenner L, Mullner EW, Gouilleux F,
Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.

Stat5 proteins modulate gene transcription upon cytokine- and growth factor
action. Stat5a and Stat5b proteins alone are weak activators of transcription.
They can modify chromatin organization through oligomerization and they act
predominantly in co-operation and interaction with other proteins. The
conservative view of exclusively nuclear functions of Stat5 was challenged by the
observation of additional Stat5 effects in the cytoplasm, resulting in activation
of the PI3K-Akt pathway. We summarize biological consequences of mutations in
conserved domains of Stat5 or of deletions in the N- or C-terminal domains with
impact on target gene transcription. Formation of higher-order oligomers is
dramatically changed upon amino- or carboxyterminal deletions in Stat5 proteins. 
Mutations in or deletion of the Stat5 N-terminus leads to diminished leukemogenic
potential of oncogenic Stat5, probably due to the inability to form Stat5
tetramers. The Stat5 N-terminal domain prevents persistent activation and can act
as a DNA-docking platform for the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The corresponding
protocols should facilitate follow-up studies on Stat5 proteins and their
contribution to normal physiological versus pathological processes through
differential chromatin binding.

PMCID: PMC2976847
PMID: 18508657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. BMC Syst Biol. 2008 May 22;2:46. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-46.

Transcription profiling of lung adenocarcinomas of c-myc-transgenic mice:
identification of the c-myc regulatory gene network.

Reymann S(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center for Drug 
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Nikolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. reymann@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional regulator c-Myc is the most frequently
deregulated oncogene in human tumors. Targeted overexpression of this gene in
mice results in distinct types of lung adenocarcinomas. By using microarray
technology, alterations in the expression of genes were captured based on a
female transgenic mouse model in which, indeed, c-Myc overexpression in alveolar 
epithelium results in the development of bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma (BAC) and 
papillary adenocarcinoma (PLAC). In this study, we analyzed exclusively the
promoters of induced genes by different in silico methods in order to elucidate
the c-Myc transcriptional regulatory network.
RESULTS: We analyzed the promoters of 361 transcriptionally induced genes with
respect to c-Myc binding sites and found 110 putative binding sites in 94
promoters. Furthermore, we analyzed the flanking sequences (+/- 100 bp) around
the 110 c-Myc binding sites and found Ap2, Zf5, Zic3, and E2f binding sites to be
overrepresented in these regions. Then, we analyzed the promoters of 361 induced 
genes with respect to binding sites of other transcription factors (TFs) which
were upregulated by c-Myc overexpression. We identified at least one binding site
of at least one of these TFs in 220 promoters, thus elucidating a potential
transcription factor network. The analysis correlated well with the significant
overexpression of the TFs Atf2, Foxf1a, Smad4, Sox4, Sp3 and Stat5a. Finally, we 
analyzed promoters of regulated genes which where apparently not regulated by
c-Myc or other c-Myc targeted TFs and identified overrepresented Oct1, Mzf1,
Ppargamma, Plzf, Ets, and HmgIY binding sites when compared against control
promoter background.
CONCLUSION: Our in silico data suggest a model of a transcriptional regulatory
network in which different TFs act in concert upon c-Myc overexpression. We
determined molecular rules for transcriptional regulation to explain, in part,
the carcinogenic effect seen in mice overexpressing the c-Myc oncogene.

PMCID: PMC2430022
PMID: 18498649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3802-18. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn271. Epub 2008
May 20.

In vivo identification of novel STAT5 target genes.

Basham B(1), Sathe M, Grein J, McClanahan T, D'Andrea A, Lees E, Rascle A.

Author information: 
(1)Schering-Plough Biopharma, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

STAT5A and STAT5B proteins belong to the family of signal transducers and
activators of transcription. They are encoded by two separate genes with 91%
identity in their amino acid sequences. Despite their high degree of
conservation, STAT5A and STAT5B exert non-redundant functions, resulting at least
in part from differences in target gene activation. To better characterize the
differential contribution of STAT5A and STAT5B in gene regulation, we performed
single or double knockdown of STAT5A and STAT5B using small interfering RNA.
Subsequent gene expression profiling and RT-qPCR analyses of IL-3-stimulated
Ba/F3-beta cells led to the identification of putative novel STAT5 target genes. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays analyzing the corresponding gene loci
identified unusual STAT5 binding sites compared to conventional STAT5 responsive 
elements. Some of the STAT5 targets identified are upregulated in several human
cancers, suggesting that they might represent potential oncogenes in
STAT5-associated malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2441806
PMID: 18492722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Jul 15;34(2):135-43. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00048.2008. Epub 2008 May 6.

Genomic dissection of the cytokine-controlled STAT5 signaling network in liver.

Hosui A(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-0822, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) controls the physiology and pathophysiology of the liver, and
its signals are conducted by two members of the family of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription, STAT5A and STAT5B. Mice in which the Stat5a/b locus 
has been inactivated specifically in hepatocytes display GH resistance, the
sex-specific expression of genes associated with liver metabolism and the
cytochrome P-450 system is lost, and they develop hepatosteatosis. Several groups
have shown by global gene expression profiling that a cadre of STAT5A/B target
genes identify genetic cascades induced by GH and other cytokines. Evidence is
accumulating that in the absence of STAT5A/B GH aberrantly activates STAT1 and
STAT3 and their downstream target genes and thereby offers a partial explanation 
of some of the physiological alterations observed in Stat5a/b-null mice and human
patients. We hypothesize that phenotypic changes observed in the absence of
STAT5A/B are due to two distinct molecular consequences: first, the failure of
STAT5A/B target genes to be activated by GH and second, the rerouting of GH
signaling to other members of the STAT family. Rerouting of GH signaling to STAT1
and STAT3 might partially compensate for the loss of STAT5A/B, but it certainly
activates biological programs distinct from STAT5A/B. Here we discuss the extent 
to which studies on global gene expression profiling have fostered a better
understanding of the biology behind cytokine-STAT5A/B networks in hepatocytes. We
also explore whether this wealth of information on gene activity can be used to
further understand the roles of cytokines in liver disease.

PMCID: PMC2494844
PMID: 18460640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Exp Physiol. 2008 May;93(5):570-8. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2007.014269.

Angiotensin-(1-7) has a dual role on growth-promoting signalling pathways in rat 
heart in vivo by stimulating STAT3 and STAT5a/b phosphorylation and inhibiting
angiotensin II-stimulated ERK1/2 and Rho kinase activity.

Giani JF(1), Gironacci MM, Muñoz MC, Turyn D, Dominici FP.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas, Facultad de Farmacia y
Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Angiotensin (ANG) II contributes to cardiac remodelling by inducing the
activation of several signalling molecules, including ERK1/2, Rho kinase and
members of the STAT family of proteins. Angiotensin-(1-7) is produced in the
heart and inhibits the proliferative actions of ANG II, although the mechanisms
of this inhibition are poorly understood. Accordingly, in the present study we
examined whether ANG-(1-7) affects the ANG II-mediated activation of ERK1/2 and
Rho kinase, STAT3 and STAT5a/b in rat heart in vivo. We hypothesized that
ANG-(1-7) inhibits these growth-promoting pathways, counterbalancing the trophic 
action of ANG II. Solutions of normal saline (0.9% NaCl) containing ANG II (8
pmol kg(-1)) plus ANG-(1-7) in increasing doses (from 0.08 to 800 pmol kg(-1))
were administered via the inferior vena cava to anaesthetized male Sprague-Dawley
rats. After 5 min, hearts were removed and ERK1/2, Rho kinase, STAT3 and STAT5a/b
phosphorylation was determined by Western blotting using phosphospecific
antibodies. Angiotensin II stimulated ERK1/2 and Rho kinase phosphorylation (2.3 
+/- 0.2- and 2.1 +/- 0.2-fold increase over basal values, respectively), while
ANG-(1-7) was without effect. The ANG II-mediated phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and
Rho kinase was prevented in a dose-dependent manner by ANG-(1-7) and disappeared 
in the presence of the Mas receptor antagonist d-Ala7-ANG-(1-7). Both ANG II and 
ANG-(1-7) increased STAT3 and STAT5a/b phosphorylation to a similar extent
(130-140% increase). The ANG-(1-7)-stimulated STAT phosphorylation was blocked by
the AT(1) receptor antagonist losartan and not by d-Ala7-ANG-(1-7). Our results
show a dual action of ANG-(1-7), that is, a stimulatory effect on STAT3 and 5a/b 
phosphorylation through AT(1) receptors and a blocking action on ANG
II-stimulated ERK1/2 and Rho kinase phosphorylation through Mas receptor
activation. The latter effect could be representative of a mechanism for a
protective role of ANG-(1-7) in the heart by counteracting the effects of locally
generated ANG II.

PMID: 18448663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Stem Cells. 2008 Jul;26(7):1732-42. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0899. Epub 2008
Apr 24.

Downregulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) in
CD34+ cells promotes megakaryocytic development, whereas activation of STAT5
drives erythropoiesis.

Olthof SG(1), Fatrai S, Drayer AL, Tyl MR, Vellenga E, Schuringa JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1,
Groningen, 9700RB, The Netherlands.

Although it has been proposed that the common myeloid progenitor gives rise to
granulocyte/monocyte progenitors and megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitors (MEP),
little is known about molecular switches that determine whether MEPs develop into
either erythrocytes or megakaryocytes. We used the thrombopoietin receptor c-Mpl,
as well as the megakaryocytic marker CD41, to optimize progenitor sorting
procedures to further subfractionate the MEP (CD34(+)CD110(+)CD45RA(-)) into
erythroid progenitors (CD34(+)CD110(+)CD45RA(-)CD41(-)) and megakaryocytic
progenitors (CD34(+)CD110(+)CD45RA(-)CD41(+)) from peripheral blood. We have
identified signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) as a
critical denominator that determined lineage commitment between erythroid and
megakaryocytic cell fates. Depletion of STAT5 from CD34(+) cells by a lentiviral 
RNAi approach in the presence of thrombopoietin and stem cell factor resulted in 
an increase in megakaryocytic progenitors (CFU-Mk), whereas erythroid progenitors
(BFU-E) were decreased. Furthermore, an increase in cells expressing
megakaryocytic markers CD41 and CD42b was observed in STAT5 RNAi cells, as was an
increase in the percentage of polyploid cells. Reversely, overexpression of
activated STAT5A(1*6) mutants severely impaired megakaryocyte development and
induced a robust erythroid differentiation. Microarray and quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed changes in expression
of a number of genes, including GATA1, which was downmodulated by STAT5 RNAi and 
upregulated by activated STAT5.

PMID: 18436865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1765-75. doi: 10.1172/JCI33037.

Human and simian immunodeficiency viruses deregulate early hematopoiesis through 
a Nef/PPARgamma/STAT5 signaling pathway in macaques.

Prost S(1), Le Dantec M, Augé S, Le Grand R, Derdouch S, Auregan G, Déglon N,
Relouzat F, Aubertin AM, Maillere B, Dusanter-Fourt I, Kirszenbaum M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunovirology Division and Innovative Therapy Division, Institute of Emerging
Diseases and Innovative Therapies, CEA, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
stephane.prost@cea.fr

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1622-5.

Infection of primates by HIV-1 and SIV induces multiple hematological
abnormalities of central hematopoietic origin. Although these defects greatly
contribute to the pathophysiology of HIV-1 infection, the molecular basis for
altered BM function remains unknown. Here we show that when cynomolgus macaques
were infected with SIV, the multipotent potential of their hematopoietic
progenitor cells was lost, and this correlated with downregulation of STAT5A and 
STAT5B expression. However, forced expression of STAT5B entirely rescued the
multipotent potential of the hematopoietic progenitor cells. In addition, an
accessory viral protein required for efficient SIV and HIV replication and
pathogenicity, "Negative factor" (Nef), was essential for SIV-mediated impairment
of the multipotent potential of hematopoietic progenitors ex vivo and in vivo.
This newly uncovered property of Nef was both conserved between HIV-1 and SIV
strains and entirely dependent upon the presence of PPARgamma in targeted cells. 
Further, PPARgamma agonists mimicked Nef activity by inhibiting STAT5A and STAT5B
expression and hampering the functionality of hematopoietic progenitors both ex
vivo and in vivo. These findings have extended the role of Nef in the
pathogenicity of HIV-1 and SIV and reveal a pivotal role for the PPARgamma/STAT5 
pathway in the regulation of early hematopoiesis. This study may provide a basis 
for investigating the potential therapeutic benefits of PPARgamma antagonists in 
both patients with AIDS and individuals with hematopoietic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2323187
PMID: 18431514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1622-5. doi: 10.1172/JCI35487.

Is Nef the elusive cause of HIV-associated hematopoietic dysfunction?

Kirchhoff F(1), Silvestri G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
frank.kirchhoff@uniklinik-ulm.de

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1765-75.

HIV-associated hematological abnormalities involve all lineages of blood cells,
thus implying that the virus impairs the function of early HSCs. However, the
underlying mechanisms of this defect are unknown, particularly since HSCs are
largely resistant to HIV-1 infection. In this issue of the JCI, Prost and
colleagues show that the viral accessory protein Negative factor (Nef) plays a
potentially critical role in the pathogenesis of HIV/SIV-associated hematopoietic
dysfunction by affecting the clonogenic potential of HSCs (see the related
article beginning on page 1765). Soluble Nef induces PPARgamma in uninfected
HSCs, thereby suppressing the expression of STAT5A and STAT5B, two factors
necessary for proper HSC function. The identification of this novel activity of
extracellular Nef defines a new mechanism of HIV/SIV pathogenesis and suggests
that approaches aimed at increasing STAT5A and STAT5B expression may be
considered in HIV-infected individuals with prominent hematological
abnormalities. The results also raise the question of whether dysregulation of
hematopoiesis by extracellular Nef plays a role in the development of T cell
immunodeficiency and the high levels of chronic immune activation associated with
AIDS.

PMCID: PMC2323195
PMID: 18431512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. EURASIP J Bioinform Syst Biol. 2006:85759. doi: 10.1155/BSB/2006/85759.

Reaction-diffusion modeling ERK- and STAT-interaction dynamics.

Georgiev N(1), Petrov V, Georgiev G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biodynamics and Biorheology, Institute of Mechanics and
Biomechanics, Bulgarian Academia of Sciences, Acad. G. Bonchev Street, bl. 4,
Sofia, Bulgaria.

The modeling of the dynamics of interaction between ERK and STAT signaling
pathways in the cell needs to establish the biochemical diagram of the
corresponding proteins interactions as well as the corresponding
reaction-diffusion scheme. Starting from the verbal description available in the 
literature of the cross talk between the two pathways, a simple diagram of
interaction between ERK and STAT5a proteins is chosen to write corresponding
kinetic equations. The dynamics of interaction is modeled in a form of
two-dimensional nonlinear dynamical system for ERK-and STAT5a -protein
concentrations. Then the spatial modeling of the interaction is accomplished by
introducing an appropriate diffusion-reaction scheme. The obtained system of
partial differential equations is analyzed and it is argued that the possibility 
of Turing bifurcation is presented by loss of stability of the homogeneous steady
state and forms dissipative structures in the ERK and STAT interaction process.
In these terms, a possible scaffolding effect in the protein interaction is
related to the process of stabilization and destabilization of the dissipative
structures (pattern formation) inherent to the model of ERK and STAT cross talk.

PMCID: PMC3171321
PMID: 18427585  [PubMed]


427. J Immunol. 2008 May 1;180(9):5898-906.

Deacetylase activity is required for STAT5-dependent GM-CSF functional activity
in macrophages and differentiation to dendritic cells.

Sebastián C(1), Serra M, Yeramian A, Serrat N, Lloberas J, Celada A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine and University of Barcelona, Barcelona
Science Park, Josep Samitier 105, Barcelona, Spain.

After interaction with its receptor, GM-CSF induces phosphorylation of the
beta-chain in two distinct domains in macrophages. One induces activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases and the PI3K/Akt pathway, and the other induces
JAK2-STAT5. In this study we describe how trichostatin A (TSA), which inhibits
deacetylase activity, blocks JAK2-STAT5-dependent gene expression but not the
expression of genes that depend on the signal transduction induced by the other
domain of the receptor. TSA treatment inhibited the GM-CSF-dependent
proliferation of macrophages by interfering with c-myc and cyclin D1 expression. 
However, M-CSF-dependent proliferation, which requires ERK1/2, was unaffected.
Protection from apoptosis, which involves Akt phosphorylation and p21(waf-1)
expression, was not modified by TSA. GM-CSF-dependent expression of MHC class II 
molecules was inhibited because CIITA was not induced. The generation of
dendritic cells was also impaired by TSA treatment because of the inhibition of
IRF4, IRF2, and RelB expression. TSA mediates its effects by preventing the
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter of STAT5 target genes and by
inhibiting their expression. However, this drug did not affect STAT5A or STAT5B
phosphorylation or DNA binding. These results in GM-CSF-treated macrophages
reveal a relationship between histone deacetylase complexes and STAT5 in the
regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 18424709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jul;198(1):71-82. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0648. Epub 2008 Apr 17.

Developmental changes in the human GH receptor and its signal transduction
pathways.

Kenth G(1), Mergelas JA, Goodyer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

We previously reported the presence of functional human GH receptors (hGHRs) in
the human fetal hepatocyte (FH) as early as the first trimester. Interestingly,
fetal serum levels of hGH are in the acromegalic range, yet certain hGH-dependent
factors are expressed at very low levels (IGF-I, IGF-binding protein-3),
suggesting that fetal liver has limited responsiveness to hGH. To determine
whether this is due to the fetal tissue levels of hGHR or factors in the hGH/hGHR
axis that might influence hGHR function, we compared hGHR isoforms and downstream
signaling proteins in FH versus human adult liver (HAL).
Immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting (IB) analyses found similar precursor and
mature hGHR forms while RT-PCR assays of truncated (T) hGHR(1-279), dominant
negative for the full-length (FL) receptor, showed similar T/FL mRNA ratios in FH
and HAL. IB demonstrated that Janus kinase (JAK) 2, signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT(1, 3, 5A/B)), and suppressors of cytokine
signaling (SOCS(1, 2, 3, cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS)))
proteins were detectable in all FH and HAL tested (12 weeks of fetal age to 60
years); the levels were similar (STAT5B) or lower (JAK2/STAT1/STAT3/STAT5A:
38-53%, SOCS/CIS: 58-76%) in FH compared with HAL. Our studies to date
demonstrate that, during hepatocyte development, hGHR levels are lower in the
fetal cells but the hGHR isoforms, including the relative amount of truncated
versus FL, remain unchanged. The JAK2/STAT/SOCS signaling molecules are present
in the FH as early as the first trimester. However, they are generally at <50%
level in postnatal liver. These data suggest that low expression of both hGHR and
major hGHR signaling components may explain the limited responsiveness of the
fetal cells to the high circulating levels of hGH.

PMID: 18420710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Mar;114(2):233-42. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0003-8. 
Epub 2008 Apr 11.

Transcriptional profiles of progestogen effects in the postmenopausal breast.

Wood CE(1), Register TC, Cline JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology/Section on Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1040, USA.
chwood@wfubmc.edu

Estrogen plus progestin hormone therapy has been associated with increased breast
proliferation, breast density, and breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women,
beyond that seen with estrogen alone. The goal of this study was to evaluate
progestogen effects on gene expression profiles in the breast contributing to
this promotional effect. Twenty-five ovariectomized adult female cynomolgus
monkeys were given the following treatments (expressed as equivalent doses for
women) in a randomized crossover design: (1) placebo; (2) oral estradiol (E2, 1
mg/day); (3) E2 + micronized progesterone (P4, 200 mg/day); and (4) E2 +
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA, 2.5 mg/day). Treatments were given for two
months, and breast biopsies were taken after each treatment period. On microarray
analysis E2 + MPA treatment resulted in a greater number of significantly
regulated genes compared to E2 + P4 and E2 alone (P < 0.0001). Treatment with E2 
alone induced modest effects on select genes related to epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) activity which were augmented by the addition of MPA but not P4, 
consistent with patterns of epithelial cell proliferation. Genes induced by E2 + 
MPA included the EGFR ligands EGF, TGFA, and AREG, and downstream targets such as
STAT5A, STAT5B, SRC, EIF4EBP1, and MYC. Progestogens showed mixed antagonistic
effects on E2-induced genes which tended to be greater for P4 than MPA. These
findings suggest that a standard dose of oral E2 + MPA has a more pronounced
effect on gene expression in the breast compared to E2 alone or E2 + P4 and that 
promotional effects of E2 + MPA may be mediated in part by increased EGFR
activity.

PMID: 18404370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(11):3830-49. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01217-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
31.

Progesterone induction of the 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 promoter
in breast cancer cells involves coordinated recruitment of STAT5A and
progesterone receptor to a distal enhancer and polymerase tracking.

Subtil-Rodríguez A(1), Millán-Ariño L, Quiles I, Ballaré C, Beato M, Jordan A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica de Barcelona, Dr. Aiguader 88, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Steroid hormone receptors regulate gene expression, interacting with target DNA
sequences but also activating cytoplasmic signaling pathways. Using the human
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11beta-HSD2) gene as a model, we have
investigated the contributions of both effects on a human progesterone-responsive
promoter in breast cancer cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation has identified two
different mechanisms of hormone-induced progesterone receptor (PR) recruitment to
the 11beta-HSD2 promoter: (i) direct PR binding to DNA at the proximal promoter, 
abrogated when PR contains a mutated DNA binding domain (DBD), and (ii) STAT5A
(signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A)-mediated recruitment of PR 
to an upstream distal region, impaired by AG490, a JAK/STAT pathway inhibitor.
The JAK/STAT inhibitor, as well as expression of dominant-negative STAT5A,
impairs hormone induction of 11beta-HSD2. On the other hand, the DBD-mutated PR
fully supports 11beta-HSD2 expression. These results, along with data from a
deletion analysis, indicate that the distal region is crucial for hormone
regulation of 11beta-HSD2. We show active RNA polymerase II tracking from the
distal region upon PR and STAT5A binding, concomitant with synthesis of
noncoding, hormone-dependent RNAs, suggesting that this region works as a
hormone-dependent transcriptional enhancer. In conclusion, coordination of PR
transcriptional effects and cytoplasmic signaling activation, in particular the
JAK/STAT pathway, are critical in regulating progestin-induced endogenous
11beta-HSD2 gene expression in breast cancer cells. This is not unique to this
promoter, as AG490 also alters the expression of other progesterone-regulated
genes.

PMCID: PMC2423295
PMID: 18378698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 16;283(20):14100-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801357200. Epub 2008 
Mar 17.

Differential regulation of the IL-17 receptor by gammac cytokines: inhibitory
signaling by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway.

Lindemann MJ(1), Hu Z, Benczik M, Liu KD, Gaffen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University at Buffalo, State University of New
York, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

The gammac-family cytokine IL-2 activates signaling events that contribute to
cell survival and proliferation, the best-studied of which are the STAT-5 and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. The starting point of this study
was to define genes regulated by the IL-2R-mediated PI3K pathway in T cells.
Accordingly, we used an erythropoietin (EPO) receptor chimeric receptor system in
which IL-2-dependent HT-2 T cells expressed a mutant EPO-IL-2Rbeta construct
where Tyr-338 is mutated to Phe. Cells expressing this mutant IL-2Rbeta chain
fail to induce phosphorylation of PI3K-p85alpha/beta or activate Akt, but mediate
normal IL-2-dependent proliferation and activation of JAK1 and STAT-5A/B.
Microarray analyses revealed differential regulation of numerous genes compared
with cells expressing a wild-type IL-2Rbeta, including up-regulation of the IL-17
receptor subunit IL-17RA. Blockade of the PI3K pathway but not p70S6K led to
up-regulation of IL-17RA, and constitutive Akt activation was associated with
suppressed IL-17RA expression. Moreover, similar to the mutant EPO-IL-2Rbeta
chimera, IL-15 and IL-21 induced IL-17RA preferentially compared with IL-2, and
IL-2 but not IL-15 or IL-21 mediated prolonged activation of the PI3K p85
regulatory subunit. Thus, there are intrinsic signaling differences between IL-2 
and IL-15 that can be attributed to differences in activation of the PI3K
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2376247
PMID: 18348982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):711-21. doi: 10.1101/gad.1643908.

Interpretation of cytokine signaling through the transcription factors STAT5A and
STAT5B.

Hennighausen L(1), Robinson GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA. hennighausen@nih.gov

Transcription factors from the family of Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription (STAT) are activated by numerous cytokines. Two members of this
family, STAT5A and STAT5B (collectively called STAT5), have gained prominence in 
that they are activated by a wide variety of cytokines such as interleukins,
erythropoietin, growth hormone, and prolactin. Furthermore, constitutive STAT5
activation is observed in the majority of leukemias and many solid tumors.
Inactivation studies in mice as well as human mutations have provided insight
into many of STAT5's functions. Disruption of cytokine signaling through STAT5
results in a variety of cell-specific effects, ranging from a defective immune
system and impaired erythropoiesis, the complete absence of mammary development
during pregnancy, to aberrant liver function. On a molecular level, STAT5 has
been linked to cell specification, proliferation, differentiation, and survival. 
Evidence is growing that the diverse outcomes of STAT5 signaling are not only
determined by the expression of specific receptors but also by the interaction of
STAT5 with cofactors and the cell-specific activity of members of the SOCS
family, which negatively regulate STAT function. In this review, we focus on
emerging concepts and challenges in the field of Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT5
signaling. First, we discuss unique functions of STAT5 in three distinct systems:
mammary epithelial cells, hepatocytes, and regulatory T cells. Second, we present
an example of how STAT5 can achieve cell specificity in hepatocytes through a
physical and functional interaction with the glucocorticoid receptor. Third, we
focus on the relevance of STAT5 in the development and progression of leukemia.
Next, we discuss lessons derived from human mutations and disease. Finally, we
address an emerging issue that the interpretation of experiments from
STAT5-deficient mice and cells might be compromised as these cells might reroute 
and reprogram cytokine signals to the "wrong" STATs and thus acquire
inappropriate cues. We propose that mice with mutations in various components of 
the JAK-STAT signaling pathway are living laboratories, which will provide
insight into the versatility of signaling hardware and the adaptability of the
software.

PMCID: PMC2394721
PMID: 18347089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;14(5):1317-24. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-2024.

Transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 promotes 
growth of human prostate cancer cells in vivo.

Dagvadorj A(1), Kirken RA, Leiby B, Karras J, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

PURPOSE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a/b (Stat5a/b) is the 
key mediator of prolactin effects in prostate cancer cells via activation of
Janus-activated kinase 2. Prolactin is a locally produced growth factor in human 
prostate cancer. Prolactin protein expression and constitutive activation of
Stat5a/b are associated with high histologic grade of clinical prostate cancer.
Moreover, activation of Stat5a/b in primary prostate cancer predicts early
disease recurrence. Here, we inhibited Stat5a/b by several different methodologic
approaches. Our goal was to establish a proof of principle that Stat5a/b is
critical for prostate cancer cell viability in vitro and for prostate tumor
growth in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We inhibited Stat5a/b protein expression by antisense
oligonucleotides or RNA interference and transcriptional activity of Stat5a/b by 
adenoviral expression of a dominant-negative mutant of Stat5a/b in prostate
cancer cells in culture. Moreover, Stat5a/b activity was suppressed in human
prostate cancer xenograft tumors in nude mice. Stat5a/b regulation of Bcl-X(L)
and cyclin D1 protein levels was shown by antisense suppression of Stat5a/b
protein expression followed by Western blotting.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We show here that inhibition of Stat5a/b by antisense
oligonucleotides, RNA interference, or adenoviral expression of dominant-negative
Stat5a/b effectively kills prostate cancer cells. Moreover, we show that Stat5a/b
is critical for human prostate cancer xenograft growth in nude mice. The effects 
of Stat5a/b on the viability of prostate cancer cells involve Stat5a/b regulation
of Bcl-X(L) and cyclin D1 protein levels but not the expression or activation of 
Stat3. This work establishes Stat5a/b as a therapeutic target protein for
prostate cancer. Pharmacologic inhibition of Stat5a/b in prostate cancer can be
achieved by small-molecule inhibitors of transactivation, dimerization, or DNA
binding of Stat5a/b.

PMID: 18316550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):946-55. doi: 10.1172/JCI32704.

Csf3r mutations in mice confer a strong clonal HSC advantage via activation of
Stat5.

Liu F(1), Kunter G, Krem MM, Eades WC, Cain JA, Tomasson MH, Hennighausen L, Link
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):847-50.

A fundamental property of leukemic stem cells is clonal dominance of the bone
marrow microenvironment. Truncation mutations of CSF3R, which encodes the G-CSF
receptor (G-CSFR), are implicated in leukemic progression in patients with severe
congenital neutropenia. Here we show that expression of a truncated mutant Csf3r 
in mice confers a strong clonal advantage at the HSC level that is dependent upon
exogenous G-CSF. G-CSF-induced proliferation, phosphorylation of Stat5, and
transcription of Stat5 target genes were increased in HSCs isolated from mice
expressing the mutant Csf3r. Conversely, the proliferative advantage conferred by
the mutant Csf3r was abrogated in myeloid progenitors lacking both Stat5A and
Stat5B, and HSC function was reduced in mice expressing a truncated mutant Csf3r 
engineered to have impaired Stat5 activation. These data indicate that in mice,
inappropriate Stat5 activation plays a key role in establishing clonal dominance 
by stem cells expressing mutant Csf3r.

PMCID: PMC2248325
PMID: 18292815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. PLoS One. 2008 Feb 20;3(2):e1639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001639.

Loss of cytokine-STAT5 signaling in the CNS and pituitary gland alters energy
balance and leads to obesity.

Lee JY(1), Muenzberg H, Gavrilova O, Reed JA, Berryman D, Villanueva EC, Louis
GW, Leinninger GM, Bertuzzi S, Seeley RJ, Robinson GW, Myers MG, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are critical
components of cytokine signaling pathways. STAT5A and STAT5B (STAT5), the most
promiscuous members of this family, are highly expressed in specific populations 
of hypothalamic neurons in regions known to mediate the actions of cytokines in
the regulation of energy balance. To test the hypothesis that STAT5 signaling is 
essential to energy homeostasis, we used Cre-mediated recombination to delete the
Stat5 locus in the CNS. Mutant males and females developed severe obesity with
hyperphagia, impaired thermal regulation in response to cold, hyperleptinemia and
insulin resistance. Furthermore, central administration of GM-CSF mediated the
nuclear accumulation of STAT5 in hypothalamic neurons and reduced food intake in 
control but not in mutant mice. These results demonstrate that STAT5 mediates
energy homeostasis in response to endogenous cytokines such as GM-CSF.

PMCID: PMC2237899
PMID: 18286195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2219-29. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1320. Epub 2008 Feb 
14.

Transcriptional activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) 3 and STAT5B partially mediate homeobox A1-stimulated oncogenic
transformation of the immortalized human mammary epithelial cell.

Mohankumar KM(1), Perry JK, Kannan N, Kohno K, Gluckman PD, Emerald BS, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute and National Research Centre for Growth and Development,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

We have previously demonstrated that the p44/42 MAPK pathway is one pathway
involved in homeobox (HOX) A1-stimulated oncogenesis. However, inhibition of MAPK
kinase 1 does not completely prevent HOXA1-stimulated oncogenic transformation,
suggesting the involvement of additional signal transduction pathways. Here, we
report that forced expression of HOXA1 in immortalized human mammary epithelial
cells significantly increased levels of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 3, 5A, and 5B mRNA by transcriptional up-regulation. The
protein levels of STAT3 and 5B, but not STAT5A, and protein phosphorylation
levels of STAT3 and 5B were significantly increased by forced expression of
HOXA1. Forced expression of STAT3 or STAT5B was sufficient to transform
oncogenically an immortalized human mammary epithelial cell line. Accordingly,
inhibition of STAT3 or STAT5B activity with dominant negative STAT3 or STAT5B
abrogated the ability of HOXA1 to stimulate cell proliferation, survival,
oncogenic transformation, and generation of large disorganized multiacinar
structures in three-dimensional culture. These results suggest that HOXA1
partially mediates oncogenic transformation of the immortalized human mammary
epithelial cell through modulation of the STAT3 and STAT5B pathways.

PMID: 18276758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cancer Sci. 2008 Feb;99(2):272-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00685.x.

Co-overexpression of Janus kinase 2 and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a promotes differentiation of mammary cancer cells through
reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Sultan AS(1), Brim H, Sherif ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical 
Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5 appears to play a vital
role in prolactin (PRL)-induced cell differentiation and normal mammary gland
development. We previously showed that PRL-activated Stat5a induced expression of
E-cadherin-beta-catenin complex in vitro and in xenotransplant tumors in vivo led
to inhibition of breast cancer invasion. In the present study, we show that human
breast cancer cells co-overexpressing Stat5a and its tyrosine kinase (Jak) 2
cultured in three-dimensional (3D) Matrigel culture demonstrate changes
consistent with induction of mesenchymal-epithelial redifferentiation. Jak2 and
Stat5a-co-overexpressing cells treated with cocktail (PRL, dexamethasone, and
insulin), effectively reverse epithelial-mesenchymal transition by stimulating 3D
organoids more reminiscent of the acinar growth of normal mammary epithelial
cells, compared with cells overexpressing only Stat5a or Jak2. In contrast,
dominant-negative dominant-negative-Stat5 blocks 3D organoid formation, causing
cells to grow in layers instead. Hyperactivation of Jak2 and Stat5a in T-47D
cells induces alveolar-like structures, mamospheres, with marked lumen formation 
through central apoptosis and restores a polarized epithelial phenotype. However,
Jak2 and Stat5a overexpression in BT-20 cells induces partially differentiated 3D
organoids with no central lumen, but effectively re-expresses estrogen receptor
alpha. Jak2 and Stat5a-induced 3D differentiated organoids are accompanied by
increased expression of E-cadherin, zonula occludens-1, and cytokeratins 8 and
18, and decreased levels of vimentin and Snail, indicating a shift from a
mesenchymal phenotype toward an epithelial phenotype. Collectively, Jak2 and
Stat5a co-overexpression cooperatively reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and promotes differentiation in human breast cancer cells, which may provide a
mechanism to explain the invasive suppressor role of PRL-activated Stat5a in
mammary cancer cells.

PMID: 18271926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Int Immunol. 2008 Mar;20(3):421-31. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn002. Epub 2008 Feb 12.

STAT5-signaling cytokines regulate the expression of FOXP3 in CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells and CD4+CD25- effector T cells.

Passerini L(1), Allan SE, Battaglia M, Di Nunzio S, Alstad AN, Levings MK,
Roncarolo MG, Bacchetta R.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (HSR-TIGET), Via Olgettina
58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) is considered a specific marker for CD4(+)CD25(+)
regulatory T (Treg) cells, but increasing evidence suggests that human
CD4(+)CD25(-) effector T (Teff) cells can transiently express FOXP3 upon
activation. We demonstrate that the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5)-signaling cytokines, IL-2, IL-15 and to a lesser extent
IL-7, induce FOXP3 up-regulation in vitro in activated human Teff cells. In
contrast, cytokines which do not activate STAT5, such as IL-4 or transforming
growth factor-beta alone, do not directly induce FOXP3 expression in activated
Teff cells. Moreover, expression of a constitutively active form of STAT5a is
sufficient to induce FOXP3 expression in Teff cells. Expression of FOXP3 in
activated Teff cells requires both TCR-mediated activation and endogenous IL-2,
but is not dependent on cell division and does not induce suppressive function.
The presence of STAT5-activating cytokines is also required to maintain high
FOXP3 expression and suppressive activity of Treg cells in vitro. These data
indicate that activation of STAT5 sustains FOXP3 expression in both Treg and Teff
cells and contribute to our understanding of how cytokines affect the expression 
of FOXP3.

PMID: 18270368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Death Differ. 2008 Apr;15(4):783-92. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2008.1. Epub 2008 Feb 
8.

Essential role for Stat5 in the neurotrophic but not in the neuroprotective
effect of erythropoietin.

Byts N(1), Samoylenko A, Fasshauer T, Ivanisevic M, Hennighausen L, Ehrenreich H,
Sirén AL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Neurosurgery, Department of Neurosurgery, University
of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-St. 11, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

The transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a and
5b (Stat5) are activated by the neuroprotective and neurotrophic cytokines,
erythropoietin (EPO) and growth hormone (GH). Here, we show a dissociation of the
intracellular pathway mediating the protective effect of EPO against glutamate
toxicity from that needed for its neurotrophic activity using hippocampal
neuronal cultures from Stat5a/b-knockout (Stat5(-/-)) mouse fetuses. Both
pretreatment and post-treatment with EPO counteracted glutamate-induced cell
death in Stat5(+/+) and Stat5(-/-) neurons. Acute pharmacological inhibition of
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/Stat signalling had no effect on EPO neuroprotection,
whereas inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-3' kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway abolished
the protective effect of EPO in both Stat5(+/+) and Stat5(-/-) neurons. GH
effectively protected Stat5(+/+) cells against glutamate toxicity but had no
effect in Stat5(-/-) neurons or in Stat5(+/+) neurons treated with JAK2/Stat or
PI3K inhibitor. EPO and GH stimulated neurite outgrowth and branching of
Stat5(+/+) neurons by activating PI3K/Akt signalling but had no trophic effect in
Stat5(-/-) cells. We conclude that in hippocampal neurons, Stat5 is not required 
for neuroprotection by EPO but is together with Akt essential for its
neurotrophic activity. Both Stat5 and Akt are needed for neuroprotective and
neurotrophic signalling of GH in neurons.

PMID: 18259195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2271-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01789-07. Epub 2008 Feb
4.

Phosphorylation of human Jak3 at tyrosines 904 and 939 positively regulates its
activity.

Cheng H(1), Ross JA, Frost JA, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Biosciences Building, University of Texas
at El Paso, 500 W. University Ave., El Paso, TX 79902, USA.

Janus tyrosine kinase 3 (Jak3) is essential for signaling by interleukin-2 (IL-2)
family cytokines and proper immune function. Dysfunctional regulation of Jak3 may
result in certain disease states. However, the molecular mechanisms governing
Jak3 activation are not fully understood. In this study, we used a
functional-proteomics approach to identify two novel tyrosine phosphorylation
sites within Jak3, Y904 and Y939, which are conserved among Jak family proteins. 
By using phosphospecific antibodies, both residues were observed to be rapidly
induced by stimulation of cells with IL-2 or other gammac cytokines. Mechanistic 
studies indicated that Y904 and Y939 regulate Jak3 activities. A phenylalanine
substitution at either site greatly reduced Jak3 kinase activity in vitro and its
ability to phosphorylate signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(Stat5) in vivo, suggesting that phosphorylation of these previously unrecognized
residues positively regulates Jak3 activity. Y904 and Y939 were required for
optimal ATP usage by Jak3, while phosphorylation of Y939 preferentially promoted 
Stat5 activity in intact cells. Together, these findings demonstrate positive
functional roles for two novel Jak3 phosphoregulatory sites which may be
similarly important for other Jak family members. Identification of these sites
also provides new therapeutic opportunities to modulate Jak3 function.

PMCID: PMC2268424
PMID: 18250158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):924-34. doi: 10.1172/JCI34013.

Regulation of myeloproliferation and M2 macrophage programming in mice by
Lyn/Hck, SHIP, and Stat5.

Xiao W(1), Hong H, Kawakami Y, Lowell CA, Kawakami T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is
finely regulated by extrinsic and intrinsic factors via various signaling
pathways. Here we have shown that, similar to mice deficient in the lipid
phosphatase SHIP, loss of 2 Src family kinases, Lyn and Hck, profoundly affects
HSC differentiation, producing hematopoietic progenitors with increased
proliferation, reduced apoptosis, growth factor-independent survival, and skewed 
differentiation toward M2 macrophages. This phenotype culminates in a
Stat5-dependent myeloproliferative disease that is accompanied by M2 macrophage
infiltration of the lung. Expression of a membrane-bound form of SHIP in HSCs
lacking both Lyn and Hck restored normal hematopoiesis and prevented
myeloproliferation. In vitro and in vivo studies suggested the involvement of
autocrine and/or paracrine production of IL-3 and GM-CSF in the increased
proliferation and myeloid differentiation of HSCs. Thus, this study has defined a
myeloproliferative transformation-sensitive signaling pathway, composed of
Lyn/Hck, SHIP, autocrine/paracrine cytokines, and Stat5, that regulates HSC
differentiation and M2 macrophage programming.

PMCID: PMC2214849
PMID: 18246197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Blood. 2008 May 1;111(9):4511-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-102848. Epub 2008
Jan 31.

Stat5 activation enables erythropoiesis in the absence of EpoR and Jak2.

Grebien F(1), Kerenyi MA, Kovacic B, Kolbe T, Becker V, Dolznig H, Pfeffer K,
Klingmüller U, Müller M, Beug H, Müllner EW, Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Erythropoiesis requires erythropoietin (Epo) and stem cell factor (SCF) signaling
via their receptors EpoR and c-Kit. EpoR, like many other receptors involved in
hematopoiesis, acts via the kinase Jak2. Deletion of EpoR or Janus kinase 2
(Jak2) causes embryonic lethality as a result of defective erythropoiesis. The
contribution of distinct EpoR/Jak2-induced signaling pathways (mitogen-activated 
protein kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 [Stat5]) to functional erythropoiesis is incompletely understood.
Here we demonstrate that expression of a constitutively activated Stat5a mutant
(cS5) was sufficient to relieve the proliferation defect of Jak2(-/-) and
EpoR(-/-) cells in an Epo-independent manner. In addition, tamoxifen-induced DNA 
binding of a Stat5a-estrogen receptor (ER)* fusion construct enabled
erythropoiesis in the absence of Epo. Furthermore, c-Kit was able to enhance
signaling through the Jak2-Stat5 axis, particularly in lymphoid and myeloid
progenitors. Although abundance of hematopoietic stem cells was 2.5-fold reduced 
in Jak2(-/-) fetal livers, transplantation of Jak2(-/-)-cS5 fetal liver cells
into irradiated mice gave rise to mature erythroid and myeloid cells of donor
origin up to 6 months after transplantation. Cytokine- and c-Kit pathways do not 
function independently of each other in hematopoiesis but cooperate to attain
full Jak2/Stat5 activation. In conclusion, activated Stat5 is a critical
downstream effector of Jak2 in erythropoiesis/myelopoiesis, and Jak2 functionally
links cytokine- with c-Kit-receptor tyrosine kinase signaling.

PMCID: PMC2976848
PMID: 18239084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Dairy Sci. 2008 Feb;91(2):784-93. doi: 10.3168/jds.2007-0669.

Mutations in the STAT5A gene are associated with embryonic survival and milk
composition in cattle.

Khatib H(1), Monson RL, Schutzkus V, Kohl DM, Rosa GJ, Rutledge JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA. hkhatib@wisc.edu

The objective of this study was to investigate the association of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) gene with fertilization
rate, embryonic survival, and milk production and composition in cattle. The STAT
proteins are transcription factors that are specifically activated to regulate
gene transcription when cells encounter cytokines and growth factors. The STAT5A 
gene is a member of the interferon-tau (IFN-tau) and placental lactogen (PL)
signaling pathway, which is involved in both milk production and initiation of
pregnancy. Using the DNA-pooling sequencing approach, a total of 12 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were identified, 1 exonic and 11 intronic. For the
study of association of these SNP with embryonic survival, 1,551 embryos were
produced in vitro from 160 cows and 3 sires. Significant associations with
embryonic survival were found for 7, 5, and 2 SNP for embryos produced from sires
1, 2, and 3 respectively. The association of fertilization rate with STAT5A
polymorphisms was evaluated in more than 2,300 oocytes. Significant associations 
were found for 6, 2, and 2 SNP for sires 1, 2, and 3 respectively. For sire 1, 5 
SNP showed significant associations with both embryonic survival and
fertilization rate compared with 1 SNP for sires 2 and 3. To determine if
embryonic losses had occurred before the blastocyst stage, 145 of the surviving
embryos were harvested at d 7 of development and genotyped for the single exonic 
SNP12195. A significant segregation distortion was observed between oocytes
produced from 2 sires carrying the same genotype. Thus, it is most likely that
STAT5A is associated with 2 mechanisms of embryo death. One is a prefertilization
mechanism involving sperm factors that cause low fertilization rate. The second
is a postfertilization mechanism that causes incompatibility between the male
pronucleus and the oocyte, which in turn leads to death of the embryo before the 
blastocyst stage. Association testing of SNP12195 (exon 8) and SNP14217 (intron
9) with milk composition revealed that allele G of SNP12195 was associated with a
decrease in both protein and fat percentages. However, SNP14217 in intron 9
showed no significant association with milk production or health traits. The G
allele of SNP12195 was also associated with low embryonic survival, making this
SNP an attractive candidate for progeny testing programs in dairy cattle.

PMID: 18218766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 23;8:6. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-6.

Lactation failure in Src knockout mice is due to impaired secretory activation.

Watkin H(1), Richert MM, Lewis A, Terrell K, McManaman JP, Anderson SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Research Complex I, South Tower, Mail Stop 8104, 12801 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, 
CO 80045, USA. harriet.watkin@uchsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Mammary gland development culminates in lactation and is orchestrated
by numerous stimuli and signaling pathways. The Src family of nonreceptor
tyrosine kinases plays a pivotal role in cell signaling. In order to determine if
Src plays a role in mammary gland development we have examined mammary gland
development and function during pregnancy and lactation in mice in which
expression of Src has been eliminated.
RESULTS: We have characterized a lactation defect in the Src-/- mice which
results in the death of over 80% of the litters nursed by Src-/- dams. Mammary
gland development during pregnancy appears normal in these mice; however
secretory activation does not seem to occur. Serum prolactin levels are normal in
Src-/- mice compared to wildtype controls. Expression of the prolactin receptor
at both the RNA and protein level was decreased in Src-/- mice following the
transition from pregnancy to lactation, as was phosphorylation of STAT5 and
expression of milk protein genes. These results suggest that secretory
activation, which occurs following parturition, does not occur completely in
Src-/- mice. Failed secretory activation results in precocious involution in the 
mammary glands of Src-/- even when pups were suckling. Involution was accelerated
following pup withdrawal perhaps as a result of incomplete secretory activation. 
In vitro differentiation of mammary epithelial cells from Src-/- mice resulted in
diminished production of milk proteins compared to the amount of milk proteins
produced by Src+/+ cells, indicating a direct role for Src in regulating the
transcription/translation of milk protein genes in mammary epithelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Src is an essential signaling modulator in mammary gland development 
as Src-/- mice exhibit a block in secretory activation that results in lactation 
failure and precocious involution. Src appears to be required for increased
expression of the prolactin receptor and successful downstream signaling, and
alveolar cell organization.

PMCID: PMC2266720
PMID: 18215306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Arch Pediatr. 2008 Feb;15(2):179-88. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2007.10.023. Epub 2008
Jan 18.

[New molecular mechanisms of growth hormone insensitivity].

[Article in French]

Edouard T(1), Raynal P, Yart A, Conte-Auriol F, Salles JP, Tauber M.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'endocrinologie pédiatrique, hôpital des enfants, place du
Docteur-Baylac, 330 avenue de Grande-Bretagne, 31059 Toulouse cedex, France.
edouard.t@chu-toulouse.fr

Growth hormone (GH), secreted by the anterior pituitary into the circulation,
binds to membrane receptors in target tissues to stimulate body growth; most of
its effects is mediated by the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). In addition 
to promoting growth, GH has important metabolic actions. The syndrome of GH
insensitivity (GHI) was first identified in 1966 by Laron et al. in three
children with clinical phenotype characteristic of growth hormone deficiency but 
associated with elevated serum concentration of GH. Direct evidence of a GH
receptor (GHR) abnormality was provided in 1989. More recently, molecular
abnormalities in the postreceptor signalling mechanism were found. Mutations of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) were reported in
patients with growth retardation and primary immunodeficiency. Mutations of the
tyrosin phosphatase Shp2 were identified in patients affected by Noonan syndrome 
characterized by short stature, cardiopathy and increased risk of leukaemia. The 
unmasking of the molecular bases for these defects will contribute greatly to our
future understanding of both normal and aberrant growth. Moreover, this knowledge
should bring insight on cancerogenesis or immunodeficiency caused by cytokines
resistance.

PMID: 18207712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. EMBO J. 2008 Feb 20;27(4):642-53. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601986. Epub 2008 Jan
17.

Crif1 is a novel transcriptional coactivator of STAT3.

Kwon MC(1), Koo BK, Moon JS, Kim YY, Park KC, Kim NS, Kwon MY, Kong MP, Yoon KJ, 
Im SK, Ghim J, Han YM, Jang SK, Shong M, Kong YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang
University of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a transcriptional
factor that performs a broad spectrum of biological functions in response to
various stimuli. However, no specific coactivator that regulates the
transcriptional activity of STAT3 has been identified. Here we report that
CR6-interacting factor 1 (Crif1) is a specific transcriptional coactivator of
STAT3, but not of STAT1 or STAT5a. Crif1 interacts with STAT3 and positively
regulates its transcriptional activity. Crif1-/- embryos were lethal around
embryonic day 6.5, and manifested developmental arrest accompanied with defective
proliferation and massive apoptosis. The expression of STAT3 target genes was
markedly reduced in a Crif1-/- blastocyst culture and in Oncostatin M-stimulated 
Crif1-deficient MEFs. Importantly, the key activities of constitutively active
STAT3-C, such as transcription, DNA binding, and cellular transformation, were
abolished in the Crif1-null MEFs, suggesting the essential role of Crif1 in the
transcriptional activity of STAT3. Our results reveal that Crif1 is a novel and
essential transcriptional coactivator of STAT3 that modulates its DNA binding
ability, and shed light on the regulation of oncogenic STAT3.

PMCID: PMC2262042
PMID: 18200042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biochemistry. 2008 Feb 12;47(6):1482-9. doi: 10.1021/bi701131e. Epub 2008 Jan 16.

Modulation of STAT5 interaction with LMW-PTP during early megakaryocyte
differentiation.

Rigacci S(1), Guidotti V, Parri M, Berti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences, University of Florence, Viale Morgagni 50,
Florence 50134, Italy. rigacci@unifi.it

STATs are involved in a variety of cellular processes, including cell
proliferation and differentiation. They are activated through tyrosine
phosphorylation, which promotes their dimerization via SH2 domains. We have
demonstrated previously that in DAMI megakaryoblastic cells LMW-PTP
dephosphorylates STAT5, interacting with an essential sequence of nine amino
acids in its C-terminal region. Here we characterize STAT5 tyrosine
phosphorylation and its interaction with LMW-PTP during early
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced megakaryocyte differentiation; these
processes show clear dependence on STAT5 threonine phosphorylation. Since protein
kinase C inhibition prevents phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced STAT5
threonine phosphorylation and association with LMW-PTP, it follows that these
processes depend on protein kinase C activity. By using a Thr757/Val mutant of
STAT5 we also demonstrate that the 757 serine/threonine conserved residue, which 
is in the STAT5A region involved in the interaction with LMW-PTP, is essential
for such an association, though its phosphorylation is not necessary.

PMID: 18197699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):236-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2972.

Transcription factor Stat5 synergizes with androgen receptor in prostate cancer
cells.

Tan SH(1), Dagvadorj A, Shen F, Gu L, Liao Z, Abdulghani J, Zhang Y, Gelmann EP, 
Zellweger T, Culig Z, Visakorpi T, Bubendorf L, Kirken RA, Karras J, Nevalainen
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The molecular mechanisms underlying progression of prostate cancer to the
hormone-independent state are poorly understood. Signal transducer and activator 
of transcription 5a and 5b (Stat5a/b) is critical for the viability of human
prostate cancer cells. We have previously shown that Stat5a/b is constitutively
active in high-grade human prostate cancer, but not in normal prostate
epithelium. Furthermore, activation of Stat5a/b in primary human prostate cancer 
predicted early disease recurrence. We show here that transcription factor
Stat5a/b is active in 95% of clinical hormone-refractory human prostate cancers. 
We show for the first time that Stat5a/b synergizes with androgen receptor (AR)
in prostate cancer cells. Specifically, active Stat5a/b increases transcriptional
activity of AR, and AR, in turn, increases transcriptional activity of Stat5a/b. 
Liganded AR and active Stat5a/b physically interact in prostate cancer cells and,
importantly, enhance nuclear localization of each other. The work presented here 
provides the first evidence of synergy between AR and the prolactin signaling
protein Stat5a/b in human prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 18172316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Breast Cancer (Auckl). 2008;1:7-14. Epub 2008 Feb 26.

Reversed Expression of the JAK/STAT Pathway Related Proteins Prolactin Receptor
and STAT5a in Normal and Abnormal Breast Epithelial Cells.

Bratthauer GL(1), Strauss BL, Barner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology, Washington.

The JAK/STAT pathway is important for cellular metabolism. One component, STAT5a,
is activated in the breast upon prolactin to prolactin receptor (PRLR) binding
facilitating the transcription of genes involved in lobule development. STAT5a
was previously found to be expressed in most normal breast epithelial cells but
not in many in situ or invasive carcinomas except secretory carcinomas which
retain STAT5a expression. This report examines the JAK/STAT pathway in the breast
through the detection of PRLR and STAT5a. Fifty breast tissues, including benign 
secretory change, microglandular adenosis, usual and atypical hyperplasia and in 
situ and invasive ductal carcinoma both usual and secretory, were obtained from
the files of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. Sections were immunostained
with antibodies to PRLR and STAT5a. PRLR was minimally detected on the surface of
a few normal breast epithelial cells whereas STAT5a was greatly expressed in over
80% of normal cell nuclei. PRLR was also minimally detected in secretory
carcinomas expressing STAT5a. However, the opposite pattern was seen in breast
carcinomas lacking STAT5a expression. PRLR was abundantly expressed in these
cells. This reversed expression may indicate a JAK/STAT pathway disturbance that 
could play a role in the initiation or maintenance of an abnormal breast
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3091403
PMID: 21655368  [PubMed]


450. Protein Expr Purif. 2008 Mar;58(1):70-7. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Producing human mechano growth factor (MGF) in Escherichia coli.

Kuznetsova TV(1), Schulga AA, Wulfson AN, Keruchenko JS, Ermolyuk YS, Keruchenko 
ID, Tikhonov RV, Lisitskaya KV, Makarov AA, Chobotova K, Khomenkov VG,
Khotchenkov VP, Popov VO, Kirpichnikov MP, Shevelev AB.

Author information: 
(1)A.N. Bakh Institute of Biochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninskii
prosp., 33, Moscow 119071, Russia.

MGF is a product of a unique muscle-specific splice variant of IGF1 gene
(insulin-like growth factor). Its peculiar feature is a specific E-peptide, a 16 
a.a. strand at the C-terminus. MGF increases cellular proliferation and inhibits 
terminal differentiation of myoblasts necessary for the secondary myotube
formation. Previous analysis of physiological effects of MGF was performed using 
indirect methods such as RT-PCR based examination of the transcript contents in
normal tissues, adenovirus-mediated DNA delivery and synthetic E-domain
administration. Here, we describe isolation and purification of recombinant MGF
thus allowing for the first time the possibility of direct examining MGF effects.
The recombinant MGF of directly examining--was expressed in Escherichia coli as
inclusion bodies (about 100-200mg/l), purified and refolded. Biological activity 
of refolded MGF was analyzed in vitro in proliferation assays with normal human
myoblasts. As a result of our work, it has become possible to generate a standard
MGF control with characterized activity and a ready-to use MGF test-system
neither of which have been previously described. Our data open opportunities for 
the future works on MGF characterization and to the development of a powerful and
highly specific therapeutic agent potentially applicable for muscle growth
up-regulation, post-trauma muscle repair, age and hereditary myodystrophy
mitigation and in sport medicine.

PMID: 18068377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Exp Hematol. 2007 Nov;35(11):1684-94.

STAT5 requires the N-domain to maintain hematopoietic stem cell repopulating
function and appropriate lymphoid-myeloid lineage output.

Li G(1), Wang Z, Zhang Y, Kang Z, Haviernikova E, Cui Y, Hennighausen L, Moriggl 
R, Wang D, Tse W, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University, School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a
critical regulator of hematopoietic development and its impaired activation is
associated with hematopoietic and immune cell defects. However, much of this
information has been learned from knockout mice that still retain the potential
for expression of STAT5 proteins that are N-terminally truncated due to
alternative internal translation initiation codons. The goal of these studies was
to use transplantation-based assays to analyze the degree of STAT5 deltaN
activity in hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and throughout lymphomyeloid
development.
METHODS: We have directly compared E14.5 fetal liver cells from mice with
potential to express STAT5ab deltaN (STAT5ab(deltaN/deltaN)) with mice completely
lacking STAT5a and STAT5b (STAT5abnull/null). We have also utilized retroviral
complementation of STAT5abnull/null fetal liver HSC to enforce expression of
full-length STAT5a or STAT5a lacking the first 136 amino acids (STAT5a deltaN).
RESULTS: We report that STAT5 is required for HSC, lymphocyte, and erythrocyte
development. We demonstrate that restored expression of STAT5a in
STAT5abnull/null HSC provides a strong selective advantage, correcting T- and
B-lymphocyte and erythrocyte development. Interestingly, Gr-1(+) blood cells were
inversely correlated with B lymphocytes and both were normalized by STAT5a
expression. In contrast, transduction of STAT5a deltaN only provided partial
B-lymphocyte development.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies define the role of STAT5 in maintaining normal
lymphoid vs myeloid balance during hematopoiesis and highlight a major role for
the N-domain in HSC function. The platform of retroviral complementation
described here will be particularly useful for future studies to subdefine the
N-domain regions that are critical for hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2134320
PMID: 17976521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Nat Med. 2007 Nov;13(11):1341-8. Epub 2007 Oct 7.

STAT5A is epigenetically silenced by the tyrosine kinase NPM1-ALK and acts as a
tumor suppressor by reciprocally inhibiting NPM1-ALK expression.

Zhang Q(1), Wang HY, Liu X, Wasik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4283, USA.
qian2@mail.med.upenn.edu

Although STAT5A and STAT5B have some nonredundant functional properties, their
distinct contributions to carcinogenesis are not clearly defined. Here we report 
that STAT5A expression is selectively inhibited by DNA methylation of the STAT5A 
gene promoter region in cells expressing the oncogenic tyrosine kinase NPM1-ALK
(also known as NPM-ALK). The DNA methylation is induced by NPM1-ALK itself via
STAT3, and is associated with binding to the promoter of the gene encoding MeCP2 
capping protein and with lack of binding of the STAT5A gene transcription
activator SP1. Reversal of methylation by the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restores SP1 binding and STAT5A gene expression. Notably,
the induced or exogenously expressed STAT5A protein binds to the enhancer and
intron 14 of the NPM1-ALK gene and triggers selective suppression of NPM1-ALK
expression. These results show that NPM1-ALK induces epigenetic silencing of
STAT5A gene and that STAT5A protein can act as a key tumor suppressor by
reciprocally inhibiting expression of NPM1-ALK.

PMID: 17922009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 30;282(48):34938-44. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Myc down-regulation as a mechanism to activate the Rb pathway in STAT5A-induced
senescence.

Mallette FA(1), Gaumont-Leclerc MF, Huot G, Ferbeyre G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7,
Canada.

Senescence is a general antiproliferative program that avoids the expansion of
cells bearing oncogenic mutations. We found that constitutively active STAT5A
(ca-STAT5A) can induce a p53- and Rb-dependent cellular senescence response.
However, ca-STAT5A did not induce p21 and p16(INK4a), which are responsible for
inhibiting cyclin-dependent protein kinases and engaging the Rb pathway during
the senescence response to oncogenic ras. Intriguingly, ca-STAT5A led to a
down-regulation of Myc and Myc targets, including CDK4, a negative regulator of
Rb. The down-regulation of Myc was in part proteasome-dependent and correlated
with its localization to promyelocytic leukemia bodies, which were found to be
highly abundant during STAT5-induced senescence. Introduction of CDK4 or Myc
bypassed STAT5A-induced senescence in cells in which p53 was also inactivated.
These results uncover a novel mechanism to engage the Rb pathway in
oncogene-induced senescence and indicate the existence of oncogene-specific
pathways that regulate senescence.

PMID: 17913706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):344-50. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

A Stat5b transgene is capable of inducing CD8+ lymphoblastic lymphoma in the
absence of normal TCR/MHC signaling.

Bessette K(1), Lang ML, Fava RA, Grundy M, Heinen J, Horne L, Spolski R, Al-Shami
A, Morse HC 3rd, Leonard WJ, Kelly JA.

Author information: 
(1)White River Junction Veteran's Association, White River Junction, VT, USA.

Stat5 proteins are critical signaling molecules activated by many cytokines.
Within the immune system, Stat5 plays important roles related to the development 
of thymocytes and proliferation of T cells. Stat5 has been implicated in
malignant transformation, and moreover, the activated tyrosine phosphorylated
form of Stat5 is frequently observed in human lymphomas. We previously
demonstrated the oncogenic potential of Stat5, with thymic lymphoblastic
lymphomas developing in a significant proportion of transgenic (TG) mice
overexpressing Stat5a or Stat5b in lymphocytes. In addition, immunization or
expression of a T-cell receptor (TCR) transgene augmented the rate of tumor
formation. Here, we investigate the mechanism of Stat5-mediated lymphomagenesis
by exploring the contributions of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)/TCR and 
pre-TCR signals. We present data demonstrating that Stat5b TG mice unexpectedly
develop CD8(+) lymphoma even in the absence of either pre-TCR signaling or normal
thymic selection. Indeed, acceleration of Stat5b transgene-mediated lymphoma
occurred on TCRalpha(-/-) and pre-TCRalpha(-/-) backgrounds. In light of these
data, we propose a model in which alterations in T-cell development at the
double-negative/double-positive (DN/DP) stages cooperate with cytokine-mediated
pathways in immature thymocytes to give rise to lymphoblastic T-cell lymphomas in
Stat5b TG mice.

PMCID: PMC2200817
PMID: 17890450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Endocrinology. 2008 Jan;149(1):329-38. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Estrogen and progesterone are critical regulators of Stat5a expression in the
mouse mammary gland.

Santos SJ(1), Haslam SZ, Conrad SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48824, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a is a well-established
regulator of mammary gland development. Several pathways for activating Stat5a
have been identified, but little is known about the mechanisms that regulate its 
expression in this tissue. In this report, we used immunofluorescent staining to 
examine Stat5a expression in mammary epithelial cells during normal development
and in response to treatment with the ovarian hormones estrogen (E) and
progesterone (P). Stat5a was present at very low levels in the prepubertal gland 
and was highly induced in a subset of luminal epithelial cells during puberty.
The percentage of positive cells increased in adult virgin, pregnant, and
lactating animals, dropped dramatically during involution, and then increased
again after weaning. Ovariectomy ablated Stat5a expression in virgin animals, and
treatment with both E and P was necessary to restore it. Double-labeling
experiments in animals treated with E plus P for 3 d demonstrated that Stat5a was
localized exclusively to cells containing both E and P receptors. Together, these
results identify a novel role for E and P in inducing Stat5a expression in the
virgin mammary gland and suggest that these hormones act at the cellular level
through their cognate receptors.

PMCID: PMC2194608
PMID: 17884938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2007 Nov;34(11):1097-101.

Modulation of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) factor
pathways during focal cerebral ischaemia: a gene expression array study in rat
hippocampus after middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Sun SL(1), Li TJ, Yang PY, Qiu Y, Rui YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

1. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) factors are a family
of transcription factors that mediate intracellular signalling initiated at
cytokine cell surface receptors and transmitted to the nucleus. In the present
study, we determined the global changes in STAT gene expression in the
hippocampus of rats after focal cerebral ischaemia and reperfusion using
microarray analysis. 2. The present study used middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) to induce ischaemia and reperfusion in Sprague-Dawley rats. Using
superarray Q series Janus tyrosine kinases (Jak)/STAT signalling pathway gene
array, a total of 96 genes was screened in adult male rat hippocampus after
transient focal cerebral ischaemia. 3. The results showed that 23 genes were
upregulated at least twofold by ischaemia treatment and that 12 genes were
downregulated at least threefold by ischaemia treatment compared with controls.
4. After confirmation by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, the
data suggest that the gene expression of STAT2, 5a, 5b, 6 and suppressor of
cytokine signalling (SOCS) 4 was increased by ischaemia, probably due to a
compensatory response of the brain, which may play a protective role in damaged
brain tissue. 5. The results of the present study provide evidence on global
changes in STAT gene expression in the hippocampus of rats after focal cerebral
ischaemia and reperfusion, in which STAT2, 5a, 5b, 6 and SOCS4 were confirmed to 
be significantly modulated during focal cerebral ischaemia.

PMID: 17880360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. FASEB J. 2008 Feb;22(2):391-400. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

Constitutive nuclear import of latent and activated STAT5a by its coiled coil
domain.

Iyer J(1), Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) is a critical
transcription factor for a number of physiological processes including
hematopoiesis and mammary gland development. Cytokines such as growth hormone,
prolactin, erythropoietin, and interleukin-2 stimulate the activation of STAT5a
by tyrosine phosphorylation. Tyrosine phosphorylation confers a conformational
change and the ability to bind specific target DNA. To execute its function as a 
signaling molecule and transcription factor, accurate cellular localization of
STAT5a is essential. This study explores the nuclear trafficking of STAT5a both
before phosphorylation and after tyrosine phosphorylation. With the use of live
cell imaging we demonstrate the continuous shuttling of STAT5a in and out of the 
nucleus. Evaluation of a series of mutations and deletions identifies a region
within the coiled coil domain of STAT5a that is critical for nuclear import of
both unphosphorylated and tyrosine-phosphorylated forms. The mechanism that
regulates transport of STAT5a through nuclear pore complexes into the nucleus is 
therefore independent of tyrosine phosphorylation. However, after tyrosine
phosphorylation, STAT5a accumulates in the nucleus because of its retention by
DNA binding. These findings should provide a foundation for further studies that 
involve targeting the activity of STAT5a.

PMID: 17846080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 19;282(42):31019-27. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

The long form of the leptin receptor regulates STAT5 and ribosomal protein S6 via
alternate mechanisms.

Gong Y(1), Ishida-Takahashi R, Villanueva EC, Fingar DC, Münzberg H, Myers MG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

The action of leptin via the long form of its receptor (LepRb) is central to the 
control of body energy homeostasis and neuroendocrine function, but the
mechanisms by which LepRb regulates intracellular signaling have remained
incompletely understood. Here we demonstrate that leptin stimulates the
phosphorylation of STAT5 and ribosomal protein S6 in the hypothalamic arcuate
nucleus in mice. In cultured cells, we investigate the mechanisms by which leptin
regulates each of these pathways. Our analysis reveals a dominant role for LepRb 
Tyr(1077) (which we demonstrate to be phosphorylated during receptor activation) 
and a secondary role for LepRb Tyr(1138) in the acute phosphorylation of STAT5a
and STAT5b. Tyr(1138) and STAT3 attenuate STAT5-dependent transcription over the 
long-term, however. In contrast, Tyr(985) (the LepRb phosphorylation site
required for ERK activation) mediates the phosphorylation of the ribosomal S6
kinase (RSK) and S6, as well as cap-dependent translation. Thus, these data
demonstrate the phosphorylation of Tyr(1077) on LepRb during receptor activation,
substantiate the hypothalamic regulation of STAT5 and S6 by leptin, and define
the alternate LepRb signaling pathways that mediate each of these signals and
their effects in cultured cells. Dissecting the contributions of these individual
pathways to leptin action will be important for our ultimate understanding of the
processes that regulate energy balance in vivo.

PMID: 17726024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Dec;72(6):1440-6. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Monitoring interactions between receptor tyrosine kinases and their downstream
effector proteins in living cells using bioluminescence resonance energy
transfer.

Tan PK(1), Wang J, Littler PL, Wong KK, Sweetnam TA, Keefe W, Nash NR, Reding EC,
Piu F, Brann MR, Schiffer HH.

Author information: 
(1)ACADIA Pharmaceuticals, 3911 Sorrento Valley Blvd., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

A limited number of whole-cell assays allow monitoring of receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) activity in a signaling pathway-specific manner. We present the
general use of the bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) technology to
quantitatively study the pharmacology and signaling properties of the receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) superfamily. RTK BRET-2 assays monitor, in living cells,
the specific interaction between RTKs and their effector proteins, which control 
the activation of specific downstream signaling pathways. A total of 22 BRET
assays have been established for nine RTKs derived from four subfamilies
[erythroblastic leukemia viral (v-erb-b) oncogene homolog (ErbB),
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor
(TRK), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)] monitoring the interactions
with five effectors (Grb2, p85, Stat5a, Shc46, PLCgamma1). These interactions are
dependent on the RTK kinase activity and autophosphorylation of specific tyrosine
residues in the carboxyl terminus. RTK BRET assays are highly sensitive for
quantifying ligand-independent (constitutive), agonist-induced, or
antagonist-inhibited RTK activity levels. We studied the signaling properties of 
the PDGF receptor, alpha polypeptide (PDGFRA) isoforms (V561D; D842V and
delta842-845) carrying activating mutations identified in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GIST). All three PDGFRA isoforms are fully constitutively
activated, insensitive to the growth factor PDGF-BB, but show differential
sensitivity of their constitutive activity to be inhibited by the inhibitor
imatinib (Gleevec). Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) BRET
structure-function studies identify the tyrosine residues 1068, 1114, and 1148 as
the main residues mediating the interaction of EGFR with the adapter protein
Grb2. The BRET technology provides an assay platform to study signaling
pathway-specific RTK structure-function and will facilitate drug discovery
efforts for the identification of novel RTK modulators.

PMID: 17715395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Aug;6(8):2346-59.

213Bi-induced death of HSC45-M2 gastric cancer cells is characterized by G2
arrest and up-regulation of genes known to prevent apoptosis but induce necrosis 
and mitotic catastrophe.

Seidl C(1), Port M, Gilbertz KP, Morgenstern A, Bruchertseifer F, Schwaiger M,
Röper B, Senekowitsch-Schmidtke R, Abend M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Technische Universität München, Ismaninger
Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany. Christof.Seidl@lrz.tum.de

Tumor cells are efficiently killed after incubation with alpha-emitter
immunoconjugates targeting tumor-specific antigens. Therefore, application of
alpha-emitter immunoconjugates is a promising therapeutic option for treatment of
carcinomas that are characterized by dissemination of single tumor cells in the
peritoneum like ovarian cancer or gastric cancer. In diffuse-type gastric cancer,
10% of patients express mutant d9-E-cadherin on the surface of tumor cells that
is targeted by the monoclonal antibody d9MAb. Coupling of the alpha-emitter
(213)Bi to d9MAb provides an efficient tool to eliminate HSC45-M2 gastric cancer 
cells expressing d9-E-cadherin in vitro and in vivo. Elucidation of the molecular
mechanisms triggered by alpha-emitters in tumor cells could help to improve
strategies of alpha-emitter radioimmunotherapy. For that purpose, gene expression
of (213)Bi-treated tumor cells was quantified using a real time quantitative-PCR 
low-density array covering 380 genes in combination with analysis of cell
proliferation and the mode of cell death. We could show that (213)Bi-induced cell
death was initiated by G(2) arrest; up-regulation of tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
SPHK1, STAT5A, p21, MYT1, and SSTR3; and down-regulation of SPP1, CDC25
phosphatases, and of genes involved in chromosome segregation. Together with
morphologic changes, these results suggest that (213)Bi activates death cascades 
different from apoptosis. Furthermore, (213)Bi-triggered up-regulation of SSTR3
could be exploited for improvement of the therapeutic regimen.

PMID: 17699730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Nov;35(11):2102-10. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Attenuated expression of episodic growth hormone-induced CYP2C11 in female rats
associated with suboptimal activation of the Jak2/Stat5B and other modulating
signaling pathways.

Dhir RN(1), Thangavel C, Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary
Medicine, 3800 Spruce St., Philadelphia, PA 19104-6048, USA.

Inherent sex differences in various parameters of growth, musculoskeletal
function, metabolism, and cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent drug metabolism have
been reported in rats and humans administered typical intermittent/episodic
growth hormone (GH) replacement therapy. Having infused and monitored the
identical physiologic masculine (episodic) growth hormone profile to both
hypophysectomized male and female rats, we observed that induction levels of
hepatic CYP2C11 were 35 to 40% lower in females. Associated with the reduced
expression of the P450 isoform in the episodic GH-treated females were
dramatically lower activation levels of Janus kinase (Jak2), signal transducers
and activators of transcription (Stat5A and 5B) as well as 50% less binding of
Stat5B to the CYP2C11 promoter. Because the Jak2/Stat5B signaling pathway
mediates the effects of the masculine GH profile on its target cells, we conclude
that the lower induction level of CYP2C11 in females exposed to the masculine GH 
profile is probably due, at least in part, to the suboptimum activation of the
Jak2/Stat5B pathway. In addition to the reduced activation of the Jak2/Stat5B
pathway, we observed lower activational levels of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p44/p42) and, indirectly, nuclear factor-kappaB in the episodic
GH-treated females that may be involved in attenuating the activity of the
Jak2/Stat5B pathway diminishing CYP2C11 expression levels.

PMID: 17682071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Exp Med. 2007 Aug 6;204(8):1803-12. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Naive CD8+ T cells differentiate into protective memory-like cells after IL-2
anti IL-2 complex treatment in vivo.

Kamimura D(1), Bevan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

An optimal CD8(+) T cell response requires signals from the T cell receptor
(TCR), co-stimulatory molecules, and cytokines. In most cases, the relative
contribution of these signals to CD8(+) T cell proliferation, accumulation,
effector function, and differentiation to memory is unknown. Recent work (Boyman,
O., M. Kovar, M.P. Rubinstein, C.D. Surh, and J. Sprent. 2006. Science.
311:1924-1927; Kamimura, D., Y. Sawa, M. Sato, E. Agung, T. Hirano, and M.
Murakami. 2006. J. Immunol. 177:306-314) has shown that anti-interleukin (IL) 2
monoclonal antibodies that are neutralizing in vitro enhance the potency of IL-2 
in vivo. We investigated the role of IL-2 signals in driving CD8(+) T cell
proliferation in the absence of TCR stimulation by foreign antigen. IL-2 signals 
induced rapid activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 in
all CD8(+) T cells, both naive and memory phenotype, and promoted the
differentiation of naive CD8(+) T cells into effector cells. IL-2-anti-IL-2
complexes induced proliferation of naive CD8(+) T cells in an environment with
limited access to self-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and when
competition for self-MHC ligands was severe. After transfer into wild-type
animals, IL-2-activated CD8(+) T cells attained and maintained a central memory
phenotype and protected against lethal bacterial infection. IL-2-anti-IL-2
complex-driven memory-like CD8(+) T cells had incomplete cellular fitness
compared with antigen-driven memory cells regarding homeostatic turnover and
cytokine production. These results suggest that intense IL-2 signals, with
limited contribution from the TCR, program the differentiation of protective
memory-like CD8(+) cells but are insufficient to guarantee overall cellular
fitness.

PMCID: PMC2118678
PMID: 17664293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Hepatology. 2007 Aug;46(2):504-13.

Loss of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 leads to
hepatosteatosis and impaired liver regeneration.

Cui Y(1), Hosui A, Sun R, Shen K, Gavrilova O, Chen W, Cam MC, Gao B, Robinson
GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA.

Growth hormone controls many facets of a cell's biology through the transcription
factors Stat5a and Stat5b (Stat5). However, whole body deletion of these genes
from the mouse does not provide portentous information on cell-specific cytokine 
signaling. To explore liver-specific functions of Stat5, the entire Stat5 locus
was deleted in hepatocytes using Cre-mediated recombination. Notably,
Stat5-mutant mice developed fatty livers and displayed impaired proliferation of 
hepatocytes upon partial hepatectomy (PHx). Loss of Stat5 led to molecular
consequences beyond the reduced expression of Stat5 target genes, such as those
encoding suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2), Cish, and insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1). In particular, circulating growth hormone levels were
increased and correlated with insulin resistance and increased insulin levels.
Aberrant growth hormone (GH)-induced activation of the transcription factors
Stat1 and Stat3 was observed in mutant livers. To test whether some of the
defects observed in liver-specific Stat5 deficient mice were due to aberrant
Stat1 expression and activation, we generated Stat1(-/-) mice with a
hepatocyte-specific deletion of Stat5. Concomitant loss of both Stat5 and Stat1
restored cell proliferation upon PHx but did not reverse fatty liver development.
Thus the molecular underpinnings of some defects observed in the absence of Stat5
are the consequence of a deregulated activation of other signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) family members.CONCLUSION: Aberrant
cytokine-Stat5 signaling in hepatocytes alters their physiology through increased
activity of Stat1 and Stat3. Such cross-talk between different pathways could add
to the complexity of syndromes observed in disease.

PMID: 17640041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Jun;14(2):267-77.

Polymorphisms in the Janus kinase 2 (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) genes: putative association of the STAT gene region with
familial breast cancer.

Vaclavicek A(1), Bermejo JL, Schmutzler RK, Sutter C, Wappenschmidt B, Meindl A, 
Kiechle M, Arnold N, Weber BH, Niederacher D, Burwinkel B, Bartram CR, Hemminki
K, Försti A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology C050, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. a.vaclavicek@dkfz.de

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
pathway mediates the signals of a wide range of cytokines, growth factors and
hormones. Thus, aberrant activation of the JAK/STAT pathway may predispose to
malignancy due to deregulation of proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. In
this study, we investigated whether genetic variation in the JAK2 gene and the
STAT gene region (STAT3, STAT5A and STAT5B) is associated with breast cancer (BC)
risk. We carried out a case-control study using a German sample set with 441
familial, unrelated BC cases and 552 controls matched by age, ethnicity and
geographical region. A second similar set (381 cases, 460 controls) was applied
to validate the findings. Haplotypes in the JAK2 gene were not associated with
the risk of BC. In the STAT gene region, the rare haplotype CAGCC containing the 
variant alleles of each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was associated with 
an increased risk odds ratio (OR = 5.83, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.51-26.28). According to Akaike's information criterion, the best model to
describe the relationship between the haplotypes and BC was based on the SNPs
rs6503691 (STAT5B) and rs7211777 (STAT3). Carriers of the AC haplotype, which
represents the variant alleles of both SNPs, were at an increased risk (OR =
1.41, 95% CI 1.09-1.82). A decreased risk was observed for carriers of the AT
haplotype (OR = 0.60, 95% CI 0.38-0.94). Furthermore, individuals with the AC/GC 
diplotype were at a significantly increased risk (OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.13-3.14).
The observed genetic variation may also influence the inter-individual variation 
in response to STAT-signalling targeted therapy.

PMID: 17639043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 15;179(2):1068-79.

Stat5 is essential for early B cell development but not for B cell maturation and
function.

Dai X(1), Chen Y, Di L, Podd A, Li G, Bunting KD, Hennighausen L, Wen R, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

The two closely related Stat5 (Stat5A and Stat5B) proteins are activated by a
broad spectrum of cytokines. However, with the complication of the involvement of
Stat5A/5B in stem cell function, the role of Stat5A/5B in the development and
function of lymphocytes, especially B cells, is not fully understood. In this
study, we demonstrated that Stat5A/5B(-/-) fetal liver cells had severe
diminution of B cell progenitors but clearly had myeloid progenitors.
Consistently, the mutant fetal liver cells could give rise to hemopoietic
progenitors and myeloid cells but not B cells beyond pro-B cell progenitors in
lethally irradiated wild-type or Jak3(-/-) mice. Deletion of Stat5A/5B in vitro
directly impaired IL-7-mediated B cell expansion. Of note, reintroduction of
Stat5A back into Stat5A/5B(-/-) fetal liver cells restored their abilities to
develop B cells. Importantly, CD19-Cre-mediated deletion of Stat5A/5B in the B
cell compartment specifically impaired early B cell development but not late B
cell maturation. Moreover, the B cell-specific deletion of Stat5A/5B did not
impair splenic B cell survival, proliferation, and Ig production. Taken together,
these data demonstrate that Stat5A/5B directly control IL-7-mediated early B cell
development but are not required for B cell maturation and Ig production.

PMID: 17617599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;21(10):2503-15. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Regulation of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOC3) by growth hormone in
pro-B cells.

Barclay JL(1), Anderson ST, Waters MJ, Curlewis JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Queensland 4072,
Australia.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) is expressed by lymphoid cells and can
modulate the sensitivity of these cells to cytokine stimulation through
inhibition of Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) signaling pathways. This study employed a mouse pro-B cell
line expressing the human GH receptor (BaF/3-GHR), to elucidate the signal
transduction pathways used by GH to elicit SOCS3 expression. GH treatment of
these cells caused a rapid, dose-dependent increase in SOCS3 mRNA expression,
which was independent of de novo protein synthesis. As expected, GH treatment
increased JAK-dependent STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation, which bound to the
proximal STAT response element (pSRE) on the SOCS3 promoter. This process
appeared to involve STAT5b, rather than STAT5a. In addition, GH activation of the
SOCS3 promoter required a nearby activator protein (AP) 1/cAMP response element
(CRE), which bound cAMP response element binding protein, c-Fos, and c-Jun.
Moreover, inhibitors of p38 MAPK and c-Jun N-terminal kinase prevented
GH-stimulation of SOCS3 mRNA expression in these cells, suggesting a role for
these kinases in SOCS3 transcription. Importantly, GH stimulation increased
binding of FOXO3a to the SOCS3 promoter at a site overlapping the AP1/CRE
response element, and overexpression of FOXO3a in these cells augmented SOCS3
promoter activation. In addition, we show a direct interaction between FOXO3a and
STAT5 in these cells, which may provide a link between STAT5 and the AP1
transcription factors on the SOCS3 promoter. We conclude that regulation of SOCS3
expression by GH in a pro-B cell involves not only the pSRE, but also a
transcriptionally active complex involving cAMP response element binding
protein/c-Fos/c-Jun and FOXO3a. This study has implications for cytokine
regulation of SOCS gene expression in lymphoid cells.

PMID: 17609438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep;1773(9):1455-61. Epub 2007 May 29.

The transcription factors Stat5a/b are not required for islet development but
modulate pancreatic beta-cell physiology upon aging.

Lee JY(1), Gavrilova O, Davani B, Na R, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Room 101, Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA.

In insulinoma cell lines proliferation and insulin gene transcription are
stimulated by growth hormone and prolactin, which convey their signals through
the transcription factors Stat5a and 5b (referred to as Stat5). However, the
contribution of Stat5 to the physiology of beta-cells in vivo could not be
assessed directly since Stat5-null mice die perinataly. To explore the
physiological role of Stat5 in the mouse, the corresponding gene locus targeted
with loxP sites was inactivated in beta-cells using two lines of Cre recombinase 
expressing transgenic mice. While the RIP-Cre transgene is active in pancreatic
beta-cells and the hypothalamus, the Pdx1-Cre transgene is active in precursor
cells of the endocrine and exocrine pancreas. Mice carrying two floxed
Stat5alleles and a RIP-Cre transgene developed mild obesity, were hyperglycemic
and exhibited impaired glucose tolerance. Since RIP-Cre transgenic mice by
themselves display some glucose intolerance, the significance of these data is
unclear. In contrast, mice, in which the Stat5 locus had been deleted with the
Pdx1-Cre transgene, developed functional islets and were glucose tolerant. Mild
glucose intolerance occurred with age. We conclude that Stat5 is not essential
for islet development but may modulate beta-cell function.

PMCID: PMC2695665
PMID: 17599554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):126-31.

Beta-catenin expression enhances IL-7 receptor signaling in thymocytes during
positive selection.

Yu Q(1), Xu M, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute on
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Gerontology Research Center, 5600 Nathan
Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Differentiation of CD4+CD8+ double-positive thymocytes into CD8+ single-positive 
(SP) thymocytes is regulated by TCR and cytokine receptor signals. Previously, we
have shown that expression of stabilized beta-catenin, the major transcriptional 
cofactor of T cell factor, results in increase in both CD4SP and CD8SP thymocytes
with a preferential effect on CD8SP thymocytes. In this report, using mice
expressing stabilized beta-catenin and mice with T cell specific deletion of
beta-catenin, we show that beta-catenin expression augments IL-7Ralpha-chain
expression and down-regulates suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 expression in
thymocytes undergoing positive selection. Consequently, beta-catenin expression
augments IL-7R signaling in thymocytes during positive selection and promotes the
development of CD8SP thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC2273996
PMID: 17579030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Sep;21(9):2218-32. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Coactivation of janus tyrosine kinase (Jak)1 positively modulates prolactin-Jak2 
signaling in breast cancer: recruitment of ERK and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)3 and enhancement of Akt and Stat5a/b pathways.

Neilson LM(1), Zhu J, Xie J, Malabarba MG, Sakamoto K, Wagner KU, Kirken RA, Rui 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) receptors (PRLRs) have been considered selective activators of
Janus tyrosine kinase (Jak)2 but not Jak1, Jak3, or Tyk2. We now report marked
PRL-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak1, in addition to Jak2, in a series of
human breast cancer cell lines, including T47D, MCF7, and SKBR3. In contrast, PRL
did not activate Jak1 in immortalized, noncancerous breast epithelial lines HC11,
MCF10A, ME16C, and HBL-100, or in CWR22Rv1 prostate cancer cells or MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. However, introduction of exogenous PRLR into MCF10A, ME16C, 
or MDA-MB-231 cells reconstituted both PRL-Jak1 and PRL-Jak2 signals. In vitro
kinase assays verified that PRL stimulated enzymatic activity of Jak1 in T47D
cells, and PRL activated Jak1 and Jak2 with indistinguishable time and dose
kinetics. Relative Jak2 deficiency did not cause PRLR activation of Jak1, because
overexpression of Jak2 did not interfere with PRL activation of Jak1. Instead,
PRL activated Jak1 through a Jak2-dependent mechanism, based on disruption of PRL
activation of Jak1 after Jak2 suppression by 1) lentiviral delivery of Jak2 short
hairpin RNA, 2) adenoviral delivery of dominant-negative Jak2, and 3) AG490
pharmacological inhibition. Finally, suppression of Jak1 by lentiviral delivery
of Jak1 short hairpin RNA blocked PRL activation of ERK and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)3 and suppressed PRL activation of Jak2, Stat5a,
Stat5b, and Akt, as well as tyrosine phosphorylation of PRLR. The data suggest
that PRL activation of Jak1 represents a novel, Jak2-dependent mechanism that may
serve as a regulatory switch leading to PRL activation of ERK and Stat3 pathways,
while also serving to enhance PRL-induced Stat5a/b and Akt signaling.

PMID: 17550976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Sep 19;31(1):63-74. Epub 2007 May 29.

Role of STAT5a in regulation of sex-specific gene expression in female but not
male mouse liver revealed by microarray analysis.

Clodfelter KH(1), Miles GD, Wauthier V, Holloway MG, Zhang X, Hodor P, Ray WJ,
Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Massachusetts, USA.

Sexual dimorphism in mammalian liver impacts genes affecting hepatic physiology, 
including inflammatory responses, diseased states, and the metabolism of steroids
and foreign compounds. Liver sex specificity is dictated by sex differences in
pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretion, with the transcription factor signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5b required for intracellular
signaling initiated by the pulsatile male plasma GH profile. STAT5a, a minor
liver STAT5 form >90% identical to STAT5b, also responds to sexually dimorphic
plasma GH stimulation but is unable to compensate for the loss of STAT5b and the 
associated loss of sex-specific liver gene expression. A large-scale gene
expression study was conducted using 23,574-feature oligonucleotide microarrays
and livers of male and female mice, both wild-type and Stat5a-inactivated mice,
to elucidate any dependence of liver gene expression on STAT5a. Significant sex
differences in expression were found for 2,482 mouse genes, 1,045 showing higher 
expression in males and 1,437 showing higher expression in females. In contrast
to the widespread effects of the loss of STAT5b, STAT5a deficiency had a limited 
but well-defined impact on liver sex specificity, with 219 of 1,437
female-predominant genes (15%) specifically decreased in expression in
STAT5a-deficient female liver. Analysis of liver RNAs from wild-type mice
representing three mixed or outbred strains identified 1,028 sexually dimorphic
genes across the strains, including 393 female-predominant genes, of which 89
(23%) required STAT5a for normal expression in female liver. These findings
highlight the importance of STAT5a for regulation of sex-specific gene expression
specifically in female liver, in striking contrast to STAT5b, whose major effects
are restricted to male liver.

PMCID: PMC2586676
PMID: 17536022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jul 6;358(3):770-6. Epub 2007 May 7.

The C-terminal domain of the nuclear factor I-B2 isoform is glycosylated and
transactivates the WAP gene in the JEG-3 cells.

Mukhopadhyay SS(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cancer Genetics, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. suditmukhopadhy@yahoo.com

The transcription factor nuclear factor I (NFI) has been shown previously both in
vivo and in vitro to be involved in the cooperative regulation of whey acidic
protein (WAP) gene transcription along with the glucocorticoid receptor and
STAT5. In addition, one of the specific NFI isoforms, NFI-B2, was demonstrated in
transient co-transfection experiments in JEG cells, which lack endogenous NFI, to
be preferentially involved in the cooperative regulation of WAP gene expression. 
A comparison of the DNA-binding specificities of the different NFI isoforms only 
partially explained their differential ability to activate the WAP gene
transcription. Here, we analyzed the transactivation regions of two NFI isoforms 
by making chimeric proteins between the NFI-A and B isoforms. Though, their
DNA-binding specificities were not altered as compared to the corresponding
wild-type transcription factors, the C-terminal region of the NFI-B isoform was
shown to preferentially activate WAP gene transcription in cooperation with GR
and STAT5 in transient co-transfection assays in JEG-3 cells. Furthermore,
determination of serine and threonine-specific glycosylation (O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine) of the C-terminus of the NFI-B isoform suggested that the
secondary modification by O-GlcNAc might play a role in the cooperative
regulation of WAP gene transcription by NFI-B2 and STAT5.

PMCID: PMC1942171
PMID: 17511965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;21(8):1861-76. Epub 2007 May 15.

The HER4 cytoplasmic domain, but not its C terminus, inhibits mammary cell
proliferation.

Feng SM(1), Sartor CI, Hunter D, Zhou H, Yang X, Caskey LS, Dy R, Muraoka-Cook
RS, Earp HS 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Unlike the proliferative action of other epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor
family members, HER4/ErbB4 is often associated with growth-inhibitory and
differentiation signaling. These actions may involve HER4 two-step proteolytic
processing by intramembraneous gamma-secretase, releasing the soluble,
intracellular 80-kDa HER4 cytoplasmic domain, s80HER4. We demonstrate that
pharmacological inhibition of either gamma-secretase activity or HER4 tyrosine
kinase activity blocked heregulin-dependent growth inhibition of SUM44 breast
cancer cells. We next generated breast cell lines stably expressing GFP-s80HER4
[green fluorescent protein (GFP) fused to the N terminus of the HER4 cytoplasmic 
domain, residues 676-1308], GFP-CT(HER4) (GFP fused to N terminus of the HER4
C-terminus distal to the tyrosine kinase domain, residues 989-1308), or GFP
alone. Both GFP-s80HER4 and GFP-CTHER4 were found in the nucleus, but GFP-s80HER4
accumulated to a greater extent and sustained its nuclear localization. s80HER4
was constitutively tyrosine phosphorylated, and treatment of cells with a
specific HER family tyrosine kinase inhibitor 1) blocked tyrosine
phosphorylation; 2) markedly diminished GFP-s80HER4 nuclear localization; and 3) 
reduced signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5A tyrosine
phosphorylation and nuclear localization as well as GFP-s80HER4:STAT5A
interaction. Multiple normal mammary and breast cancer cell lines, stably
expressing GFP-s80HER4 (SUM44, MDA-MB-453, MCF10A, SUM102, and HC11) were growth 
inhibited compared with the same cell line expressing GFP-CTHER4 or GFP alone.
The s80HER4-induced cell number reduction was due to slower growth because rates 
of apoptosis were equivalent in GFP-, GFP-CTHER4-, and GFP-s80HER4-expressing
cells. Lastly, GFP-s80HER4 enhanced differentiation signaling as indicated by
increased basal and prolactin-dependent beta-casein expression. These results
indicate that surface HER4 tyrosine phosphorylation and ligand-dependent release 
of s80HER4 are necessary, and s80HER4 signaling is sufficient for HER4-dependent 
growth inhibition.

PMCID: PMC2917064
PMID: 17505063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2007 Jun;35(2):272-82. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

STAT5A/B activity is required in the developing forebrain and spinal cord.

Markham K(1), Schuurmans C, Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, HSC
2153, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1. kmarkham@ucalgary.ca

Formation of the CNS requires the coordination and integration of processes such 
as cell proliferation, neuronal differentiation, neuronal migration, axon tract
formation and synaptogenesis, all of which must occur at precise times and places
during development. Although growth factors are known to play a role in
regulating many of these processes, very little is known of the signaling events 
immediately downstream of ligand-receptor interactions in the developing CNS.
Here we present evidence that STAT5, an important mediator of cytokine signaling,
is required for some aspects of CNS development. We show that phosphorylated and 
hence activated forms of STAT5 (pSTAT5) are expressed in a temporally restricted 
manner in a subset of early-born telencephalic neurons and axons. Accordingly,
Stat5 mutants have reduced numbers of interneurons in the cortical marginal zone,
suggestive of migration defects. Moreover, corticofugal axons develop aberrantly 
in Stat5 mutants, indicative of a role for pSTAT5 in axon guidance. Notably,
pSTAT5 is also expressed in commissural axons in the embryonic spinal cord, where
it is also required for their guidance. Taken together, we provide the first
evidence that STAT5 is a key effector molecule in the developing mammalian CNS.

PMID: 17462911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Oncogene. 2007 Sep 20;26(43):6341-8. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Stat5 activation inhibits prolactin-induced AP-1 activity: distinct
prolactin-initiated signals in tumorigenesis dependent on cell context.

Gutzman JH(1), Rugowski DE, Nikolai SE, Schuler LA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The essential role of prolactin (PRL) in normal mammary gland growth and
differentiation has implicated this hormone in the development and progression of
breast cancer. Although Stat5 is the best-characterized mediator of PRL signals, 
PRL also activates multiple other signals, whose roles in normal and pathologic
processes are not well understood. We have shown that PRL stimulates activating
protein-1 (AP-1) activity in breast cancer cells, and can cooperate with
estradiol in this pathway. AP-1 modulates many processes critical for
carcinogenesis, including cell proliferation, survival, transformation, invasion 
and angiogenesis, and is elevated in many neoplasms, including breast tumors.
Here, we investigated the relationship between PRL signals to AP-1 and Stat5. We 
found that PRL activation of Stat5a and Stat5b, but not Stat1 or Stat3, reduced
PRL signals to AP-1, without altering estradiol-induced AP-1 activity. The
truncation mutant, Stat5/Delta53C, but not Stat5Y699F, was an effective
inhibitor, consistent with a requirement for Stat5 dimerization and nuclear
accumulation, but not its C-terminal transactivation activity. The association of
Stat5 with AP-1 proteins suggests that this underlies the inhibition.
Predictably, the ability of PRL to activate Stat5 and AP-1 was inversely related 
in mammary cell lines. Further, reduction of Stat5 protein with siRNA in T47D
cells, which contain elevated Stat5, increased PRL-induced AP-1 signals,
transcripts for the AP-1 target, matrix metalloproteinase-2 and associated
invasive behavior. This study points to the importance of cell context in
determining the spectrum of PRL-induced actions, which is critical for
understanding the contributions of PRL to breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3190200
PMID: 17438530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2007 Jun;190(2):137-49. Epub 2007 Apr 13.

Proliferation and apoptosis in mammary epithelium during the rat oestrous cycle.

Strange R(1), Westerlind KC, Ziemiecki A, Andres AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, CO 80214, USA. robert.strange@uchsc.edu

AIM: During each oestrous cycle, the mammary gland is subject to changes in
ovarian hormone levels. It responds with limited proliferation, differentiation
and regression. To understand the processes resulting in these changes,
particularly the regulation of cell death, we examined protein levels in mammary 
epithelium during the oestrous cycle of the Sprague-Dawley rat.
METHODS: Studies of serum hormone levels, vaginal smears, uterine weight and
morphology, mammary gland morphology, proliferation and apoptotic indices, and
protein levels during the stages of the Sprague-Dawley rat oestrous cycle were
used to examine the response of mammary epithelium to the oestrous cycle.
RESULTS: Proliferation of mammary epithelium was greater in diestrus and
proestrus, while apoptosis was increased in metestrus and diestrus. Growth
factor-, hormone- and anchorage-mediated cell survival signalling, indicated by
activation of Stat5A, FAK and Akt 1 and expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
members, was greater in proestrus and reduced in metestrus. In contrast, the
levels of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members and proteins associated with
apoptosis in mammary epithelium (TGFbeta3, pStat3) were increased during
metestrus and diestrus.
CONCLUSION: Decreases in growth factor, hormone and cell attachment survival
signals corresponded with increased apoptosis during the second half of the
oestrous cycle. The protein levels detected during oestrus suggest parallels to
apoptosis in mammary involution.

PMID: 17433024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3089-101. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Autocrine prolactin promotes prostate cancer cell growth via Janus
kinase-2-signal transducer and activator of transcription-5a/b signaling pathway.

Dagvadorj A(1), Collins S, Jomain JB, Abdulghani J, Karras J, Zellweger T, Li H, 
Nurmi M, Alanen K, Mirtti T, Visakorpi T, Bubendorf L, Goffin V, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, BLSB 309B, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107,
USA, and Department of Surgery, University Hospital of Turku, Finland.

The molecular mechanisms that promote progression of localized prostate cancer to
hormone-refractory and disseminated disease are poorly understood. Prolactin
(Prl) is a local growth factor produced in high-grade prostate cancer, and
exogenously added Prl in tissue or explant cultures of normal and malignant
prostate is a strong mitogen and survival factor for prostate epithelium. The key
signaling proteins that mediate the biological effects of Prl in prostate cancer 
are Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (Stat)-5a/5b via activation 
of Janus kinase-2. Importantly, inhibition of Stat5a/b in prostate cancer cells
induces apoptotic death. Using a specific Prl receptor antagonist
(Delta1-9G129R-hPRL), we demonstrate here for the first time that autocrine Prl
in androgen-independent human prostate cancer cells promotes cell viability via
Stat5 signaling pathway. Furthermore, we examined a unique clinical material of
human hormone refractory prostate cancers and metastases and show that autocrine 
Prl is expressed in 54% of hormone-refractory clinical human prostate cancers and
62% prostate cancer metastases. Finally, we demonstrate that autocrine Prl is
expressed from both the proximal and distal promoters of the Prl gene in clinical
human prostate cancers and in vivo and in vitro human prostate cancer models,
independently of pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1). Collectively, the data
provide novel evidence for the concept that autocrine Prl signaling pathway is
involved in growth of hormone-refractory and metastatic prostate cancer. The
study also provides support for the use of Prl receptor antagonists or other
therapeutic strategies to block the Prl-Janus kinase-2-Stat5 signaling pathway in
advanced prostate cancer.

PMID: 17412813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 1;282(22):15954-64. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Curcumin prevents tumor-induced T cell apoptosis through Stat-5a-mediated Bcl-2
induction.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Mandal D, Saha B, Sen GS, Das T, Sa G.

Author information: 
(1)Bose Institute, P-1/12 Calcutta Improvement Trust Scheme VII M, Kolkata 700
054, India.

Patients with advanced cancer exhibit multifaceted defects in their immune
capacity, which are likely to contribute to an increased susceptibility to
infections and disease progression. We demonstrated earlier that curcumin
inhibits tumor growth and prevents immune cell death in tumor-bearing hosts. Here
we report that tumor-induced immunodepletion involves apoptosis of thymic
CD4+/CD8+ single/double positive cells as well as loss of circulating CD4+/CD8+ T
cells. Administration of curcumin to tumor-bearing animals resulted in
restoration of progenitor, effecter, and circulating T cells. In fact, tumor
burden decreased the expression level of the pro-proliferative protein Bcl-2
while increasing the pro-apoptotic protein Bax in T cells. Curcumin
down-regulated the Bax level while augmenting Bcl-2 expression in these cells,
thereby protecting the immunocytes from tumor-induced apoptosis. A search for the
upstream mechanism revealed down-regulation of the common cytokine receptor gamma
chain (gammac) expression in T cells by tumor-secreted prostaglandin E2. As a
result, Jak-3 and Stat-5a phosphorylation and to a lesser extent Stat-5b
phosphorylation were also decreased in T cells. These entire phenomena could be
reverted back by curcumin, indicating that this phytochemical restored the
cytokine-dependent Jak-3/Stat-5a signaling pathway in T cells of tumor bearers.
Overexpressed Stat-5a/constitutively active Stat-5a1*6 but not Stat-5b could
efficiently elevate Bcl-2 levels and protect T cells from tumor-induced death,
whereas C-terminal truncated Stat-5a713 overexpression failed to do so,
indicating the importance of Stat-5a signaling in T cell survival. Thus, these
results raise the possibility of inclusion of curcumin in successful therapeutic 
regimens against cancer.

PMID: 17392282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 11;356(3):727-32. Epub 2007 Mar 16.

STAT5 transcriptional activity is impaired by LIF in a mammary epithelial cell
line.

Granillo AR(1), Boffi JC, Barañao L, Kordon E, Pecci A, Guberman A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Pab. II, Piso 2, Ciudad Universitaria, C1428EGA
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Gene regulation mediated by STAT factors has been implicated in cellular
functions with relevance to a variety of processes. Particularly, STAT5 and STAT3
play a crucial role in mammary epithelium displaying reciprocal activation
kinetics during pregnancy, lactation and involution. Here, we show that LIF
treatment of mammary epithelial HC11 cells reduces the phosphorylation levels and
transcriptional activity of p-STAT5 in correlation with STAT3 phosphorylation. We
have also found that STAT5 activity is negatively modulated by this cytokine,
both on a gene whose expression is induced, as well as on a promoter repressed by
STAT5. Besides, our results show that lactogenic hormones increase LIF effect on 
gene induction without modifying STAT3 phosphorylation state. Our findings
strongly suggest that there is crosstalk between STAT5 and STAT3 pathways that
could modulate their ability to regulate gene expression.

PMID: 17382296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Exp Hematol. 2007 Apr;35(4 Suppl 1):105-16.

Constitutive activation of Flt3 and STAT5A enhances self-renewal and alters
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Moore MA(1), Dorn DC, Schuringa JJ, Chung KY, Morrone G.

Author information: 
(1)Moore Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, 
USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

OBJECTIVE: To model human leukemogenesis by transduction of human hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) with genes associated with leukemia and expressed in leukemic
stem cells.
METHODS: Constitutive activation of Flt3 (Flt3-ITD) has been reported in 25 to
30% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Retroviral vectors expressing 
constitutively activated Flt3 and STAT5A were used to transduce human cord blood 
CD34(+) cells and HSC cell self-renewal and differentiation were evaluated.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that retroviral transduction of Flt3 mutations into
CD34(+) cells enhanced HSC self-renewal as measured in vitro in competitive
stromal coculture and limiting-dilution week-2 cobblestone (CAFC) assays.
Enhanced erythropoiesis and decreased myelopoiesis were noted together with
strong activation of STAT5A. Consequently, transduction studies were undertaken
with a constitutively active mutant of STAT5A (STAT5A[1( *)6]) and here also a
marked, selective expansion of transduced CD34(+) cells was noted, with a massive
increase in self-renewing CAFC detectable at both 2 and 5 weeks of stromal
coculture. Differentiation was biased to erythropoiesis, including erythropoietin
independence, with myeloid maturation inhibition. The observed phenotypic changes
correlated with differential gene expression, with a number of genes
differentially regulated by both the Flt3 and STAT5A mutants. These included
upregulation of genes involved in erythropoiesis and downregulation of genes
involved in myelopoiesis. The phenotype of week-2 self-renewing CAFC also
characterized primary Flt3-ITD(+) AML bone marrow samples. Isolation of leukemic 
stem cells (LSC) with a CD34(+), CD38(-), HLA-DR(-) phenotype was undertaken with
Flt3-ITD(+) AML samples resulting in co-purification of early CAFC. Gene
expression of LSC relative to the bulk leukemic population revealed upregulation 
of homeobox genes (HOXA9, HOXA5) implicated in leukemogenesis, and hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF) involved in stem cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Myeloid leukemogenesis is a multi-stage process that can involve
constitutively activated receptors and downstream pathways involving STAT5, HOX
genes, and HLF.

PMID: 17379095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Mar;15(3):583-90.

The modulation of STAT5A/GR complexes during fat cell differentiation and in
mature adipocytes.

Baugh JE Jr(1), Floyd ZE, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5A has been
shown to interact with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in adipocytes. The aim of
this study was to investigate the subcellular locations and modulation of
STAT5A/GR complexes during adipogenesis and in mature adipocytes.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Both 3T3-L1 and 3T3-F442A cells were studied by 
performing subcellular fractionations, immunoprecipitation, and Western blotting 
after various treatments.
RESULTS: The formation of nuclear STAT5A/GR complexes was regulated in the
cytosol and in the nucleus at distinct times during adipogenesis and in mature
adipocytes. STAT5A, but not STAT5B, forms a complex with GR in adipocytes. The
STAT5A associated with GR in the nucleus is tyrosine phosphorylated.
DISCUSSION: The association of STAT5A with GR in the nucleus of adipocytes is
modulated by the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A. Both GR and STAT5A are known
to have important roles in adipocyte function. Hence, our data suggest that the
association of these two transcription factors may be important in the regulation
of adipocyte gene expression.

PMID: 17372307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Diabetes. 2007 Jun;56(6):1623-9. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

The STAT5A-mediated induction of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 expression by
prolactin or growth hormone in adipocytes.

White UA(1), Coulter AA, Miles TK, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70803, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 
(PDK)4 was expressed in adipocytes and whether PDK4 expression was hormonally
regulated in fat cells. Both Northern blot and Western blot analyses were
conducted on samples isolated from 3T3-L1 adipocytes after various treatments
with prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH), and/or insulin. Transfection of PDK4
promoter reporter constructs was performed. In addition, glucose uptake
measurements were conducted. Our studies demonstrate that PRL and porcine GH can 
induce the expression of PDK4 in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Our studies also show that
insulin pretreatment can attenuate the ability of these hormones to induce PDK4
mRNA expression. In addition, we identified a hormone-responsive region in the
murine PDK4 promoter and characterized a STAT5 binding site in this region that
mediates the PRL (sheep) and GH (porcine) induction in PDK4 expression in 3T3-L1 
adipocytes. PDK4 is a STAT5A target gene. PRL is a potent inducer of PDK4 protein
levels, results in an inhibition of insulin-stimulated glucose transport in fat
cells, and likely contributes to PRL-induced insulin resistance.

PMID: 17360981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Endocrinology. 2007 Jun;148(6):2894-903. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

A molecular basis for the sexually dimorphic response to growth hormone.

Thangavel C(1), Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary 
Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6048, USA.

Once reserved solely for the treatment of short stature, the now readily
available recombinant GH has expanded the use of the hormone to include the
treatment of cardiovascular, renal, muscular, skeletal, immunological,
psychosocial, and metabolic abnormalities associated with GH deficiency. There
are also proposals for the widespread use of the hormone to ameliorate or reverse
aging. However, this extensive use of GH has revealed intrinsic sexual
dimorphisms in which females are considerably less responsive to the therapeutic 
regimen than are males. Dynamic changes in the Janus kinase-2 (Jak2)/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stat5B) signaling pathway [as
determined by transducer activation, Stat5B binding to the GH-responsive promoter
of the CYP2C11 gene, and expression levels of the suppressors of cytokine
signaling family (Socs2, Socs3, and Cis)] were examined in male and female
rat-derived primary hepatocyte cultures exposed to the masculine-like episodic GH
profile. We report that the cellular actions of GH normally mediated by
activation of the Jak2/Stat5B pathway are suppressed in female cells possibly due
to an inherent overexpression of Cis, a member of the suppressors of cytokine
signaling family that normally down-regulates the Jak2/Stat5B pathway.

PMID: 17332060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Jul;127(7):1728-35. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

STAT5a/PPARgamma pathway regulates involucrin expression in keratinocyte
differentiation.

Dai X(1), Sayama K, Shirakata Y, Hanakawa Y, Yamasaki K, Tokumaru S, Yang L, Wang
X, Hirakawa S, Tohyama M, Yamauchi T, Takashi K, Kagechika H, Hashimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are critical to growth
factor-mediated intracellular signal transduction. We observed the rapid
expression and activation of STAT5a during keratinocyte differentiation induced
by suspension culture. STAT5a expression preceded that of involucrin, an
important molecule in the terminal differentiation of keratinocytes. To determine
whether STAT5a regulated involucrin expression, we expressed a dominant-negative 
(dn) STAT5a that blocks the dimerization of STAT5 and inhibits its nuclear
translocation. We found that dn-STAT5a inhibited involucrin expression in
keratinocytes. Given that STAT5 regulates adipogenesis via activating the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma signal, we hypothesized
that STAT5a regulated involucrin expression in the same manner. To test this
hypothesis, we examined the expression and transactivation of PPARgamma in a
suspension culture of keratinocytes. Suspension culture induced PPARgamma
expression and triggered PPARgamma transactivation rapidly and dn-STAT5a
downregulated this induction and suppressed PPARgamma transactivation.
Furthermore, preincubation with the PPARgamma/retinoid X-receptor inhibitor
HX-531 or the introduction of a dn-PPARgamma prevented the activation of
involucrin promoter and inhibited its induction. This report provides early
evidence of a major role for STAT5a in the differentiation of keratinocytes,
where it contributes to involucrin expression by activating the PPARgamma signal.

PMID: 17330131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2007 Mar;1(3):264-71. doi: 10.1002/prca.200600381.

Proteomic expression profiling of thyroid neoplasms.

Braunschweig T(1), Kaserer K, Chung JY, Bilke S, Krizman D, Knezevic V, Hewitt
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Array Research Program, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine neoplasm with multiple histologic
subtypes, each associated with different treatments and outcomes. Differentiating
benign neoplasms such as follicular adenomas from malignant entities such as
follicular carcinomas and papillary carcinoma can be challenging. To define the
proteomic profile of different thyroid tumors, we screened an antibody array of
330 features against five thyroid neoplasms: follicular adenoma, follicular
carcinoma, papillary carcinoma, anaplastic carcinoma, and medullary carcinoma as 
well as normal thyroid epithelium. Eight candidate biomarkers; c-erbB-2, Stat5a, 
Annexin IV, IL-11, RARa, FGF7, Caspase 9, and phospho-c-myc were identified as
differentially expressed on the antibody array, and validated with
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays, with a total of 144 samples of the
same variety of thyroid neoplasms. Analysis revealed c-erbB-2, Annexin IV, and
Stat5a have potential clinical utility to differentiate follicular adenoma,
follicular carcinoma, and papillary carcinoma from each other. By using an
antibody array as a discovery platform and a tissue microarray as a first step in
validation on a large number of specimens, we have identified new markers that
have potential utility in the diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms.

Copyright © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21136677  [PubMed]


485. Endocrinology. 2007 May;148(5):1977-86. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Loss of sexually dimorphic liver gene expression upon hepatocyte-specific
deletion of Stat5a-Stat5b locus.

Holloway MG(1), Cui Y, Laz EV, Hosui A, Hennighausen L, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Hepatocyte-specific, albumin-Cre recombinase-mediated deletion of the entire
mouse Stat5a-Stat5b locus was carried out to evaluate the role of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a and 5b (STAT5ab) in the
sex-dependent transcriptional actions of GH in the liver. The resultant
hepatocyte STAT5ab-deficient mice were fertile, and unlike global
STAT5b-deficient male mice, postnatal body weight gain was normal, despite a 50% 
decrease in serum IGF-I. Whole-liver STAT5ab RNA decreased by approximately
65-85%, and residual STAT5 immunostaining was observed in a minority of the
hepatocytes, indicating incomplete excision by Cre-recombinase. Quantitative PCR 
analysis of 20 sexually dimorphic, liver-expressed genes revealed significant
down-regulation of 10 of 11 male-specific genes in livers of male hepatocyte
STAT5ab-deficient mice. Class I female-specific liver genes were markedly
up-regulated (de-repressed), whereas the expression of class II female genes,
belonging to the Cyp3a subfamily, was unaffected by the loss of hepatocyte
STAT5ab. STAT5ab is thus required in the liver for positive regulation of
male-specific genes and for negative regulation of a subset of female-specific
genes. Continuous GH infusion strongly induced (>500-fold) the class II female
gene Cyp3a16 in both wild-type and hepatocyte STAT5ab-deficient male mice,
indicating sex-specific transcriptional regulation by GH that is STAT5ab
independent. In contrast, hepatocyte STAT5ab deficiency abolished the strong
suppression of the male-specific Cyp2d9 by continuous GH seen in control mouse
liver. Analysis of global STAT5a-deficient mice indicated no essential
requirement of STAT5a for expression of these sex-specific liver Cyp genes. Thus,
the major loss of liver sexual dimorphism in hepatocyte STAT5ab-deficient mice
can primarily be attributed to the loss of STAT5b.

PMCID: PMC3282149
PMID: 17317776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Biochem J. 2007 May 15;404(1):81-7.

Purification and identification of the STAT5 protease in myeloid cells.

Schuster B(1), Hendry L, Byers H, Lynham SF, Ward MA, John S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection, Immunity and Inflammatory Diseases, Guy's Campus,
King's College London, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2007 May 15;404(1):e1-2.

STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) proteins are critical
regulators of cytokine-induced cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. 
STAT functional activity can be variably regulated by post-translational
modifications, including phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation and
sumoylation. Additionally, limited proteolytic digestion of full-length STAT
proteins (STATalpha) generates C-terminally truncated forms (STATgamma) in
different cell lineages, which have significantly reduced transcriptional
activity due to the lack of the transactivation domain. Previously, it has been
shown that STAT5gamma, generated by an unidentified nuclear serine protease,
plays an important role in myeloid cell differentiation and is aberrantly
expressed in acute myeloid leukaemia. To better understand this regulatory
mechanism for STAT5 function, we have purified the STAT5 protease from the
immature myeloid cell line 32D and identified it by MS analysis as the
granule-derived serine protease, CatG (cathepsin G). We show that purified CatG
can specifically cleave full-length STAT5 to generate STAT5gamma, and this
activity can be inhibited by AEBSF [4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride] in 
an in vitro protease assay. Importantly, preparation of nuclear and cytoplasmic
extracts from immature myeloid cell lines, 32D and FDC-P1, in the presence of a
specific inhibitor for CatG results in the identification of STAT5alpha only.
These studies indicate that nuclear STAT5gamma does not naturally exist in
immature myeloid cells and is artificially generated from STAT5alpha during the
preparation of extracts due to the abundance of CatG in these cells. Therefore in
contrast with earlier studies, our data suggest that STAT5alpha, rather than
STAT5gamma is the active form in immature myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC1868840
PMID: 17300217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Leukemia. 2007 Mar;21(3):421-6. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Different target range and cytotoxic specificity of adaphostin and
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin in imatinib-resistant and sensitive cell
lines.

Barnes DJ(1), De S, van Hensbergen P, Moravcsik E, Melo JV.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Haematology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

Imatinib mesylate is a selective inhibitor of the oncogenic tyrosine kinase,
Bcr-Abl, and is widely used as a first-line treatment for chronic myeloid
leukaemia (CML). Prolonged monotherapy is frequently associated with patients
becoming refractory to imatinib. Therefore, there is considerable interest in
small molecule inhibitors which may be used either as replacements or as adjuncts
to existing imatinib therapy. For this purpose, it is most likely that drugs
which do not share imatinib's mechanism of action will be most valuable. We
compared two such compounds with different modes of action, adaphostin and
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG), for their cytotoxic effect and
ability to induce the downregulation of cellular proteins in a murine
haemopoietic cell line transformed with human p210(Bcr-Abl), and two subclones
resistant to imatinib owing to an Abl-kinase domain mutation (E255K) or
amplification of the BCR-ABL gene, respectively. We found that, whereas 17-AAG
selectively killed Bcr-Abl-positive cells and inhibited proteins dependent on
heat-shock protein 90 for their stability (p210(Bcr-Abl) and Akt), adaphostin
induced the downregulation of multiple cell-signalling proteins (p210(Bcr-Abl),
Akt, Bcr, Abl and STAT5a) and was cytotoxic to both Bcr-Abl-positive and
-negative cells. We suggest that both compounds may prove useful in the treatment
of CML but caution that undesirable side-effects may result from the inhibition
of multiple cell signalling proteins.

PMID: 17252018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;38(1-2):19-34.

Growth hormone stimulates adipogenesis of 3T3-L1 cells through activation of the 
Stat5A/5B-PPARgamma pathway.

Kawai M(1), Namba N, Mushiake S, Etani Y, Nishimura R, Makishima M, Ozono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Growth hormone-deficient (GHD) patients show a decreased number of adipocytes,
which is normalized by GH replacement, indicating an adipogenic effect of GH.
However, the precise mechanisms underlying this effect remain to be clarified. In
this study, we investigated the adipogenic effect of GH. GH stimulated MDI
(3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, dexamethasone, and insulin)-induced adipogenesis of
3T3-L1 cells with early induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors 
(PPAR)gamma2 expression. This adipogenic effect of GH was suppressed by
overexpression of Stat5A mutant (Stat5A-Y694F), a transcriptional suppressor for 
the GH-Stat5A/5B signaling pathway, with the reduction of PPARgamma2 expression. 
Next, we investigated the relationship between Stat5A/5B and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP)beta/delta orPPARgamma in 3T3-L1 cells. Stat5A/5B
stimulated C/EBPbeta- and C/EBPdelta-induced adipogenesis with enhancement of
PPARgamma2 expression. In addition, Stat5A/5B enhanced the transcriptional
activity of C/EBPbeta/delta in the PPARgamma gene promoter. Furthermore,
Stat5A/5B stimulated PPARgamma-induced adipogenesis and enhanced the
transcriptional activity of PPARgamma. These results suggest that the
GH-Stat5A/5B signaling pathway stimulates adipogenesis in cooperation with
C/EBPbeta/delta and PPARgamma. To completely understand the effect of GH, cDNA
microarray analysis was performed to screen genes affected by GH during
MDI-induced adipogenesis. Among 4277 genes, 18 and 19 genes were up- and
down-regulated respectively. cDNA microarray analysis also indicated the
up-regulation of PPARgamma and the modulation of expression of genes coding for
growth factors or growth factor receptors, suggesting that GH stimulates
adipogenesis in association with the modulation of cell growth. Thus, the
GH-Stat5A/B signaling pathway stimulates adipogenesis through two distinct steps.
In addition, cDNA microarray data provide us the further insights underlying the 
adipogenic effect of GH.

PMID: 17242167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Exp Med. 2007 Jan 22;204(1):65-71. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Helper T cell IL-2 production is limited by negative feedback and STAT-dependent 
cytokine signals.

Villarino AV(1), Tato CM, Stumhofer JS, Yao Z, Cui YK, Hennighausen L, O'Shea JJ,
Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. alejandro.villarino@ucsf.edu

Although required for many fundamental immune processes, ranging from
self-tolerance to pathogen immunity, interleukin (IL)-2 production is transient, 
and the mechanisms underlying this brevity remain unclear. These studies reveal
that helper T cell IL-2 production is limited by a classic negative feedback loop
that functions autonomously or in collaboration with other common gamma chain
(IL-4 and IL-7) and IL-6/IL-12 family cytokines (IL-12 and IL-27). Consistent
with this model for cytokine-dependent regulation, they also demonstrate that the
inhibitory effect can be mediated by several signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) family transcription factors, namely STAT5, STAT4, and
STAT6. Collectively, these findings establish that IL-2 production is limited by 
a network of autocrine and paracrine signals that are readily available during
acute inflammatory responses and, thus, provide a cellular and molecular basis
for its transient pattern of expression.

PMCID: PMC2118423
PMID: 17227909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4368-75. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Nonredundant roles for Stat5a/b in directly regulating Foxp3.

Yao Z(1), Kanno Y, Kerenyi M, Stephens G, Durant L, Watford WT, Laurence A,
Robinson GW, Shevach EM, Moriggl R, Hennighausen L, Wu C, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892-1820, USA.

Stats (signal transducers and activators of transcription) regulate multiple
aspects of T-cell fate. T regulatory (Treg) cells are a critical subset that
limits immune responses, but the relative importance of Stat5a/b versus Stat3 for
Treg cell development has been contentious. We observed that peripheral
CD25(+)CD4(+) T cells were reduced in Stat5(DeltaN) mice; however, the levels of 
Foxp3, a transcription factor that is critical for Treg cells, were normal in
splenic CD4(+) T cells even though they were reduced in the thymus. In contrast, 
complete deletion of Stat5a/b (Stat5(-/-)) resulted in dramatic reduction in
CD25- or Foxp3-expressing CD4(+) T cells. An intrinsic requirement was
demonstrated by reduction of Stat5a/b in CD4-expressing cells and by stem cell
transplantation using Stat5(-/-) fetal liver cells. Stat5a/b were also required
for optimal induction of Foxp3 in vitro and bound directly to the Foxp3 gene.
Reduction of Stat3 in T cells did not reduce the numbers of Treg cells in the
thymus or spleen; however, Stat3 was required for IL-6-dependent down-regulation 
of Foxp3. Therefore, we conclude that Stat5a/b have an essential, nonredundant
role in regulating Treg cells, and that Stat3 and Stat5a/b appear to have
opposing roles in the regulation of Foxp3.

PMCID: PMC1885496
PMID: 17227828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3906-14. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

Myeloproliferative disease induced by TEL-PDGFRB displays dynamic range
sensitivity to Stat5 gene dosage.

Cain JA(1), Xiang Z, O'Neal J, Kreisel F, Colson A, Luo H, Hennighausen L,
Tomasson MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University
Siteman Cancer Center, 550 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Expression of the constitutively activated TEL/PDGFbetaR fusion protein is
associated with the t(5;12)(q33;p13) chromosomal translocation found in a subset 
of patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. TEL/PDGFbetaR activates
multiple signal transduction pathways in cell-culture systems, and expression of 
the TEL-PDGFRB fusion gene induces myeloproliferative disease (MPD) in mice. We
used gene-targeted mice to characterize the contribution of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat) and Src family genes to TEL-PDGFRB-mediated
transformation in methylcellulose colony and murine bone marrow
transduction/transplantation assays. Fetal liver hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells harboring targeted deletion of both Stat5a and Stat5b
(Stat5ab(null/null)) genes were refractory to transformation by TEL-PDGFRB in
methylcellulose colony assays. Notably, these cell populations were maintained in
Stat5ab(null/null) fetal livers and succumbed to transformation by c-Myc.
Surprisingly, targeted disruption of either Stat5a or Stat5b alone also impaired 
TEL-PDGFRB-mediated transformation. Survival of TPiGFP-->Stat5a(-/-) and
TPiGFP-->Stat5a(+/-) mice was significantly prolonged, demonstrating significant 
sensitivity of TEL-PDGFRB-induced MPD to the dosage of Stat5a.
TEL-PDGFRB-mediated MPD was incompletely penetrant in TPiGFP-->Stat5b(-/-) mice. 
In contrast, Src family kinases Lyn, Hck, and Fgr and the Stat family member
Stat1 were dispensable for TEL-PDGFRB disease. Together, these data demonstrate
that Stat5a and Stat5b are dose-limiting mediators of TEL-PDGFRB-induced
myeloproliferation.

PMCID: PMC1874559
PMID: 17218386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Cutan Pathol. 2007 Jan;34(1):33-8.

Expression and prognostic significance of Stat5a and E-cadherin in extramammary
Paget's disease.

Liu H(1), Urabe K, Uchi H, Takeuchi S, Nakahara T, Dainichi T, Tu Y, Furue M,
Moroi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Stat5 has been shown to regulate the proliferation and inhibition of 
apoptosis in cancer cells. E-cadherin plays an important role in maintaining
epithelial stability and is widely regarded as a prognostic marker in many types 
of human cancers. The expression of Stat5 has not been investigated in
extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD).
OBJECTIVES: To study the expression of Stat5a and E-cadherin protein in EMPD and 
to evaluate the relationships between them.
METHODS: Thirty-six tissue samples from 34 cases with primary EMPD were subjected
to immunohistochemical staining for Stat5a and E-cadherin.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine of 30 in situ EMPD specimens were positive for Stat5a
expression, and the staining pattern for Stat5a was mainly nuclear in the
majority of Paget's cells. All four invasive specimens and two metastatic lymph
node specimens were negative for Stat5a. Twenty-six of 30 in situ EMPD specimens 
expressed E-cadherin in more than 50% of tumor cells, and three of 30 in situ
EMPD specimens expressed E-cadherin in less than 50% of tumor cells. One in situ 
EMPD specimen and one invasive specimen expressed E-cadherin in less than 25% of 
tumor cells. Three invasive specimens and two metastatic lymph node specimens
were negative, with occasional membranous staining for E-cadherin. There is a
significant correlation between the expression of Stat5a and E-cadherin.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that these proteins were found in in situ
lesions, and it is speculated that these proteins may play some role in the
prognosis/invasion of EMPD.

PMID: 17214852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Genes Dev. 2007 Jan 1;21(1):43-8.

The DNA damage signaling pathway is a critical mediator of oncogene-induced
senescence.

Mallette FA(1), Gaumont-Leclerc MF, Ferbeyre G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7,
Canada.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2007 Jan 1;21(1):1-5.

Here we report that RNA interference against ATM inhibited p53 accumulation in
cells expressing oncogenic STAT5 and cooperated with Rb inactivation to suppress 
STAT5A-induced senescence. Knocking down ATM was also effective to bypass
E2F1-induced senescence and in combination with Rb inactivation, inhibited
RasV12-induced senescence. Cells that senesced in response to ca-STAT5A or RasV12
accumulated DNA damage foci and activated ATM, ATR, Chk1, and Chk2, indicating
that aberrant oncogene activation induces a DNA damage signaling response.
Intriguingly, bypassing oncogene-induced senescence by inactivation of p53 and Rb
did not eliminate the accumulation of oncogene-induced DNA damage foci (ODDI),
suggesting a mechanism that may limit transformation in immortalized cells.

PMCID: PMC1759898
PMID: 17210786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Exp Med. 2007 Jan 22;204(1):79-91. Epub 2006 Dec 26.

Convergence of TCR and cytokine signaling leads to FOXO3a phosphorylation and
drives the survival of CD4+ central memory T cells.

Riou C(1), Yassine-Diab B, Van grevenynghe J, Somogyi R, Greller LD, Gagnon D,
Gimmig S, Wilkinson P, Shi Y, Cameron MJ, Campos-Gonzalez R, Balderas RS, Kelvin 
D, Sekaly RP, Haddad EK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Centre de Recherche, Hôpital Saint-Luc du Centre
Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Montréal, Québec H2X 1P1, Canada.

The molecular events involved in the establishment and maintenance of CD4+
central memory and effector memory T cells (TCM and TEM, respectively) are poorly
understood. In this study, we demonstrate that ex vivo isolated TCM are more
resistant to both spontaneous and Fas-induced apoptosis than TEM and have an
increased capacity to proliferate and persist in vitro. Using global gene
expression profiling, single cell proteomics, and functional assays, we show that
the survival of CD4+ TCM depends, at least in part, on the activation and
phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a)
and forkhead box O3a (FOXO3a). TCM showed a significant increase in the levels of
phosphorylation of STAT5a compared with TEM in response to both IL-2 (P<0.04) and
IL-7 (P<0.002); the latter is well known for its capacity to enhance T cell
survival. Moreover, ex vivo TCM express higher levels of the transcriptionally
inactive phosphorylated forms of FOXO3a and concomitantly lower levels of the
proapoptotic FOXO3a target, Bim. Experiments aimed at blocking FOXO3a
phosphorylation confirmed the role of this phosphoprotein in protecting TCM from 
apoptosis. Our results provide, for the first time in humans, an insight into
molecular mechanisms that could be responsible for the longevity and persistence 
of CD4+ TCM.

PMCID: PMC2118424
PMID: 17190839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):262-70.

IL-7/STAT5 cytokine signaling pathway is essential but insufficient for
maintenance of naive CD4 T cell survival in peripheral lymphoid organs.

Seki Y(1), Yang J, Okamoto M, Tanaka S, Goitsuka R, Farrar MA, Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Signal Network, Research Center for Allergy and Immunology,
RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Kanagawa, Japan.

Constitutive expression of suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 in T lineage
in vivo attenuated cytokine signaling and resulted in a dramatic reduction in the
number of naive CD44(low)CD62L(high) CD4 T cells in the spleen. After adoptive
transfer of thymocytes from SOCS1 transgenic mice into normal recipients, naive
CD4 T cells rapidly disappeared from the spleen within 1 wk. Likewise, T
cell-specific deletion of STAT5a/b in vivo resulted in a similar phenotype
characterized by loss of naive CD4 T cells. Thus, STAT5-mediated signaling is
crucial for promoting naive T cell survival. However, forced expression of
constitutively active STAT5 failed to rescue CD4 T cells in SOCS1 transgenic
mice, implying that STAT5 activation is necessary but not sufficient for naive
CD4 T cell survival. Although blockade of the IL-7R, a SOCS1 target, resulted in 
clear inhibition of naive T cell survival, the effect occurred 3 wk after
anti-IL-7R Ab treatment, but not at earlier time points. These results suggest
that IL-7-mediated STAT5 activation is essential for long-term survival of naive 
CD4 cells after export from thymus, and that another SOCS1-sensitive cytokine is 
critical for short-term naive T cell survival.

PMID: 17182563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Cell Biol. 2006 Dec 18;175(6):937-46.

Rac1 and a GTPase-activating protein, MgcRacGAP, are required for nuclear
translocation of STAT transcription factors.

Kawashima T(1), Bao YC, Nomura Y, Moon Y, Tonozuka Y, Minoshima Y, Hatori T,
Tsuchiya A, Kiyono M, Nosaka T, Nakajima H, Williams DA, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Therapy, The Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

STAT transcription factors are tyrosine phosphorylated upon cytokine stimulation 
and enter the nucleus to activate target genes. We show that Rac1 and a
GTPase-activating protein, MgcRacGAP, bind directly to p-STAT5A and are required 
to promote its nuclear translocation. Using permeabilized cells, we find that
nuclear translocation of purified p-STAT5A is dependent on the addition of
GTP-bound Rac1, MgcRacGAP, importin alpha, and importin beta. p-STAT3 also enters
the nucleus via this transport machinery, and mutant STATs lacking the MgcRacGAP 
binding site do not enter the nucleus even after phosphorylation. We conclude
that GTP-bound Rac1 and MgcRacGAP function as a nuclear transport chaperone for
activated STATs.

PMCID: PMC2064703
PMID: 17178910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jan 9;581(1):29-33. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Proliferation and apoptosis in PhIP-induced rat mammary gland carcinomas with
elevated phosphotyrosine-STAT5a.

Papaconstantinou AD(1), Snyderwine EG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In the present study we addressed whether proliferation and apoptosis in
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine-induced rat mammary gland
carcinomas were different between carcinomas with high and low expression of
phosphotyrosine (pY)-STAT5a. We determined that carcinomas with high pY-STAT5a
were more proliferative (MIB5 immunostaining) and had a higher expression of
cyclin D1 and estrogen receptor alpha. Furthermore, carcinomas with elevated
pY-STAT5a demonstrated lower apoptosis as measured by the TUNEL assay and the
Bcl-2 to Bax ratio, and showed increased expression of the long and short
isoforms of the prolactin receptor. The results of this study are consistent with
the notion that activated STAT5a may provide a growth advantage in some types of 
mammary gland cancers.

PMID: 17173897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1489-97. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

Postnatal body growth is dependent on the transcription factors signal
transducers and activators of transcription 5a/b in muscle: a role for
autocrine/paracrine insulin-like growth factor I.

Klover P(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Building 8, Room 107, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0822, USA. kloverp@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1486-8.

The transcription factors signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT)5a and STAT5b (STAT5) are essential mediators of many actions of GH,
including transcription of the IGF-I gene. Here, we present evidence that
skeletal muscle STAT5 is important for postnatal growth and suggest that this is 
conveyed by the production of localized IGF-I. To investigate the role of STAT5
signaling in skeletal muscle, mice with a skeletal-muscle-specific deletion of
the Stat5a and Stat5b genes (Stat5MKO mice) were used. IGF-I mRNA levels were
reduced by 60% in muscle tissue of these mice. Despite only a 15% decrease in
circulating IGF-I, 8-wk-old male Stat5MKO mice displayed approximately 20%
reduction in body weight that was accounted for by a reduction in lean mass. The 
skeletons of Stat5MKO mice were found to be smaller than controls, indicating the
growth defect was not restricted to skeletal muscle. These results demonstrate an
as yet unreported critical role for STAT5 in skeletal muscle for local IGF-I
production and postnatal growth and suggest the skeletal muscle as a major site
of GH action.

PMID: 17158201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):989-1008. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

In vivo response-based identification of direct hormone target cell populations
using high-density tissue arrays.

LeBaron MJ(1), Ahonen TJ, Nevalainen MT, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas Jefferson University, Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Cancer
Biology, 233 South 10th Street, 330 BLSB, Philadelphia, PA 19107-5541, USA.
mlebaron@kimmelcancercenter.org

To identify cell populations directly responsive to prolactin (PRL), GH,
erythropoietin, or granulocyte-colony stimulating factor within the physiological
setting of an intact mammal, we combined in situ detection of hormone-activated
signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)-5 in rats with
high-throughput tissue array analysis using cutting-edge matrix assembly (CEMA). 
Inducible activation of Stat5a/b, as judged by levels of nuclear-localized,
phosphoTyr694/699-Stat5a/b, served as an immediate and sensitive in situ marker
of receptor signaling in rat tissues after injection into male and female rats of
a single, receptor-saturating dose of hormone for maximal receptor activation.
CEMA tissue arrays facilitated analysis of most tissues, including
architecturally complex, thin-walled, and stratified tissues such as gut and
skin. In 40 tissues analyzed, 35 PRL-responsive and 32 GH-responsive cell types
were detected, of which 22 cell types were responsive to both hormones.
Interestingly, PRL but not GH activated Stat5 in nearly all of the endocrine
glands. In mammary glands, PRL activated Stat5 in a majority of luminal
epithelial cells but not myoepithelial cells, stromal fibroblasts, or adipocytes,
whereas GH activated Stat5 in a significant fraction of myoepithelial cells,
fibroblasts, and adipocytes but only in a minority of luminal cells. Finally, the
organism-wide screening revealed a yet-to-be identified erythropoietin-responsive
cell type in connective tissue. CEMA tissue arrays provide cost-effective in situ
analysis of large numbers of tissues. Biomarker-based identification of cell
populations responsive to individual hormones may shed new light on endocrine
disease as well as improve understanding of effects and side effects of hormones 
and drugs.

PMID: 17138649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Am J Pathol. 2006 Nov;169(5):1784-801.

Stromal and epithelial caveolin-1 both confer a protective effect against mammary
hyperplasia and tumorigenesis: Caveolin-1 antagonizes cyclin D1 function in
mammary epithelial cells.

Williams TM(1), Sotgia F, Lee H, Hassan G, Di Vizio D, Bonuccelli G, Capozza F,
Mercier I, Rui H, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Here, we investigate the role of caveolin-1 (Cav-1) in breast cancer onset and
progression, with a focus on epithelial-stromal interactions, ie, the tumor
microenvironment. Cav-1 is highly expressed in adipocytes and is abundant in
mammary fat pads (stroma), but it remains unknown whether loss of Cav-1 within
mammary stromal cells affects the differentiated state of mammary epithelia via
paracrine signaling. To address this issue, we characterized the development of
the mammary ductal system in Cav-1-/- mice and performed a series of mammary
transplant studies, using both wild-type and Cav-1-/- mammary fat pads. Cav-1-/- 
mammary epithelia were hyperproliferative in vivo, with dramatic increases in
terminal end bud area and mammary ductal thickness as well as increases in
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation, extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2
hyperactivation, and up-regulation of STAT5a and cyclin D1. Consistent with these
findings, loss of Cav-1 dramatically exacerbated mammary lobulo-alveolar
hyperplasia in cyclin D1 Tg mice, whereas overexpression of Cav-1 caused
reversion of this phenotype. Most importantly, Cav-1-/- mammary stromal cells
(fat pads) promoted the growth of both normal mammary ductal epithelia and
mammary tumor cells. Thus, Cav-1 expression in both epithelial and stromal cells 
provides a protective effect against mammary hyperplasia as well as mammary
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC1780215
PMID: 17071600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;66(20):9948-56.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5b activation enhances
hepatocellular carcinoma aggressiveness through induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Lee TK(1), Man K, Poon RT, Lo CM, Yuen AP, Ng IO, Ng KT, Leonard W, Fan ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong,
China.

Poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is associated with a high
potential of vascular invasion and metastasis. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) is a key event in the tumor invasion process. Recently, signal transducers 
and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) has been linked to tumor progression by
EMT induction. However, the precise roles of STAT5 genes (STAT5a and STAT5b) in
human epithelial cancers have not been elucidated clearly. The aim of this study 
is to analyze the roles of STAT5 isoforms in HCC progression using HCC clinical
samples. We showed that activation of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, was found in HCC
clinical samples and its expression was significantly associated with younger age
(P = 0.037), advanced tumor stages (P = 0.003), venous infiltration (P = 0.016), 
microsatellite formation (P = 0.024), multiple tumor nodules (P = 0.02), and poor
patient survival. To specifically investigate the mechanism underlying
constitutive activation of STAT5b in HCC, EGFP-HBX was introduced into Huh-7
cells. STAT5b activation in HCC is at least partially mediated by HBX activation.
Ectopic STAT5b transfection conferred increased HCC cell motility and
invasiveness by induction of EMT changes. In conclusion, STAT5b activation
enhanced HCC aggressiveness by induction of EMT, which was possibly mediated by
HBX activation. STAT5b could serve as a novel molecular target for HCC treatment.

PMID: 17047057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int Immunol. 2006 Dec;18(12):1681-90. Epub 2006 Oct 11.

Genetic background influences Th cell differentiation by controlling the capacity
for IL-2-induced IL-4 production by naive CD4+ T cells.

Yagi J(1), Arimura Y, Takatori H, Nakajima H, Iwamoto I, Uchiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tokyo Women's Medical University
School of Medicine, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.
jyagi1@research.twmu.ac.jp

Comparative studies using T(h)2-prone BALB/c and T(h)1-prone C57BL/6 mice were
performed to clarify the influence of genetic background on T(h) cell
differentiation. The results showed IL-4, the production of which is induced by
IL-2, to be much more abundantly produced by BALB/c naive CD4(+) T cells than by 
C57BL/6 naive CD4(+) T cells, thereby leading to a tendency for differentiation
toward T(h)2 in BALB/c naive CD4(+) T cells. This difference in IL-4 production
between the two naive CD4(+) T cells appeared to be attributable to specific
intracellular signaling events. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 
5 (STAT5) was preferentially activated by IL-2 in CD4(+) T cells developing in
BALB/c in contrast to the corresponding cells in C57BL/6. In addition, IL-4 also 
induced stronger STAT5 activation in CD4(+) T cells developing in BALB/c than in 
those developing in C57BL/6, whereas STAT6 was equally activated in these two
cells. Further results supported the involvement of STAT5 in the difference in
T(h) cell differentiation between BALB/c and C57BL/6 naive CD4(+) T cells.
STAT5A(-)(/)(-) naive CD4(+) T cells with the BALB/c genetic background showed
markedly less IL-2-induced IL-4 production than BALB/c naive CD4(+) T cells.
Conversely, forced expression of the constitutively active forms of STAT5A and
STAT5B in C57BL/6 naive CD4(+) T cells promoted the differentiation of T(h)2
cells. Thus, our results indicate IL-2-induced IL-4 production by naive CD4(+) T 
cells, in which STAT5 activation is involved and directly controlled by the
genetic background, to influence T(h) cell differentiation in murine strains.

PMID: 17035345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006 Sep;14(9):1543-52.

Decreased expression of adipogenic genes in obese subjects with type 2 diabetes.

Dubois SG(1), Heilbronn LK, Smith SR, Albu JB, Kelley DE, Ravussin E; Look AHEAD 
Adipose Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Health and Performance Enhancement Division, Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to delineate the potential role of adipogenesis in
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Obesity is characterized by an increase
in adipose tissue mass resulting from enlargement of existing fat cells
(hypertrophy) and/or from increased number of adipocytes (hyperplasia). The
inability of the adipose tissue to recruit new fat cells may cause ectopic fat
deposition and insulin resistance.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: We examined the expression of candidate genes
involved in adipocyte proliferation and/or differentiation
[CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha, C/EBPdelta, GATA domain-binding
protein 3 (GATA3), C/EBPbeta, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
gamma2, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A), Wnt-10b,
tumor necrosis factor alpha, sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c
(SREBP1c), 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, PPARG angiopoietin-related
protein (PGAR), insulin-like growth factor 1, PPARgamma coactivator 1alpha,
PPARgamma coactivator 1beta, and PPARdelta] in subcutaneous adipose tissue from
42 obese individuals with type 2 diabetes and 25 non-diabetic subjects matched
for age and obesity.
RESULTS: Insulin sensitivity was measured by a 3-hour 80 mU/m2 per minute
hyperinsulinemic glucose clamp (100 mg/dL). As expected, subjects with type 2
diabetes had lower glucose disposal (4.9 +/- 1.9 vs. 7.5 +/- 2.8 mg/min per
kilogram fat-free mass; p < 0.001) and larger fat cells (0.90 +/- 0.26 vs. 0.78
+/- 0.17 microm; p = 0.04) as compared with obese control subjects. Three genes
(SREBP1c, p < 0.01; STAT5A, p = 0.02; and PPARgamma2, p = 0.02) had significantly
lower expression in obese type 2 diabetics, whereas C/EBPbeta only tended to be
lower (p = 0.07).
DISCUSSION: This cross-sectional study supports the hypothesis that impaired
expression of adipogenic genes may result in impaired adipogenesis, potentially
leading to larger fat cells in subcutaneous adipose tissue and insulin
resistance.

PMCID: PMC2677804
PMID: 17030965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2705-12.

STAT5 activity in pancreatic beta-cells influences the severity of diabetes in
animal models of type 1 and 2 diabetes.

Jackerott M(1), Møldrup A, Thams P, Galsgaard ED, Knudsen J, Lee YC, Nielsen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen,
Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. jackerott@imbg.ku.dk

Pancreatic beta-cell growth and survival and insulin production are stimulated by
growth hormone and prolactin through activation of the transcription factor
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5. To assess the role of
STAT5 activity in beta-cells in vivo, we generated transgenic mice that expressed
a dominant-negative mutant of STAT5a (DNSTAT5) or constitutive active mutant of
STAT5b (CASTAT5) under control of the rat insulin 1 promoter (RIP). When
subjected to a high-fat diet, RIP-DNSTAT5 mice showed higher body weight,
increased plasma glucose levels, and impairment of glucose tolerance, whereas
RIP-CASTAT5 mice were more glucose tolerant and less hyperleptinemic than
wild-type mice. Although the pancreatic insulin content and relative beta-cell
area were increased in high-fat diet-fed RIP-DNSTAT5 mice compared with wild-type
or RIP-CASTAT5 mice, RIP-DNSTAT5 mice showed reduced beta-cell proliferation at 6
months of age. The inhibitory effect of high-fat diet or leptin on insulin
secretion was diminished in isolated islets from RIP-DNSTAT5 mice compared with
wild-type islets. Upon multiple low-dose streptozotocin treatment, RIP-DNSTAT5
mice exhibited higher plasma glucose levels, lower plasma insulin levels, and
lower pancreatic insulin content than wild-type mice, whereas RIP-CASTAT5 mice
maintained higher levels of plasma insulin. In conclusion, our results indicate
that STAT5 activity in beta-cells influences the susceptibility to experimentally
induced type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17003334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Feb;292(2):E461-8. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Degradation of STAT5 proteins in 3T3-L1 adipocytes is induced by TNF-{alpha} and 
cycloheximide in a manner independent of STAT5A activation.

Floyd ZE(1), Segura BM, He F, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, 202 Life
Sciences Bldg., Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is a multifunctional cytokine that has
been implicated as a causative factor in obesity-linked insulin resistance. It is
commonly accepted that macrophage-derived TNF-alpha acts in a paracrine manner on
adjacent adipocytes to inhibit the expression of various adipocyte genes and to
attenuate insulin signaling. Several studies have revealed that signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT)5 proteins are modulated during adipogenesis
and can modulate the transcription of some adipocyte genes. In this study, we
demonstrate that TNF-alpha treatment, in the presence of cycloheximide, also
results in the rapid turnover of STAT5A and STAT5B in a process that is
independent of STAT5 activation by tyrosine phosphorylation. In addition, STAT5B 
is more labile than STAT5A under these conditions, suggesting that the COOH
terminus of STAT5 may be involved in the turnover of each protein. Initial
characterization of the TNF-alpha and cycloheximide-mediated degradation of STAT5
indicates that inhibition of the proteasome stabilizes both forms of STAT5 in the
presence of TNF-alpha. In addition, the use of an NF-kappaB inhibitor results in 
the stabilization of STAT5A in the presence of TNF-alpha and cycloheximide,
indicating that the degradation of STAT5 proteins under these conditions may
involve the NF-kappaB pathway. STAT5 proteins are abundantly expressed in mature 
adipocytes and are normally extremely stable proteins under a wide range of
conditions. However, our results demonstrate that the potentiation of
TNF-alpha-mediated signaling in the presence of cyclohexmide is associated with a
significant increase in the degradation of STAT5 proteins in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

PMID: 16985255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jan;21(1):106-25. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Progesterone receptor repression of prolactin/signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 5-mediated transcription of the beta-casein gene in mammary
epithelial cells.

Buser AC(1), Gass-Handel EK, Wyszomierski SL, Doppler W, Leonhardt SA, Schaack J,
Rosen JM, Watkin H, Anderson SM, Edwards DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) and glucocorticoids act synergistically to stimulate
transcription of the beta-casein milk protein gene. Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) mediates PRL-dependent trans-activation, and
glucocorticoid potentiation occurs through cross talk between glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) and Stat5 at the beta-casein promoter. In the mouse, progesterone
withdrawal leads to terminal differentiation and secretory activation of the
mammary gland at parturition, indicating progesterone's role in repressing milk
protein gene expression during pregnancy. To investigate the mechanism of the
inhibitory action of progesterone, experiments were performed with cell culture
systems reconstituted to express progesterone receptor (PR), the PRL
receptor/Stat5 signaling pathway, and GR, enabling evaluation of PR, GR, and
Stat5 interactions at the beta-casein promoter. With COS-1, normal murine mammary
gland, HC-11, and primary mammary epithelial cells, progestin-PR directly
repressed the PRL receptor/Stat5a signaling pathway's mediation of PRL-induced
beta-casein transcription. Progestin-PR also inhibited glucocorticoid-GR
enhancement of PRL induced trans-activation of beta-casein. Inhibition depended
on a functional PR DNA binding domain and specific PR-DNA interactions at the
beta-casein promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in HC-11 cells
revealed recruitment of PR and Stat5a to the beta-casein promoter by progestin or
PRL, respectively. Recruitment was disrupted by cotreatment with progestin and
PRL, suggesting a mutual interference between activated PR and Stat5a. Without
PRL, progestin-PR also recruited Stat5a to the beta-casein promoter, suggesting
that recruitment of an unactivated form of Stat5a may contribute to inhibition of
beta-casein by progesterone. These results define a negative cross talk between
PR and Stat5a/GR that may contribute to the physiological role of progesterone to
repress lactogenic hormone induction of the beta-casein gene in the mammary gland
during pregnancy.

PMID: 16973758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Ai Zheng. 2006 Aug;25(8):946-53.

[Mechanism of apoptosis induced by trichostatin A in leukemia Molt-4 cells
analyzed by microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Hong ZY(1), Yi LS, Miao XY, Lu YP, Zhou JF, Liu WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science &Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Histone deacetylase is overexpressed in a variety of
cancers and is closely correlated with oncogenic factors. A histone-deacetylase
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), has been shown to induce apoptosis in many
cancer cells at submicromolar concentrations. However, the mechanism remains
unknown. This study was to investigate the underlying mechanism of trichostatin A
on apoptosis of Molt-4 cells by characterizing the global gene expression
profiles before and after TSA treatment.
METHODS: PI single-labeled flow cytometry, MTT and DNA ladder were used to
observe the effect of TSA on apoptosis of MOLT-4 cells and normal human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Microarray and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot were used to
detect the differentially expressed genes of Molt-4 cells after incubation with
TSA.
RESULTS: TSA could induce apoptosis in Molt-4 cells in a dose and time-dependent 
manner. Besides, the dose of TSA within the time duration which could induce
significant apoptosis in Molt-4 cells did not demonstrate apparent cytotoxicity
to PBMCs. After incubation with TSA for 9 hours, 313 genes were detected
down-regulated by microarray. Proteins encoded by these genes included signal
transduction molecules, transcription factors, enzymes etc., which were involved 
in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation and survival. STAT5A, MYC and
ikaros were down-regulated by 80.4%, 77.3% and 83.1%, respectively. The changes
of the three genes were confirmed by RT-PCR and the changes of STAT5A and MYC
were further confirmed by Western blot.
CONCLUSION: The inhibition of cell growth and induction of apoptosis by TSA in
Molt-4 cells may be due to the changes of pro-proliferation genes and
anti-apoptosis genes.

PMID: 16965673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34374-80. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Conditional deletion of Shp2 in the mammary gland leads to impaired
lobulo-alveolar outgrowth and attenuated Stat5 activation.

Ke Y(1), Lesperance J, Zhang EE, Bard-Chapeau EA, Oshima RG, Muller WJ, Feng GS.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Stat5 and Stat3, two members of the Stat (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) family, are known to play critical roles in
mammopoiesis/lactogenesis and involution, respectively, in the mammary gland.
Phosphotyrosine phosphatase Shp2 has been shown to dephosphorylate and thus
inactivate both Stat5 and Stat3 in vitro. Paradoxically, cell culture studies
also suggest a positive role of Shp2 in promoting prolactin-stimulated Stat5
activation. We have shown here that selective deletion of Shp2 in mouse mammary
glands suppresses Stat5 activity during pregnancy and lactation, resulting in
significant impairment of lobulo-alveolar outgrowth and lactation. In contrast,
Stat3 activity was slightly up-regulated shortly before/at involution, leading to
normal epithelial cell apoptosis/involution in Shp2-deficient mammary gland.
Thus, Shp2 acts to promote Stat5 activation by the JAK2.prolactin receptor
complex, while negatively modulating Stat3 activity before the onset of
involution. This is the first demonstration that Shp2 manipulates Stat5 and Stat3
activities reciprocally in mammary epithelial cells, providing novel insight into
the complex mechanisms for regulation of various Stat family members by a
cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase.

PMCID: PMC1761121
PMID: 16959766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Nov 30;72(11):1547-54. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Curcumin regulates signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
expression in K562 cells.

Blasius R(1), Reuter S, Henry E, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, 9 Rue Edward Steichen, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) play important roles
in numerous cellular events as for example differentiation, inflammation or
immune response. Furthermore, constitutive STAT activation can be observed in a
high number of tumors. In our hands, curcumin treatment induced a decrease of
nuclear STAT3, -5a and -5b, without affecting neither STAT1, nor the
phosphorylation state of STAT1, -3 or -5 in the K562 cell line. Most
interestingly, the decrease of nuclear STAT5a and -5b after curcumin treatment
was accompanied by an increase of truncated STAT5 isoforms, indicating that
curcumin is able to induce the cleavage of STAT5 into its dominant negative
variants lacking the STAT5 C-terminal region. Interferon (IFN)-beta and -gamma
treatment induced IFN-stimulated responsive element (ISRE) transcriptional
activity, which was efficiently inhibited by curcumin pre-treatment. In parallel,
IFN-gamma treatment induced an increase of the amount of nuclear STAT1 and -3, as
well as their phosphorylated isoforms. Again, curcumin pre-treatment inhibited
these increases. Finally, curcumin treatment inhibited Jak2 mRNA expression as
well as cyclin D1 and v-src gene expression in K562 chronic leukaemia cells.

PMID: 16959222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2006 Aug;16(4):247-57.

Spatio-temporal kinetics of growth hormone receptor signaling in single cells
using FRET microscopy.

Biener-Ramanujan E(1), Ramanujan VK, Herman B, Gertler A.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science, and Nutrition, Faculty of
Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel.

The growth hormone (GH) receptor (R)-mediated JAK2 (Janus kinase-2)-STAT5
(signaling transducer and activator of transcription-5) pathway involves a
cascade of protein-protein interactions and tyrosine phosphorylations that occur 
in a spatially and temporally sensitive manner in cells. To study GHR
dimerization or GH-induced conformational change of predimerized GHRs and STAT5
activation kinetics in intact cells, fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) and live-cell imaging methods were employed. FRET measurements at the
membrane of HEK-293T cells co-expressing GHRs tagged at the C-terminus with cyan 
(C) and yellow (Y) fluorescent proteins (FPs) revealed transient GHR dimerization
lasting 2-3 min, with a maximum at 3 min after GH stimulation, which was
sufficient to induce STAT5 activation. The transient nature of the dimerization
or GH-induced conformational change of predimerized GHRs kinetics was not a
result of GHR internalization, as neither potassium- nor cholesterol-depletion
treatments prolonged the FRET signal. YFP-tagged STAT5 recruitment to the
membrane, binding to GHR-CFP, and phosphorylation, occurred within minutes of GH 
stimulation. Activated STAT5a-YFP did not show nuclear accumulation, despite
nuclear pSTAT5 increase, suggesting high turnover of STAT5 nuclear shuttling.
Although GHR dimerization and STAT5 activation have been reported previously,
this is the first spatially resolved demonstration of GHR-signaling kinetics in
intact cells.

PMID: 16950496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2006 Sep;231(8):1379-97.

Physiologic and genomic analyses of nutrition-ethanol interactions during
gestation: Implications for fetal ethanol toxicity.

Shankar K(1), Hidestrand M, Liu X, Xiao R, Skinner CM, Simmen FA, Badger TM,
Ronis MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Nutrition-ethanol (EtOH) interactions during gestation remain unclear primarily
due to the lack of appropriate rodent models. In the present report we utilize
total enteral nutrition (TEN) to specifically understand the roles of nutrition
and caloric intake in EtOH-induced fetal toxicity. Time-impregnated rats were
intragastrically fed either control or diets containing EtOH (8-14 g/kg/day) at a
recommended caloric intake for pregnant rats or rats 30% undernourished, from
gestation day (GD) 6-20. Decreased fetal weight and litter size (P < 0.05) and
increased full litter resorptions (33% vs. 0%), were observed in undernourished
dams compared to adequately fed rats given the same dose of EtOH, while
undernutrition alone did not produce any fetal toxicity. Undernutrition led to
impairment of EtOH metabolism, increased blood EtOH concentrations (160%), and
decreased maternal hepatic ADH1 mRNA, protein, and activity. Microarray analyses 
of maternal hepatic gene expression on GD15 revealed that 369 genes were altered 
by EtOH in the presence of undernutrition, as compared to only 37 genes by EtOH
per se (+/-2-fold, P < 0.05). Hierarchical clustering and gene ontology analysis 
revealed that stress and external stimulus responses, transcriptional regulation,
cellular homeostasis, and protein metabolism were affected uniquely in the
EtOH-under-nutrition group, but not by EtOH alone. Microarray data were confirmed
using real-time RT-PCR. Undernourished EtOH-fed animals had 2-fold lower IGF-1
mRNA and 10-fold lower serum IGF-1 protein levels compared to undernourished
controls (P < 0.0005). Examination of maternal GH signaling via STAT5a and -5b
revealed significant reduction in both gene and protein expression produced by
both EtOH and undernutrition. However, despite significantly elevated fetal BECs,
fetal IGF-1 mRNA and protein were not affected by EtOH or EtOH-undernutrition
combinations. Our data suggest that undernutrition potentiates the fetal toxicity
of EtOH in part by disrupting maternal GH-IGF-1, signaling thereby decreasing
maternal uterine capacity and placental growth.

PMID: 16946407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochem J. 2006 Dec 1;400(2):367-75.

STAT5 proteins are involved in down-regulation of iron regulatory protein 1 gene 
expression by nitric oxide.

Starzynski RR(1), Gonçalves AS, Muzeau F, Tyrolczyk Z, Smuda E, Drapier JC,
Beaumont C, Lipinski P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Jastrzebiec, ul. Postepu 1, 05-552 Wolka Kosowska,
Poland.

RNA-binding activity of IRP1 (iron regulatory protein 1) is regulated by the
insertion/extrusion of a [4Fe-4S] cluster into/from the IRP1 molecule. NO (nitic 
oxide), whose ability to activate IRP1 by removing its [4Fe-4S] cluster is well
known, has also been shown to down-regulate expression of the IRP1 gene. In the
present study, we examine whether this regulation occurs at the transcriptional
level. Analysis of the mouse IRP1 promoter sequence revealed two conserved
putative binding sites for transcription factor(s) regulated by NO and/or changes
in intracellular iron level: Sp1 (promoter-selective transcription factor 1) and 
MTF1 (metal transcription factor 1), plus GAS (interferon-gamma-activated
sequence), a binding site for STAT (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) proteins. In order to define the functional activity of these
sequences, reporter constructs were generated through the insertion of
overlapping fragments of the mouse IRP1 promoter upstream of the luciferase gene.
Transient expression assays following transfection of HuH7 cells with these
plasmids revealed that while both the Sp1 and GAS sequences are involved in basal
transcriptional activity of the IRP1 promoter, the role of the latter is
predominant. Analysis of protein binding to these sequences in EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) using nuclear extracts from mouse RAW
264.7 macrophages stimulated to synthesize NO showed a significant decrease in
the formation of Sp1-DNA and STAT-DNA complexes, compared with controls. We have 
also demonstrated that the GAS sequence is involved in NO-dependent
down-regulation of IRP1 transcription. Further analysis revealed that levels of
STAT5a and STAT5b in the nucleus and cytosol of NO-producing macrophages are
substantially lower than in control cells. These findings provide evidence that
STAT5 proteins play a role in NO-mediated down-regulation of IRP1 gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC1652831
PMID: 16886906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Anim Breed Genet. 2006 Aug;123(4):284-7.

Polymorphism and chromosomal localization of the porcine signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5B gene (STAT5B).

Ballester M(1), Sardina MT, Folch JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciència Animal i dels Aliments, Facultat de Veterinària,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain. maria.ballester@uab.es

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are a family of
transcription factors. STAT5A and 5B are two highly related proteins encoded by
two distinct genes. Transgenic knockout mice studies have indicated the
importance of STAT5 proteins for the regulation of both lactation and growth
performance. Moreover, different studies determine the role of STAT5 proteins in 
the modulation of adipocyte function. In this study, we sequenced one fragment of
STAT5B gene from animals of six breeds (Duroc, Iberian, Landrace, Large White,
Piétrain and Meishan) to identify genetic variants. A G/A single nucleotide
polymorphism in intron 14 creates a polymorphic PstI restriction site and was
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism
in the six breeds. Allele G was only present in Large White, Piétrain and Meishan
populations, detecting only G allele in this last pig breed. The STAT5B gene was 
located by radiation hybrid mapping to porcine chromosome 12, within the
confidence interval for the fatty acid composition quantitative trait loci,
previously identified in an Iberian x Landrace cross.

PMID: 16882096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):6947-54.

Gene expression profiling of acute myeloid leukemia with translocation
t(8;16)(p11;p13) and MYST3-CREBBP rearrangement reveals a distinctive signature
with a specific pattern of HOX gene expression.

Camós M(1), Esteve J, Jares P, Colomer D, Rozman M, Villamor N, Costa D, Carrió
A, Nomdedéu J, Montserrat E, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Hematology Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS,
University of Barcelona, Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) is an infrequent
leukemia subtype with characteristic clinicobiological features. This
translocation leads to fusion of MYST3 (MOZ) and CREBBP (CBP) genes, probably
resulting in a disturbed transcriptional program of a myelomonocytic precursor.
Nonetheless, its gene expression profile is unknown. We have analyzed the gene
expression profile of 23 AML patients, including three with molecularly confirmed
MYST3-CREBBP fusion gene, using oligonucleotide U133A arrays (Affymetrix).
MYST3-CREBBP cases clustered together and clearly differentiated from samples
with PML-RARalpha, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFbeta-MYH11 rearrangements. The relative 
expression of 46 genes, selected according to their differential expression in
the high-density array study, was analyzed by low-density arrays in an additional
series of 40 patients, which included 7 MYST3-CREBBP AML cases. Thus, genes such 
as prolactin (PRL) and proto-oncogene RET were confirmed to be specifically
overexpressed in MYST3-CREBBP samples whereas genes such as CCND2, STAT5A, and
STAT5B were differentially underexpressed in this AML category. Interestingly,
MYST3-CREBBP AML exhibited a characteristic pattern of HOX expression, with
up-regulation of HOXA9, HOXA10, and cofactor MEIS1 and marked down-regulation of 
other homeobox genes. This profile, with overexpression of FLT3, HOXA9, MEIS1,
AKR7A2, CHD3, and APBA2, partially resembles that of AML with MLL rearrangement. 
In summary, this study shows the distinctive gene expression profile of
MYST3-CREBBP AML, with overexpression of RET and PRL and a specific pattern of
HOX gene expression.

PMID: 16849538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Sep;17(9):4118-29. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

The intracellular domain of ErbB4 induces differentiation of mammary epithelial
cells.

Muraoka-Cook RS(1), Sandahl M, Husted C, Hunter D, Miraglia L, Feng SM, Elenius
K, Earp HS 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Departments of Genetics, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Differentiation of mammary epithelium in vivo requires signaling through
prolactin- and ErbB4/HER4-dependent mechanisms; how these pathways intersect is
unknown. We show herein that HC11 mouse mammary cells undergo ErbB4-dependent
lactational differentiation. Prolactin and the ErbB4 ligand HB-EGF each induced
STAT5A activation, expression of lactogenic differentiation markers, and lumen
formation in three-dimensional Matrigel cultures in HC11 cells. ErbB4 undergoes
ligand-dependent transmembrane domain cleavage at Val-675, releasing a soluble
80-kDa intracellular domain (s80(HER4)) that localizes to nuclei; the
physiological relevance of s80(HER4) is unknown. A HER4(V675A) mutant abolishing 
transmembrane cleavage impaired STAT5A activity, lactogenic gene expression, and 
lumen formation. Kinase-dead HER4(KD) was neither cleaved nor able to induce
differentiation of HC11 cells. Without treating HC11 cells with prolactin or
HB-EGF, s80(HER4) (expressed from a cDNA construct) localized to the nucleus,
activated STAT5A, and induced three-dimensional lumen formation. Nuclear
localization of exogenous s80(HER4) required intact kinase activity of s80(HER4),
as did activation of STAT5A. In contrast, nuclear localization of s80(HER4) and
STAT5A activation did not require the 16-amino acid region of the ErbB4
intracellular domain specific to the Cyt-1 isoform of ErbB4, and absent in the
Cyt-2 isoform. These results suggest that s80(HER4) formation contributes to
ErbB4-dependent differentiation of mammary epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1556387
PMID: 16837552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 18;26(3):462-6. Epub 2006 Jul 10.

A constitutively active ERBB4/HER4 allele with enhanced transcriptional
coactivation and cell-killing activities.

Vidal GA(1), Clark DE, Marrero L, Jones FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

In the normal breast, ERBB4 regulates epithelial differentiation and functions as
a nuclear chaperone for signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
5A, thereby stimulating milk-gene expression. In addition, ERBB4 functions as a
proapoptotic protein, suppressing the growth of malignant cells. We hypothesize
that these ERBB4 activities can be marshaled to suppress the growth of breast
tumors. To this end, we have created an ERBB4 allele harboring an activating
transmembrane mutation (ERBB4-CA) by substituting isoleucine 658 for glutamic
acid. This base substitution forms a valine-glutamic acid-glycine activation
domain first identified in oncogenic ERBB2/HER2/Neu. Ectopic expression of
ERBB4-CA in HEK293T cells resulted in a fivefold increase in receptor tyrosine
phosphorylation. Functionally, ERBB4-CA exhibited higher levels of nuclear
translocation than wild-type ERBB4, leading to significantly enhanced
ERBB4-induced STAT5A simulation of the beta-casein promoter. Activated ERBB4 has 
been demonstrated to induce cell killing of breast tumor cells. Significantly,
ERBB4-CA potentiated the proapoptotic function of ERBB4 in each breast, prostate 
and ovarian cancer cell line tested. Untransformed cell lines were resistant to
both ERBB4 and ERBB4-CA-mediated apoptosis underscoring the potential utility of 
active ERBB4 signaling for the therapeutic intervention of human cancer.

PMID: 16832345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biol Reprod. 2006 Oct;75(4):508-17. Epub 2006 Jun 14.

Involvement of the STAT5 signaling pathway in the regulation of mouse
preimplantation development.

Nakasato M(1), Shirakura Y, Ooga M, Iwatsuki M, Ito M, Kageyama S, Sakai S,
Nagata M, Aoki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8562, Japan.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is an essential
factor in the signal transduction pathways for a number of cytokines that
regulate the growth and differentiation of mammalian cells. In this study, we
investigated the STAT5 signaling pathway in mouse embryos, to elucidate the
mechanism of cytokine signal transduction that regulates preimplantation
development. The results of the RT-PCR analysis showed that both STAT5A and B
were expressed throughout preimplantation development. Immunocytochemistry
revealed that the STAT5A/B proteins were located in the nucleus from the early
1-cell stage to the blastocyst stage. STAT5 activation appeared to be regulated
by Janus kinases (JAKs) and SRC family kinases (SFKs), since inhibitors of these 
kinases inhibited the localization of STAT5 proteins to the nucleus. The JAK
inhibitor Ag490 reduced both the developmental rate of the embryos and the
expression levels of the downstream genes of the JAK-STAT5 signaling pathway.
These findings suggest that STAT5 proteins function in preimplantation
development by mediating the signals from cytokines.

PMID: 16775227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cytokine. 2006 May;34(3-4):143-54. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

A role for STAT5A/B in protection of peripheral T-lymphocytes from postactivation
apoptosis: insights from gene expression profiling.

Gatzka M(1), Piekorz R, Moriggl R, Rawlings J, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38120, USA. gatzka.tina@uci.edu

Activation of the transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B by JAK1 and JAK3
tyrosine kinases is a key event in downstream signaling of gammac (common gamma
chain)-family cytokine receptors in lymphoid cells. STAT5A/B-deficiency in mice
causes, among other consequences, a reduced size and altered composition of the
peripheral T-cell pool with predominance of an activated or memory-like
population (CD4(+)/CD44(high)/CD62L(low)) and a proliferative deficiency
following antigenic stimulation and subsequent IL-2 treatment. To further
elucidate the critical function of STAT5A/B in homeostasis and activation of
murine naïve peripheral T-lymphocytes, we have analyzed global gene expression of
STAT5A/B-deficient versus wild-type splenic T-cells by profiling with
high-density oligonucleotide arrays (Affymetrix). Comparison of (1) basal gene
expression of untreated peripheral STAT5A/B-deficient and control T-cells and (2)
immediate early gene induction upon in vitro stimulation of either population
with IL-2 has revealed differential expression of a broad range of genes
potentially contributing to the defects of STAT5A/B deficient T-cells. In the
context of enhanced apoptotic rates of STAT5A/B(-/-)-T-cells in vivo and upon
TCR-stimulation in culture our data suggest a role for STAT5 in post-activation
survival beyond regulation of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins and hence provide new 
insights into the nature of the late proliferative block in the T-cell
compartment caused by STAT5-deficiency.

PMID: 16757175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Horm Res. 2006;66(3):101-10. Epub 2006 May 30.

Growth hormone and prolactin receptors in adipogenesis: STAT-5 activation,
suppressors of cytokine signaling, and regulation of insulin-like growth factor
I.

Fleenor D(1), Arumugam R, Freemark M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA. fleen001@mc.duke.edu

Growth hormone GH stimulates lipolysis in mature adipocytes and primary
preadipocytes but promotes adipogenesis in preadipocyte cell lines. The
lactogenic hormones (prolactin PRL and placental lactogen) also stimulate
adipogenesis in preadipocyte cell lines but have variable lipolytic and lipogenic
effects in mature adipose tissue. We hypothesized that differences in expression 
of GH receptors GHR and PRL receptors PRLR during adipocyte development might
explain some of the differential effects of the somatogens and lactogens on fat
metabolism. To that end, we compared: (a) the expression of GHR and PRLR mRNAs in
3T3-L1 preadipocytes during the course of adipocyte differentiation; (b) the
induction of STAT-5 activity by GH and PRL during adipogenesis; and (c) the acute
effects of GH and PRL on the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS-1-3 and
cytokine-inducible SH2-domain-containing protein CIS) and IGF-I. In confluent,
undifferentiated 3T3-L1 cells, the levels of GHR mRNA were approximately 250-fold
higher than the levels of PRLR mRNA. Following induction of adipocyte
differentiation the levels of PRLR mRNA rose 90-fold but GHR mRNA increased only 
0.8-fold. Expression of both full-length (long) and truncated (short) isoforms of
the PRLR increased during differentiation but the long isoform predominated at
all time points. Mouse GH mGH stimulated increases in STAT-5a and 5b activity in 
undifferentiated as well as differentiating 3T3-L1 cells; mouse PRL mPRL had
little or no effect on STAT-5 activity in undifferentiated cells but stimulated
increases in STAT-5a and 5b activity in differentiating cells. mGH stimulated
increases in SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 mRNAs in undifferentiated cells and SOCS-1-3 and
CIS mRNAs in differentiating cells; mPRL induced CIS in differentiating cells but
had no effect on SOCS-1-3. mPRL and mGH stimulated increases in IGF-I mRNA in
differentiating cells but not in undifferentiated cells; the potency of mGH
(3-6-fold increase, p < 0.01) exceeded that of mPRL (40-90% increase, p < 0.05). 
Our findings reveal disparities in the expression of PRLR and GHR during
adipocyte development and differential effects of the hormones on STAT-5, the
SOCS proteins, CIS, and IGF-I. These observations suggest that somatogens and
lactogens regulate adipocyte development and fat metabolism through distinct but 
overlapping cellular mechanisms.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16735796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Syst Biol. 2005;1:2005.0008. Epub 2005 May 25.

Phosphotyrosine interactome of the ErbB-receptor kinase family.

Schulze WX(1), Deng L, Mann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Experimental
Bioinformatics, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Interactions between short modified peptide motifs and modular protein domains
are central events in cell signal-transduction. We determined interaction
partners to all cytosolic tyrosine residues of the four members of the
ErbB-receptor family in an unbiased fashion by quantitative proteomics using
pull-down experiments with pairs of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated
synthetic peptides. Each receptor had characteristic preferences for interacting 
proteins and most interaction partners had multiple binding sites on each
receptor. EGFR and ErbB4 had several docking sites for Grb2, while ErbB3 was
characterized by six binding sites for PI3K. We identified STAT5 as a direct
binding partner to EGFR and ErbB4 and discovered new recognition motifs for Shc
and STAT5. The overall pattern of interaction partners of EGFR and ErbB4 suggests
similar roles during signaling through their respective ligands. Phosphorylation 
kinetics of several tyrosine resides was measured by mass spectrometry and
correlated with interaction partner preference. Our results demonstrate that
system-wide mapping of peptide-protein interactions sites is possible, and
suggest shared and unique roles of ErbB-receptor family members in downstream
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1681463
PMID: 16729043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Cell Sci. 2006 Jun 1;119(Pt 11):2214-24. Epub 2006 May 9.

A complex interaction pattern of CIS and SOCS2 with the leptin receptor.

Lavens D(1), Montoye T, Piessevaux J, Zabeau L, Vandekerckhove J, Gevaert K,
Becker W, Eyckerman S, Tavernier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Protein Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, VIB09, Ghent
University, Belgium.

Hypothalamic leptin receptor signalling plays a central role in weight regulation
by controlling fat storage and energy expenditure. In addition, leptin also has
direct effects on peripheral cell types involved in regulation of diverse body
functions including immune response, bone formation and reproduction. Previous
studies have demonstrated the important role of SOCS3 (suppressor of cytokine
signalling 3) in leptin physiology. Here, we show that CIS (cytokine-inducible
SH2 protein) and SOCS2 can also interact with the leptin receptor. Using MAPPIT
(mammalian protein-protein interaction trap), a cytokine receptor-based
two-hybrid method operating in intact cells, we show specific binding of CIS with
the conserved Y985 and Y1077 motifs in the cytosolic domain of the leptin
receptor. SOCS2 only interacts with the Y1077 motif, but with higher binding
affinity and can interfere with CIS and STAT5a prey recruitment at this site.
Furthermore, although SOCS2 does not associate with Y985 of the leptin receptor, 
we find that SOCS2 can block interaction of CIS with this position. This
unexpected interference can be explained by the direct binding of SOCS2 on the
CIS SOCS box, whereby elongin B/C recruitment is crucial to suppress CIS
activity.

PMID: 16684815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 16;344(4):1342-5. Epub 2006 Apr 25.

STAT5 activators modulate acyl CoA oxidase (AOX) expression in adipocytes and
STAT5A binds to the AOX promoter in vitro.

Coulter AA(1), Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, 202 Life
Sciences Bldg., Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) diminishes adipose tissue mass in vivo and prolactin (PRL)
can also modulate adipocyte metabolism. Both GH and PRL are potent activators of 
STAT5 and exert a variety of effects on adipocyte gene expression. In this study,
we have demonstrated that GH and PRL increase the mRNA of acyl CoA oxidase in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. We also identified seven putative STAT elements in the murine 
AOX promoter. We observed that GH modulates protein binding to the majority of
these promoter elements. However, GH induced very potent binding to -1841 to
-1825 of the murine AOX promoter. EMSA supershift analysis revealed that this
site was specifically bound by STAT5A, but not by STAT1 or STAT3. Taken together,
these data strongly suggest that GH directly induces the expression of AOX in
adipocytes through STAT5A binding to the -1841 to -1825 site within the AOX
promoter. Our observations are consistent with other studies that demonstrate
that STAT5 activators modulate fatty acid oxidation.

PMID: 16650827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Hum Pathol. 2006 May;37(5):586-92.

STAT 5a expression in the breast is maintained in secretory carcinoma, in
contrast to other histologic types.

Strauss BL(1), Bratthauer GL, Tavassoli FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000, USA. brian.strauss@lackland.af.mil

The 7 signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) molecules are
responsible for the transcription of a variety of regulatory and differentiation 
proteins. STAT 5a is activated through a variety of mechanisms; in the breast,
this is predominantly through binding of prolactin to its receptor. Previously,
we showed that STAT 5a expression is decreased in atypical and malignant breast
ductal epithelial cells. Interestingly, STAT 5a overexpression was observed in
cells undergoing secretory change. In this study, secretory carcinomas were
examined by immunohistochemistry for the presence of STAT 5a. In contrast to
usual in situ or invasive ductal carcinoma, which lacked STAT 5a expression, all 
secretory carcinomas (11 invasive and 7 in situ, including 4 cases with both)
expressed STAT 5a. No expression was seen in apocrine metaplasia or in other
specialized breast carcinomas, such as mucinous or clear cell carcinoma. This
retention of signal in the secretory carcinomas may be explained by the higher
STAT 5a concentration present in cells undergoing secretory changes in general.
Alternatively, STAT 5a expression may be related to the t(12;15)(p13;q25)
chromosomal translocation, associated with certain pediatric tumors and recently 
demonstrated in many secretory carcinomas of the breast, which results in the
expression of a tyrosine kinase through ETV6 and NTRK3 fusion. ETV6 also has been
associated with the STAT 5a signaling pathway in another gene translocation and
may be altering STAT 5a expression in secretory carcinomas. Breast cancer causes 
significant morbidity and mortality, and, regardless of the mechanism for
retention of STAT 5a expression in this uncommon variant, the examination of STAT
5a will aid our understanding of normal and abnormal breast tissues.

PMID: 16647957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Mar;5(3):298-9. Epub 2006 Mar 16.

Caveolin and STAT-5 signaling: potential overlap in lactation and breast tumor
promotion.

Gewirtz DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Medicine, Massey Cancer Center,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.
gerwitz@hsc.vsu.edu

Comment on
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Mar;5(3):292-7.

PMID: 16627971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Blood. 2006 Jul 15;108(2):566-74. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Proteasome-dependent down-regulation of activated Stat5A in the nucleus.

Chen Y(1), Dai X, Haas AL, Wen R, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University,
China.

A broad spectrum of cytokines can activate the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (Stat5) by inducing a single tyrosine phosphorylation of the
molecule. Although the process of Stat5 activation has been well studied, the
mechanism by which it is inactivated is not fully understood. We demonstrate that
the proteasome inhibitor MG132, but not the nuclear export inhibitor leptomycin B
(LMB), stabilizes active nuclear Stat5A, whereas MG132 only partially stabilizes 
active cytoplasmic Stat5A. Importantly, ubiquitinated Stat5A is detected in the
nucleus and the polyubiquitination of active Stat5A is K48 linked, a linkage type
targeting proteins for degradation. Ubiquitination of Stat5A is recapitulated in 
a cell-free system, and Ubc5 is identified as the E2-conjugating enzyme for
Stat5A ubiquitination. Interestingly, phosphorylation of Stat5A per se is not
required for ubiquitination. Finally, C-terminal deletion analysis of Stat5A
localizes the amphipathic region of amino acids 751-762 as a ubiquitination
signal, possibly representing an E3 recognition motif. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that the down-regulation of nuclear and cytoplasmic active
Stat5A is differentially regulated. In the nucleus, ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated
protein degradation is the dominant mechanism for the down-regulation of active
Stat5A, whereas in the cytoplasm, protein tyrosine phasphatase is a major player 
in the down-regulation of active Stat5A.

PMCID: PMC1895487
PMID: 16569768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Sci China C Life Sci. 2006 Feb;49(1):63-72.

Effect of docosahexaenoic acid on interleukin-2 receptor signaling pathway in
lipid rafts.

Li Q(1), Ma J, Tan L, Wang C, Li N, Li Y, Xu G, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Surgery, General Hospital of Nanjing Command, Nanjing
210002, China. liqiurong@yahoo.com

Retraction in
    Sci China C Life Sci. 2007 Feb;50(1):140.

Recent studies have shown that polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) regulated the
functions of membrane receptors in T cells and suppressed T cell -mediated immune
responses. But the molecular mechanisms of immune regulation are not yet
elucidated. Lipid rafts are plasma membrane microdomains, in which many receptors
localized. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of DHA on
IL-2R signaling pathway in lipid rafts. We isolated lipid rafts by discontinuous 
sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation, and found that DHA could change the
composition of lipid rafts and alter the distribution of key molecules of IL-2R
signaling pathway, which transferred from lipid rafts to detergent-soluble
membrane fractions. These results revealed that DHA treatment increased the
proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids especially n-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids in lipid rafts and changed the lipid environment of membrane microdomains
in T cells. Compared with controls, DHA changed the localization of IL-2R, STAT5a
and STAT5b in lipid rafts and suppressed the expression of JAK1, JAK3 and
tyrosine phosphotyrosine in soluble membrane fractions. Summarily, this study
concluded the effects of DHA on IL-2R signaling pathway in lipid rafts and
explained the regulation of PUFAs in T cell-mediated immune responses.

PMID: 16544577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 3;25(33):4573-84. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Constitutive STAT5 activation specifically cooperates with the loss of p53
function in B-cell lymphomagenesis.

Joliot V(1), Cormier F, Medyouf H, Alcalde H, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, CNRS UMR146, Centre Universitaire, Orsay, France.

Signal transducers and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) A and B are
transcriptional regulators that play a central role in cytokine signaling in the 
hematopoietic lineage and which are frequently activated in a persistent manner
in human leukemia/lymphoma, as assessed by their constitutive tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity. To study the intrinsic oncogenic
properties of persistent STAT5 activation, we generated transgenic mice in which 
a constitutively activated point mutant of STAT5A, STAT5A(S711F), was expressed
at physiological level in their lymphoid compartment. In this model, persistent
STAT5 activation is weakly oncogenic, leading to the late emergence of clonal
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia at a low incidence. In contrast, STAT5(S711F) was found 
to cooperate with the loss of function of the p53 tumor suppressor gene to both
accelerate disease onset and to skew the large tumor spectrum that normally
characterize p53-deficient mice to strongly favor B-cell lymphoma/leukemia. The
emergence of STAT5A(S711F)-induced B-cell tumors is associated with the
activation of STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity, indicating
that activation of STAT5 oncogenic properties in transgenic STAT5A (TgSTAT5A)
(S711F) mice involves the deregulation of STAT5 phosphorylation dynamics.

PMID: 16532027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4917-25. Epub 2006 Mar 7.

STAT5 signaling is required for the efficient induction and maintenance of CML in
mice.

Ye D(1), Wolff N, Li L, Zhang S, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, USA.

The role of signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) in
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is controversial. To clarify the role of STAT5
signaling in P210(BCR/ABL) leukemogenesis, P210 was introduced into primary
murine STAT5A-deficient (STAT5A(-/-)) bone marrow (BM) cells, which, unlike
STAT5A/5B double knockout BM cells, have no major intrinsic hematopoietic
defects. Interestingly, only 21% of mice reconstituted with P210-transduced
STAT5A(-/-) BM cells developed classic CML, compared with 80% to 100% of
P210/STAT5A(+/+) and P210/STAT5A(+/-)-reconstituted animals. The remainder of
P210/STAT5A(-/-) animals died from an acute B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL)-like disease (32%) or a CML/ALL mix (47%), reflecting impairment in the
induction and maintenance of CML, which normally predominates in this mouse
model. Of mice that ultimately developed CML, P210/STAT5A(-/-) animals had
prolonged survival and increased myeloid immaturity. Importantly, reconstitution 
of wild-type mice with BM cells coexpressing P210 and dominant-negative STAT5
also profoundly reduced the incidence of CML, without impairing the induction of 
ALL. Altogether, these findings indicate that STAT5 and STAT5A play an important 
role in the pathogenesis of the CML-like disease in mice. A greater understanding
of the STAT5 target genes involved in CML induction may lead to new therapeutic
targets that influence CML progenitor cell biology.

PMCID: PMC1895818
PMID: 16522816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Arch Dermatol Res. 2006 Apr;297(10):450-8. Epub 2006 Feb 25.

The influence of STAT5 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides on the proliferation and
apoptosis of selected human cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cell lines.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Walczak M, Grzegrzólka R, Rogowska D, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Al. Powstanców
Wlkp. 72, 70-111, Szczecin, Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

STAT5 (signal transducers and activators of transcription) are suggested to play 
a role in the pathogenesis of leukaemia and lymphoma; however, their influence on
the growth of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cells is not clear enough. The aim of our
study was to analyse the function of STAT5 proteins in the proliferation and
apoptosis of selected cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cell lines (HUT 78; PB-1; HUT
102B), using antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) strategy. RT-PCR and Western
blot were applied to analyse the expression of STAT5 after incubation with
antisense ODN (AS ODN). The effect of ODN pretreatment on the cell clonogenecity 
was analysed in methylcellulose cultures. The process of apoptosis was estimated 
using two different flow cytometry (FACScan) methods: (1) combined Annexin
V/propidium iodide staining, (2) the TUNEL method. Perturbation of STAT5
expression reduced the proliferation of the PB-1 cells after a 24-h exposure to
antisense ODNs. Prolonged exposure (72 h) decreased the growth of each examined
cell line, especially after antisense STAT5A (AS STAT5A) treatment. Incubation
with AS STAT5 induced apoptosis in the population of HUT 78 and PB-1 cells.
STAT5s may play a significant role in the growth and the process of apoptosis of 
selected human cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cells.

PMID: 16502315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4898-906. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Clarifying the role of Stat5 in lymphoid development and Abelson-induced
transformation.

Hoelbl A(1), Kovacic B, Kerenyi MA, Simma O, Warsch W, Cui Y, Beug H,
Hennighausen L, Moriggl R, Sexl V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria.

The Stat5 transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b have been implicated in
lymphoid development and transformation. Most studies have employed
Stat5a/b-deficient mice where gene targeting disrupted the first protein-coding
exon, resulting in the expression of N-terminally truncated forms of Stat5a/b
(Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice). We have now reanalyzed lymphoid development in
Stat5a/b(null/null) mice having a complete deletion of the Stat5a/b gene locus.
The few surviving Stat5a/b(null/null) mice lacked CD8(+) T lymphocytes. A massive
reduction of CD8(+) T cells was also found in Stat5a/b(fl/fl) lck-cre transgenic 
animals. While gammadelta T-cell receptor-positive (gammadeltaTCR(+)) cells were 
expressed at normal levels in Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice, they were completely 
absent in Stat5a/b(null/null) animals. Moreover, B-cell maturation was abrogated 
at the pre-pro-B-cell stage in Stat5a/b(null/null) mice, whereas
Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) B-lymphoid cells developed to the early pro-B-cell stage.
In vitro assays using fetal liver-cell cultures confirmed this observation. Most 
strikingly, Stat5a/b(null/null) cells were resistant to transformation and
leukemia development induced by Abelson oncogenes, whereas
Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN)-derived cells readily transformed. These findings show
distinct lymphoid defects for Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) and Stat5a/b(null/null)
mice and define a novel functional role for the N-termini of Stat5a/b in
B-lymphoid transformation.

PMCID: PMC2875852
PMID: 16493008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;112(3-4):342J.

Assignment of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5A (STAT5A) gene
to porcine chromosome 12p13-->p11 by radiation hybrid panel mapping.

Sardina MT(1), Ballester M, Folch JM.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento S.En.Fi.Mi.Zo., Facoltà di Agraria, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Italy.

PMID: 16484801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Feb;36(1):1-7.

New insights into growth hormone action.

Waters MJ(1), Hoang HN, Fairlie DP, Pelekanos RA, Brown RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience and School of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia 4072. m.waters@imb.uq.edu.au

It has been 75 years since Evans and Long identified a somatic growth-promoting
substance in pituitary extracts, yet it is only in the last 20 years that the
molecular basis for this action has been established. Three key elements in this 
elucidation were the cloning of the GH receptor, the identification of Janus
kinase (JAK) 2 as the receptor-associated tyrosine kinase, and the delineation of
signal transduction and activators of transcription (STAT) 5a/b as the key
transcription factor(s) activated by JAK2. The interaction between these three
elements results in enhanced postnatal growth and is the subject of this review. 
We describe a new model for GH receptor activation based on subunit rotation
within a constitutive dimer, together with the phenotype and hepatic transcript
profile of mice with targeted knockins to the receptor cytoplasmic domain. These 
support a central role for STAT5a/b in postnatal growth.

PMID: 16461922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Exp Hematol. 2006 Feb;34(2):179-87.

Constitutive activation of zebrafish Stat5 expands hematopoietic cell populations
in vivo.

Lewis RS(1), Stephenson SE, Ward AC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Constitutive activation of Stat5 has been observed in a variety of
malignancies, particularly myeloid leukemias. To directly investigate the in vivo
consequences of Stat5 perturbation, we expressed constitutively active forms in
zebrafish.
METHODS: We generated mutants of the zebrafish stat5.1 protein (N646H,
H298R/N714F, and N714F) based on previously identified constitutively active
mutants of murine Stat5a. The in vitro properties of these mutants were
determined using phosphorylation-specific antibodies and luciferase reporter
assays, and their in vivo effects were analyzed through microinjection of
zebrafish embryos.
RESULTS: Two of these stat5.1 mutants (N646H and H298R/N714F) showed increased
tyrosine phosphorylation and transactivation activity compared to the wild-type
protein. Expression of either mutant led to a range of hematological
perturbations, which were more pronounced for the H298R/N714F mutant.
Interestingly, expression of wild-type also produced generally similar
phenotypes. Further analysis showed that expression of the H298R/N714F mutant led
to increased numbers of early and late myeloid cells, erythrocytes, and B cells. 
Some nonhematopoietic developmental perturbations were also observed, but these
were equally prominent with wild-type or mutant forms.
CONCLUSION: These data implicate Stat5 activity as a direct critical regulator of
hematological cell proliferation, suggesting a causal role for
constitutively-active Stat5 in the etiology of hematological malignancies.

PMID: 16459186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Exp Cell Res. 2006 May 1;312(8):1371-80. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma regulates expression of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5A.

Olsen H(1), Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, NOVUM, S-141 86
Huddinge, Sweden.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A (STAT5A) has been shown to be
important for terminal differentiation of mammary epithelial cells. In order to
understand regulation of expression of STAT5A, the 5' end of the mouse Stat5a
gene was isolated. Putative regulatory elements was searched for and several
peroxisome proliferator response elements (PPREs) were found, one with high
(12/13 nucleotides) and three with less (8-10/13) similarity to the reported
consensus sequence. Mouse mammary epithelial HC11 cells were treated with
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) ligand, the
thiazolidinedione (TZD) troglitazone, and an increase in STAT5A protein
expression was seen. The 5' flank of Stat5a gene was cloned in a luciferase
reporter vector. A concentration dependent activation of the STAT5A-luciferase
reporter was detected, when transiently transfected HC11 cells were treated with 
TZD. The activation could be inhibited by treatment with a PPARgamma antagonist. 
It has earlier been shown that epidermal growth factor (EGF) induces MAPK
phosphorylation of PPARgamma resulting in a less transcriptionally active
receptor. In HC11 cells, EGF inhibited TZD induced STAT5A-reporter activity
suggesting that our previously reported EGF-mediated suppression of STAT5A
expression is mediated in all or partly through inhibition of PPARgamma activity.
Furthermore, the MEK inhibitor PD98059 inhibited the EGF effect. All together,
data presented suggest that PPARgamma participates in regulation of STAT5A
expression.

PMID: 16457814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Blood. 2006 Jun 1;107(11):4326-33. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

STAT5-induced self-renewal and impaired myelopoiesis of human hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells involves down-modulation of C/EBPalpha.

Wierenga AT(1), Schepers H, Moore MA, Vellenga E, Schuringa JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1,
9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands.

Previously, we demonstrated that enforced activation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5A) in human cord blood (CB)-derived
stem/progenitor cells results in enhanced self-renewal and impaired myelopoiesis.
The present study identifies C/EBPalpha as a critical component that is
down-regulated by STAT5. Microarray and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis on STAT5A(1*6)-transduced CD34(+) cells identified
C/EBPalpha as the most prominently down-regulated gene. To determine the
cell-biological relevance of these observations, a 4-OHT-inducible C/EBPalpha-ER 
protein was co-expressed with the STAT5A(1*6) mutant in CB CD34(+) cells using a 
retroviral approach. Re-expression of C/EBPalpha in STAT5A(1*6) cells resulted in
a marked restoration of myelopoiesis. The proliferative advantage imposed on
CD34(+) cells by STAT5A(1*6) depended on the down-modulation of C/EBPalpha, as
reintroduction of C/EBPalpha induced a quick cell-cycle arrest and the onset of
myeloid differentiation. Long-term culture-initiating cell (LTC-IC) frequencies
were elevated from 0.8% +/- 0.6% to 7.8% +/- 1.9% by STAT5A(1*6) as compared with
controls, but these elevated LTC-IC frequencies were strongly reduced upon
re-introduction of C/EBPalpha in STAT5A(1*6) cells, and no second cobble-stone
area-forming cells (CAFCs) could be generated from double-transduced cells.
Enumeration of progenitors revealed that the number of colony-forming cells
(CFCs) was reduced more than 20-fold when C/EBPalpha was co-expressed in
STAT5A(1*6) cells. Our data indicate that down-modulation of C/EBPalpha is a
prerequisite for STAT5-induced effects on self-renewal and myelopoiesis.

PMID: 16455947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Endocrinol. 2005 Dec;187(3):387-97.

Increased sensitivity to GH in liver of Ames dwarf (Prop1df/Prop1df) mice related
to diminished CIS abundance.

Miquet JG(1), Sotelo AI, Dominici FP, Bonkowski MS, Bartke A, Turyn D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas (UBA-CONICET), Facultad de
Farmacia y Bioquímica, Junín 956, 1113, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

To investigate the influence of chronic GH deficiency on GH signaling in vivo, we
have analyzed Janus kinase (JAK) 2/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) 5 GH signaling pathway, and its regulation by the
suppressors of the cytokine signaling SOCS and by the JAK2-interacting protein
SH2-Bbeta, in liver of Ames dwarf (Prop1df/Prop1df) mice, which are severely
deficient in GH, prolactin and TSH, and of their normal littermates.
Prop1df/Prop1df mice displayed unaltered GH receptor, JAK2 and STAT5a/b protein
levels. No significant differences in the basal tyrosine-phosphorylation levels
of JAK2 and STAT5a/b were found between both groups of animals. After in vivo
administration of a high GH dose (5 microg/g body weight (BW)), the
tyrosine-phosphorylation levels of JAK2 and STAT5a/b increased significantly,
reaching similar values in normal and dwarf mice. However, after stimulation with
lower GH doses (50 and 15 ng/g BW) the tyrosine-phosphorylation level of STAT5a/b
was higher in dwarf mice. The protein content of CIS, a SOCS protein that
inhibits STAT5 signaling, was approximately 80% lower in dwarf mice liver, while 
SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 levels were unaltered. The content of SH2-Bbeta, a modulator of
JAK2 activity, was reduced by approximately 30% in dwarf mice, although this was 
associated with normal JAK2 response to a high GH dose. In summary,
Prop1df/Prop1df mice display increased hepatic sensitivity to GH, an effect that 
could be related to the lower abundance of CIS in this tissue. Furthermore, the
lower CIS content found in this model of GH deficiency suggests that CIS protein 
levels are regulated by GH in vivo.

PMID: 16423818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Mar;5(3):292-7. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Genetic ablation of caveolin-1 in mammary epithelial cells increases milk
production and hyper-activates STAT5a signaling.

Sotgia F(1), Schubert W, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology & Medicine, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Mar;5(3):298-9.

Caveolin-1 (Cav-1) is the main structural protein of caveolae, plasma membrane
invaginations that have been implicated in vesicular transport, cholesterol
homeostasis, and the regulation of signal transduction. Previous in vivo studies 
have established a correlation between Cav-1 expression levels and milk
production. In the normal mouse mammary gland, Cav-1 levels were shown to be
downregulated during late pregnancy and lactation, via a Ras-p42/44-MAPK-
dependent mechanism. Conversely, mammary glands from Cav-1 null-/- mice exhibit
premature lactation, with augmented development of the lobulo-alveolar
compartment and hyper-activation of the Jak-2/STAT5a signaling cascade. However, 
it remains unknown whether these phenotypes are cell-autonomous, i.e., intrinsic 
to the alveolar mammary epithelial cells, or whether stromal or
adipocyte-secreted factors contribute. To directly address this issue, we have
isolated primary mammary epithelial cells from wild-type (WT) and Cav-1 null-/-
mammary glands. We cultured them either in a 2D model (monolayers of mammary
epithelial cells) or in a 3D system on exogenous basement membrane (Matrigel; to 
reconstitute the minimal lactating unit, i.e., the mammary acinus). We show here 
that Cav-1 deficient mammary epithelial cells display the ability to
spontaneously generate milk droplets, and to secrete them into the acinar lumen. 
Interestingly, such milk production occurs in the absence of lactogenic
stimulation. Our results show that monolayers of Cav-1 null mammary epithelial
cells are enriched in milk droplets, as judged by both (1) phase contrast
microscopy and (2) immunofluorescence analysis with an antiserum directed against
mouse milk proteins. Consistently, Cav-1 deficient mammary acini display
increased milk production and secretion, as evaluated by Western blot analysis
and electron microscopic examination. Mechanistically, we show that loss of Cav-1
in mammary epithelial cells induces the baseline constitutive hyper-activation of
STAT5a signaling, which normally controls the temporal progression of
lactogenesis in the mammary gland. The possible implications of our findings for 
understanding mammary tumorigenesis are also discussed.

PMID: 16418573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 24;103(4):1000-5. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Stat5a/b are essential for normal lymphoid development and differentiation.

Yao Z(1), Cui Y, Watford WT, Bream JH, Yamaoka K, Hissong BD, Li D, Durum SK,
Jiang Q, Bhandoola A, Hennighausen L, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

Cytokines that use the common gamma chain gammac are critical for lymphoid
development and function. Mutations of the IL-7 receptor, gammac, or its
associated kinase, Jak3, are the major cause of human severe combined
immunodeficiency. Although activated by IL-7, Stat5a/b (Stat, signal transducer
and activator of transcription) have been thought to play limited roles in
lymphoid development. However, we now show that mice completely deficient in
Stat5a/b have severely impaired lymphoid development and differentiation. Absence
of Stat5 also abrogates T cell receptor gamma rearrangement and survival of
peripheral CD8(+) T cells. Thus, deficiency of Stat5 results in severe combined
immunodeficiency, similar in many respects to deficiency of IL-7R, gammac, and
Jak3.

PMCID: PMC1327727
PMID: 16418296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 1;176(1):128-37.

Allograft rejection requires STAT5a/b-regulated antiapoptotic activity in T cells
but not B cells.

Zhang Y(1), Kirken RA, Furian L, Janczewska S, Qu X, Hancock WW, Wang M, Tejpal
N, Kerman R, Kahan BD, Stepkowski SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Organ Transplantation, Department of Surgery,
University of Texas Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

STATs play key roles in immune function. We examined the role of STAT5a/b in
allograft rejection. STAT5a/b-deficient mice showed a 4-fold increased survival
time of heart allografts (p < 0.01). Unlike wild type, purified STAT5a/b-/- T
cells transferred to Rag1-/- recipients failed to mediate heart allograft
rejection until supplemented with STAT5a/b-/- B cells. In vitro, STAT5a/b-/- T
cells did not proliferate in response to Con A or alloantigens but entered
apoptosis within 48 h (95%). Activated STAT5a/b-/- T cells showed increased
expression of proapoptotic (caspases, DNA repair genes, TNF/TNFR-associated
factor family genes) and decreased antiapoptotic mRNAs in microarrays, while
Western blots confirmed reduced antiapoptotic Bcl-2 and elevated proapoptotic Bax
protein expression. Interestingly, at 24 h postactivation, STAT5a/b+/+ and
STAT5a/b-/- T cells produced similar levels of IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IFN-gamma
mRNA; ELISPOT assay showed an equivalent number of IL-4- and IFN-gamma-producing 
T cells in both STAT5a/b+/+ and STAT5a/b-/- splenic populations. Sera from
STAT5a/b+/+ and STAT5a/b-/- rejectors had donor-specific IgM, IgG1, IgG2a, and
IgG2b Ab, while STAT5a/b deficiency had no impact on B cell survival or
proliferation in response to LPS. Compared with allografts from STAT5a/b+/+
recipients, heart allografts from STAT5a/b-/- recipients had markedly reduced
infiltration by CD4 and CD8 T cells but increased infiltration by B cells and
dense endothelial deposition of C4d, a marker of humoral rejection. Thus,
activated STAT5a/b-/- T cells produce cytokines prior to entering apoptosis,
thereby promoting differentiation of B cells yielding donor-specific IgM and IgG 
Ab that mediate allograft rejection.

PMID: 16365403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Toxicol Pathol. 2005;33(7):768-75.

Global gene expression profiling of chemically induced rat mammary gland
carcinomas and adenomas.

Shan L(1), Yu M, Snyderwine EG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis,
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
20892-4262, USA.

Chemical carcinogens induce both benign and malignant mammary gland tumors in
female Sprague-Dawley rats. To identify gene expression profiles associated with 
malignancy, cDNA microarray analysis was used to compare gene expression profiles
in rat mammary gland carcinomas, adenomas, and normal mammary gland. Tumors were 
induced with various chemical carcinogens including
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP),
2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline (MeIQx),
7-12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA), N-nitrosomethylurea (NMU), and
4-aminobiphenyl. The global gene expression profiles in carcinomas and adenomas
were distinguishable by hierarchical clustering and multi-dimensional scaling
analyses. Permutation analysis revealed 110 clones statistically differentially
expressed between benign and malignant tumors (p < 0.0005). Carcinomas showed
relatively high expression of several genes associated with mammary epithelial
cell growth and proliferation (e.g., cyclin D1, PDGFalpha) and relatively low
expression of differentiation marker genes (e.g., beta -casein, whey acidic
protein, transferrin). Other categories of genes showing differential expression 
between carcinomas and adenomas were associated with protein homeostasis,
cytoskeleton, extracellular matrix, and cell metabolism (fatty acid metabolism,
oxidative phosphorylation, and glycolysis). Major gene families implicated in
malignancy by over-expression in carcinomas included the annexins (annexin A1 and
A4) and Stat family of transcription factors (Stat3 and Stat5a). The elevated
expression of the prolactin receptor in carcinomas concomitant with several
components of the mitogenic prolactin signaling pathway implicated
prolactin/prolactin receptor/Stat5a/cyclin D1 in rat mammary gland malignancy.

PMID: 16316942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Lett. 2006 Aug 28;240(2):306-11. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

Expression of Stat5A in tobacco chewing-mediated oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Kar P(1), Supakar PC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco Square, Bhubaneswar 751023, India.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (oscc) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide and
the number of cases is increasing regularly in the developing world. The
effective detection of oscc at its early stages becomes necessary for proper
treatment due to limited understanding of the critical pathways during
oncogenesis. Signal transducer and activators of transcription (Stats) are an
important group of transcription factors, which contribute to tumorigenesis due
to their intimate connection to growth factor signalling, apoptosis, and
angiogenesis. They also play a critical role in immune responses and hence
defective Stat signalling could favour tumour development by compromising immune 
surveillance. The role of Stat5A in mammary gland carcinoma and leukaemia has
already been reported. We for the first time report here the constitutive
activation of Stat5A as one of the early events in tobacco mediated-oscc in the
eastern Indian population, which can be used as a potent prognostic molecular
marker.

PMID: 16303247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cell Signal. 2006 Aug;18(8):1117-26. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Regulation of Stat3 nuclear import by importin alpha5 and importin alpha7 via two
different functional sequence elements.

Ma J(1), Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
Proteos Building, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore, 138673, Republic of Singapore.

Regulated import of STAT proteins into the nucleus through the nuclear pores is a
vital event. We previously identified Arg214/215 in the coiled-coil domain and
Arg414/417 in the DNA binding domain involved in the ligand-induced nuclear
translocation of Stat3. In this study, we investigated the mechanism for Stat3
nuclear transport. We report here that among five ubiquitously expressed human
importin alphas, importin alpha5 and alpha7, but not importin alpha1, alpha3, and
alpha4, bind to Stat3 upon cytokine stimulation. Similar results were observed
for Stat1, but not for Stat5a and 5b, which were unable to interact with any of
the importin alphas. The C-terminus of importin alpha5 is necessary but not
sufficient for Stat3 binding. Truncation mutant of Stat3 (aa1-320) that contains 
Arg214/215 exhibits specific binding to importin alpha5, and an exclusive nuclear
localization. Point mutations of Arg214/215 in this mutant destroy importin
alpha5 binding and its nuclear localization. In contrast, the truncation mutant
(aa320-770) including Arg414/417 fails to interact with importin alpha5 and is
localized in the cytoplasm. However, both sequence elements are necessary for the
full-length Stat3's interaction with importin alpha5. These results suggest that 
Arg214/215 is likely the binding site for importin alpha5, whereas Arg414/417 may
not be involved in the direct binding, but necessary for maintaining the proper
conformation of Stat3 dimer for importin binding. A model for Stat3 nuclear
translocation is proposed based on these data.

PMID: 16298512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Mar;20(3):675-85. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

The genes induced by signal transducer and activators of transcription (STAT)3
and STAT5 in mammary epithelial cells define the roles of these STATs in mammary 
development.

Clarkson RW(1), Boland MP, Kritikou EA, Lee JM, Freeman TC, Tiffen PG, Watson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, United Kingdom.

Prolactin and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) have different roles in the adult 
mammary gland, which are mediated in part by the signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT)5 and STAT3. In vivo studies have shown that
STAT5 contributes to prolactin-dependent lobuloalveolar development and lactation
whereas STAT3 mediates LIF-dependent epithelial apoptosis during postlactational 
involution. To understand the molecular basis of these STAT-dependent pathways,
we demonstrate the ligand-independent effects of STAT5 and STAT3 in mammary
epithelial cells in vitro and also identify the genes regulated by these related 
transcription factors. Thus, using conditionally active STAT3- or STAT5a-GyraseB 
fusion proteins, we observed that enforced and specific dimerization of STAT3
induced apoptosis whereas STAT5 induced differentiation of mammary epithelial
cells. Furthermore, STAT5 attenuated apoptosis mediated by LIF, the physiological
inducer of STAT3. Microarray analysis of STAT3- and STAT5-induced genes using
this system demonstrated a marked specificity, which reflected their different
physiological effects in vitro and in vivo. STAT5-specific gene targets included 
the milk protein genes alpha-casein and kallikrein-8 and the survival factors
prosaposin and Grb10. STAT3-specific genes included the apoptosis regulators
CCAAT enhancer binding protein-delta, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-regulatory
subunits, purine nucleoside phosphorylase, and c-fos. These data illustrate that 
specific activation of STAT3 and STAT5 alone is sufficient to induce and suppress
apoptosis, respectively, and that these transcription factors elicit their
actions by inducing distinct subsets of target genes in mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 16293640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1696-701. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

SOCS3 promotes apoptosis of mammary differentiated cells.

Le Provost F(1), Miyoshi K, Vilotte JL, Bierie B, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
Fabienne.LeProvost@jouy.inra.fr

Growth and function of the mammary gland is regulated by cytokines and modulated 
by suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS) proteins. In vitro experiments
demonstrated that SOCS3 can inhibit PRL induction of milk protein gene expression
and STAT5 activation. We explored the SOCS3 expression pattern during mouse
mammary development and its regulation by PRL and GH in wild-type and STAT5a-null
mammary tissue. Our results suggest that, in vivo, PRL stimulates SOCS3
expression in stromal adipocytes, independently of STAT5a stimulation. In mammary
epithelial cells, SOCS3 expression appears to be related to STAT3 activation.
Together, our results are consistent with a role of SOCS3 in the mammary gland by
promoting apoptosis of differentiated cells (adipocytes during gestation and
epithelial cells during involution).

PMID: 16289036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biol Reprod. 2006 Feb;74(2):383-94. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Identification of endometrial genes regulated by early pregnancy, progesterone,
and interferon tau in the ovine uterus.

Gray CA(1), Abbey CA, Beremand PD, Choi Y, Farmer JL, Adelson DL, Thomas TL,
Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

During early pregnancy in ruminants, progesterone (P4) from the corpus luteum and
interferon tau (IFNT) from the conceptus act on the endometrium to regulate genes
important for uterine receptivity and conceptus growth. The use of the uterine
gland knockout (UGKO) ewe has demonstrated the critical role of epithelial
secretions in regulation of conceptus survival and growth. A custom ovine cDNA
array was used to identify alterations in gene expression of endometria from Day 
14 cyclic, pregnant, and UGKO ewes (study 1) and from cyclic ewes treated with P4
or P4 with ZK 136,317 antiprogestin and control proteins or IFNT (study 2). In
study 1, expression of 47 genes was more than 2-fold different between Day 14
pregnant and cyclic endometria, whereas 23 genes was different between Day 14
cyclic and UGKO endometria. In study 2, 70 genes were different due to P4 alone, 
74 genes were affected by IFNT in a P4-dependent manner, and 180 genes were
regulated by IFNT in a P4-independent manner. In each study, an approximately
equal number of genes were found to be activated or repressed in each group.
Endometrial genes increased by pregnancy and P4 and/or IFNT include B2M, CTSL,
CXCL10, G1P3, GRP, IFI27, IFIT1, IFITM3, LGALS15, MX1, POSTN, RSAD2, and STAT5A. 
Transcripts decreased by pregnancy and P4 and/or IFNT include COL3A1, LUM, PTMA, 
PUM1, RPL9, SPARC, and VIM. Identification and analysis of these hormonally
responsive genes will help define endometrial pathways critical for uterine
support of peri-implantation conceptus survival, growth, and implantation.

PMID: 16251498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Vascul Pharmacol. 2005 Nov;43(5):346-52. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

Effect of obesity on insulin signaling through JAK2 in rat aorta.

Gottardello Zecchin H(1), De Souza CT, Oliveira Prada P, Campello Carvalheira JB,
Augusto Velloso L, Abdalla Saad MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, Cidade Universitária, Campinas, São Paulo, 13083-970,
Brazil.

Pathway specific resistance to insulin signaling through PI 3-kinase/Akt/eNOS
associated with a normal or hyper-activated MAP kinase signaling in vascular
tissues has recently been proposed as a candidate link between cardiovascular
disease and insulin resistance. Growth stimulatory pathways other than ERK/MAP
kinase, such as JAK/STAT have not yet been investigated in vessels of animal
models of insulin resistance. Here we have examined whether insulin is able to
activate JAK2/STAT pathway in rat aorta and also the regulation of this pathway
in an animal model of obesity/insulin resistance. Our results demonstrate that
insulin activates JAK2 tyrosine kinase activity in rat aorta in parallel with the
activation of STAT3 and STAT5a/b. Moreover, it is shown that, in obese animals,
JAK2/STAT and MAP kinase pathways are hyper-activated in response to insulin,
which occurs in association with a reduced activation of PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway 
in aorta. The results of the present study suggest that, besides ERK/MAP kinase
pathway, another potentially pro-atherogenic pathway, JAK2/STAT is
hyper-activated in vessels in a state of insulin resistance and this phenomenon, 
in association with the inhibition of the PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway, may play an
important role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 16236556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 30;280(52):43010-6. Epub 2005 Oct 14.

Nuclear localization of STAT5A modified with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine and
early involution in the mammary gland of Hirosaki hairless rat.

Nanashima N(1), Asano J, Hayakari M, Nakamura T, Nakano H, Yamada T, Shimizu T,
Akita M, Fan Y, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Biochemistry, Hirosaki University School of Medicine,
Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.

Hirosaki hairless rat (HHR) is a mutant strain spontaneously derived from
Sprague-Dawley rats (SDR), and its inheritance is autosomal recessive. In
addition to hair loss, female HHRs show involution of the mammary gland at an
early stage of lactation. In the present study we investigated the mammary gland 
development in HHR. Morphological examinations revealed that HHR mammary glands
are underdeveloped in virgins and exhibit distended alveoli on day 1 of lactation
(L1), followed by involution. Milk secretion was observed on L1 in HHR. Whey
acidic protein and other proteins were increased in milk of HHR and heterozygous 
rats on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Terminal deoxynucleotide
transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling assay revealed apoptosis induction in
HHRs at an early stage of lactation. By Western blotting, signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 5A levels in cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions 
of the mammary glands were not different between HHR and SDR on L1 and L7.
Nuclear localization of STAT5A in HHR and SDR was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. Tyr-phosphorylated STAT5A was not detected in HHR but was
detected in SDR nuclear fractions. Several proteins modified with O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) were detected in HHR nuclear extract on L1,
although not in SDR or heterozygous rats by Western blotting. When HHR nuclear
extract was applied to wheat germ agglutinin-agarose, a part of STAT5A was
recovered in bound fractions. STAT5A of SDR or heterozygous rat nuclei were not
bound to the lectin. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed that STAT5A
modified with O-GlcNAc is bound to the STAT5-responsive element. These results
indicate that the mammary glands of HHR showed terminal differentiation for a
short period, followed immediately by involution. In HHR, STAT5A is modified with
O-GlcNAc but is not Tyr-phosphorylated. This type of glycosylation is suggested
to be involved in the transient activation of STAT5A in HHR.

PMID: 16227201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int Immunol. 2005 Dec;17(12):1543-52. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Physical and functional interactions between STAT3 and ZIP kinase.

Sato N(1), Kawai T, Sugiyama K, Muromoto R, Imoto S, Sekine Y, Ishida M, Akira S,
Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences Hokkaido 
University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a latent
cytoplasmic transcription factor that can be activated by cytokines and growth
factors. It plays important roles in cell growth, apoptosis and cell
transformation, and is constitutively active in a variety of tumor cells. In this
study, we provide evidence that zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIPK)
interacts physically with STAT3. ZIPK specifically interacted with STAT3, and did
not bind to STAT1, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b or STAT6. ZIPK phosphorylated STAT3 on
serine 727 (Ser727) and enhanced STAT3 transcriptional activity. Small
interfering RNA-mediated reduction of ZIPK expression decreased leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF)- and IL-6-induced STAT3-dependent transcription.
Furthermore, LIF- and IL-6-mediated STAT3 activation stimulated ZIPK activity.
Taken together, our data suggest that ZIPK interacts with STAT3 within the
nucleus to regulate the transcriptional activity of STAT3 via phosphorylation of 
Ser727.

PMID: 16219639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Oct;24(10):1557-64.

Prevention of acute lung allograft rejection in rat by the janus kinase 3
inhibitor, tyrphostin AG490.

Higuchi T(1), Shiraishi T, Shirakusa T, Hirayama S, Shibaguchi H, Kuroki M,
Hiratuka M, Yamamoto S, Iwasaki A, Kuroki M.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Surgery, Fukuoka University School of Medicine,
Fukuoka, Japan. tshiraishi-ths@umin.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Tyrphostin AG490 (AG490) potently and selectively inhibits
gammac/Janus kinase 3-dependent signaling pathways, including downstream Stat5a/b
activation and subsequent T cell proliferation by alloantigen stimulation. We
evaluated the effects of AG490 on acute rat lung allograft rejection.
METHODS: A 7-day course of an intraperitoneal (IP) injection with 10 mg/kg, 15
mg/kg, or 20 mg/kg AG490 was administered to inhibit the rejection of
orthotopically transplanted Brown Norway (RT1n) rat lung allografts in Fischer
344 (RT1(1vl)) rat recipients. The progression of allograft rejection was
evaluated by X-ray with a semi-quantitative scoring system and was evaluated
histologically with a semi-quantitative rejection scoring system for acute lung
allograft rejection. Moreover, to determine whether AG490 regulates CD4+ T cell
differentiation during acute rejection, flow cytometry was used to investigate
Th1 (interferon-gamma) and Th2 (interleukin [IL]-4, IL-10) intracellular cytokine
profiles and the CD4+CD25+ T cell population in recipient splenocytes.
RESULTS: Results of radiology and histology confirmed that treatment with AG490
significantly suppressed acute lung allograft rejection. Furthermore, the
splenocytes of the AG490-treated recipients had significantly lower production of
interferon-gamma and relatively higher production of IL-10, implying that a Th2
shift was induced by AG490. In addition, AG490-treated recipients had a
significantly increased population of CD4+CD25+ T cells in their splenocytes on
Day 6 after transplantation.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that treatment with AG490 prevents acute lung 
allograft rejection in rats. The effects of AG490 may contribute to development
of CD4+CD25+ T cells and a Th2 shift of CD4+ T cells.

PMID: 16210130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40782-7. Epub 2005 Sep 28.

Structure of the unphosphorylated STAT5a dimer.

Neculai D(1), Neculai AM, Verrier S, Straub K, Klumpp K, Pfitzner E, Becker S.

Author information: 
(1)Department for NMR-based Structural Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

STAT proteins have the function of signaling from the cell membrane into the
nucleus, where they regulate gene transcription. Latent mammalian STAT proteins
can form dimers in the cytoplasm even before receptor-mediated activation by
specific tyrosine phosphorylation. Here we describe the 3.21-A crystal structure 
of an unphosphorylated STAT5a homodimer lacking the N-terminal domain as well as 
the C-terminal transactivation domain. The overall structure of this fragment is 
very similar to phosphorylated STATs. However, important differences exist in the
dimerization mode. Although the interface between phosphorylated STATs is
mediated by their Src-homology 2 domains, the unphosphorylated STAT5a fragment
dimerizes in a completely different manner via interactions between their
beta-barrel and four-helix bundle domains. The STAT4 N-terminal domain dimer can 
be docked onto this STAT5a core fragment dimer based on shape and charge
complementarities. The separation of the dimeric arrangement, taking place upon
activation and nuclear translocation of STAT5a, is demonstrated by fluorescence
resonance energy transfer experiments in living cells.

PMID: 16192273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Genet. 2005 Aug;43(7-8):459-64.

Nucleotide sequence variation in the transcription factor STAT5A 5'-noncoding
region in Bos taurus and Bos indicus cattle.

Flisikowski K(1), Hiendleder S, Zwierzchowski L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Jastrzebiec, Wólka Kosowska,
Poland.

PMID: 16187168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4561-5.

Nonobese diabetic mouse congenic analysis reveals chromosome 11 locus
contributing to diabetes susceptibility, macrophage STAT5 dysfunction, and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor overproduction.

Litherland SA(1), Grebe KM, Belkin NS, Paek E, Elf J, Atkinson M, Morel L,
Clare-Salzler MJ, McDuffie M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
litherla@pathology.ufl.edu

Unstimulated monocytes of at-risk/type 1 diabetic humans and macrophages of the
NOD mouse have markedly elevated autocrine GM-CSF production and persistent STAT5
phosphorylation. We analyzed the relationship between GM-CSF production and
persistent STAT5 phosphorylation in NOD macrophages using reciprocal congenic
mouse strains containing either diabetes-susceptible NOD (B6.NODC11), or
diabetes-resistant C57L (NOD.LC11) loci on chromosome 11. These intervals contain
the gene for GM-CSF (Csf2; 53.8 Mb) and those for STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B
(Stat3, Stat5a, and Stat5b; 100.4-100.6 Mb). High GM-CSF production and
persistent STAT5 phosphorylation in unactivated NOD macrophages can be linked to 
a region (44.9-55.7 Mb) containing the Csf2 gene, but not the Stat3/5a/5b genes. 
This locus, provisionally called Idd4.3, is upstream of the previously described 
Idd4.1 and Idd4.2 loci. Idd4.3 encodes an abundance of cytokine genes that use
STAT5 in their macrophage activation signaling and contributes approximately 50% 
of the NOD.LC11 resistance to diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2605964
PMID: 16177100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4236-46.

The Mannich base NC1153 promotes long-term allograft survival and spares the
recipient from multiple toxicities.

Stepkowski SM(1), Kao J, Wang ME, Tejpal N, Podder H, Furian L, Dimmock J, Jha A,
Das U, Kahan BD, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Organ Transplantation, Department of Surgery,
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

JAK3 is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase with limited tissue expression but is
readily found in activated T cells. Patients lacking JAK3 are immune compromised,
suggesting that JAK3 represents a therapeutic target for immunosuppression.
Herein, we show that a Mannich base, NC1153, blocked IL-2-induced activation of
JAK3 and its downstream substrates STAT5a/b more effectively than activation of
the closely related prolactin-induced JAK2 or TNF-alpha-driven NF-kappaB. In
addition, NC1153 failed to inhibit several other enzymes, including growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinases, Src family members, and serine/threonine protein
kinases. Although NC1153 inhibited proliferation of normal human T cells
challenged with IL-2, IL-4, or IL-7, it did not block T cells void of JAK3. In
vivo, a 14-day oral therapy with NC1153 significantly extended survival of
MHC/non-MHC mismatched rat kidney allografts, whereas a 90-day therapy induced
transplantation tolerance (>200 days). Although NC1153 acted synergistically with
cyclosporin A (CsA) to prolong allograft survival, it was not nephrotoxic,
myelotoxic, or lipotoxic and did not increase CsA-induced nephrotoxicity. In
contrast to CsA, NC1153 was not metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4. Thus, NC1153 
prolongs allograft survival without several toxic effects associated with current
immunosuppressive drugs.

PMID: 16177063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Exp Mol Med. 2005 Aug 31;37(4):353-64.

Hypoxia activates the cyclin D1 promoter via the Jak2/STAT5b pathway in breast
cancer cells.

Joung YH(1), Lim EJ, Lee MY, Park JH, Ye SK, Park EU, Kim SY, Zhang Z, Lee KJ,
Park DK, Park T, Moon WK, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Bio-Food and Drug Research
Center, College of Biomedical and Health Science, Konkuk University, Chungju
380-701, Korea.

Hypoxia, a common consequence of solid tumor growth in breast cancer or other
cancers, serves to propagate a cascade of molecular pathways which include
angiogenesis, glycolysis, and various cell-cycle control proteins. As we have
shown previously, hypoxia activates STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5) and increases its binding activity to the GAS element in mammary
epithelial cells. In this study we attempted to elucidate the mechanism by which 
cyclin D1 is regulated by the STAT5 protein under hypoxic conditions. Our data
demonstrate that hypoxia (2% O(2)) or desferrioxamine (DFO) induces tyrosine and 
serine phosphorylation of STAT5 in human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) and mammary 
epithelial cells (HC11). Imunoprecipitation and subsequent Western analysis
showed that Jak2 leads to the tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STAT5a
or STAT5b under hypoxic conditions. Using a transfected COS-7 cell model system, 
we demonstrate that the activity of a cyclin D1 promoter-luciferase construct
increased under hypoxic conditions or DFO treatment. The activity of the
STAT5b/cyclin D1 promoter increased significantly by 12 h of hypoxia, whereas the
activity of the STAT5a/cyclin D1 promoter was unaffected under hypoxic
conditions. These increases in promoter activity are predominantly mediated by
the Jak2/STAT5b signaling pathway. We have shown by EMSA that hypoxia induces
STAT5 to bind to the cyclin D1 promoter (GAS-1) in MCF-7 and HC11 cells. These
data suggest that STAT5b may mediate the transcriptional activation of cyclin D1 
after hypoxic stimulation.

PMID: 16155412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Virchows Arch. 2006 Feb;448(2):165-71. Epub 2005 Aug 19.

STAT 5a expression in various lesions of the breast.

Bratthauer GL(1), Strauss BL, Tavassoli FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000, USA. bratthauer@afip.osd.mil

The seven signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) molecules are
effectors of hormonal or cytokine stimulation through receptors. STAT 5a,
isolated from prolactin-stimulated mammary cells, contributes to normal
proliferation and is essential for mammary gland differentiation. Using a
monoclonal antibody, we tested 100 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast
tissues representing everything from simple hyperplasia to invasive carcinoma for
the expression of STAT 5a in comparison to normal breast epithelial cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed following heat treatment in a pressure
cooker. STAT 5a was found in endothelial cells, adipocytes, and leukocytes as
well as in the cytoplasm and nucleus of normal epithelial cells, usual ductal
hyperplasia, and benign lesions such as fibroadenoma. Myoepithelial cells and
stromal fibroblasts failed to demonstrate any STAT 5a in addition to most
atypical proliferations including in situ and invasive carcinomas. A few examples
of lobular intraepithelial neoplasia and invasive carcinoma demonstrated some
reactivity, albeit comparatively reduced. The absence of STAT 5a in the abnormal 
breast epithelial cells may indicate a defect contributory to the abnormal state.

PMID: 16133357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Endocrinology. 2005 Dec;146(12):5112-9. Epub 2005 Aug 25.

Prolactin specifically activates signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b in neuroendocrine dopaminergic neurons.

Ma FY(1), Anderson GM, Gunn TD, Goffin V, Grattan DR, Bunn SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroendocrinology and Department of Anatomy and Structural
Biology, University of Otago School of Medical Sciences, Dunedin, New Zealand.

The hypothalamic neuroendocrine dopaminergic (NEDA) neurons are crucial in
regulating prolactin secretion from the anterior pituitary. Rising prolactin
concentrations stimulate these neurons to secrete dopamine, which acts via the
pituitary portal vasculature to inhibit additional prolactin release. Prolactin
is known to activate Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) signaling pathways in other cell types, including neurons.
The possible role of JAK-STAT signaling in NEDA neurons has therefore been
examined in this study using fetal rat mediobasal hypothalamic cell cultures and 
an adult rat in vivo preparation. Cultured cells expressing the dopamine
synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) responded to prolactin with a
time-dependent increase in phospho-STAT5, but not phospho-STAT1 or phospho-STAT3,
nuclear labeling. This response was inhibited by the prolactin receptor
antagonist Delta1-9-G129R-human prolactin and the JAK inhibitor AG490, but was
unaffected by selected serine/threonine kinase inhibitors (H89, KN-93,
bisindolymaleimide, or PD98059). Antibodies selective for STAT5a or STAT5b
indicated that the response was restricted to STAT5b, with the number of TH cells
displaying STAT5b nuclear immunoreactivity rising from less than 10% under basal 
conditions to approximately 70% after prolactin stimulation. STAT5a nuclear
labeling remained unchanged at 6-10% of TH-positive cells. STAT5b selectivity was
confirmed in vivo, where the injection of prolactin into bromocriptine-treated
rats stimulated a time-dependent increase in STAT5b, but not STAT5a, nuclear
staining in the TH-expressing neurons in the arcuate nucleus. These results
extend our previous findings with STAT5b-deficient mice and strongly suggest that
in NEDA neurons, prolactin signaling via the JAK/STAT pathway is mediated
exclusively by STAT5b.

PMID: 16123156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 1;65(15):6864-73.

Overexpression of the tumor suppressor gene phosphatase and tensin homologue
partially inhibits wnt-1-induced mammary tumorigenesis.

Zhao H(1), Cui Y, Dupont J, Sun H, Hennighausen L, Yakar S.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Branch and Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute 
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-1758, USA.

The tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) is involved in cell 
proliferation, adhesion, and apoptosis. PTEN overexpression in mammary epithelium
leads to reduced cell number and impaired differentiation and secretion. In
contrast, overexpression of the proto-oncogene Wnt-1 in mammary epithelium leads 
to mammary hyperplasia and subsequently focal mammary tumors. To explore the
possibility that PTEN intersects with Wnt-induced tumorigenesis, mice that
ectopically express PTEN and Wnt-1 in mammary epithelium were generated. PTEN
overexpression resulted in an 11% reduction of Wnt-1-induced tumors within a
12-month period and the onset of tumors was delayed from an average of 5.9 to 7.7
months. The rate of tumor growth, measured from 0.5 cm diameter until the tumors 
reached 1.0 cm diameter, was increased from 8.4 days in Wnt-1 mice to 17.7 days
in Wnt-1 mice overexpressing PTEN. Here we show for the first time in vivo that
overexpression of PTEN in the Wnt-1 transgenic mice resulted in a marked decrease
in the insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I receptor levels leading to a reduced
IGF-I-mediated mitogenesis. Moreover, the percentage of BrdUrd-positive
epithelial nuclei was decreased by 48%. beta-Catenin immunoreactivity was
significantly decreased and the percentage of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 5a (stat5a)-positive mammary epithelial cells was increased by
2-fold in Wnt-1 mice overexpressing PTEN. The present study shows that PTEN can
partially inhibit the Wnt-1-induced mammary tumorigenesis in early neoplastic
stages by blocking the AKT pathway and by reducing the IGF-I receptor levels in
mammary gland. This study identifies the PTEN as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of mammary cancer and presumably other types of cancer.

PMID: 16061670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 1;65(15):6701-10.

A Ras homologue member I directly inhibits signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3 translocation and activity in human breast and ovarian cancer
cells.

Nishimoto A(1), Yu Y, Lu Z, Mao X, Ren Z, Watowich SS, Mills GB, Liao WS, Chen X,
Bast RC Jr, Luo RZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Immunology, and Molecular Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A Ras homologue member I (ARHI) is a novel imprinted tumor suppressor gene whose 
expression is frequently lost in breast and ovarian cancers. This small
GTP-binding protein is a member of the Ras superfamily with significant homology 
to both Ras and Rap. Unlike the Ras oncogene, however, ARHI inhibits tumor cell
growth. To elucidate the mechanisms by which ARHI inhibits cancer growth, we
screened a human breast epithelial cell cDNA library using a yeast two-hybrid
system for ARHI-interacting proteins. ARHI was found to interact with signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 3, a latent transcription
factor that transduces signals from the cell surface to the nucleus and activates
gene transcription. STAT3 is frequently phosphorylated and activated in breast
and ovarian cancers, where cytokines and growth factors up-regulate STAT3 and
stimulate proliferation. The ARHI-STAT3 interaction was confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation in mammalian cells and shown to be specific for STAT3 but
not STAT1 or STAT5a. When ARHI and STAT3 were coexpressed in SKOv3 cells, ARHI
formed a complex with STAT3 in the cytoplasm and prevented interleukin-6-induced 
STAT3 accumulation in the nucleus. ARHI markedly reduced STAT3 binding to DNA and
STAT3-dependent promoter activity while only moderately affecting STAT3
phosphorylation. Deletion of the NH2 terminus of ARHI significantly compromised
its inhibitory activity, suggesting that this unique NH2-terminal extension
contributes to ARHI's inhibition of STAT3-mediated transcriptional activity.
Thus, the physical association between STAT3 and ARHI as well as the functional
inhibition of STAT3 transcriptional activity by ARHI suggests a novel mechanism
through which a putative tumor suppressor gene can inhibit STAT3 activity in
breast and ovarian cancers.

PMID: 16061651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Diabetes. 2005 Jul;54(7):1968-75.

The regulation of fatty acid synthase by STAT5A.

Hogan JC(1), Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana State University, Department of Biological Sciences, 202 Life
Sciences Bldg., Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) diminishes adipose tissue mass in vivo and decreases
expression and activity of fatty acid synthase (FAS) in adipocytes. GH and
prolactin (PRL) are potent activators of STAT5 and exert adipogenic and
antiadipogenic effects in adipocytes. In this study, we demonstrate that GH and
PRL decrease the mRNA and protein levels of FAS in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. We present 
evidence that indicates that FAS is repressed at the level of transcription. In
addition, PRL responsiveness was shown to exist between -1,594 and -700 of the
rat FAS promoter. Moreover, responsiveness to PRL was abolished with mutation of 
a site at position -908 to -893, which we have shown to bind STAT5A in a
PRL-dependent manner. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that PRL
directly represses expression of FAS in adipocytes through STAT5A binding to the 
-908 to -893 site. Furthermore, our results indicate that STAT5A has an
antilipogenic function in adipocytes and may contribute to the regulation of
energy balance.

PMID: 15983196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Exp Hematol. 2005 Jul;33(7):719-37.

Converging pathways in leukemogenesis and stem cell self-renewal.

Moore MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)James Ewing Laboratory of Developmental Hematopoiesis, Cell Biology Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

Studies over the last 40 years have led to an understanding of the hierarchical
organization of the hematopoietic system and the role of the pluripotential
hematopoietic stem cell. Earlier recognition of the importance of bone marrow
hematopoietic microenvironments has evolved into the recognition of specific
niches that regulate stem cell pool size, proliferative status, mobilization, and
differentiation. The discovery of the role of multiple hematopoietic growth
factors and their receptors in the orchestration of stem cell self-renewal and
differentiation has been followed by recognition of the importance of the Notch
and Wnt pathways. The homeobox family of transcription factors serve as master
regulators of development and are increasingly found to be critical regulators of
hematopoiesis. In parallel with this understanding of normal hematopoiesis has
come a recognition that stem cell dysregulation at various levels is involved in 
leukemogenesis. Furthermore, the progression from chronic leukemia or
myelodysplasia to acute leukemia involves accumulation of at least two mutational
events that lead to enhancement of stem cell proliferation, or acquisition of
stem cell behavior by a progenitor cell, coupled with maturation inhibition.
Translocations resulting in development of oncogenic fusion genes are found in
AML and the transforming potential of two of these, AML1-ETO and NUP98-HOXA9,
will be discussed. Secondary, constitutively activating mutations of the Flt3 and
c-kit receptors and of K- and N-ras are found with high frequency in AML, and the
transforming potential of mutated FLT3 and the role of STAT5A activation in human
stem cell transformation will be reviewed.

PMID: 15963848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2005;137 Suppl 1:45-50. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Stat5a is essential for the proliferation and survival of murine mast cells.

Ikeda K(1), Nakajima H, Suzuki K, Watanabe N, Kagami S, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Clinical Cell Biology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba University, Japan.

The regulatory role of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5a
in the proliferation and survival of mast cells was determined using
Stat5a-deficient (Stat5a(-/-)) mice. First, although the mast cells in
Stat5a(-/-) mice were morphologically indistinguishable from those in wild-type
(WT) mice, the number of peritoneal mast cells was significantly decreased in
Stat5a(-/-) mice as compared with that in WT mice. Furthermore, the interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent development of bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) was
markedly decreased in Stat5a(-/-) mice. Second, IL-3-induced but not stem cell
factor (SCF)-induced proliferation of BMMCs was significantly diminished in
Stat5a(-/-) mice as compared with that in WT mice. Moreover, survival rates of
both peritoneal mast cells and BMMCs were significantly decreased with increased 
apoptotic cells in Stat5a(-/-) mice as compared with those in WT mice. Finally,
mRNA of Bcl-x(L) was induced after IL-3 stimulation in WT BMMCs but not in
Stat5a(-/-) BMMCs, which may account for the accelerated apoptosis in Stat5a(-/-)
mast cells. These results indicate that Stat5a plays an important role in mast
cell development, proliferation, and survival.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15947484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Lipid Res. 2005 Sep;46(9):1904-13. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Docosahexaenoic acid changes lipid composition and interleukin-2 receptor
signaling in membrane rafts.

Li Q(1), Wang M, Tan L, Wang C, Ma J, Li N, Li Y, Xu G, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing 210002, China.
liqiurong@yahoo.com

Polyunsaturated fatty acids, including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3),
modulate immune responses and exert beneficial immunosuppressive effects, but the
molecular mechanisms inhibiting T-cell activation are not yet elucidated. Lipid
rafts have been shown to play an important role in the compartmentalization and
modulation of cell signaling. We investigated the role of DHA in modulating the
lipid composition in lipid rafts and membrane subdomain distribution of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor signaling molecules. We found that DHA altered
lipid components of rafts and modified the IL-2-induced Janus kinase-signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway by partially
displacing IL-2 receptors from lipid rafts. We fractionated plasma membrane
subcellular compartments and discovered that certain amounts of STAT5a and STAT5b
existed in detergent-resistant plasma membrane fractions of T-cells. After DHA
treatment, STAT5a and STAT5b were not detected in lipid raft fractions and were
located in detergent-soluble fractions. These data demonstrate for the first time
that DHA alters the lipid composition of membrane microdomains and suppresses
IL-2 receptor signaling in T-cells. Thus, our data provide evidence for a
functional modification in lipid rafts by DHA treatment and explain PUFA-mediated
immunosuppressive effects.

PMID: 15930520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Autoimmun. 2005 Jun;24(4):297-310. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Signal transduction activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) dysfunction in
autoimmune monocytes and macrophages.

Litherland SA(1), Xie TX, Grebe KM, Davoodi-Semiromi A, Elf J, Belkin NS,
Moldawer LL, Clare-Salzler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, 100275 JHMHC, 1600 SW Archer Road, Gainesville, 
FL 32610, USA. litherla@pathology.ufl.edu

Autocrine granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) sequentially 
activates intracellular components in monocyte/macrophage production of the
pro-inflammatory and immunoregulatory prostanoid, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). GM-CSF
first induces STAT5 signaling protein phosphorylation, then prostaglandin
synthase 2 (COX2/PGS2) gene expression, and finally IL-10 production, to
downregulate the cascade. Without activation, monocytes of at-risk, type 1
diabetic (T1D), and autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) humans, and macrophages of 
nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice have aberrantly high GM-CSF, PGS2, and PGE2
expression, but normal levels of IL-10. After GM-CSF stimulation, repressor
STAT5A and B isoforms (80-77kDa) in autoimmune human and NOD monocytes and
activator STAT5A (96-94kDa) and B (94-92kDa) isoforms in NOD macrophages stay
persistently tyrosine phosphorylated. This STAT5 phosphorylation persisted
despite treatment in vitro with IL-10, anti-GM-CSF antibody, or the JAK2/3
inhibitor, AG490. Phosphorylated STAT5 repressor isoforms in autoimmune monocytes
had diminished DNA binding capacity on GAS sequences found in the PGS2 gene
enhancer. In contrast, STAT5 activator isoforms in NOD macrophages retained their
DNA binding capacity on these sites much longer than in healthy control strain
macrophages. These findings suggest that STAT5 dysfunction may contribute to
dysregulation of GM-CSF signaling and gene activation, including PGS2, in
autoimmune monocytes and macrophages.

PMCID: PMC2605968
PMID: 15927792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 4;24(33):5252-7.

Haploinsufficiency identifies STAT5 as a modifier of IL-7-induced lymphomas.

Abraham N(1), Ma MC, Snow JW, Miners MJ, Herndier BG, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British Columbia,
#300-6174, University Boulevard, BC, Canada. ninan@interchange.ubc.ca

The requirement for receptor components and the signalling effector, signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5A/5B, was assessed genetically 
in a lymphoma development model induced by interleukin-7 (IL-7). This growth
factor for T- and B-cell progenitors and mature lymphocytes activates survival
and proliferative pathways including Bcl-2, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and
STAT5. Overexpression of IL-7 in vivo causes early mortality from lymphoma
development. Mice overexpressing IL-7 that were heterozygous for the IL-7Ralpha
subunit showed improved survival compared to wild-type mice. In addition,
STAT5A/5B+/- compound heterozygous mice with one targeted allele each of STAT5A
and STAT5B showed striking amelioration of IL-7-induced mortality and disease
development. STAT5A/5B+/- compound heterozygous mice were otherwise normal in
stem cell and lymphocyte development and cellularity. Lower STAT5 protein levels 
accompanied the reduction in STAT5A/5B copy number, which suggests that STAT5
haploinsufficiency is a modifier of IL-7 signal strength.

PMID: 15870688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 24;280(25):24175-80. Epub 2005 Apr 29.

ERBB4/HER4 potentiates STAT5A transcriptional activity by regulating novel STAT5A
serine phosphorylation events.

Clark DE(1), Williams CC, Duplessis TT, Moring KL, Notwick AR, Long W, Lane WS,
Beuvink I, Hynes NE, Jones FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, Tulane
Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112-2669, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor family member ERBB4 is required for mammary 
gland development and lactation. ERBB4 activities in the breast are mediated
through the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family member
STAT5A, and ERBB4 directly activates STAT5A, in part, through phosphorylation of 
STAT5A at the regulatory Tyr-694. Here we show that STAT5A regulation by ERBB4 is
also mediated through STAT5A serine phosphorylation. Using a reverse-phase high
performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis of
proteolytically digested STAT5A coexpressed with ERBB4, we identified STAT5A
serine phosphorylations at the previously described Ser-779 and at the novel
Ser-127/Ser-128. Immunohistochemistry of wild-type and ERBB4-null mammary glands 
at late pregnancy showed that ERBB4 expression was required for STAT5A
phosphorylation at Ser-779. Independent serine-to-alanine residue substitutions
in full-length STAT5A revealed that although STAT5A Ser-779 phosphorylation was
dispensable for phosphorylation of STAT5A at Tyr-694 and subsequent DNA binding, 
Ser-779 was required to stabilize an interaction with ERBB4 and mediate
ERBB4-induced STAT5A stimulation of gene expression. STAT5A Ser-127/Ser-128, on
the other hand, was required for ERBB4-induced phosphorylation of Tyr-694,
whereas Ser-779 and as yet unidentified tyrosine residues were phosphorylated in 
the absence of Ser-127/Ser-128. In addition, STAT5A S127A/S128A remained
associated with ERBB4 but failed to bind DNA or activate transcription in
response to ERBB4 coexpression. Our studies demonstrate that phosphorylation of
STAT5A at Ser-127/Ser-128 and Ser-779 are obligatory events regulating
ERBB4-mediated activation of STAT5A.

PMID: 15863494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Neurochem. 2005 May;93(4):918-31.

STAT5A interacts with and is phosphorylated upon activation of the mu-opioid
receptor.

Mazarakou G(1), Georgoussi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Signalling and Molecular Pharmacology, Institute of
Biology, National Center for Scientific Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece.

Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STATs) are transcription
factors shown to be activated by G protein-coupled receptors. In the present
study, we demonstrate that acute morphine or
[D-Ala(2),N-Me-Phe(4),Gly(5)-ol]enkephalin (DAMGO) exposure of COS-7 cells
transiently transfected with the micro-opioid receptor and STAT5A, leads to
receptor-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A. Activation of HEK293
cells, stably expressing the micro-opioid receptor with micro-opioid agonists
results in the transcriptional activation of a STAT-responsive reporter gene.
Pertussis toxin has no effect on the level of STAT5A phosphorylation, while the
Src inhibitor PP1 abolishes opioid-dependent STAT5A phosphorylation. All three
opioid receptor subtypes -micro, delta and kappa- share the conserved motif YXXL 
(amino-acids 336-339 for the micro-opioid receptor), known to be critical for
STAT5A/5B binding. Co-immunoprecipitation and pull-down experiments using a
GST-carboxyl-terminal tail of the micro-opioid receptor and rat brain, or COS-7
cell cytosolic extracts, demonstrate the direct binding of STAT5A to this region.
Mutation of the Y336 to alanine does not prevent STAT5A binding, whereas deletion
of the entire putative STAT5A binding site YXXL abolishes STAT5A interaction to
the carboxyl-terminal tail of the micro-opioid receptor. Collectively, our
results demonstrate the association of STAT5A with the micro-opioid receptor and 
reveal novel signalling pathways in the regulation of transcription by the
micro-opioid receptor.

PMID: 15857395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jul;68(1):218-25. Epub 2005 Apr 19.

Hormonal regulation of hepatic organic anion transporting polypeptides.

Wood M(1), Ananthanarayanan M, Jones B, Wooton-Kee R, Hoffman T, Suchy FJ, Vore
M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, 306 Health Sciences Research Building,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0305, USA.

Organic anion transporting polypeptides (Oatp) mediate the transport of a wide
variety of amphipathic organic substrates. Rat Oatp1b2 and human OATP1B3 are
members of a liver-specific subfamily of Oatps/OATPs. We investigated whether
prolactin (PRL) and growth hormone (GH) regulated Oatp1b2 and OATP1B3 gene
expression via signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (Stat5).
Binding sites for Stat5 transcription factors were located in the promoters of
Oatp1b2 and OATP1B3 at -209 to -201 (5'-TTCTGGGAA-3') and -170 to -162
(5'-TTCTGAGAA-3'), respectively. In primary hepatocytes from female and male rats
treated with PRL or GH, Oatp1b2 mRNA measured by real-time polymerase chain
reaction was significantly induced 2-fold. HepG2 cells were transiently
transfected with expression vectors containing Oatp1b2 or OATP1B3 promoter
fragments, cDNAs for Stat5a, and the receptors for PRL (PRLR(L)) or GH (GHR), and
treated with PRL or GH. PRL and GH induction of Oatp1b2 and OATP1B3 promoter
activity required cotransfection of Stat5a and PRLR(L) or GHR. Mutation of the
Stat5 binding site in both promoters eliminated hormonal induction. In DNA
binding assays, HepG2 cells transfected with cDNAs for Stat5a and PRLR(L) were
treated with PRL, and nuclear extracts were probed with a (32)P-labeled oligomer 
corresponding to -177 to -157 of the OATP1B3 promoter. PRL enhanced the binding
of Stat5a to the OATP1B3 promoter and DNA-protein binding was inhibited in
competition assays by excess OATP1B3 and Stat5 consensus oligomers but not by
mutant Stat5 oligomers. These findings indicate that PRL and GH can regulate
Oatp1b2 and OATP1B3 gene expression via the Stat5 signal-transduction pathway.

PMID: 15840840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biochem J. 2005 Aug 15;390(Pt 1):359-66.

Activated STAT5 proteins induce activation of the PI 3-kinase/Akt and Ras/MAPK
pathways via the Gab2 scaffolding adapter.

Nyga R(1), Pecquet C, Harir N, Gu H, Dhennin-Duthille I, Régnier A,
Gouilleux-Gruart V, Lassoued K, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0351, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de
Picardie Jule Verne, 3 rue des Louvels, 80036 Amiens, France.

The active forms of STAT5A (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A) 
and STAT5B are able to relieve the cytokine dependence of haematopoietic cells
and to induce leukaemia in mice. We have demonstrated previously that activation 
of the PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) signalling cascade plays a major role in 
cell growth and survival induced by these proteins. Interaction between STAT5 and
p85, the regulatory subunit of the PI3K, has been suggested to be required for
this activation. We show in the present study that the scaffolding protein Gab2
[Grb2 (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2)-associated binder-2] is an
essential component of this interaction. Gab2 is persistently
tyrosine-phosphorylated in Ba/F3 cells expressing caSTAT5 (constitutively
activated STAT5), independent of JAK2 (Janus kinase 2) activation where it
interacts with STAT5, p85 and Grb2, but not with Shp2 [SH2 (Src homology
2)-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase] proteins. Interaction of STAT5 with
Gab2 was also observed in Ba/F3 cells stimulated with interleukin-3 or expressing
the oncogenic fusion protein Tel-JAK2. The MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein
kinases) ERK1 (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1) and ERK2 were
constitutively activated in the caSTAT5-expressing cells and were found to be
required for caSTAT5-induced cell proliferation. Overexpression of Gab2-3YF, a
mutant of Gab2 incapable of binding PI3K, inhibited the proliferation and
survival of caSTAT5-expressing cells as well as ERK1/2 and Akt/protein kinase B
phosphorylation. Taken together, our results indicate that Gab2 is required for
caSTAT5-induced cell proliferation by regulating both the PI3K/Akt and the
Ras/MAPK pathways.

PMCID: PMC1188271
PMID: 15833084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Ai Zheng. 2005 Apr;24(4):414-8.

[Regulatory effect of STAT5 decoy oligonucleotides on trans-activation of bcl-x
gene promoter in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng JM(1), Feng WL, Wang XZ, Shi M, Tu ZG, Huang ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Chongqing University of Medical Sciences,
Chongqing, 400016, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Constitutive activation of signal transducers and
activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) plays an important role in malignant
transformation of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells. This study was to explore
regulatory effect of STAT5 decoy oligonucleotides (ODNs) on trans-activation of
its downstream target bcl-x gene in K562 cells.
METHODS: STAT5 decoy ODNs, mismatched ODNs (M-ODNs), and FAM-decoy ODNs were
designed and synthesized. FAM-decoy ODNs were used as control, and transfected
into K562 cells by cationic liposomes, analyzed by flow cytometry (FCM) and
fluorescent inversive microscopy. The bcl-x promoter fragment acquired by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was inserted into pGL3-basic to construct
luciferase report plasmid pGL3b-bclxp, which was co-transfected with decoy ODNs
or M-ODNs into K562 cells. The activity of luciferase was detected. After
transfection of decoy ODNs, and M-ODNs, expression of bcl-xL mRNA in K562 cells
was detected by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR),cell apoptosis was detected by
FCM.
RESULTS: FAM-decoy ODNs were incorporated into K562 cells in a dose-dependent
manner. The incorporation efficiency reached 99.1% at the concentration of 4
micromol/L 24 h after transfection, and green fluorescence could be observed in
cells under fluorescent inversive microscope. The luciferase activity was
significantly lower in STAT5 decoy ODNs group than in control group
[(181.48+/-204.46) RLU/microg protein vs. (675.26+/-62.91) RLU/mug protein, P <
0.05], but that of M-ODNs group [(632.07+/-98.95) RLU/microg protein] has no
significant difference with that of control group (P > 0.05). mRNA level of
bcl-xL was decreased by STAT5 decoy ODNs, but not by M-ODNs. Moreover, Sub G1
peak was detected in STAT5 decoy ODNs group by FCM.
CONCLUSION: Transfection of STAT5 decoy ODNs can down-regulate the
trans-activation of bcl-x in K562 cells.

PMID: 15820062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Cell Biol. 2005 Mar 28;168(7):1099-108.

{beta}1 Integrin and IL-3R coordinately regulate STAT5 activation and
anchorage-dependent proliferation.

Defilippi P(1), Rosso A, Dentelli P, Calvi C, Garbarino G, Tarone G, Pegoraro L, 
Brizzi MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino, 10126,
Torino, Italy. paola.defilippi@unito.it

We previously demonstrated that integrin-dependent adhesion activates STAT5A, a
well known target of IL-3-mediated signaling. Here, we show that in endothelial
cells the active beta1 integrin constitutively associates with the
unphosphorylated IL-3 receptor (IL-3R) beta common subunit. This association is
not sufficient for activating downstream signals. Indeed, only upon fibronectin
adhesion is Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2) recruited to the beta1 integrin-IL-3R complex
and triggers IL-3R beta common phosphorylation, leading to the formation of
docking sites for activated STAT5A. These events are IL-3 independent but require
the integrity of the IL-3R beta common. IL-3 treatment increases JAK2 activation 
and STAT5A and STAT5B tyrosine and serine phosphorylation and leads to cell cycle
progression in adherent cells. Expression of an inactive STAT5A inhibits cell
cycle progression upon IL-3 treatment, identifying integrin-dependent STAT5A
activation as a priming event for IL-3-mediated S phase entry. Consistently,
overexpression of a constitutive active STAT5A leads to anchorage-independent
cell cycle progression. Therefore, these data provide strong evidence that
integrin-dependent STAT5A activation controls IL-3-mediated proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2171831
PMID: 15795318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 1;174(7):4105-12.

Stat5a inhibits IL-12-induced Th1 cell differentiation through the induction of
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 expression.

Takatori H(1), Nakajima H, Kagami S, Hirose K, Suto A, Suzuki K, Kubo M,
Yoshimura A, Saito Y, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University School of
Medicine, Chiba City, Japan.

In previous studies, we have shown that Th2 cell differentiation is diminished
but Th1 cell differentiation is increased in Stat5a-deficient (Stat5a(-/-))
CD4(+) T cells. In the present study, we clarified the molecular mechanisms of
Stat5a-mediated Th cell differentiation. We found that enhanced Th1 cell
differentiation and the resultant IFN-gamma production played a dominant
inhibitory role in the down-regulation of IL-4-induced Th2 cell differentiation
of Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. We also found that IL-12-induced Stat4
phosphorylation and Th1 cell differentiation were augmented in Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+)
T cells. Importantly, the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)3,
a potent inhibitor of IL-12-induced Stat4 activation, was decreased in
Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. Moreover, a reporter assay showed that a
constitutively active form of Stat5a but not Stat6 activated the SOCS3 promoter. 
Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Stat5a binds to
the SOCS3 promoter in CD4(+) T cells. Finally, the retrovirus-mediated expression
of SOCS3 restored the impaired Th cell differentiation of Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+) T
cells. These results suggest that Stat5a forces the Th1/Th2 balance toward a
Th2-type by preventing IL-12-induced Th1 cell differentiation through the
induction of SOCS3.

PMID: 15778369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Anim Sci. 2005 Apr;83(4):825-32.

Exogenous prolactin stimulates mammary development and alters expression of
prolactin-related genes in prepubertal gilts.

Farmer C(1), Palin MF.

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Dairy and Swine Research and Development
Centre, Lennoxville, Quebec J1M 1Z3, Canada. farmerc@agr.gc.ca
<farmerc@agr.gc.ca>

The goal of this project was to determine whether recombinant porcine (rp)
prolactin (PRL) can enhance mammary development when given to pre-pubertal gilts 
and/or modify the expression of PRL-related genes. Crossbred gilts were injected 
s.c. twice daily with saline (CTRL; n = 13), 2 mg of rpPRL (4PRL; n = 13), or 4
mg of rpPRL (8PRL; n = 13) in a 2.0-mL volume for a period of 29 d, starting at
75.1 +/- 0.5 kg BW. Jugular blood samples were collected before the first
injection, as well as 14 and 28 d later, and were assayed for PRL, IGF-I, and
leptin. Gilts were slaughtered on d 29 of treatment, and mammary glands were
collected for dissection of parenchymal and extraparenchymal tissues, and for
determination of parenchymal DNA, DM, protein, and fat contents. Levels of mRNA
for PRL, PRL receptor (PRL-R), and signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT5A and STAT5B) were determined via real-time PCR in the
mammary parenchyma, as well as levels for PRL and PRL-R in the pituitaries.
Treatments did not alter plasma (P = 0.48) IGF-I. Serum concentrations of PRL at 
slaughter were greater (P < 0.01) in both 4PRL and 8PRL compared with CTRL,
whereas at mid-treatment, they were greater (P < 0.05) only in 8PRL gilts.
Parenchymal tissue weight and parenchymal DNA concentrations increased with
exogenous rpPRL (P < 0.001). The percentage of protein in parenchyma increased (P
< 0.001), whereas that of DM (P < 0.001), fat (P < 0.001), and the protein:DNA
ratio (P < 0.05) decreased with exogenous rpPRL. Treatment differences were
always observed between the 4 mg dose and CTRL, and no further differences were
noted when the dose was increased to 8 mg daily. Expression levels of PRL, but
not PRL-R, were decreased (P < 0.05) in anterior pituitary glands and mammary
glands of treated gilts. The mRNA levels of STAT5A and STAT5B increased (P <
0.05) with exogenous rpPRL. It is evident from these data that rpPRL can
stimulate mammogenesis in prepubertal gilts through hyperplasia and increased
expression of PRL-related genes.

PMID: 15753337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 15;174(6):3734-40.

Indispensable role of Stat5a in Stat6-independent Th2 cell differentiation and
allergic airway inflammation.

Takatori H(1), Nakajima H, Hirose K, Kagami S, Tamachi T, Suto A, Suzuki K, Saito
Y, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

It is well-recognized that Stat6 plays a critical role in Th2 cell
differentiation and the induction of allergic inflammation. We have previously
shown that Stat5a is also required for Th2 cell differentiation and allergic
airway inflammation. However, it is the relative importance and redundancy of
Stat6 and Stat5a in Th2 cell differentiation and allergic airway inflammation are
unknown. In this study we addressed these issues by comparing Stat5a-deficient
(Stat5a(-/-)) mice, Stat6(-/-) mice, and Stat5a- and Stat6 double-deficient
(Stat5a(-/-) Stat6(-/-)) mice on the same genetic background. Th2 cell
differentiation was severely decreased in Stat6(-/-)CD4+ T cells, but
Stat6-independent Th2 cell differentiation was still significantly observed in
Stat6(-/-)CD4+ T cells. However, even in the Th2-polarizing condition (IL-4 plus 
anti-IFN-gamma mAb), no Th2 cells developed in Stat5a(-/-)Stat6(-/-) CD4+ T
cells. Moreover, Ag-induced eosinophil and lymphocyte recruitment in the airways 
was severely decreased in Stat5a(-/-)Stat6(-/-) mice compared with that in
Stat6(-/-) mice. These results indicate that Stat5a plays an indispensable role
in Stat6-independent Th2 cell differentiation and subsequent Th2 cell-mediated
allergic airway inflammation.

PMID: 15749913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):19777-83. Epub 2005 Mar 3.

Presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase processing regulates multiple ERBB4/HER4
activities.

Vidal GA(1), Naresh A, Marrero L, Jones FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112-2699, USA.

Transmembrane receptors typically transmit cellular signals following growth
factor stimulation by coupling to and activating downstream signaling cascades.
Reports of proteolytic processing of cell surface receptors to release an
intracellular domain (ICD) has raised the possibility of novel signaling
mechanisms directly mediated by the receptor ICD. The receptor tyrosine kinase
ERBB4/HER4 (referred to here as ERBB4) undergoes sequential processing by tumor
necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme and presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase 
to release the ERBB4 ICD (4ICD). Our recent data suggests that regulation of gene
expression by the ERBB4 nuclear protein and the proapoptotic activity of ERBB4
involves the gamma-secretase release of 4ICD. To determine the role
gamma-secretase processing plays in ERBB4 signaling, we generated an ERBB4 allele
with the transmembrane residue substitution V673I (ERBB4-V673I). We demonstrate
that ERBB4-V673I fails to undergo processing by gamma-secretase but retains
normal cell surface signaling activity. In contrast to wild-type ERBB4, however, 
ERBB4-V673I was excluded from the nuclei of transfected cells and failed to
activate STAT5A stimulation of the beta-casein promoter. These results support
the contention that gamma-secretase processing of ERBB4 is necessary to release a
functional 4ICD nuclear protein which directly regulates gene expression. We also
demonstrate that 4ICD failed to accumulate within mitochondria of ERBB4-V673I
transfected cells and the potent proapoptotic activity of ERBB4 was completely
abolished in cells expressing ERBB4-V673I. Our results provide the first formal
demonstration that proteolytic processing of ERBB4 is a critical event regulating
multiple receptor signaling activities.

PMID: 15746097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Kidney Int. 2005 Mar;67(3):858-66.

Cardiac resistance to growth hormone in uremia.

Zheng Z(1), Sun DF, Tummala P, Rabkin R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System and Department
of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease is a major cause of death in end-stage renal
disease (ESRD). Since growth hormone is required for maintaining normal cardiac
structure and function and as growth hormone has a salutary effect on cardiac
remodeling in disease, we postulated that if cardiac resistance to growth hormone
develops in chronic renal failure (CRF) this may predispose to the cardiomyopathy
of uremia. We set out to test whether in CRF there is resistance to the cardiac
action of growth hormone and whether this defect might be caused by altered
growth hormone signaling.
METHODS: Growth hormone-deficient (dw/dw) rats and growth hormone-intact
Sprague-Dawley rats underwent a subtotal nephrectomy or sham operation and pair
feeding.
RESULTS: In dw/dw rats treated with growth hormone for 8 days there was a
significant increase in insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) mRNA levels in
controls but this response was attenuated in CRF. Next, growth hormone-stimulated
Janus kinase-signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK2-STAT5)
signaling was studied 15 minutes after intravenous growth hormone in dw/dw and
Sprague-Dawley rats. Growth hormone receptor, JAK2, STAT5a, and STAT5b protein
levels were unaltered in CRF. Growth hormone-induced JAK2, growth hormone
receptor (GHR), and STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation was significantly depressed in
CRF as was nuclear translocation of phosphorylated STAT5. When rats were treated 
with pharmacologic dose growth hormone, STAT5 phosphorylation increased similarly
in CRF and control rats.
CONCLUSION: Uremic rats develop cardiac resistance to growth hormone caused at
least, in part, by a postreceptor defect in growth hormone-induced signaling that
is characterized by impaired phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT5. 
These findings raise the question whether growth hormone resistance contributes
to the cardiac changes of uremia.

PMID: 15698425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13364-73. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Differential STAT5 signaling by ligand-dependent and constitutively active
cytokine receptors.

Moucadel V(1), Constantinescu SN.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels B-1200, Belgium.

Many leukemia and cancer cells exhibit constitutive activation of STAT5, which
was suggested to provide an anti-apoptotic advantage. Transformation of
cytokine-dependent hematopoietic cells, such as Ba/F3 cells to autonomous growth 
and tumorigenicity equally results in selection for constitutive activation of
STAT5. We compared STAT5 signaling between erythropoietin(Epo)-dependent cells
and cells that were transformed by oncogenic activation of the erythropoietin
receptor (EpoR) by coexpression of the gp55-P envelope protein of the spleen
focus forming virus or by expression of the R129C constitutively active EpoR
mutant. In transformed cells it was mainly STAT5B that was constitutively
activated. In contrast, Epo stimulation activated both STAT5A and STAT5B. In
transformed cells, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) showed STAT5 to be
physically bound to promoters of STAT5 target genes, such as Bcl(XL), and to be
able to promote transactivation of the Bcl(XL) promoter in a constitutive
fashion. Sequencing of native sequences after ChIP with anti-STAT5 antibodies in 
Epo-dependent and -transformed cells indicated that in gp55-transformed cells,
STAT5B bound in the chromatin not only to N3 high affinity, but also to low
affinity N4 GAS sites. Transactivation for N3 GAS sites in luciferase reporters
was specific to gp55 transformation. Because we also found preferential
constitutive STAT5B activation after transformation of cells by a truncated form 
of the G-CSF-R that produces severe neutropenia (Kostmann syndrome) and favors
leukemia in humans, we discuss the potential role of STAT5B in oncogenic
transformation of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15677477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):10955-63. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Identification of a distal STAT5-binding DNA region that may mediate growth
hormone regulation of insulin-like growth factor-I gene expression.

Wang Y(1), Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) regulates insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) gene
expression through signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b)
and STAT5a. The objective of this study was to identify the cis-regulatory DNA
region involved in this process. By cotransfection analyses of shotgun DNA
fragments of a bacterial artificial chromosome sequence containing the entire
human IGF-I gene and a large 5'-flanking region, a approximately 700-bp DNA
region approximately 75 kb 5' to the IGF-I gene was found to have the ability to 
enhance gene expression from both heterologous and homologous promoters in the
presence of constitutively active STAT5a or STAT5b. This 700-bp DNA region
contains two closely located consensus STAT5-binding sites, and its sequence
appears to be evolutionarily conserved. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
verified the ability of the two putative STAT5-binding sites to bind to STAT5a
and STAT5b. Cotransfection analyses confirmed that both STAT5-binding sites were 
necessary for the 700-bp DNA region to mediate STAT5a or STAT5b activation of
gene transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that the
chromosomal region containing these two STAT5-binding sites was bound by
constitutively active STAT5b protein in HepG2 cells and that the binding was
accompanied by increased expression of IGF-I mRNA. In reconstituted GH-responsive
cells, this 700-bp DNA region was able to mediate GH-induced STAT5a or STAT5b
activation of gene expression. These results together suggest that this
STAT5-binding site-containing distal 5'-flanking region of IGF-I gene may be an
enhancer mediating GH-induced STAT5 activation of IGF-I gene transcription.

PMID: 15677453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2005 Jan;113(1):13-20.

Functional thyrotropin receptor expression in the pituitary folliculo-stellate
cell line TtT/GF.

Brokken LJ(1), Bakker O, Wiersinga WM, Prummel MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Centre,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Leon.Brokken@utu.fi

Thyrotropin secretion from the anterior pituitary is regulated mainly through TRH
and thyroid hormones. Recent findings of a TSH receptor (TSHR) on
folliculo-stellate (FS) cells in the human anterior pituitary indicate that TSH
secretion might, in addition, be regulated in a paracrine manner via FS cells. In
order to elucidate the physiological relevance of TSHR expression in FS cells we 
evaluated the effects of TSH on a murine FS cell line, TtT/GF. First, Western
blot analysis confirmed the expression of TSHR protein in these cells. Second,
three potential second messenger pathways were studied. Last, cDNA array
hybridization was used to evaluate the effect of TSH on gene expression levels.
TSH failed to induce either the adenylate cyclase/cAMP pathway, the
phosphatidylinositol/calcium pathway, or the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT) 3 pathway. Most of the genes regulated by
TSH were related to cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and apoptosis.
Moreover, TSH induced STAT5a and TGFbeta2 expression. We report that TtT/GF cells
express a functional TSHR that is not coupled to cAMP nor IP (3) but probably
signals through the JAK/STAT5a pathway. Functional TSHR expression in this cell
line offers an in vitro model to study the role of TSHR in FS cells.

PMID: 15662590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Cell. 2005 Jan;7(1):87-99.

Stat5 tetramer formation is associated with leukemogenesis.

Moriggl R(1), Sexl V, Kenner L, Duntsch C, Stangl K, Gingras S, Hoffmeyer A,
Bauer A, Piekorz R, Wang D, Bunting KD, Wagner EF, Sonneck K, Valent P, Ihle JN, 
Beug H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
moriggl@imp.univie.ac.at

Activation of Stat5 is frequently found in leukemias. To study the mechanism and 
role of Stat5 activation, we introduced a constitutively activated Stat5a mutant,
cS5F, into murine bone marrow (BM) cells. BM transplantation with
cS5F-transfected cells caused development of multilineage leukemias in lethally
irradiated wild-type or nonirradiated Rag2(-/-) mice. The leukemic cells showed
strongly enhanced levels of cS5F tetramers but unchanged cS5F dimer levels in a
DNA binding assay. Moreover, Stat5a mutants engineered to form only dimers, but
not tetramers, failed to induce leukemias. In addition, Stat5 tetramers were
found to accumulate in excess compared to dimers in various human leukemias.
These data suggest that Stat5 tetramers are associated with leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15652752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 15;174(2):609-13.

Cutting edge: role of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5 in IFN-alpha beta responses in T
lymphocytes.

Tanabe Y(1), Nishibori T, Su L, Arduini RM, Baker DP, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, and Cancer Center, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Engagement of the IFN-alphabeta receptor initiates multiple signaling cascades,
including activation of the STAT. In this study, we demonstrate that
IFN-alphabeta, although antiproliferative in wild-type CD4(+) or CD8(+) T cells, 
act as strong mitogens on their STAT1(-/-) counterparts. Furthermore,
IFN-alphabeta exert little effect on apoptosis in wild-type cells, but are potent
survival factors in the absence of STAT1. The antiapoptotic response in the
absence of STAT1 is predominantly mediated by STAT3, and to a lesser extent by
STAT5A/B. In contrast, the mitogenic IFN-alphabeta response gained through the
absence of STAT1 is only marginally affected when STAT5A/B expression is also
abrogated, but is completely dependent on STAT3 activation. These findings
provide the first evidence for a function of STAT3 and STAT5A/B in the
IFN-alphabeta response, and support a model in which the IFN-alphabeta receptor
initiates both pro- and antiapoptotic responses through STAT1, and STAT3 and
STAT5A/B, respectively.

PMID: 15634877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Apr;67(4):1166-76. Epub 2004 Dec 29.

Cotreatment with suberanoylanilide hydroxamic acid and 17-allylamino
17-demethoxygeldanamycin synergistically induces apoptosis in Bcr-Abl+ Cells
sensitive and resistant to STI571 (imatinib mesylate) in association with
down-regulation of Bcr-Abl, abrogation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 activity, and Bax conformational change.

Rahmani M(1), Reese E, Dai Y, Bauer C, Kramer LB, Huang M, Jove R, Dent P, Grant 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Medical
College of Virginia, MCV Station Box 230, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Interactions between the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors suberanoylanilide 
hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and sodium butyrate (SB) and the heat shock protein (Hsp) 
90 antagonist 17-allylamino 17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) have been examined 
in Bcr-Abl(+) human leukemia cells (K562 and LAMA84), including those sensitive
and resistant to STI571 (imatinib mesylate). Cotreatment with 17-AAG and SAHA or 
SB synergistically induced mitochondrial dysfunction (cytochrome c and
apoptosis-inducing factor release), caspase-3 and -8 activation, apoptosis, and
growth inhibition. Similar effects were observed in LAMA84 cells and K562 cells
resistant to STI571, as well as in CD34(+) cells isolated from the bone marrows
of three patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. These events were associated
with increased binding of Bcr-Abl, Raf-1, and Akt to Hsp70, and inactivation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and Akt. In addition, 17-AAG/SAHA
abrogated the DNA binding and the transcriptional activities of signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT) 5 in K562 cells, including those
ectopically expressing a constitutively active STAT5A construct. Cotreatment with
17-AAG and SAHA also induced down-regulation of Mcl-1, Bcl-xL, and B-Raf;
up-regulation of Bak; cleavage of 14-3-3 proteins; and a profound conformational 
change in Bax accompanied by translocation to the membrane fraction. Moreover,
ectopic expression of Bcl-2 attenuated cell death induced by this regimen,
implicating mitochondrial injury in the lethality observed. Together, these
findings raise the possibility that combining HDAC inhibitors with the Hsp90
antagonist 17-AAG may represent a novel strategy against Bcr-Abl(+) leukemias,
including those resistant to STI571.

PMID: 15625278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Basic Res Cardiol. 2005 May;100(3):187-97. Epub 2004 Dec 22.

Erythropoietin protects the infant heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury by
triggering multiple signaling pathways.

Rafiee P(1), Shi Y, Su J, Pritchard KA Jr, Tweddell JS, Baker JE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, Division of Pediatric Surgery, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

The immediate protective effect of erythropoietin (EPO) against ischemia in heart
suggests a role beyond hematopoiesis and the treatment of anemia. We determined
the role of JAK/STAT and Ras/Rac/MAPK in the protective effect of EPO against
ischemia-reperfusion injury in infant rabbit heart. EPO (1.0 U/ml) administered
15 minutes prior to 30-minutes global ischemia and 35 minutes reperfusion
resulted in increased recovery of postischemic ventricular developed pressure in 
rabbit hearts. EPO exerted its immediate cardioprotective effect via activation
of multiple signaling pathways by: 1) phosphorylation and activation of JAK1/2,
STAT3 and STAT5A but not of STAT1alpha and STAT5B, 2) phosphorylation and
activation of PI(3) kinase and its downstream kinases Akt and Rac, 3) activation 
of PKCepsilon, Raf, MEK1/2, p42/44 MAPK and p38 MAPK. Pretreatment with
Wortmannin abolished EPO-induced Akt activation and phosphorylation. Pretreatment
with Chelerythrine followed by EPO treatment resulted in partial inhibition of
Raf activation, and abolished PKCepsilon and p38 MAPK activation without any
effect on Akt, MEK1/2 and p42/44 MAPK. PD98059 abolished MEK1/2 and p42/44 MAPK
activation with no effect on Akt, Raf and p38 MAPK activation. SB203580 inhibited
only p38 MAPK activation by EPO. We can conclude EPO increases immediate
cardioprotection through the activation of multiple signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 15611843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):8188-96. Epub 2004 Dec 17.

Physical and functional interactions between STAP-2/BKS and STAT5.

Sekine Y(1), Yamamoto T, Yumioka T, Sugiyama K, Tsuji S, Oritani K, Shimoda K,
Minoguchi M, Yoshimura A, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo 060-0812 Japan.

Signal-transducing adaptor protein family of proteins (STAPs), which currently
contains two members, are proposed to be adaptor molecules because of their
pleckstrin homology (PH) and Src-homology 2 (SH2)-like domains. STAP-1 has been
shown to interact with STAT5 and the tyrosine kinase Tec. With regard to
STAP-2/BKS functions, immunoprecipitation experiments and intracellular stainings
revealed STAP-2/BKS binds STAT5 in several types of cells. Mutational studies
revealed that the PH- and SH2-like domains of STAP-2/BKS interacted with the
C-terminal region of STAT5. STAP-2/BKS and STAT5 were found to constitutively
co-localize in the cytoplasm of resting cells, but STAP-2/BKS was found to
dissociate upon STAT5 phosphorylation, suggesting a role in regulating signaling 
of STAT5. The physiological role of these interactions is not fully understood,
but in studies of overexpression of STAP-2/BKS, cytokine-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation and transcriptional activation of STAT5 was diminished. In
addition, thymocytes from STAP-2/BKS-deficient mice showed the enhanced
interleukin-2-dependent cell growth. Taken together, STAP-2/BKS is an additional 
modulator of STAT5-mediated signaling.

PMID: 15611091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004 Dec;88(3):263-72.

Possible role of Stat5a in rat mammary gland carcinogenesis.

Shan L(1), Yu M, Clark BD, Snyderwine EG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis,
CCR, NCI, Building 37, Room 4146, 37 Convent Dr., Bethesda, MD, 20892-4262, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5a is a transcription
factor mediating the action of specific cytokines, growth factors and hormones on
gene expression. In the mammary gland, Stat5a is well recognized for its function
in prolactin signaling, lobuloalveolar development, and milk protein expression
during pregnancy and lactation. Latent cytoplasmic Stat5a is activated by
tyrosine phosphorylation and following dimerization undergoes nuclear import. In 
the current study, Stat5a expression was examined immunohistochemically in
carcinomas induced by the chemical carcinogens 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene and
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine. A high percentage of carcinomas 
showed nuclear labeling of Stat5a [44 of 68 (65%)] with Stat5a nuclear labeling
index ranging from 18 to 77%. In contrast, control normal mammary gland tissue
displayed cytosolic expression. Carcinomas with different Stat5a staining
patterns (cytoplasmic or nuclear) showed a statistical difference for the
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) labeling, tumor differentiation,
nuclear grade, mitotic activity, and tumor size. High Stat5a nuclear expression
was closely correlated with the higher-grade carcinomas. Stat5a nuclear
expression was also detected in intraductal proliferations (10 of 21 lesions) and
in ductal carcinomas in situ (13 of 15 lesions). Immunohistochemical analysis was
further carried out in human breast cancers. Stat5a nuclear expression was
detected in ductal and lobular carcinomas and DCIS at a frequency of 48% (15/31),
33% (2/6), and 40% (2/5), respectively. Nuclear expression of Stat5a in human
breast cancers also correlated with the PCNA nuclear labeling index. The findings
implicate activated Stat5a in mammary gland cancer development in the rat and
human.

PMID: 15609129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Dec;271(23-24):4613-20.

Regulation of STAT signalling by proteolytic processing.

Hendry L(1), John S.

Author information: 
(1)Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, Programme in Infection and Immunity, 
King's College, London, UK.

Interaction of cytokines with their cognate receptors leads to the activation of 
latent transcription factors, the signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) proteins. Numerous studies have identified the critical
roles played by STAT proteins in regulating cell proliferation, differentiation
and survival. Consequently, the activity of STAT proteins is negatively regulated
by a variety of different mechanisms, which include alternative splicing,
covalent modifications, protein-protein interactions with negative regulatory
proteins and proteolytic processing by proteases. Cleavage of STAT proteins by
proteases results in the generation of C-terminally truncated proteins, called
STATgamma, which lack the transactivation domain and behave as functional
dominant-negative proteins. Currently, STATgamma isoforms have been identified
for Stat3, Stat5a, Stat5b and Stat6 in different cellular contexts and biological
processes. Evidence is mounting for the role of as yet unidentified serine
proteases in the proteolytic processing of STAT proteins, although at least one
cysteine protease, calpain is also known to cleave these STATs in platelets and
mast cells. Recently, studies of acute myeloid leukaemia and cutaneous T cell
lymphoma patients have revealed important roles for the aberrant expression of
Stat3gamma and Stat5gamma proteins in the pathology of these diseases. Together, 
these findings indicate that proteolytic processing is an important mechanism in 
the regulation of STAT protein biological activity and provides a fertile area
for future studies.

PMID: 15606748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 27;24(5):746-60.

Stat5 promotes homotypic adhesion and inhibits invasive characteristics of human 
breast cancer cells.

Sultan AS(1), Xie J, LeBaron MJ, Ealley EL, Nevalainen MT, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, NRB E504, 3970 Reservoir Rd NW, Washington, DC
20057-1469, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 (Stat5) mediates prolactin
(PRL)-induced differentiation and growth of breast epithelial cells. We have
recently identified active Stat5 as a tumor marker of favorable prognosis in
human breast cancer, and determined that Stat5 activation is lost during
metastatic progression. Here we provide novel evidence for an
invasion-suppressive role of Stat5 in human breast cancer. Activation of Stat5 by
PRL in human breast cancer lines was associated with increased surface levels of 
the invasion-suppressive adhesion molecule E-cadherin in vitro and in
xenotransplant tumors in vivo. Inducible E-cadherin was blocked by
dominant-negative (Dn) Stat5 or Dn-Jak2, but not by Dn-Stat3. Further
experimental data indicated a role of Stat5 as a coordinate regulator of
additional invasion-related characteristics of human breast cancer cells,
including cell surface association of beta-catenin, homotypic cell clustering,
invasion through Matrigel, cell migration, and matrix metalloproteinase activity.
A role of Stat5 as a suppressor of breast cancer invasion and metastatic
progression provides a biological mechanism to explain the favorable prognosis
associated with active Stat5 in human breast cancer.

PMID: 15592524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Stem Cells. 2004;22(7):1191-204.

Enforced activation of STAT5A facilitates the generation of embryonic
stem-derived hematopoietic stem cells that contribute to hematopoiesis in vivo.

Schuringa JJ(1), Wu K, Morrone G, Moore MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Hematopoiesis, Cell Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that direct the transition from
primitive to definitive hematopoiesis. In this study, we cocultured murine
embryonic stem (ES) cells on OP9 stroma to induce hematopoietic differentiation
as a model to study factors involved in the generation of adult hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs). Overexpression of the constitutively activated mutant signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5A(1*6) in ES cells facilitated 
the generation of cells that expressed the endothelial-hemangioblast marker Flk-1
within 5 days of coculture on OP9. The first CD41+/ CD45+/c-Kit+/(Flk-1)-
hematopoietic cells arose in our culture conditions between days 5 and 7.
Persistent activation of STAT5A greatly enhanced the generation of hematopoietic 
progenitors compared with controls, as determined by colony assays in
methylcellulose. Moreover, whereas controls generated only a short transient wave
of hematopoiesis lasting less than 3 weeks, expression of STAT5A(1*6) resulted in
the generation of hematopoietic cobblestone area-forming cells (CAFCs) on OP9
that could be serially passaged onto new OP9, giving rise to second and third
CAFCs that generated hematopoietic progenitors for > or = 5 weeks, indicating a
role for STAT5A in HSC self-renewal in vitro. Several definitive hematopoietic
genes were upregulated by STAT5A (1*6), as well as Runx1/AML1, vascular
endothelial growth factor, oncostatin M receptor, HoxB4, Wnt5A, Delta-like-1, and
Bmi-1. Furthermore, ES-derived hematopoietic cells expressing STAT5A(1*6)
contributed to myeloid-lymphoid hematopoiesis in primary and secondary nonobese
diabetic-severe combined immunodeficiency recipients, although no donor-derived
cells could be detected after 7 weeks in the secondary recipients. These data
indicate that a persistent activation of STAT5A allows the generation of
ES-derived HSCs that can, at least for an intermediate period, contribute to
hematopoiesis in vivo.

PMID: 15579639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Mar;19(3):644-56. Epub 2004 Nov 18.

Overexpression of an N-terminally truncated isoform of the nuclear receptor
coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 leads to altered proliferation of
mammary epithelial cells in transgenic mice.

Tilli MT(1), Reiter R, Oh AS, Henke RT, McDonnell K, Gallicano GI, Furth PA,
Riegel AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Research Building, Room E307, 3970 Reservoir Road, Washington, D.C. 20057, USA.

Amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1, also known as ACTR, SRC-3, RAC-3, TRAM-1,
p/CIP) is a member of the p160 nuclear receptor coactivator family involved in
transcriptional regulation of genes activated through steroid receptors, such as 
estrogen receptor alpha (ER(alpha)). The AIB1 gene and a more active N-terminally
deleted isoform (AIB1-Delta3) are overexpressed in breast cancer. To determine
the role of AIB1-Delta3 in breast cancer pathogenesis, we generated transgenic
mice with human cytomegalovirus immediate early gene 1 (hCMVIE1) promoter-driven 
over-expression of human AIB1/ACTR-Delta3 (CMVAIB1/ACTR-Delta3 mice).
AIB1/ACTR-Delta3 transgene mRNA expression was confirmed in CMV-AIB1/ACTR-Delta3 
mammary glands by in situ hybridization. These mice demonstrated significantly
increased mammary epithelial cell proliferation (P < 0.003), cyclin D1 expression
(P = 0.002), IGF-I receptor protein expression (P = 0.026), mammary gland mass (P
< 0.05), and altered expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein isoforms (P =
0.029). At 13 months of age, mammary ductal ectasia was found in
CMV-AIB1/ACTR-Delta3 mice, but secondary and tertiary branching patterns were
normal. There were no changes in the expression patterns of either ER(alpha) or
Stat5a, a downstream mediator of prolactin signaling. Serum IGF-I levels were not
altered in the transgenic mice. These data indicate that overexpression of the
AIB1/ACTR-Delta3 isoform resulted in altered mammary epithelial cell growth. The 
observed changes in cell proliferation and gene expression are consistent with
alterations in growth factor signaling that are thought to contribute to either
initiation or progression of breast cancer. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that the N-terminally deleted isoform of AIB1 can play a role in
breast cancer development and/or progression.

PMID: 15550471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Cell Biol. 2004 Nov 8;167(3):469-78.

The ERBB4/HER4 receptor tyrosine kinase regulates gene expression by functioning 
as a STAT5A nuclear chaperone.

Williams CC(1), Allison JG, Vidal GA, Burow ME, Beckman BS, Marrero L, Jones FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, Tulane
Cancer Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

In the lactating breast, ERBB4 localizes to the nuclei of secretory epithelium
while regulating activities of the signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 5A transcription factor essential for milk-gene expression. 
We have identified an intrinsic ERBB4 NLS (residues 676-684) within the ERBB4
intracellular domain (4ICD) that is essential for nuclear accumulation of 4ICD.
To determine the functional significance of 4ICD nuclear translocation in a
physiologically relevant system, we have demonstrated that cotransfection of
ERBB4 and STAT5A in a human breast cancer cell line stimulates beta-casein
promoter activity. Significantly, nuclear localization of STAT5A and subsequent
stimulation of the beta-casein promoter requires nuclear translocation of 4ICD.
Moreover, 4ICD and STAT5A colocalize within nuclei of heregulin beta 1
(HRG)-stimulated cells and both proteins bind to the endogenous beta-casein
promoter in T47D breast cancer cells. Together, our results establish a novel
molecular mechanism of transmembrane receptor signal transduction involving
nuclear cotranslocation of the receptor intracellular domain and associated
transcription factor. Subsequent binding of the two proteins at transcription
factor target promoters results in activation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2172499
PMID: 15534001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):6409-17.

IL-5 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor activate STAT3 and
STAT5 and promote Pim-1 and cyclin D3 protein expression in human eosinophils.

Stout BA(1), Bates ME, Liu LY, Farrington NN, Bertics PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, 1300 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Allergic inflammation is characterized by elevated eosinophil numbers and by the 
increased production of the cytokines IL-5 and GM-CSF, which control several
eosinophil functions, including the suppression of apoptosis. The JAK/STAT
pathway is important for several functions in hemopoietic cells, including the
suppression of apoptosis. We report in this study that STAT3, STAT5a, and STAT5b 
are expressed in human eosinophils and that their signaling pathways are active
following IL-5 or GM-CSF treatment. However, in airway eosinophils, the
phosphorylation of STAT5 by IL-5 is reduced, an event that may be related to the 
reduced expression of the IL-5Ralpha on airway eosinophils. Furthermore, IL-5 and
GM-CSF induced the protein expression of cyclin D3 and the kinase Pim-1, both of 
which are regulated by STAT-dependent processes in some cell systems. Pim-1 is
more abundantly expressed in airway eosinophils than in blood eosinophils.
Because Pim-1 reportedly has a role in the modulation of apoptosis, these results
suggest that Pim-1 action is linked to the suppression of eosinophil apoptosis by
these cytokines. Although cyclin D3 is known to be critical for cell cycle
progression, eosinophils are terminally differentiated cells that do not proceed 
through the cell cycle. Thus, this apparent cytokine regulation of cyclin D3
suggests that there is an alternative role(s) for cyclin D3 in eosinophil
biology.

PMID: 15528381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):6241-7.

Enhancer role of STAT5 in CD2 activation of IFN-gamma gene expression.

Gonsky R(1), Deem RL, Bream J, Young HA, Targan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 
Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

IFN-gamma is an important immunoregulatory protein with tightly controlled
expression in activated T and NK cells. Three potential STAT binding regions have
been recognized within the IFN-gamma promoter: 1) an IL-12-mediated STAT4 binding
site at -236 bp; 2) a newly identified IL-2-induced STAT5 binding element at -3.6
kb; and 3) CD2-mediated STAT1 and STAT4 binding to an intronic element in mucosal
T cells. However, functional activation of these sites remains unclear. In this
study we demonstrate CD2-mediated activation of the newly characterized -3.6-kb
IFN-gamma STAT5 binding region. CD2 signaling of human PBMC results in activation
of the -3.6-kb IFN-gamma promoter, whereas mutation of the -3.6-kb STAT5 site
attenuates promoter activity. Functional activation is accompanied by STAT5A but 
little STAT5B nucleoprotein binding to the IFN-gamma STAT5 site, as determined by
competition and supershift assays. STAT5 activation via CD2 occurs independent of
IL-2. Western and FACS analysis shows increased phospho-STAT5 following CD2
signaling. AG490, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor affecting Jak proteins, inhibits
CD2-mediated IFN-gamma mRNA expression, secretion, and nucleoprotein binding to
the IFN-gamma STAT5 site in a dose-dependent fashion. This report is the first to
describe CD2-mediated activation of STAT5 and supports STAT5 involvement in
regulation of IFN-gamma expression.

PMID: 15528362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1123-31. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

STAT5B-mediated growth hormone signaling is organized by highly dynamic
microtubules in hepatic cells.

Phung-Koskas T(1), Pilon A, Poüs C, Betzina C, Sturm M, Bourguet-Kondracki ML,
Durand G, Drechou A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Cellulaire, EA 1595, Faculté de
Pharmacie, 5, rue JB. Clément, 92296 Chatenay-Malabry, France.

In the last decade, the notion that microtubules are critical to the spatial
organization of signal transduction and contribute to the transmission of signals
to downstream targets has been proposed. Because the STAT5B transduction and
transcription factor is the major STAT protein activated by growth hormone
stimulation in hepatocytes and is a crossroads between many signaling pathways,
we studied the involvement of microtubules in STAT5B-mediated growth hormone
signaling pathway in the highly differentiated and polarized WIF-B hepatic cell
line. We showed that depolymerization of the microtubule network impaired STAT5B 
translocation to the nucleus upon growth hormone treatment. A significant amount 
of STAT5B binds to microtubules, while STAT5A and STAT3 are exclusively
compartmentalized in the cytosol. Moreover, taxol-induced stabilization of
microtubules released STAT5B from its binding, and we show that STAT5B binds
specifically to the highly dynamic microtubules and is absent of the stable
microtubule subpopulation. The specific involvement of dynamic microtubule
subpopulation in growth hormone signaling pathway was confirmed by the inhibition
of growth hormone-induced STAT5B nuclear translocation after stabilization of
microtubules or specific disruption of highly dynamic microtubules. Upon growth
hormone treatment, MT-bound STAT5B was rapidly released from microtubules by a
dynein-dependent transport to the nucleus. Altogether, our findings indicate that
the labile microtubule subpopulation specifically and dynamically organizes
STAT5B-mediated growth hormone signaling in hepatic cells.

PMID: 15528207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Appl Genet. 2004;45(4):445-52.

New SSCP polymorphism within bovine STAT5A gene and its associations with milk
performance traits in Black-and-White and Jersey cattle.

Brym P(1), Kaminski S, Rusc A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics, University of Warmia and Mazury, M.
Oczapowskiego 5, 10-957 Olsztyn, Poland.

Milk protein genes expression in cows' mammary epithelial cells is regulated
mostly by the action of prolactin mediated through the STAT5A transcription
factor. The STAT5A gene is a potential quantitative trait locus (QTL) and genetic
marker of production traits in dairy cattle. The sequence of the bovine STAT5A
gene was analysed in this study to investigate if mutations in this sequence
might be responsible for quantitative variations in milk yield and composition.
Ten PCR fragments representing most important functional domains of STAT5A were
screened for polymorphism. Using the SSCP method a new SNP (A/G) was found,
located in intron 9 at position 9501 (GenBank AJ237937). The frequencies of
alleles were estimated in 186 Black-and-White cows (0.52 and 0.48 for A and G,
respectively) and in 138 Jersey cows (0.58 and 0.42 for A and G, respectively).
For Black-and-White cows with different STAT5A genotypes no significant
associations between STAT5A genotypes and milk performance traits were found.
Statistically significant differences in the first and second lactations for milk
yield, fat and protein content were found in Jersey cows. Cows with the GG
genotype showed the highest milk yield, while cows with genotypes AA and AG
showed higher protein contents when compared to cows with the GG genotype.
Interestingly, cows with genotype AG showed significantly higher protein yields
in comparison to cows with the AA genotype. For fat content, cows with genotype
AA showed the highest level of this trait in the 1st and 2nd lactation. Further
studies are necessary to evaluate an allele substitution effect in the population
of sib-families of STAT5A heterozygous bulls.

PMID: 15523155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 13;24(3):336-43.

Lyn deficiency reduces GATA-1, EKLF and STAT5, and induces extramedullary stress 
erythropoiesis.

Ingley E(1), McCarthy DJ, Pore JR, Sarna MK, Adenan AS, Wright MJ, Erber W,
Tilbrook PA, Klinken SP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Western Australian Institute for Medical
Research and Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia,
WA, Australia.

In vitro studies have implicated the Lyn tyrosine kinase in erythropoietin
signaling. In this study, we show that J2E erythroid cells lacking Lyn have
impaired signaling and reduced levels of transcription factors STAT5a, EKLF and
GATA-1. Since mice lacking STAT5, EKLF or GATA-1 have red cell abnormalities,
this study also examined the erythroid compartment of Lyn(-/-) mice.
Significantly, STAT5, EKLF and GATA-1 levels were appreciably lower in Lyn(-/-)
erythroblasts, and the phenotype of Lyn(-/-) animals was remarkably similar to
GATA-1(low) animals. Although young adult Lyn-deficient mice had normal
hematocrits, older mice developed anemia. Grossly enlarged erythroblasts and
florid erythrophagocytosis were detected in the bone marrow of mice lacking Lyn. 
Markedly elevated erythroid progenitors and precursor levels were observed in the
spleens, but not bone marrow, of Lyn(-/-) animals indicating that extramedullary 
erythropoiesis was occurring. These data indicate that Lyn(-/-) mice display
extramedullary stress erythropoiesis to compensate for intrinsic and extrinsic
erythroid defects.

PMID: 15516974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Exp Hematol. 2004 Oct;32(10):935-45.

Activated Fps/Fes tyrosine kinase regulates erythroid differentiation and
survival.

Sangrar W(1), Gao Y, Bates B, Zirngibl R, Greer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's University Cancer Research
Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: A substantial body of evidence implicates the cytoplasmic protein
tyrosine kinase Fps/Fes in regulation of myeloid differentiation and survival. In
this study we wished to determine if Fps/Fes also plays a role in the regulation 
of erythropoiesis.
METHODS: Mice tissue-specifically expressing a "gain-of-function" mutant fps/fes 
transgene (fps(MF)) encoding an activated variant of Fps/Fes (MFps), were used to
explore the in vivo biological role of Fps/Fes. Erythropoiesis in these mice was 
assessed by hematological analysis, lineage marker analysis, bone-marrow colony
assays, and biochemical approaches.
RESULTS: fps(MF) mice displayed reductions in peripheral red cell counts.
However, there was an accumulation of immature erythroid precursors, which
displayed increased survival. Fps/Fes and the related Fer kinase were both
detected in early erythroid progenitors/blasts and in mature red cells. Fps/Fes
was also activated in response to erythropoietin (EPO) and stem cell factor
(SCF), two critical factors in erythroid development. In addition, increased
Stat5A/B activation and reduced Erk1/2 phosphorylation was observed in fps(MF)
primary erythroid cells in response to EPO or SCF, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support a role for Fps/Fes in regulating the survival and
differentiation of erythroid cells through modulation of Stat5A/B and Erk kinase 
pathways induced by EPO and SCF. The increased numbers and survival of erythroid 
progenitors from fps(MF) mice, and their differential responsiveness to SCF and
EPO, implicates Fps/Fes in the commitment of multilineage progenitors to the
erythroid lineage. The anemic phenotype in fps(MF) mice suggests that
downregulation of Fps/Fes activity might be required for terminal erythroid
differentiation.

PMID: 15504549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2005 Feb 15;105(4):1476-83. Epub 2004 Oct 21.

A STAT5 modifier locus on murine chromosome 7 modulates engraftment of
hematopoietic stem cells during steady-state hematopoiesis.

Couldrey C(1), Bradley HL, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical
Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD, USA.

Homologous disruption of expression of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b (STAT5ab(-/-)) in mice results in
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that can engraft irradiated hosts alone but are
noncompetitive against wild-type HSCs. To explore mechanisms for this phenotype, 
we crossed the STAT5 mutations onto an HW80 background congenic to the original
C57BL/6 that differs in a small chromosome 7 genomic locus. We previously
demonstrated that C57BL/6 or HW80 background STAT5ab(-/-) bone marrow (BM) cells 
showed equal repopulating function either competitively or noncompetitively in
irradiated hosts. However, one intraperitoneal injection of wild-type green
fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic BM cells into unconditioned newborn
STAT5ab(-/-) recipients of either background was sufficient for high-level donor 
engraftment. Furthermore, haploinsufficiency of STAT5 (STAT5ab(+/-)) allowed
improved engraftment over wild-type recipients, indicating a dose-dependent
requirement for STAT5 activation. In reciprocal experiments, STAT5ab(-/-) BM was 
transplanted into nonirradiated W/W(v) hosts. In these mice, C57BL/6 STAT5ab(-/-)
BM cells were 10-fold more defective in long-term engraftment than control
wild-type BM cells and HW80 STAT5ab(-/-) BM cells were 5- to 10-fold more
defective than C57BL/6 STAT5ab(-/-) BM cells. Therefore, we conclude that STAT5
plays a critical role during steady-state HSC engraftment and a chromosome 7
modifier locus regulates this activity.

PMID: 15498858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54724-30. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Isolation of unique STAT5 targets by chromatin immunoprecipitation-based gene
identification.

Nelson EA(1), Walker SR, Alvarez JV, Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

STAT5a and STAT5b are two highly related transcription factors that control
essential cellular functions. Several STAT5 targets are known, although it is
likely that most remain uncharacterized. To identify a more complete set of
STAT5-regulated genes, we used a modification of the chromatin
immunoprecipitation procedure, which does not presuppose any information
regarding these targets. Employing Ba/f3 cells in which STAT5 is activated by
interleukin-3, we have identified novel STAT5 binding sites that may be
regulatory regions for nearby genes. These sites are typically found far from
transcription start sites, and most do not contain CpG islands, indicating that
they are not in traditional promoter regions. Nonetheless, when the expression of
genes near these STAT5 binding sites was examined, all were expressed in Ba/f3
cells, and most were modulated by interleukin-3. Furthermore, genes identified by
this strategy show unique expression patterns in acute leukemias, tumors
characterized by activated STAT5. Whereas both STAT5 isoforms bound to all
promoters tested, STAT5a and STAT5b bound with different kinetics, suggesting
that at least some of the differences between the functions of these two proteins
are mediated by their DNA binding activity. Therefore, this method of
transcription factor target identification represents an effective strategy to
isolate transcription factor targets in an unbiased fashion, and it has revealed 
many novel STAT5-dependent regulatory regions outside of traditional promoters.

PMID: 15498775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;19(2):431-40. Epub 2004 Oct 7.

Regulation of progesterone levels during pregnancy and parturition by signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 and 20alpha-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase.

Piekorz RP(1), Gingras S, Hoffmeyer A, Ihle JN, Weinstein Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The two highly related signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stats), Stat5a and Stat5b, are major mediators of prolactin signaling in both
the mammary gland and in the ovary. Deficiencies in Stat5b, or in both Stat5a and
Stat5b, result in loss of pregnancy during midgestation and are correlated with
an increase in ovarian 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20alpha-HSD) and a
decrease in serum progesterone, which normally declines only immediately before
parturition. To determine the relative contribution of 20alpha-HSD to
progesterone metabolism and Stat5 function during pregnancy and parturition, we
created a 20alpha-HSD-deficient strain of mice by gene disruption. Mice deficient
for 20alpha-HSD sustain high progesterone levels and display a delay in
parturition of several days demonstrating that 20alpha-HSD regulates parturition 
downstream of the prostaglandin F2alpha receptor in an essential and nonredundant
manner. Moreover, 20alpha-HSD deficiency partially corrected the abortion of
pregnancies associated with Stat5b deficiency, supporting the concept that
prolactin activation of Stat5b is important in suppressing 20alpha-HSD gene
expression and thereby allowing the maintenance of progesterone levels that are
required to sustain pregnancy.

PMID: 15471942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Sep 15;199(3):275-84.

Simultaneous, bidirectional inhibitory crosstalk between PPAR and STAT5b.

Shipley JM(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, MA 02215, USA.

The transcription factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activate genes
involved in fatty acid metabolism (PPARalpha) and adipogenesis (PPARgamma) and
mediate hormonal responses important for body growth, liver gene expression, and 
mammary gland development (STAT5a and STAT5b). These seemingly disparate pathways
are subject to mutually inhibitory crosstalk, with growth hormone (GH)-activated 
STAT5 able to inhibit PPAR-regulated gene transcription by approximately 80%, and
conversely, ligand-activated PPAR able to inhibit STAT5-regulated transcription
to a similar degree. Given the co-expression of PPAR and STAT5 in multiple
tissues, we investigated whether one of the factors dominates the inhibitory
crosstalk. A PPAR-responsive Renilla luciferase reporter was constructed and used
to monitor PPAR transcriptional activity in COS-1 cells co-transfected with a
STAT5 firefly luciferase reporter. In cells co-stimulated with GH and a PPAR
agonist, STAT5b inhibited expression of the PPAR-regulated Renilla luciferase
reporter, whereas PPARalpha and PPARgamma inhibited transcription of the
STAT5b-regulated firefly luciferase reporter. The extent of the inhibitory
crosstalk was dependent on the relative levels of expression of each
transcription factor and on the relative concentrations of GH and PPAR agonist.
Dose-response studies revealed that STAT5b was inhibited at an approximately
7-fold lower concentration of the PPARgamma ligand troglitazone than was required
for activation of PPARgamma, indicating that only a portion of cellular PPARgamma
is needed for STAT5b inhibition. Similarly, mono-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (MEHP), 
a reproductive toxicant and primary metabolite of the environmental chemical
di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP), inhibited STAT5b transcriptional activity with
an EC50 value of 1.1 microM, corresponding to an approximately 10-fold lower
concentration than required for activation of PPARgamma-dependent transcription. 
We conclude that the cross-inhibition between PPAR and STAT5 proceeds in a
simultaneous, bidirectional manner. Exposure to phthalates and other
environmental chemical activators of PPARs may thus lead to alteration of
hormone-induced, STAT5-regulated gene expression in tissues such as liver, fat
and breast, where both transcription factors are expressed. Conversely,
STAT5-activating hormones and cytokines may modulate the responsiveness of PPARs 
to their foreign chemical ligands.

PMID: 15364543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 7;23(46):7701-11.

HIV-Tat promotes cellular proliferation and inhibits NGF-induced differentiation 
through mechanisms involving Id1 regulation.

Bergonzini V(1), Delbue S, Wang JY, Reiss K, Prisco M, Amini S, Khalili K,
Peruzzi F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, Temple University, 1900 12th
North Street, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

Id1 is a helix-loop-helix transcriptional factor that controls growth and
survival of neuronal cells. Downregulation of Id1 expression is required to
initiate differentiation and cell-cycle withdrawal in primary neuronal culture as
well as in PC12 cells. The HIV-1 transactivating factor, Tat, has been suspected 
of causing neuronal dysfunction that often leads to the development of
HIV-associated dementia in AIDS patients. We found that the expression of Tat in 
PC12 cells promotes serum-independent growth, formation of large colonies in soft
agar, and the acceleration of tumor growth in nude mice. In addition, Tat showed 
the ability to inhibit the nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced neuronal
differentiation of PC12 cells. Our results show that the Tat-mediated signaling
events, which lead to serum-independent growth and the inhibition of NGF-induced 
differentiation, have a common cellular target: the upregulation of Id1
expression. In the absence of NGF, expression of Id1 is required to promote
serum-independent proliferation of PC12/Tat cells, as the inhibition of Id1 by
antisense DNA restored the serum-dependent growth of PC12/Tat cells. In the
presence of NGF, Tat utilizes an additional pathway that involves phosphorylation
of Stat5a, to upregulate Id1 expression and block neuronal cell differentiation. 
Suppression of Stat5a by use of its dominant-negative mutant reversed the
transient expression of Id1 and the blockage of NGF-mediated differentiation in
PC12/Tat cells. Finally, the treatment of PC12 cells with recombinant Tat also
enhanced the NGF-induced Id1 expression, further pointing to Id1 as a target for 
Tat. Taken together, these studies suggest additional targets for Tat action in
neuronal cells and provide new insights into the mechanisms involved in the
dysregulation of neuronal functions.

PMID: 15361847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 13;321(1):145-53.

Transcriptional regulation of SLP-76 family hematopoietic cell adaptor MIST/Clnk 
by STAT5.

Sasanuma H(1), Tatsuno A, Tsuji K, Hidano S, Morita S, Kitamura T, Kubo M,
Kitamura D, Goitsuka R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biological Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, 2669 
Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-0022, Japan.

SLP-76-related adaptor protein MIST (also called Clnk) is expressed in a variety 
of cytokine-dependent hematopoietic cell lines of myeloid and lymphoid origin as 
well as some cytokine-independent mast cell lines. To understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying the MIST gene expression, we have characterized the
5'-flanking region of the mouse MIST gene. We have identified an enhancer region 
(-773 to -709), which is active in P815 mast cells expressing the endogenous MIST
gene, but not in EL-4 T cells lacking MIST expression. Outside of this enhancer
region, one STAT element present in the MIST promoter (-44 to -36) was found to
bind STAT5A when IC-2 mast cells were stimulated with IL-3. Mutation of this STAT
element did not affect basal MIST promoter activity in P815 mast cells, but was
required for STAT5-mediated activation of the MIST promoter. Furthermore,
endogenous MIST gene expression was induced in mast cells by a constitutively
activated form of STAT5A, but not by an active mutant of c-Kit receptor. These
findings suggest that STAT5 is involved in cytokine-mediated up-regulation of
MIST gene expression, probably in collaboration with other lineage-specific
transcription factors that promote basal MIST expression in mast cells.

PMID: 15358227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Exp Med. 2004 Sep 6;200(5):623-35.

Constitutive activation of STAT5A promotes human hematopoietic stem cell
self-renewal and erythroid differentiation.

Schuringa JJ(1), Chung KY, Morrone G, Moore MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Hematopoiesis, Cell Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Activation of the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)5 is involved in various aspects of hematopoiesis, affecting 
cell proliferation, differentiation, and cell survival. Constitutive activation
of STAT5 has also been associated with leukemic transformation. We overexpressed 
the constitutively active mutant STAT5A(1*6) in human cord blood CD34+ cells and 
evaluated the effects on the hematopoietic potential of stem cells in a variety
of in vitro and in vivo systems. The observed phenotypic changes were correlated 
with differential gene expression patterns induced by STAT5A(1*6). Our data
indicate that a persistent activation of STAT5A in human hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells results in their enhanced self-renewal and diverts
differentiation to the erythroid lineage.

PMCID: PMC2212750
PMID: 15353555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(18):8037-47.

Inactivation of Stat5 in mouse mammary epithelium during pregnancy reveals
distinct functions in cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation.

Cui Y(1), Riedlinger G, Miyoshi K, Tang W, Li C, Deng CX, Robinson GW,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-0822, USA.

This study explored the functions of the signal transducers and activators of
transcription 5a and 5b (referred to as Stat5 here) during different stages of
mouse mammary gland development by using conditional gene inactivation. Mammary
gland morphogenesis includes cell specification, proliferation and
differentiation during pregnancy, cell survival and maintenance of
differentiation throughout lactation, and cell death during involution. Stat5 is 
activated by prolactin, and its presence is mandatory for the proliferation and
differentiation of mammary epithelium during pregnancy. To address the question
of whether Stat5 is also necessary for the maintenance and survival of the
differentiated epithelium, the two genes were deleted at different time points.
The 110-kb Stat5 locus in the mouse was bracketed with loxP sites, and its
deletion was accomplished by using two Cre-expressing transgenic lines. Loss of
Stat5 prior to pregnancy prevented epithelial proliferation and differentiation. 
Deletion of Stat5 during pregnancy, after mammary epithelium had entered
Stat5-mediated differentiation, resulted in premature cell death, indicating that
at this stage epithelial cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival
require Stat5.

PMCID: PMC515028
PMID: 15340066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;36(11):2120-4.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5).

Buitenhuis M(1), Coffer PJ, Koenderman L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, G03.550, University Medical Center,
Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands. m.buitenhuis@hli.azu.nl

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activity is induced by
a plethora of cytokines and growth factors resulting in transcriptional
activation of specific target genes. STAT5 plays an important role in a variety
of cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
Aberrant regulation of STAT5 has been observed in solid tumors as well as in
patients with either chronic or acute myeloid leukemia. Kinase inhibitors are
currently being developed to negatively regulate STAT5 activity for clinical
purposes.

PMID: 15313458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biol Reprod. 2004 Dec;71(6):1907-12. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Prolactin signals through RUSH/SMARCA3 in the absence of a physical association
with Stat5a.

Hewetson A(1), Moore SL, Chilton BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

Jak/Stat-mediated prolactin signal transduction culminates in the
sequence-selective binding of Stat5a. However, in the absence of Stat-binding
sites, a RUSH-binding element mediates the prolactin signal in the rabbit
uteroglobin promoter. Speculation about the existence of a Jak/RUSH pathway
prompted this series of experiments to examine potential interactions between
RUSH and Stat5a. Profiles of Jak/Stat pathway-specific genes by RT-PCR showed
that mRNA for Jak2 and Stat5a is expressed in the endometrium of estrous,
progesterone-treated, and 5-day pseudopregnant rabbits. Interspecies microarrays 
showed that transcripts for Stat5a were present at equal concentrations in the
endometrium regardless of hormone treatment. The absence of a physical
interaction between RUSH and individual Stat proteins bound to enhancer sites was
demonstrated with transcription factor interaction arrays. These studies confirm 
that transmission of the prolactin signal through RUSH occurs in the absence of a
physical association with Stat5a. Although a strong physical interaction between 
RUSH and Egr-1 was identified with the same arrays, no Egr-1 consensus sites were
found in the region of the uteroglobin promoter (-175/-80) that contains the
authentic RUSH site. Because the major transducer molecules (Jak2, Stat5a) are
activated by tyrosine phosphorylation, Western analysis of immunoprecipitated
samples, and gel shift assays were used to show that tyrosine phosphorylation is 
required for RUSH-DNA binding. The precise role for Jak2 in this process remains 
undefined. By comparison, serine-threonine-specific protein phosphorylation had
no effect on RUSH-DNA binding.

PMID: 15306550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 13;572(1-3):238-44.

ERalpha and STAT5a cross-talk: interaction through C-terminal portions of the
proteins decreases STAT5a phosphorylation, nuclear translocation and DNA-binding.

Wang Y(1), Cheng CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T.,
Hong Kong, PR China.

Cross-talk between ERalpha and STAT5a was demonstrated to mediate through a
direct physical association between the two proteins. By GST pull-down assays and
functional assays with various constructs of ERalpha and STAT5a, it was shown
that the C-termini of these two proteins were mainly responsible for this
interaction. Furthermore, the interaction between ERalpha and STAT5a was
demonstrated to give rise to functional changes in their signaling events. In
cell transfection studies, it was shown that ERalpha activation could attenuate
PRLR signaling through STAT5a. This ERalpha-mediated attenuation of PRLR
signaling was substantiated by observed decreases in the phosphorylation of JAK2 
and STAT5a, reduced translocation of STAT5a into the nucleus, and reduced binding
of STAT5a onto a GAS-containing nucleotide. Apart from transfected cells, the
interaction between ERalpha and STAT5a could also be observed in established
breast cancer cell lines of MCF-7 and T-47D in co-immunoprecipitation studies.
However, the functional consequence of the interaction in these cancer cells was 
very different from the transfected HEK293 cells. ER activation could lead to
potentiation of PRLR signaling in MCF-7 cells but not in T-47D cells. Conversely,
in both MCF-7 and T-47D cells, PRLR activation could lead to attenuation of ER
signaling. These data serve to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the
ERalpha-STAT5a cross-talk and in demonstrating that the functional consequence of
this cross-talk depends on the precise milieus of the intracellular environment.

PMID: 15304355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gene. 2004 Aug 18;338(1):65-74.

Conservation, duplication and divergence of the zebrafish stat5 genes.

Lewis RS(1), Ward AC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Biological and Chemical
Sciences, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, Victoria 3125,
Australia.

There are seven mammalian signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)
proteins that act downstream of cytokine and growth factor receptors to mediate
rapid changes in gene expression. The mammalian Stat5a and Stat5b genes show high
sequence identity and lie adjacent in a head-to-head configuration next to the
Stat3 gene, apparently the result of a relatively recent mammal-specific gene
duplication event. We have identified and characterized two stat5 homologues that
are expressed in zebrafish, named stat5.1 and stat5.2. The stat5.1 gene shows a
high level of conservation with the single stat5 gene found in other teleosts and
lies next to the stat3 gene, in the same relative orientation as the mammalian
Stat5b gene. In contrast, the stat5.2 gene lies on a different chromosome to
stat5.1 and stat3, and has diverged from the stat5 genes of other teleosts, with 
no apparent orthologue. Together, these data suggest that the ancestral Stat5
gene has undergone two independent gene duplication events to generate a stat5.2 
paralogue in zebrafish and a Stat5a paralogue in mammals.

PMID: 15302407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Aug 12;1679(2):195-9.

Promoter variant-dependent expression of the STAT5A gene in bovine liver.

Flisikowski K(1), Starzynski RR, Zwierzchowski L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding
Polish Academy of Sciences, Postepu 1, Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Wólka Kosowska,
Poland. kflisikowski@yahoo.co.uk

Using PCR-heteroduplex and sequencing we identified A/G substitution at position 
-488 in the promoter region of the bovine STAT5A gene. With reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) and other means we showed that the STAT5A expression
level in the liver was higher in cattle with AA than GG genotype. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that the A-->G transition at position -488
increased the STAT5A gene promoter binding capacity for liver nuclear proteins
[possibly hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-3].

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15297151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):41249-57. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

A distal region in the interferon-gamma gene is a site of epigenetic remodeling
and transcriptional regulation by interleukin-2.

Bream JH(1), Hodge DL, Gonsky R, Spolski R, Leonard WJ, Krebs S, Targan S,
Morinobu A, O'Shea JJ, Young HA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte and Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation
Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1820, USA.
jbream@jhsph.edu

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is a multifunctional cytokine that defines the
development of Th1 cells and is critical for host defense against intracellular
pathogens. IL-2 is another key immunoregulatory cytokine that is involved in T
helper differentiation and is known to induce IFN-gamma expression in natural
killer (NK) and T cells. Despite concerted efforts to identify the one or more
transcriptional control mechanisms by which IL-2 induces IFN-gamma mRNA
expression, no such genomic regulatory regions have been described. We have
identified a DNase I hypersensitivity site approximately 3.5-4.0 kb upstream of
the transcriptional start site. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we
found constitutive histone H3 acetylation in this distal region in primary human 
NK cells, which is enhanced by IL-2 treatment. This distal region is also
preferentially acetylated on histones H3 and H4 in primary Th1 cells as compared 
with Th2 cells. Within this distal region we found a Stat5-like motif, and in
vitro DNA binding assays as well as in vivo chromosomal immunoprecipitation
assays showed IL-2-induced binding of both Stat5a and Stat5b to this distal
element in the IFNG gene. We examined the function of this Stat5-binding motif by
transfecting human peripheral blood mononuclear cells with -3.6 kb of
IFNG-luciferase constructs and found that phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate/ionomycin-induced transcription was augmented by IL-2 treatment. The
effect of IL-2 was lost when the Stat5 motif was disrupted. These data led us to 
conclude that this distal region serves as both a target of chromatin remodeling 
in the IFNG locus as well as an IL-2-induced transcriptional enhancer that binds 
Stat5 proteins.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15271977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):932-44.

Adenosine acts through A2 receptors to inhibit IL-2-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5 in T lymphocytes: role of cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate and phosphatases.

Zhang H(1), Conrad DM, Butler JJ, Zhao C, Blay J, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Adenosine is a purine nucleoside with immunosuppressive activity that acts
through cell surface receptors (A(1), A(2a), A(2b), A(3)) on responsive cells
such as T lymphocytes. IL-2 is a major T cell growth and survival factor that is 
responsible for inducing Jak1, Jak3, and STAT5 phosphorylation, as well as
causing STAT5 to translocate to the nucleus and bind regulatory elements in the
genome. In this study, we show that adenosine suppressed IL-2-dependent
proliferation of CTLL-2 T cells by inhibiting STAT5a/b tyrosine phosphorylation
that is associated with IL-2R signaling without affecting IL-2-induced
phosphorylation of Jak1 or Jak3. The inhibitory effect of adenosine on
IL-2-induced STAT5a/b tyrosine phosphorylation was reversed by the protein
tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors sodium orthovanadate and bpV(phen). Adenosine
dramatically increased Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase-2
(SHP-2) tyrosine phosphorylation and its association with STAT5 in
IL-2-stimulated CTLL-2 T cells, implicating SHP-2 in adenosine-induced STAT5a/b
dephosphorylation. The inhibitory effect of adenosine on IL-2-induced STAT5a/b
tyrosine phosphorylation was reproduced by A(2) receptor agonists and was blocked
by selective A(2a) and A(2b) receptor antagonists, indicating that adenosine was 
mediating its effect through A(2) receptors. Inhibition of STAT5a/b
phosphorylation was reproduced with cell-permeable 8-bromo-cAMP or
forskolin-induced activation of adenylyl cyclase, and blocked by the cAMP/protein
kinase A inhibitor Rp-cAMP. Forskolin and 8-bromo-cAMP also induced SHP-2
tyrosine phosphorylation. Collectively, these findings suggest that adenosine
acts through A(2) receptors and associated cAMP/protein kinase A-dependent
signaling pathways to activate SHP-2 and cause STAT5 dephosphorylation that
results in reduced IL-2R signaling in T cells.

PMID: 15240680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;23(6):355-65.

High-throughput gateway bicistronic retroviral vectors for stable expression in
mammalian cells: exploring the biologic effects of STAT5 overexpression.

Royer Y(1), Menu C, Liu X, Constantinescu SN.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels, Belgium.

Stable expression of cloned genes in mammalian cells has been achieved in the
past by retroviral transduction using bicistronic retroviral vectors. In these
vectors, the use of an Internal Ribosome Entry Site (IRES) allows simultaneous
expression of a protein of interest and a fluorescence marker. However,
traditional cDNA cloning in these vectors is often difficult. Here we report the 
construction of a high-throughput retroviral vector using the Invitrogen
"Gateway" Cloning system. The Gateway recombination sequences (attR) flanking the
ccdB and chloramphenicol resistance genes were incorporated at the 5' of the IRES
of pMX-IRES-GFP, -CD2, or -CD4 vectors. Through recombination, these vectors can 
acquire cDNAs coding for genes of interest, which will result in simultaneous
expression of the recombined gene and the marker protein. We constructed Gateway 
bicistronic vectors coding for the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) and GFP, CD4,
or CD2. Epo-dependent proliferation assays and analysis of Jak2-dependent EpoR
cell-surface expression showed that these vectors were able to function
indistinguishable from the original pMX-EpoR-IRES-GFP. The expression levels of
the genes cloned upstream the IRES were proportional to the levels of expression 
of GFP, which was cloned downstream of the IRES. We used the same approach and
generated Ba/F3 cells that overexpress STAT5a, STAT5b, or a constitutively active
form of STAT5. Overexpression of STAT5 lead to a significant effect on the
intrinsic adherence to plastic of these cells, but did not change their
proliferative responses to cytokines. We discuss possible applications of the new
vectors for cell signaling and expression cloning.

PMID: 15231069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Blood. 2005 Jan 15;105(2):552-61. Epub 2004 Jun 22.

A novel role for STAT1 in regulating murine erythropoiesis: deletion of STAT1
results in overall reduction of erythroid progenitors and alters their
distribution.

Halupa A(1), Bailey ML, Huang K, Iscove NN, Levy DE, Barber DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Erythropoietin (EPO) activates many distinct signal transduction cascades on
engagement of its receptor. Deletion of the EPO, EPO receptor (EPO-R), or JAK2
genes in mice results in embryonic lethality due to a fatal anemia. EPO activates
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), STAT3, and STAT5a/b
transcription factors in erythroid cell lines. Studies have focused on STAT5 as
the primary target of EPO-dependent JAK2 activation. However, STAT5a/b(-/-) mice 
are viable, displaying a nonfatal anemia during embryogenesis, and delayed
differentiation in adult erythropoiesis. Importantly, EPO-R cytoplasmic tyrosines
are dispensable for viability in vivo. Interestingly, no cytoplasmic tyrosines
are required for phosphorylation of STAT1. This led us to examine whether
STAT1-deficient mice have altered erythropoiesis. A shift in erythropoiesis was
observed in STAT1(-/-) mice, with reduced bone marrow-derived erythroid
colony-forming units (CFU-Es) and a compensatory increase in splenic
burst-forming units (BFU-Es) and CFU-Es. Both types of splenic-derived cells
displayed EPO hyperresponsiveness. A 1.6-fold reduction in total CFU-Es was
observed in STAT1-deficient mice, whereas total BFU-Es were comparable. Flow
cytometry of STAT1-deficient erythroid cells revealed a less differentiated
phenotype, associated with increased apoptosis of early erythroblasts.
STAT1-deficient erythroblasts from phenylhydrazine-primed mice displayed enhanced
phosphorylation of STAT5a/b, Erk1/2, and protein kinase B (PKB)/Akt. These
results illustrate that STAT1 plays an important role in the regulation of
erythropoiesis.

PMID: 15213094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 May 31;220(1-2):109-23.

Growth hormone (GH) receptors in prostate cancer: gene expression in human
tissues and cell lines and characterization, GH signaling and androgen receptor
regulation in LNCaP cells.

Weiss-Messer E(1), Merom O, Adi A, Karry R, Bidosee M, Ber R, Kaploun A, Stein A,
Barkey RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Technion, P.O.B. 9649, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

Various hormones and growth factors have been implicated in progression of
prostate cancer, but their role and the underlying molecular mechanism(s)
involved remain poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the role of
human growth hormone (GH) and its receptor (GHR) in human prostate cancer. We
first demonstrated mRNA expression of GHR and of its exon 9-truncated isoform
(GHR(tr)) in benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate adenocarcinoma
patient tissues, as well as in LNCaP, PC3 and DU145 human prostate cancer cell
lines. GHR mRNA levels were 80% higher and GHR(tr) only 25% higher, in the
carcinoma tissues than in BPH. Both isoforms were also expressed in LNCaP and PC3
cell lines and somewhat less so in DU145 cells. The LNCaP cell GHR protein was
further characterized, on the basis of its M(r) of 120kDa, its binding to two
different GHR monoclonal antibodies, its high affinity and purely somatogenic
binding to (125)I-hGH and its ability to secrete GH binding protein, all
characteristic of a functional GHR. Furthermore, GH induced rapid, time- and
dose-dependent signaling events in LNCaP cells, including phosphorylation of JAK2
tyrosine kinase, of GHR itself and of STAT5A (JAK2-STAT5A pathway), of p42/p44
MAPK and of Akt/PKB. No effect of GH (72h) could be shown on basal or
androgen-induced LNCaP cell proliferation nor on PSA secretion. Interestingly,
however, GH caused a rapid (2-12h) though transient striking increase in
immunoreactive androgen receptor (AR) levels (< or =5-fold), followed by a slower
(24-48h) reduction (< or = 80%), with only modest parallel changes in
serine-phosphorylated AR. In conclusion, the GH-induced activation of signaling
pathways, its effects on AR protein in LNCaP cells and the isoform-specific
regulation of GHR in prostate cancer patient tissues, suggest that GH, most
likely in concert with other hormones and growth factors, may play an important
role in progression of human prostate cancer.

PMID: 15196705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5510-20.

Impaired alveologenesis and maintenance of secretory mammary epithelial cells in 
Jak2 conditional knockout mice.

Wagner KU(1), Krempler A, Triplett AA, Qi Y, George NM, Zhu J, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases and Department of 
Pathology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, 68198-6805, USA.
kuwagner@unmc.edu

Jak2 is a hormone-receptor-coupled kinase that mediates the tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of signal transducers and activators of
transcription (Stat). The biological relevance of Jak2-Stat signaling in
hormone-responsive adult tissues is difficult to investigate since Jak2
deficiency leads to embryonic lethality. We generated Jak2 conditional knockout
mice to study essential functions of Jak2 during mammary gland development. The
mouse mammary tumor virus-Cre-mediated excision of the first coding exon resulted
in a Jak2 null mutation that uncouples signaling from the prolactin receptor
(PRL-R) to its downstream mediator Stat5 in the presence of normal and
supraphysiological levels of PRL. Jak2-deficient females were unable to lactate
as a result of impaired alveologenesis. Unlike Stat5a knockouts, multiple
gestation cycles could not reverse the Jak2-deficient phenotype, suggesting that 
neither other components of the PRL-R signaling cascade nor other growth factors 
and their signal transducers were able to compensate for the loss of Jak2
function to activate Stat5 in vivo. A comparative analysis of Jak2-deficient
mammary glands with transplants from Stat5a/b knockouts revealed that Jak2
deficiency also impairs the pregnancy-induced branching morphogenesis. Jak2
conditional mutants therefore resemble PRL-R knockouts more closely, which
suggested that Jak2 deficiency might affect additional PRL-R downstream mediators
other than Stat5a and Stat5b. To address whether Jak2 is required for the
maintenance of PRL-responsive, differentiating alveolar cells, we utilized a
transgenic strain that expresses Cre recombinase under regulatory elements of the
whey acidic protein gene (Wap). The Wap-Cre-mediated excision of Jak2 resulted in
a negative selection of differentiated alveolar cells, suggesting that Jak2 is
required not only for the proliferation and differentiation of alveolar cells but
also for their maintenance during lactation.

PMCID: PMC419899
PMID: 15169911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Clin Oncol. 2004 Jun 1;22(11):2053-60.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 activation and breast cancer
prognosis.

Nevalainen MT(1), Xie J, Torhorst J, Bubendorf L, Haas P, Kononen J, Sauter G,
Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center NRB E504, Georgetown University, 3970
Reservoir Rd NW, Washington, DC 20057-1469, USA.

PURPOSE: Transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 
(Stat5) promotes breast epithelial cell differentiation. We retrospectively
analyzed whether levels of active Stat5 in breast cancer were linked to clinical 
outcome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to detect active,
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat5 in paraffin-embedded breast cancer specimens from
three archival tissue microarray materials A, B, and C. Material A included 19
healthy human breast tissues and a progression series of primary lymph
node-negative, primary lymph node-positive, and metastatic breast cancer (n =
400). Materials B (n = 785) and C (n = 570) represented two independent arrays of
unselected primary breast cancer specimens with clinical follow-up data.
RESULTS: Material A demonstrated that Stat5 activation, but not Stat5 protein
expression, was gradually lost during cancer progression, with detectable
activation in 100% of healthy breast specimens compared with less than 20% of
node-positive breast cancers and metastases. Stat5 activation in tumors of
material B was associated with favorable prognosis. This observation was
confirmed and extended in material C to include both breast cancer-specific
survival and disease-free survival. Stat5 activation remained an independent
prognostic marker after adjusting for patient age, tumor size, histological
grade, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and Her2/neu status by Cox
multivariate analysis (hazard ratio, 2.0; P =.029). Stat5 activation was a
particularly favorable marker in the lymph node-negative breast cancer
subpopulation (hazard ratio, 7.5; P =.003).
CONCLUSION: In our study, active Stat5 distinguishes breast cancer patients with 
favorable prognosis, and may be a useful marker for selection of more
individualized treatment, especially in localized disease. These findings require
confirmation in a large prospective study.

PMID: 15169792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cell Prolif. 2004 Jun;37(3):231-45.

The influence of antisense oligonucleotides against STAT5 on the regulation of
normal haematopoiesis in a bone marrow model.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Paczkowski M, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szcecin,
Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

Cytokines and growth factors that take part in the regulation of haematopoietic
cell development activate many signalling pathways in target cells. The STAT5
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are members of a
family of signal transducers and activators of transcription that can be
activated after cytokine stimulation. Their binding to promoters of different
genes influences cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. It is
suggested that they play an important role in haematopoiesis, however, the
question of the real function of STAT5 proteins requires further examination. The
aim of our study was to investigate the role of STAT5 in the proliferation and
apoptosis of normal haematopoietic bone marrow cells derived from heparinized
cadaveric organ donors (HCOD). We applied antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) 
to block STAT5A and STAT5B at the mRNA level and the reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction method to study STAT5 mRNA expression in the cells
after incubation with ODNs. Moreover, we performed Western blot analysis of the
STAT5A protein after exposure to antisense STAT5A. We analysed the clonogenicity 
of the colony-forming unit of granulocytes-macrophages and the burst-forming unit
of erythrocytes in methylcellulose cultures according to the type and the dose of
ODNs. We also examined apoptosis induced in bone marrow mononuclear and CD34(+)
cells by employing annexin V staining and the TUNEL method using flow cytometry
(FACScan). We found that the perturbation of STAT5 expression decreased the
clonogenicity of bone marrow haematopoietic cells. However, we did not observe
any significant increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells after incubation
with antisense ODNs. It was concluded that the STAT5 proteins play a significant 
role in the proliferation of human bone marrow cells harvested from HCOD. These
proteins might be critical in the regulation of haematopoiesis, especially under 
stress conditions.

PMID: 15144500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Eur J Haematol. 2004 Jun;72(6):420-9.

The role of the STAT5 proteins in the proliferation and apoptosis of the CML and 
AML cells.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin,
Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

OBJECTIVES: The STAT5 proteins are activated by many haematological cytokines and
growth factors. They regulate cell cycle, apoptosis and proliferation of
different cells via the influence on gene transcription. Because STAT5s are
constitutively activated in certain haematooncologic diseases, they are suggested
to play an important role in leukaemogenesis. However, the real function of these
proteins in haematopoietic cell transformation and proliferation is not clear
enough. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of suppression of
STAT5A and STAT5B expression on the clonogenicity and apoptosis of the chronic
myeloid leukaemia (CML) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Blast cells from 34 newly diagnosed patients with CML and
AML were used in our experiments. Antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) were
applied to block STAT5A and STAT5B at the mRNA level and the RT-PCR method was
used to study STAT5 mRNA expression in the cells after incubation with ODNs.
Moreover, Western blot analysis of the STAT5 proteins was performed. The effect
of ODN pretreatment on cell clonogenicity in methylocellulose cultures was
examined according to the type of oligodeoxynucleotide and the time of exposure. 
The induction of apoptosis in cells was also estimated by the Annexin V/PI
staining and the TUNEL method using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Perturbation of STAT5 expression decreased proliferative potential of
the CML and the AML blasts as well as enhanced their apoptosis (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies showed that the STAT5 proteins may be critical in the
regulation of growth and apoptosis of the CML and AML leukaemic cells.

PMID: 15128421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32737-50. Epub 2004 Apr 20.

RhoA/ROCK activation by growth hormone abrogates p300/histone deacetylase 6
repression of Stat5-mediated transcription.

Ling L(1), Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 30 Medical Drive, Singapore 117609,
Republic of Singapore.

We demonstrate here that growth hormone (GH) stimulates the activation of RhoA
and its substrate Rho kinase (ROCK) in NIH-3T3 cells. GH-stimulated formation of 
GTP-bound RhoA requires JAK2-dependent dissociation of RhoA from its negative
regulator p190 RhoGAP. Inactivation of RhoA does not affect GH-stimulated JAK2
tyrosine phosphorylation nor p44/42 MAPK activity. However, RhoA and ROCK
activities are required for GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated transcription.
RhoA-dependent enhancement of GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated transcription is due 
to repression of histone deacetylase 6 activity recruited by transcription
cofactor p300 that negatively regulates GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated
transcription. We also demonstrate that RhoA is the pivot for cAMP-dependent
protein kinase inhibition of GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated transcription as a
consequence of cAMP-dependent protein kinase inactivation of RhoA through serine 
residue 188 of RhoA. We have therefore provided a novel mechanism by which a
Ras-like small GTPase, RhoA, can regulate Stat5-mediated transcription.

PMID: 15102857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. AIDS. 2004 Feb 20;18(3):421-6.

Defective interleukin-2-dependent STAT5 signalling in CD8 T lymphocytes from
HIV-positive patients: restoration by antiretroviral therapy.

Kryworuchko M(1), Pasquier V, Keller H, David D, Goujard C, Gilquin J, Viard JP, 
Joussemet M, Delfraissy JF, Thèze J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cellular Immunogenetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris.

BACKGROUND: CD8 T lymphocytes are critical in the control of HIV replication and 
disease progression. Our previous studies demonstrated that CD8 T cells from
chronically infected patients with high virus load proliferated poorly in
response to interleukin-2 (IL-2), a cytokine critical in CD8 T cell growth and
differentiation, even though relatively high levels of IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) were
expressed. This suggested that signal transduction defects in response to IL-2
might be involved. The STAT5 transcription factor is important in IL-2-dependent 
biological responses and it is known that there are defects in unstimulated CD3
and CD4 cells in HIV-infected patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the induction of STAT5 by IL-2 is altered in
the CD8 T cells from HIV-positive individuals and the impact of highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) on its status.
METHODS: CD8 T lymphocytes were purified from the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of HIV-positive patients before and after HAART. Ex vivo IL-2-induced STAT5
activation was evaluated by immunoblotting and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays.
RESULTS: CD8 T cells from a subset of untreated HIV-positive patients were unable
to activate STAT5a and STAT5b proteins functionally in response to IL-2. This
defect was not a result of alterations in IL-2R expression but correlated with an
impaired activation of the upstream kinase Jak-3, known to mediate STAT5
activation. Overall, HAART restored Jak/STAT signalling in such patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results further uncover a potential mechanism by which CD8 T
cell function is impaired in HIV-infected patients.

PMID: 15090793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. In Silico Biol. 2004;4(2):109-25.

Content analysis of the core promoter region of human genes.

Bajic VB(1), Choudhary V, Hock CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infocomm Research, 21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Singapore.
bajicv@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

We analyzed an extended core promoter regions covering [-70,+60] segment relative
to the transcription start site of human promoters contained in the Eukaryotic
Promoter Database. The analysis was made by using the Match program ver. 1.9 with
an optimized setting and the TRANSFAC Professional database ver. 7.2. This
analysis revealed that the most common transcription factor binding site in the
examined collection of core promoters appears to be initiator (characterized by
GEN_INI), which is expected. The other less obvious sites found were Spz1, E2F-1,
ZF5, and C/EBP. The 'cap' site was also in this most common group.
Over-representation of these sites relative to the non-promoter background data
ranged from 0.3167 to 32.1645. These sites were characterized by being present in
more than 60% of promoter sequences. Interestingly, the TATA-box has been found
in only 11.63% of all examined promoters. The study is complemented by separate
analyses of promoter groups having different GC content. These additional
analyses revealed that the most common promoter elements found also include AP-2,
CdxA, Pax-2, SRY, STAT1 and STAT5A. It was also observed that a number of
promoter elements show strong preference either for the GC-rich or the GC-poor
core promoters.

PMID: 15089758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Blood. 2004 Apr 15;103(8):2965-72. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Hematopoietic-repopulating defects from STAT5-deficient bone marrow are not fully
accounted for by loss of thrombopoietin responsiveness.

Bradley HL(1), Couldrey C, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical
Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 (STAT5) plays an important
role in repopulating activity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, the
relationship of STAT5 activation with early acting cytokine receptors is not well
established. We have directly compared bone marrow (BM) from mice mutant for
STAT5a and STAT5b (STAT5ab(-/-)) with that from mice lacking c-Mpl (c-Mpl(-/-)), 
the thrombopoietin receptor. Both STAT5 and c-Mpl deficiency only mildly affected
committed myeloid progenitors assayed in vitro, but STAT5ab(-/-) BM showed lower 
Gr-1+ (4.4-fold), B220+ (23-fold), CD4+ (20-fold), and Ter119+ (17-fold)
peripheral blood repopulating activity than c-Mpl(-/-) BM against wild-type
competitor in long-term repopulating assays in vivo. Direct head-to-head
competitions of STAT5ab(-/-) BM and c-Mpl(-/-) BM showed up to a 25-fold
reduction in STAT5ab(-/-) contribution. Differences affecting reconstitution of
primitive c-Kit+Lin-Sca-1+ multipotent progenitor (MPP)/HSC (1.8-fold) and
c-Kit+Lin-Sca-1- oligopotent progenitor BM fractions (3.3-fold) were more modest.
In serial transplantation experiments, STAT5ab(-/-) and c-Mpl(-/-) BM both failed
to provide consistent engraftment in tertiary hosts and could not radioprotect
lethally irradiated quaternary recipients. These results indicate substantial
overlap in c-Mpl-STAT5 signaling defects at the MPP/HSC level but indicate that
STAT5 is activated independent of c-Mpl to promote multilineage hematopoietic
differentiation.

PMID: 15070672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 30;317(2):335-41.

Genetic variations in humans associated with differences in the course of
hepatitis C.

Saito T(1), Ji G, Shinzawa H, Okumoto K, Hattori E, Adachi T, Takeda T, Sugahara 
K, Ito JI, Watanabe H, Saito K, Togashi H, Ishii K, Matsuura T, Inageda K,
Muramatsu M, Kawata S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular
Therapeutics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-nishi, Yamagata 
990-9585, Japan.

The outcome of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection varies among individuals, but
the genetic factors involved remain unknown. We conducted a population-based
association study in which 238 Japanese individuals positive for anti-HCV
antibody were genotyped for 269 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 103
candidate genes that might influence the course of infection. Altogether, 50 SNPs
in 32 genes were listed. Genetic polymorphisms in IL4, IL8RB, IL10RA, PRL, ADA,
NFKB1, GRAP2, CABIN1, IFNAR2, IFI27, IFI41, TNFRSF1A, ALDOB, AP1B1, SULT2B1, EGF,
EGFR, TGFB1, LTBP2, and CD4 were associated with persistent viremia (P < 0.05),
whereas those in IL1B, IL1RL1, IL2RB, IL12RB1, IL18R1, STAT5A, GRAP2, CABIN1,
IFNAR1, Mx1, BMP8, FGL1, LTBP2, CD34, and CD80 were associated with different
serum alanine aminotransferase levels in HCV carriers (P < 0.05). The sorted
genes allow us to draw novel hypotheses for future studies of HCV infection to
ultimately identify bona fide genes and their variations.

PMID: 15063762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Jan 15;213(2):193-8.

Effect of erythropoietin on Leydig cell is associated with the activation of
Stat5 pathway.

Yamazaki T(1), Kanzaki M, Kamidono S, Fujisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

In order to elucidate whether erythropoietin (EPO) influences male reproduction, 
EPO activation via erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) of Stat5 was studied in Leydig 
cell cultures. RT-PCR analysis of mRNA that had been prepared from primary rat
Leydig cell culture and the mouse Leydig tumor cell line (I-10 cells) each
demonstrated amplification of the appropriate fragment for the respective genes. 
Both I-10 cells and primary rat Leydig cell cultures were treated with 1U/ml
recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO) for various time periods upto 60 min,
and cytoplasmic proteins, total cellular proteins, and nuclear extracts were
isolated. Expression of Stat5b protein and phosphorylated Stat5b protein were
investigated by Western blotting using anti-Stat5b pAb and anti-phospho-Stat5a/b 
pAb. Stat5b protein exists at the cytoplasmic level irrespective of exposure to
rHuEPO, while phosphorylated Stat5b protein increases upon rHuEPO stimulation.
DNA binding of nuclear protein to synthetic double-stranded oligonucleotides
containing a DNA response element derived from PRL-inducible element (PIE) was
examined using a gel mobility shift assay. The oligonucleotide representing the
PIE of the rat beta-casein promoter was demonstrated to bind to the nuclear
extract of rHuEPO-treated cells, time dependently forming a single mobility shift
complex X. These data suggest that EPO binds to a receptor expressed on the
surface of Leydig cells. This EPOR regulates expression of specific gene, through
a Jak-Stat pathway to influence male reproductive function.

PMID: 15062567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 15;23(17):3040-7.

Interleukin-7 induces apoptosis of 697 pre-B cells expressing dominant-negative
forms of STAT5: evidence for caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Lanvin O(1), Gouilleux F, Mullié C, Mazière C, Fuentes V, Bissac E, Dantin F,
Mazière JC, Régnier A, Lassoued K, Gouilleux-Gruart V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, INSERM, EMI 0351, 3 rue des Louvels, 80036 Amiens, 
France.

The transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B (STAT: signal transducer and
activator of transcription) play a major role in the signaling events elicited by
a number of growth factor and cytokine receptors. In this work, we aimed to
investigate the role of STAT5 in human precursor B cell survival by introducing
dominant-negative (DN) forms of STAT5A or STAT5B in the 697 pre-B cell line. All 
clones expressing DN forms of either transcription factor exhibited a higher
spontaneous apoptotic rate that was massively enhanced upon interleukin-7 (IL-7) 
stimulation. This was associated with caspase 8 cleavage, mitochondrial
transmembrane potential disruption and caspase 3 activation. However, the DN
forms of STAT5 did not alter the expression of Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-x, Bim, A1 and
Mcl1 proteins in IL-7-stimulated cells. The pancaspase inhibitor
Z-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromylmethyl ketone partially suppressed IL-7-mediated
mitochondrial transmembrane potential disruption and cell death, suggesting that 
IL-7 induced the death of DN STAT5 expressing 697 cells through caspase-dependent
and -independent mechanisms that both require mitochondrial activation.

PMID: 15048088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. FEBS Lett. 2004 Mar 26;562(1-3):27-34.

Characterization of the human STAT5A and STAT5B promoters: evidence of a positive
and negative mechanism of transcriptional regulation.

Crispi S(1), Sanzari E, Monfregola J, De Felice N, Fimiani G, Ambrosio R, D'Urso 
M, Ursini MV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Via P.
Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy.

We recently published the genomic characterization of the STAT5A and STAT5B
paralogous genes that are located head to head in the 17q21 chromosome and share 
large regions of sequence identity. We here demonstrate by transient in vitro
transfection that STAT5A and STAT5B promoters are able to direct comparable
levels of transcription. The expression of basal promoters is enhanced after Sp1 
up-regulation in HeLa and SL2 cells while DNA methylation associated to the
recruitment of MeCP2 methyl CpG binding protein down-regulates STAT5A and B
promoters by interfering with Sp1-induced transcription. In addition,
cross-species sequence comparison identified a bi-directional negative cis-acting
regulatory element located in the STAT5 intergenic region.

PMID: 15043997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genetics. 2004 Feb;166(2):925-33.

Enhancers and suppressors of testicular cancer susceptibility in single- and
double-mutant mice.

Lam MY(1), Youngren KK, Nadeau JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center and Center for
Computational Genomics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106,
USA.

Susceptibility to spontaneous testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs), a common
cancer affecting young men, shows unusual genetic complexity. Despite remarkable 
progress in the genetics analysis of susceptibility to many cancers, TGCT
susceptibility genes have not yet been identified. Various mutations that are
inherited as Mendelian traits in laboratory mice affect susceptibility to
spontaneous TGCTs on the 129/Sv inbred genetic background. We compared the
frequency of spontaneous TGCTs in single- and double-mutant mice to identify
combinations that show evidence of enhancer or suppressor effects. The
lower-than-expected TGCT frequencies in mice with partial deficiencies of TRP53
and MGF-SLJ and in 129.MOLF-Chr19 (M19) consomic mice that were heterozygous for 
the A(y) mutation suggest that either these genes complement each other to
restore normal functionality in TGCT stem cells or together these genes activate 
mechanisms that suppress incipient TGCTs. By contrast, the higher-than-expected
TGCT frequencies in Mgf(Sl-J)-M19 compound heterozygous mice suggest that these
mutations exacerbate each other's effects. Together, these results provide clues 
to the genetic and molecular basis for susceptibility to TGCTs in mice and
perhaps in humans.

PMCID: PMC1470739
PMID: 15020477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Endocrinology. 2004 Jun;145(6):2824-32. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

Suppression of growth hormone (GH) Janus tyrosine kinase 2/signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 5 signaling pathway in transgenic mice overexpressing 
bovine GH.

Miquet JG(1), Sotelo AI, Bartke A, Turyn D.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Junín 956 (1113) Buenos Aires, Argentina.

High continuous GH levels in vivo produce desensitization of the Janus tyrosine
kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5)
pathway of GH signaling in the liver. To evaluate the mechanisms involved in this
desensitization, transgenic mice overexpressing bovine GH were used. In these
animals, GH receptor and membrane-associated JAK2 kinase are increased 4.5- and
6-fold, respectively. However, JAK2. STAT5a and -5b do not become tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to GH stimulus, nor are these STAT proteins recruited 
to membranes, suggesting that they cannot bind to the receptor. The content of
the suppressor cytokine-inducible src homology 2 (SH2)-containing protein (CIS), 
both total and membrane-associated, is markedly increased in the liver of GH
transgenic mice. This could account for the inhibition of STAT5 activation,
because CIS competes with STAT5 for GH receptor docking sites. Existence of an
alternative mechanism of negative regulation of this signaling pathway by
chronically elevated GH levels is suggested by the low level of JAK2
phosphorylation that transgenic mice exhibit. Whereas total SH2-containing
phosphatase 2 (SHP-2) content is the same in both kinds of mice,
membrane-associated SHP-2 protein levels increase 4.5-fold in GH transgenic
animals. This could explain the dramatic inhibition of JAK2 phosphotyrosine
level, thus contributing to the suppression of GH signaling observed in these
transgenic mice.

PMID: 15016718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):18998-9007. Epub 2004 Mar 9.

A single residue modulates tyrosine dephosphorylation, oligomerization, and
nuclear accumulation of stat transcription factors.

Meyer T(1), Hendry L, Begitt A, John S, Vinkemeier U.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Zelluläre Signalverarbeitung, Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare
Pharmakologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 13125 Berlin, Germany.

The NH(2) terminus of Stat proteins forms a versatile protein interaction domain 
that is believed to use discrete surfaces to mediate oligomerization and tyrosine
dephosphorylation of Stat dimers. Here we show for Stat1 and Stat5a/b that these 
interfaces overlap and need to be reassigned to an unrelated region of the
N-domain. Unexpectedly, our study showed for Stat1 that defective oligomerization
of DNA-bound dimers was associated with prolonged interferon-induced nuclear
accumulation. This uncoupling of DNA binding and nuclear retention was explained 
by the concomitant dephosphorylation deficiency that both Stat1 and Stat5a/b have
in common and that for Stat1 was due to defective dephosphorylation by the
phosphatase TC45. Furthermore, diminished N-domain-mediated oligomerization
affected transcriptional activation by both Stat1 and Stat5a/b in a
promoter-specific manner. DNA binding analysis indicated that oligomerization of 
Stats on DNA may be common, irrespective of the presence of multiple canonical
binding sites. Accordingly, also transcription from promoters with only a single 
discernable gamma-activated sequence site was negatively effected by reduced
tetramerization. Thus, these results indicate that defective oligomerization
cannot generally be compensated for by enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation and
prolonged nuclear accumulation. In addition, these data clarify the role of DNA
binding in nuclear retention of Stat1.

PMID: 15010467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3880-5. Epub 2004 Mar 5.

Interleukin 2 plays a central role in Th2 differentiation.

Cote-Sierra J(1), Foucras G, Guo L, Chiodetti L, Young HA, Hu-Li J, Zhu J, Paul
WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Differentiation of naïve CD4 T cells into T helper (Th) 2 cells requires
signaling through the T cell receptor and an appropriate cytokine environment.
IL-4 is critical for such Th2 differentiation. We show that IL-2 plays a central 
role in this process. The effect of IL-2 on Th2 generation does not depend on its
cell growth or survival effects. Stat5a(-/-) cells show diminished
differentiation to IL-4 production, and forced expression of a constitutively
active form of Stat5a replaces the need for IL-2. In vivo IL-2 neutralization
inhibits IL-4 production in two models. Studies of restriction enzyme
accessibility and binding of Stat5 to chromatin indicate that IL-2 mediates its
effect by stabilizing the accessibility of the Il4 gene. Thus, IL-2 plays a
critical role in the polarization of naive CD4 T cells to the Th2 phenotype.

PMCID: PMC374338
PMID: 15004274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Mar 26;316(1):85-92.

Flt3 mutation activates p21WAF1/CIP1 gene expression through the action of STAT5.

Takahashi S(1), Harigae H, Kaku M, Sasaki T, Licht JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA. shintak@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Flt3 is a type III RTK and approximately 30% of AML patients harbor an internal
tandem duplication (ITD) of the juxtamembrane region or a point mutation of the
Flt3 protein leading to the constitutive activation of downstream signaling
pathways and aberrant cell growth. The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21
inhibits cell growth when expressed at high levels and induces cell growth when
expressed at lower levels. In this study, we have addressed the role of Flt3-ITD 
in the regulation of p21. Co-transfection of p21 promoter-luciferase constructs
with Flt3-ITD plasmid into K562 and BaF3 cells results in the induction of p21
promoter activity and a -692/-684 STAT site is important for the induction.
STAT5a binds specifically to this element and Flt3-ITD enhances the protein
binding to this site. Overexpression of Flt3-ITD led to the induction of
endogenous p21 expression in various cells. These results may implicate p21 in
Flt3-ITD induced leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15003515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Neurovirol. 2004 Feb;10(1):12-20.

STAT1 binds to the herpes simplex virus type 1 latency-associated transcript
promoter.

Kriesel JD(1), Jones BB, Dahms KM, Spruance SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Opthalomology, John A. Moran Eye Center, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA. jkriesel@med.utah.edu

The authors hypothesized that environmental stimuli induce cytokines that act
through an intracellular cascade, which includes signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STATs), to change herpes simplex virus (HSV) gene
expression, thereby inducing viral reactivation. The HSV type 1 (HSV-1)
latency-associated transcript (LAT) gene regulates viral reactivation within
neurons via an unknown mechanism. HSV-1 deletion mutants that are missing key
portions of the LAT gene, particularly the 3' region of the LAT promoter, do not 
reactivate normally in vivo. The authors hypothesized that STAT transcription
factors may bind in this region to regulate viral reactivation. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) experiments were performed by incubating mouse
trigeminal ganglion (TG) nuclear extracts with each of three overlapping
sequences representing the 3' region of the HSV-1 LAT promoter (referred to as
oligos L1, L2, and L3). The ganglionic nuclear extracts bound specifically to
oligos L1 and L3, but not L2. Oligos L1 and L3 contain predicted STAT binding
sequences whereas L2 does not. Specific binding to oligo L3 (including the TATA
box sequence) was supershifted by incubating with anti-STAT1 antibodies, but not 
by incubating with anti-STAT3 or anti-STAT5a antibodies. Specific L3 binding was 
reduced by competing with excess unlabeled STAT1 consensus sequences. These
results indicate that STAT1, probably as part of a complex, is capable of binding
to the LAT promoter on or near the TATA box. Further studies are required to
determine if STAT1 is required for LAT expression in vivo. This work supports the
hypothesis that interferons act through STAT1 to regulate the expression of HSV-1
LAT.

PMID: 14982724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. FEBS Lett. 2004 Jan 30;558(1-3):96-100.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated suppression of GH receptor and Janus kinase 2 
expression in mice.

Nukaya M(1), Takahashi Y, Gonzalez FJ, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacobio-dynamics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, N12W6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Differential mRNA display revealed that a cDNA encoding the major urinary protein
2 (MUP2) that belongs to the lipocalin superfamily was absent in livers of mice
treated with 3-methylcholanthrene (MC). The expression of MUP2 is known to be
stimulated by growth hormone (GH), through the GH receptor (GHR), Janus kinase 2 
(JAK2) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) signal
transduction pathway. Since MC is an aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligand, the 
effects of MC treatment on the expression of GHR, JAK2 or STAT5 in the livers of 
wild-type or AhR-null mice were examined. The result indicated that the
expression of GHR and JAK2 mRNA was greatly decreased by MC in wild-type mice but
not in AhR-null mice. In addition, the binding activity of STAT5 bound to
STAT5-binding element was reduced after MC treatment in wild-type mice but not in
AhR-null mice. Based on these results, we conclude that the suppression of MUP2
mRNA expression by MC is caused by the AhR-mediated disruption of the GH
signaling pathway. Possible mechanism(s) by which exposure to aromatic
hydrocarbons causes a decrease in the body weight of mice, which has been
referred to as wasting syndrome, will also be discussed.

PMID: 14759523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jun;70(6):1573-9. Epub 2004 Jan 28.

A morphological and immunohistochemical comparison of mammary tissues from the
short-tailed fruit bat (Carollia perspicillata) and the mouse.

Evarts JL(1), Rasweiler JJ 4th, Behringer RR, Hennighausen L, Robinson GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

In the present study, mammary tissues from the fruit bat (Carollia perspicillata)
and mouse (Mus musculus) were compared using histological and immunohistochemical
methods. Because the female bat exhibits greater reproductive similarities to
humans, it might provide a useful animal model for studying mammary physiology
and disease with relevance to our own species. In lactating and recently
lactating specimens, bat tissue had significantly fewer adipocytes and more
collagenous connective tissue compared to the mouse. The proteins Stat5a, keratin
5, Npt2b, and E-cadherin were all similarly localized in mouse and bat mammary
tissues taken from lactating animals. The present study demonstrates that whereas
the epithelial compartment and the presence of differentiation markers are
conserved between the mouse and bat, differences exist in the stromal
compartment.

PMID: 14749297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genes Immun. 2004 Jan;5(1):46-57.

Evidence for a cluster of genes on chromosome 17q11-q21 controlling
susceptibility to tuberculosis and leprosy in Brazilians.

Jamieson SE(1), Miller EN, Black GF, Peacock CS, Cordell HJ, Howson JM, Shaw MA, 
Burgner D, Xu W, Lins-Lainson Z, Shaw JJ, Ramos F, Silveira F, Blackwell JM.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

The region of conserved synteny on mouse chromosome 11/human 17q11-q21 is known
to carry a susceptibility gene(s) for intramacrophage pathogens. The region is
rich in candidates including NOS2A, CCL2/MCP-1, CCL3/MIP-1alpha, CCL4/MIP-1beta, 
CCL5/RANTES, CCR7, STAT3 and STAT5A/5B. To examine the region in man, we studied 
92 multicase tuberculosis (627 individuals) and 72 multicase leprosy (372
individuals) families from Brazil. Multipoint nonparametric analysis (ALLEGRO)
using 16 microsatellites shows two peaks of linkage for leprosy at D17S250 (Z(lr)
score 2.34; P=0.01) and D17S1795 (Z(lr) 2.67; P=0.004) and a single peak for
tuberculosis at D17S250 (Z(lr) 2.04; P=0.02). Combined analysis shows significant
linkage (peak Z(lr) 3.38) at D17S250, equivalent to an allele sharing LOD score
2.48 (P=0.0004). To determine whether one or multiple genes contribute, 49
informative single nucleotide polymorphisms were typed in candidate genes.
Family-based allelic association testing that was robust to family clustering
demonstrated significant associations with tuberculosis susceptibility at four
loci separated by intervals (NOS2A-8.4 Mb-CCL18-32.3 kb-CCL4-6.04 Mb-STAT5B) up
to several Mb. Stepwise conditional logistic regression analysis using a
case/pseudo-control data set showed that the four genes contributed separate main
effects, consistent with a cluster of susceptibility genes across 17q11.2.

PMID: 14735149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Glia. 2004 Jan 15;45(2):188-96.

Signaling through JAK2-STAT5 pathway is essential for IL-3-induced activation of 
microglia.

Natarajan C(1), Sriram S, Muthian G, Bright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, 1222F VSRH, 2201 Capers Avenue, Nashville, TN 37212, USA.
john.bright@vanderbilt.edu

Erratum in
    Glia. 2004 Sep;47(4):387.

Microglia, the resident macrophage of the brain, mediates immune and inflammatory
responses in the central nervous system (CNS). Activation of microglia and
secretion of inflammatory cytokines associate with the pathogenesis of CNS
diseases, including multiple sclerosis (MS), Alzheimer's disease (AD),
Parkinson's disease, prion disease, and AIDS dementia. Microbial pathogens,
cytokines, chemokines, and costimulatory molecules are potent inducers of
microglial activation in the CNS. Signaling through its receptor, IL-3 induces
the activation of JAK-STAT and MAP kinase pathways in microglial cells. In this
study, we found that in vitro treatment of EOC-20 microglial cells with
tyrphostin AG490 blocked IL-3-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, STAT5A,
and STAT5B signaling proteins. Stable transfection of EOC-20 cells with a
dominant negative JAK2 mutant also blocked IL-3-induced tyrosine phosphorylation 
of JAK2, STAT5A, and STAT5B in microglia. The blockade of JAK2-STAT5 pathway
resulted in a decrease in IL-3-induced proliferation and expression of CD40 and
major histocompatibility complex class II molecules in microglia. These findings 
highlight the fact that JAK2-STAT5 signaling pathway plays a critical role in
mediating IL-3-induced activation of microglia.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14730712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Feb;3(2):188-94. Epub 2004 Feb 1.

Activating mutations in STAT3 and STAT5 differentially affect cellular
proliferation and apoptotic resistance in multiple myeloma cells.

Hodge DR(1), Xiao W, Wang LH, Li D, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, Cytokine Molecular Mechanisms
Section, Center for Cancer Research, The National Cancer Institute at Frederick, 
Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Feb;3(2):195-6.

Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a progressive malignancy with poor prognosis, commonly
treated by the use of the glucocorticoid Dexamethasone. Myeloma cells resist
Dexamethasone induced apoptosis when exposed to IL-6 or IGF-1, both of which are 
known to activate several signaling cascades. For the first time, we show the
actual contribution of downstream mediators, i.e., activated STAT factors,
independent of the contribution of their upstream signaling pathways, on the
proliferation and Dexamethasone rescue effects of IL-6 and IGF-1 in Multiple
Myeloma. Retroviral transduction of cytokine dependent myeloma cells with
activated STAT transcription factor constructs overcomes the cells dependence on 
cytokines for growth, allowing proliferation even in very low serum levels.
However, the rescue of these previously cytokine dependent cells with activated
STATs does not result in an increase in resistance to Dexamethasone induced
apoptosis. Despite the presence of activated STAT3 and STAT5a, apoptosis is
induced upon exposure to micromolar levels of Dexamethasone, and IL-6 or IGF-1 is
still required to rescue the cells. The ability of these factors to block
apoptosis is abrogated by the addition of PI-3 Kinase specific inhibitors, but
not inhibitors that target the MAP Kinase pathway. However, ectopic expression of
activated STAT3 results in partial rescue from apoptosis of cells treated with
FAS ligand. Our data suggests that mechanisms of resistance to induced apoptosis 
and cellular proliferation are separate and distinct in cytokine dependent
myeloma cells.

PMID: 14726660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Transgenic Res. 2003 Dec;12(6):693-706.

Heterogeneous inducible mammary-specific expression of Jab/SOCS1 in lactating
transgenic mice is associated with no obvious phenotype, even at the cellular
level.

Petridou B(1), Soulier S, Besnard N, Hudrisier M, Hue-Beauvais C, Costa Da Silva 
J, Djiane J, Vilotte JL.

Author information: 
(1)Génomique et Physiologie de la Lactation, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, 78352 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex, France. Petridou@diamant.jouy.inra.fr

The cytokine-inducible suppressor of cytokine signalling SOCS1, or JAB, has been 
shown to be implicated in vitro in the negative regulation of the
prolactin-receptor-induced activation of JAK2 and STAT5. Disruption of this gene 
in vivo resulted in an accelerated mammary gland development. In the present
experiment, we assessed the potential impact on the lactation process of the
doxycycline-inducible mammary-controlled expression of this gene in transgenic
mice. Three transgenic mouse lines that expressed JAB specifically in the mammary
gland in a conditional manner following doxycycline treatment were successfully
established. The resulting overall expression of JAB was high and ranged from
half to four times that of the endogenously expressed homologous gene in the
thymus. It was found to be highly heterogeneous in the mammary epithelium, with
less than 5% of JAB-expressing cells detected. Phenotypic analysis of these
transgenic mice exhibiting doxycycline-induced JAB expression did not reveal any 
obvious effect on the lactation process. Double immunostaining experiments
suggested that JAB expression in vivo did not significantly affect the
beta-casein gene expression and the STAT5a nuclear localisation. These results do
not support a role for JAB in the disruption of the lactation process.

PMID: 14713198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Cancer. 2004 Feb 20;108(5):665-71.

Stat5a is tyrosine phosphorylated and nuclear localized in a high proportion of
human breast cancers.

Cotarla I(1), Ren S, Zhang Y, Gehan E, Singh B, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are latent cytoplasmic
transcription factors that are activated and translocated into the nucleus after 
phosphorylation at a conserved tyrosine residue. Mouse model studies have
demonstrated that activated Stat5a acts as a critical survival factor for normal,
preneoplastic and malignant mammary epithelial cells. Very limited information is
available, however, on the expression, tyrosine phosphorylation status and
nuclear localization of Stat5a in human breast cancers. In our study, the pattern
of Stat5a cellular localization was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in a series 
of 83 randomly selected primary human breast adenocarcinomas.
Immunoprecipitation/Western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays employing
different phospho-specific antibodies verified Stat5a tyrosine phosphorylation
status. Stat5a was nuclear localized and tyrosine phosphorylated in 59 of 78
(76%) breast cancers examined; 38 of 78 (49%) demonstrated Stat5a nuclear
localization in more than 25% of the breast cancer cells within the
adenocarcinomas. Nuclear localized Stat5a was associated positively with
increased levels of histologic differentiation (p = 0.03). A statistically
significant positive association with p27 nuclear localization also was
identified (p = 0.05). No relationship was found between nuclear localized Stat5a
and menopausal status, tumor size, ploidy, percentage of cells in S-phase, lymph 
node metastases, ER, ErbB2, nuclear localized p21 or nuclear localized
Stat5b/Stat3. As its role in human breast cancer progression and response to
therapy is defined, Stat5a could become a new molecular target for breast cancer 
therapy.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14696092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):9048-54.

Dysregulated expression of COOH-terminally truncated Stat5 and loss of
IL2-inducible Stat5-dependent gene expression in Sezary Syndrome.

Mitchell TJ(1), Whittaker SJ, John S.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Cancer Unit, St. Johns Institute of Dermatology, Division of Skin
Sciences, Kings College London, St. Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Sezary Syndrome (SzS) is a leukemic variant of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
characterized by the accumulation of clonal neoplastic CD4+ T cells. The signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family members, Stat5a and
Stat5b, play an important role in regulating T-cell activation. Recent studies
have shown that inappropriate activation of STATs occurs frequently in a wide
variety of human cancers. Here we examine the functional status of Stat5 proteins
in SzS as compared with healthy donors. Western blotting demonstrates that in
cytoplasmic extracts of unstimulated T cells from healthy controls two isoforms
of Stat5, full-length and a COOH-terminal truncated isoform, termed Stat5(t), are
present. However, bandshift assays demonstrate that only Stat5(t) translocates to
the nucleus and binds DNA on IL-2 stimulation. In contrast, preactivated T cells 
express only full-length Stat5, which is functionally activated on IL-2
stimulation. Analysis of Stat5 protein isoforms from five of five SzS patients
revealed predominant aberrant expression of Stat5(t) in preactivated peripheral
blood mononuclear cell. Furthermore, patients showed preferential IL-2-induced
DNA binding of Stat5(t). Consistent with the inappropriate activation of Stat5(t)
in SzS patients, real-time PCR revealed that IL-2-induced mRNA expression of the 
Stat5 target genes, Bcl-2, PIM-1, and CISH were markedly reduced. These data
indicate that functional Stat5 isoform expression is regulated by T-cell
activation status and that dysregulated expression of Stat5(t) in malignant T
cells in SzS can suppress Stat5-dependent gene expression. Thus, aberrant
expression of Stat5(t) may be one mechanism that contributes to the cellular
transformation of T cells in this disease.

PMID: 14695224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):8757-62.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 is required for 
progression of autochthonous prostate cancer: evidence from the transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate system.

Kazansky AV(1), Spencer DM, Greenberg NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

The constitutive activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) proteins has been demonstrated in many diverse human cancer cell lines and
clinical tumors including prostate cancer. The STAT family has at least seven
members, and the two forms of the STAT5 protein, STAT5A and STAT5B, exhibit a
high degree of sequence similarity. We have reported previously that expression
of STAT5B, but not STAT5A, could enhance the transforming potential of v-src and 
induces cell cycle progression and motility in fibroblasts. In the current study 
we demonstrate specific activation of STAT5B in epithelial cells representing
invasive and metastatic prostate cancer. We also demonstrate that the naturally
occurring dominant-negative isoform STAT5DeltaB can block cell cycle progression 
through G(1) and inhibit the growth, invasive potential, and clonogenic ability
of these prostate cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we report that the
dominant-negative isoform STAT5DeltaB can inhibit the growth of prostate cancer
cells in grafting studies. These results support our hypothesis that specific
activation of STAT5, in particular STAT5B, facilitates the progression of
prostate cancer.

PMID: 14695191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Endocrinology. 2004 Apr;145(4):1739-49. Epub 2003 Dec 18.

Estradiol represses prolactin-induced expression of Na+/taurocholate
cotransporting polypeptide in liver cells through estrogen receptor-alpha and
signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a.

Cao J(1), Wood M, Liu Y, Hoffman T, Hyde J, Park-Sarge OK, Vore M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, Department of Physiology, Chandler Medical
Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0305, USA.

Na(+)/taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (ntcp) mediates the uptake of bile 
salts from plasma across the basolateral domain of the hepatocyte. We have
demonstrated that ntcp expression can be induced by prolactin (PRL) and placental
lactogen via the PRL receptor and signal transducers and activators of
transcription (Stat)5a pathway. However, elevated levels of placental lactogen do
not increase the expression of ntcp in pregnant rats. Because plasma estradiol
(E(2)) levels are also elevated in pregnancy, we investigated the inhibitory
effects of E(2) on PRL-induced ntcp activation. E(2) treatment inhibited the
PRL-induced increase in liver ntcp mRNA to the same levels as in rats treated
with E(2) alone. Estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) mRNA and protein expression in
liver were increased 2.6-fold and 2.2-fold, respectively, in pregnancy relative
to controls. In HepG2 cells, E(2) repressed PRL-induced ntcp reporter gene
expression in a dose-dependent manner in the presence of cotransfected ERalpha.
The ERalpha antagonist ICI 182,780 reversed E(2)-induced repression, indicating
specificity of inhibition by E(2). Overexpression of coactivator p300 did not
reverse the inhibitory effects of E(2) and ERalpha. Western and gel shift
analysis revealed that E(2)-bound ERalpha decreased the tyrosine phosphorylation 
and DNA-binding activity of Stat5a, indicating that the inhibitory effect of E(2)
was mediated, at least in part, by interfering with PRL-mediated signal
transduction. The present studies demonstrate the physiological significance of
cross-talk between ERalpha and Stat5a in liver, in which both proteins are
expressed. These data also establish a novel mechanism by which expression of
ntcp, an important hepatic bile acid transporter, can be regulated by multiple
hormones.

PMID: 14684617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Exp Hematol. 2003 Dec;31(12):1253-8.

Transgenic bcl-2 is not sufficient to rescue all hematolymphoid defects in
STAT5A/5B-deficient mice.

Snow JW(1), Abraham N, Ma MC, Bronson SK, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94141-9100, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Cytokines bind high-affinity receptors expressed on hematopoietic
cells to initiate signaling cascades that regulate differentiation,
proliferation, and survival. Previous studies have established a role for STAT5
in transducing survival signals for hematopoietic progenitor cells in response to
cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To determine if constitutive expression of a member of the
bcl-2 family of anti-apoptotic proteins could compensate for the loss of STAT5,
we utilized combinatorial genetics to generate STAT5A/5B-deficient mice
expressing a bcl-2 transgene.
RESULTS: Although bcl-2 expression restored peripheral blood counts to normal in 
STAT5A/5B(-/-) mice, we noted a striking failure of this transgene to correct
defects in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
CONCLUSION: These data imply important effects of STAT5 in modulating
hematopoietic cells in addition to promoting survival per se.

PMID: 14662332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Hematol. 2003 Dec;31(12):1247-52.

Bone marrow transplant completely rescues hematolymphoid defects in
STAT5A/5B-deficient mice.

Snow JW(1), Abraham N, Ma MC, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94141-9100, USA.

OBJECTIVE: STAT5A/5B-deficient mice are recognized to manifest defects in
multiple cell types and tissues. In particular, the hematopoietic defects in
these mice are widespread, affecting multiple lineages and multiple stages of
development. Previous studies indicate that deficiencies intrinsic to
hematopoietic cells contribute substantially to the observed defects. However, in
light of the broad physiologic effects of STAT5 in the context of the organism
outside the blood system, we wished to investigate the possibility of
STAT5-dependent environmental influence of nonhematopoietic origin on
hematopoietic development in these mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We transplanted wild-type bone marrow into
STAT5A/5B-deficient mice to determine the effects of loss of STAT5 in
nonhematopoietic tissue on hematopoietic development.
RESULTS: We observed that transplantation of wild-type marrow completely corrects
hematopoietic defects in STAT5A/5B-deficient recipient mice, including peripheral
blood counts, bone marrow cellularity, and reductions in specific progenitor
subsets.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the important role of STAT5 in
hematolymphoid development are mediated directly through effects on hematopoietic
cells and not indirectly.

PMID: 14662331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Exp Hematol. 2003 Dec;31(12):1198-205.

Differential role of Stat5 isoforms in effecting hematopoietic recovery induced
by Mpl-ligand in lethally myelosuppressed mice.

Pestina TI(1), Jackson CW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Department of Hematology-Oncology, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N. Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105-2794,
USA. tamara.pestina@stjude.org

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of the c-terminal half of c-Mpl in Mpl-L-induced
myeloprotection and the importance of Stat5 isoforms in the survival signaling
pathways induced by Mpl ligand.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Delta60-Mpl knockin mice, Stat5a(-/-)/b(-/-), Stat5a(-/-),
and Stat5b(-/-) mice and wild-type (WT) controls were given a lethal
myelosuppressive regimen: 80 mg/kg carboplatin intravenously followed by 7.5 or
6.5 Gy 137Cs total-body irradiation. A single dose of PEG-rmMGDF (65 microg/kg)
was intravenously injected immediately after myelosuppression. Mice survival and 
blood counts were monitored for 22 days posttreatment.
RESULTS: Knockin Delta60-Mpl mice lacking the c-terminal half of the
intracellular domain of c-Mpl show reduced ability of Mpl-L to prevent lethal
myelosuppression and an impaired thrombopoietic response to exogenous c-Mpl
ligand. The survival of Mpl-L-treated Stat5a(-/-)/b(-/-) mice exposed to the
lethal myelosuppressive regimen was substantially compromised compared to that of
WT mice. Reduced survival of Stat5a(-/-)/b(-/-) mice was due to more severe
hematopoietic suppression. Deletion of Stat5a did not result in a defect in
hematopoietic recovery. In contrast, Mpl-L-treated Stat5b-deficient mice
demonstrated significantly delayed hematopoietic recovery compared to WT
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Myeloprotective signaling transduced by the terminal 60 amino acids 
of the intracellular domain of c-Mpl is essential for complete protection from
lethal myelosuppression provided by Mpl-L. Our studies differentiate the
functions of Stat5 isoforms in hematopoietic stress and reveal a pivotal role of 
Stat5b in Mpl-L-induced hematopoietic recovery in this lethal myelosuppression
model.

PMID: 14662325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6666-73. Epub 2003 Dec 5.

Critical role of STAT5 activation in transformation mediated by ZNF198-FGFR1.

Heath C(1), Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith
Hospital, W12 ONN London, UK.

The 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome is an aggressive disorder caused by FGFR1
fusion proteins resulting from a subset of acquired translocations that target
chromosome band 8p11. These chimeric proteins have constitutive FGFR1 tyrosine
kinase activity and are believed to deregulate hemopoietic development in a
manner analogous to BCR-ABL in chronic myeloid leukemia. Here we have studied the
role of STAT proteins in transformation mediated by the most common of these
fusions, ZNF198-FGFR1. We found that STATs 1, 3, and 5 were activated
constitutively in ZNF198-FGFR1-transformed Ba/F3 cells and that STATs 2, 4, and 6
were also tyrosine-phosphorylated. Induction of dominant negative STAT mutants
showed that activation of STAT5, but not STATs 1 or 3, was essential for the
anti-apoptotic effect of ZNF198-FGFR1 and that STAT5 activation is essential for 
the elevated levels of BclXL in transformed cells. STAT5 activation was also
shown to be required for continued cell cycle progression of BaF3/ZNF198-FGFR1
cells in conditions of cytokine deprivation and for up-regulation of the DNA
repair protein Rad51. These findings suggest a critical role of STAT5 activation 
in transformation mediated by ZNF198-FGFR1.

PMID: 14660670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gene. 2003 Dec 24;323:149-55.

Cloning, characterization, and expression of the rat relaxin gene.

Soloff MS(1), Gal S, Hoare S, Peters CA, Hunzicker-Dunn M, Anderson GD, Wood TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1062, USA. msoloff@utmb.edu

Relaxin, a hormone in the insulin superfamily, is synthesized by the corpus
luteum of the rat ovary. Expression of relaxin precursor mRNA in rats is sharply 
induced after day 10 of pregnancy and plateaus on days 15 to 20 (parturition
occurs on day 23). In an effort to understand this induction, we cloned the gene 
and carried out promoter analyses by transient transfection and chromatin
immunoprecipitation methods. The single gene is 2.9 kilobases and is composed of 
two exons and one intron. There are alternative splice acceptor sites, 3 base
pairs apart, which account for the inclusion of an extra codon in about 10% of
the transcripts. The induction of transcription by day 15 was observed by the
binding of polymerase II and histone H3 acetylation at the promoter region. There
is a functional STAT binding site, about 3.8 kb upstream from the transcriptional
start site, that is occupied by STAT3 on day 6 of pregnancy, when relaxin
expression is minimal; on day 15, when expression is maximal, STAT3 is replaced
by STAT5a. These data are consistent with STAT5 playing a role in the induction
of relaxin expression.

PMID: 14659888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Exp Mol Med. 2003 Oct 31;35(5):350-7.

Hypoxia activates signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5)
and increases its binding activity to the GAS element in mammary epithelial
cells.

Joung YH(1), Park JH, Park T, Lee CS, Kim OH, Ye SK, Yang UM, Lee KJ, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Premedical Science, College of Medicine and Bio-Food, and Drug
Research Center, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701, Korea.

STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) are proteins with dual
functions: signal transducers in the cytoplasm and transcriptional activators in 
the nucleus. STAT proteins act as transcription factors activated by
phosphorylation on its tyrosine residues upon stimulation by various cytokines.
The phosphorylated STAT molecules then form homo- or heterodimers through
SH2-mediated interaction and translocate into the nucleus to activate the
transcription of various target genes. STAT5 recognizes the interferon-gamma
activated site TTCNNNGAA (GAS sequence) in the promoter region of the beta-casein
gene. Except for prolactin-dependent beta-casein production in mammary gland
cells, the biological consequences of STAT5a activation in various systems are
not clear. Here we showed that STAT5a was phosphorylated 10 min after
desferrioxamine (DFO) treatment, and reached a maximum induction at 4 h in
mammary epithelial cells (HC11) and transfected COS-7 cells. Under hypoxic
conditions (2% O2), a maximal phosphorylation of STAT5a was observed within 6 h. 
EMSA (electrophoretic mobility shift assay) showed that DFO or hypoxia enhanced
the binding activities of STAT5a DNA to beta-casein gene promoter in mammary
epithelial cells (HC11) and transfected COS-7 cells. These results showed that
DFO or hypoxia induces tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5a and also increases the 
binding activity of STAT5a DNA in mammary epithelial cells. Our data suggest that
the STAT5 may act as a mediator in hypoxia-mediated gene expression.

PMID: 14646587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):8934-45.

STAT5 and Oct-1 form a stable complex that modulates cyclin D1 expression.

Magné S(1), Caron S, Charon M, Rouyez MC, Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, CNRS UMR 8104,
Université René Descartes, 123 Boulevard Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is activated by
numerous cytokines that control blood cell development. STAT5 was also shown to
actively participate in leukemogenesis. Among the target genes involved in cell
growth, STAT5 had been shown to activate cyclin D1 gene expression. We now show
that thrombopoietin-dependent activation of the cyclin D1 promoter depends on the
integrity of a new bipartite proximal element that specifically binds STAT5A and 
-B transcription factors. We demonstrate that the stable recruitment of STAT5 to 
this element in vitro requires the integrity of an adjacent octamer element that 
constitutively binds the ubiquitous POU homeodomain protein Oct-1. We observe
that cytokine-activated STAT5 and Oct-1 form a unique complex with the cyclin D1 
promoter sequence. We find that STAT5 interacts with Oct-1 in vivo, following
activation by different cytokines in various cellular contexts. This interaction 
involves a small motif in the carboxy-terminal region of STAT5 which, remarkably,
is similar to an Oct-1 POU-interacting motif present in two well-known partners
of Oct-1, namely, OBF-1/Bob and SNAP190. Our data offer new insights into the
transcriptional regulation of the key cell cycle regulator cyclin D1 and
emphasize the active roles of both STAT5 and Oct-1 in this process.

PMCID: PMC309603
PMID: 14645506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Dec 1;31(23):6882-90.

Chromatin acetylation and remodeling at the Cis promoter during STAT5-induced
transcription.

Rascle A(1), Lees E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Research, DNAX Research Inc., 901 California Avenue,
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription STAT5 plays a major role in 
cytokine-induced expression of genes involved in cell proliferation and survival.
Although several STAT5 partners have been identified, the molecular events taking
place at the promoter level upon STAT5 recruitment have not yet been
characterized in great detail. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation and
accessibility assays, we characterized histone acetylation and chromatin
remodeling events occurring during transcriptional activation of the endogenous
murine Cis gene, a STAT5 target gene, in response to IL-3. We found that STAT5
binding in vivo is associated with low histone H3 and H4 acetylation levels in
the proximity of the STAT5 binding sites. STAT5 recruitment also results in
chromatin reorganization over that promoter region. These events (STAT5 binding, 
histone acetylation and chromatin remodeling) are not sufficient for
transcriptional activation, which requires a non-histone protein deacetylase.
These data reveal novel implications of STAT5 in chromatin regulation during
cytokine-induced transcription, thus contributing to a better understanding of
the mechanism of transcriptional activation by STAT5.

PMCID: PMC290274
PMID: 14627821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Immunity. 2003 Nov;19(5):739-48.

Stat5 activation plays a critical role in Th2 differentiation.

Zhu J(1), Cote-Sierra J, Guo L, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Upon TCR engagement, naive CD4 T cells differentiate toward the Th1 or Th2
phenotype. IL-4, acting through Stat6, plays a major role in Th2 differentiation;
IL-2 has also been reported to be essential. Here, we report that retroviral
(RV)-mediated expression of a constitutively active Stat5A mutant (STAT5A1*6) can
fully restore IL-4 production when naive CD4 T cells are primed in the absence of
IL-2. Furthermore, STAT5A1*6 expression causes Th2 differentiation in the absence
of IL-4 or in Stat6- or IL-4Ralpha-deficient cells. Infection with
STAT5A1*6-NGFR-RV does not enhance GATA-3 expression. STAT5A1*6-NGFR-RV and
GATA-3-GFP-RV each render the Il4 gene accessible, but the sites of restriction
enzyme accessibility are different. Stat5A binds to HSII and HSIII sites of the
Il4 gene. Coinfection with STAT5A1*6-NGFR-RV and GATA-3-GFP-RV results in optimal
Th2 priming.

PMID: 14614860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Virol. 2003 Dec;77(23):12630-8.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection inhibits granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-induced activation of STAT5A in human monocyte-derived 
macrophages.

Warby TJ(1), Crowe SM, Jaworowski A.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Pathogenesis Research Unit, Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical
Research and Public Health, Melbourne, 3004 Victoria, Australia.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infects cells of the
monocyte/macrophage lineage. While infection of macrophages by HIV-1 is generally
not cytopathic, it does impair macrophage function. In this study, we examined
the effect of HIV-1 infection on intracellular signaling in human
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) stimulated with the growth factor
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). GM-CSF is an important
growth factor for cells of both the macrophage and granulocyte lineages and
enhances effector functions of these cells via the heterodimeric GM-CSF receptor 
(GM-CSFR). A major pathway which mediates the effects of GM-CSF on macrophages
involves activation of the latent transcription factor STAT5A via a Janus kinase 
2 (JAK2)-dependent pathway. We demonstrate that GM-CSF-induced activation of
STAT5A is inhibited in MDM after infection in vitro with the laboratory-adapted
R5 strain of HIV-1, HIV-1(Ba-L), but not after infection with adenovirus. HIV-1
infection of MDM did not decrease the STAT5A or JAK2 mRNA level or STAT5A protein
level or result in increased constitutive activation of STAT5A. Surface
expression of either the alpha-chain or common beta(c)-chain of GM-CSFR was also 
unaffected. We conclude that HIV-1 inhibits GM-CSF activation of STAT5A without
affecting expression of the known components of the signaling pathway. These data
provide further evidence of disruption of cellular signaling pathways after HIV-1
infection, which may contribute to immune dysfunction and HIV-1 pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC262552
PMID: 14610185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Immunol. 2003 Nov 15;171(10):5042-50.

Loss of tolerance and autoimmunity affecting multiple organs in
STAT5A/5B-deficient mice.

Snow JW(1), Abraham N, Ma MC, Herndier BG, Pastuszak AW, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, and Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.

STAT5 has previously been reported to be dispensable for the maintenance of
tolerance in vivo. However, in examining hemopoiesis in mice lacking both
isoforms of STAT5, STAT5A, and STAT5B, we noted that a subset of these mice
demonstrated dramatic alterations in several bone marrow progenitor populations
concomitant with lymphocytic infiltration of the bone marrow. In addition,
cellular infiltration affecting the colon, liver, and kidney was observed in
these mice. Survival analysis revealed that STAT5A/5B(-/-) mice exhibited early
death. The increased mortality and the pathology affecting multiple organs
observed in these mice were abrogated on the recombination-activating gene 1(-/-)
background. In light of the similarities between STAT5A/5B-deficient mice and
mice unable to signal through the IL-2R, we hypothesized that the tolerizing role
of STAT5A/5B was triggered via activation of the IL-2R. In agreement with this,
we found that IL-2Rbeta chain-deficient mice exhibited similar hemopoietic
abnormalities. Because IL-2 signaling is thought to contribute to tolerance
through maintenance of a CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cell population, we examined 
these cells and observed a numerical reduction in STAT5A/5B(-/-) mice along with 
a higher rate of apoptosis. These data provide strong evidence for a requirement 
for STAT5 in the maintenance of tolerance in vivo.

PMID: 14607901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 30;279(5):3563-72. Epub 2003 Nov 3.

The coactivator of transcription CREB-binding protein interacts preferentially
with the glycosylated form of Stat5.

Gewinner C(1), Hart G, Zachara N, Cole R, Beisenherz-Huss C, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Paul-Ehrlich Strasse
42-44, D-60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. cgewinne@caregroup.harvard.edu

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) gene family comprises
seven members with similarities in their domain structure and a common mode of
activation. Members of this gene family mediate interferon induction of gene
transcription and the response to a large number of growth factors and hormones. 
Extracellular ligand binding to transmembrane receptors causes the intracellular 
activation of associated tyrosine kinases, phosphorylation of Stat molecules,
dimerization, and translocation to the nucleus. Prolactin-induced phosphorylation
of Stat5 is a key event in the development and differentiation of mammary
epithelial cells. In addition to the crucial phosphorylation at tyrosine 694, we 
have identified an O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) as another secondary
modification essential for the transcriptional induction by Stat5. This
modification was only found on nuclear Stat5 after cytokine activation. Similar
observations were made with Stat1, Stat3, and Stat6. Glycosylation of Stat5,
however, does not seem to be a prerequisite for nuclear translocation. Mass
spectrometric analysis revealed a glycosylated peptide in the N-terminal region
of Stat5. Replacement of threonine 92 by an alanine residue (Stat5a-T92A)
strongly reduced the prolactin induction of Stat5a glycosylation and abolished
transactivation of a target gene promoter. Only the glycosylated form of Stat5
was able to bind the coactivator of transcription CBP, an essential interaction
for Stat5-mediated gene transcription.

PMID: 14597631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 15;63(20):6763-71.

Constitutive activation of Stat5b contributes to carcinogenesis in vivo.

Xi S(1), Zhang Q, Gooding WE, Smithgall TE, Grandis JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

The development of more effective prevention and treatment strategies for solid
tumors is limited by an incomplete understanding of the critical growth pathways 
that are activated in carcinogenesis. Signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) proteins have been linked to transformation and tumor
progression. Studies to date have not elucidated clear and distinct roles for
Stat5genes (Stat5a and Stat5b) in human epithelial cancers. We analyzed the role 
of Stat5a/b isoforms in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck using
expression and activation studies in human tissues and in a xenograft model after
selective targeting. In a xenograft model, blockade of Stat5b, but not Stat5a,
using antisense oligonucleotides resulted in tumor growth inhibition and
abrogation of Stat5 target genes in vivo. Blockade of the epidermal growth factor
receptor resulted in partial abrogation of Stat5 activation, thus linking
epidermal growth factor receptor to Stat5 in vivo. In tissues from 33 individuals
with head and neck cancer, Stat5 activation levels were correlated with
progression to a malignant phenotype, where increased expression and
phosphorylation of Stat5b were detected consistently in tumors compared with
their epithelial counterparts. Thus, constitutive activation of Stat5b
contributes to squamous cell tumorigenesis and may serve as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 14583472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;81(4):285-95.

Translocation of transcription regulators into the nucleus during granulocyte
commitment of HL-60 cells.

Navakauskiene R(1), Kulyte A, Treigyte G, Gineitis A, Magnusson KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, LT-2600
Vilnius, Lithuania. ruta.navakauskiene@bchi.lt

Expression of transcription factors required for lineage commitment of
differentiating cells (C/EBPbeta and c-Myb) and for survival of differentiated
cells (STATs and NFkappaB) was examined in the HL-60 cell line. Differentiation
was induced by treating the cells with retinoic acid. c-Myb expression in the
nucleus restored at the precommitment stage (18 h) what concurred with the
highest nuclear level of C/EBPbeta, which suggests a combinatorial interaction of
these transcription factors in the granulocytic signalling pathway. Expression of
STAT5a and STAT5b varied during differentiation, whereas no significant changes
were seen in STAT3 levels. Increased cytosolic level of NFkappaB p65 during
precommitment and commitment stages of granulocytic differentiation coincided
with augmentation of the STAT5a protein level, which could be evidence of their
possible cooperation during granulocytic-lineage commitment of HL-60 cells. Our
results suggest that the studied transcription factors cooperatively promote
signalling in the differentiating promyelocytic HL-60 cell line in response to
retinoic acid.

PMID: 14569301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Sci. 2003 Oct;94(10):847-50.

Pre-B lymphomas in SL/Kh mice: a multifactorial disease model.

Hiai H(1), Tsuruyama T, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-5801, Japan. hiai@path1.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The pre-B lymphoma in the inbred mouse strain SL/Kh is an excellent
multifactorial disease model. The endogenous murine leukemia virus provirus
Emv11, genetically acquired from an AKR progenitor, is the pathogenetic agent
that reintegrates to dysregulate several host genes, i.e., Stat5a, Evi3, c-Myc,
N-Myc, Stat5b, and others. Constitutive activation of Stat5a either by provirus
integration or by transfection of the active mutant Stat5a cDNA transforms pre-B 
cells in bone marrow. Genetically determined expansion of early B cells and a
dominant SL/Kh MHC allele predispose the animals to succumb to pre-B lymphomas. A
number of other host genetic and epigenetic factors that determine the types of
lymphomas, susceptibility to lymphomas, and length of the latent period are
discussed.

PMID: 14556656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51261-6. Epub 2003 Oct 7.

Mechanisms of growth hormone (GH) action. Identification of conserved Stat5
binding sites that mediate GH-induced insulin-like growth factor-I gene
activation.

Woelfle J(1), Chia DJ, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

Many of the actions of growth hormone (GH) on somatic growth and tissue
maintenance are mediated by insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), a secreted
protein whose gene expression is rapidly and potently induced by GH by unknown
mechanisms. Recent studies implicating Stat5a and Stat5b in the growth response
to GH in mice and observations linking Stat5b to control of IGF-I gene
transcription in rats have prompted the current investigations into the molecular
determinants of a putative regulatory network extending from GH through Stat5b to
IGF-I. Here we characterize as critical components of this hormone-activated
transcriptional pathway two adjacent Stat5 binding sites in the second intron of 
the rat IGF-I gene located within a conserved region previously found to undergo 
acute and reversible changes in chromatin structure after in vivo GH treatment.
As assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, GH rapidly induced binding
of Stat5 to this DNA segment in the liver of GH-deficient rats, just prior to the
onset of transcription from both major and minor IGF-I gene promoters.
Biochemical reconstitution experiments showed that the two intronic Stat5 DNA
elements were able to bind Stat5b in vitro after GH treatment could transmit GH- 
and Stat5b-dependent transcriptional responsiveness to the major IGF-I promoter
and to a minimal neutral gene promoter and were required for full stimulation of 
reporter gene activity by GH. Taken together, these results identify an intronic 
enhancer as a key mediator of GH-induced IGF-I gene transcription working through
Stat5b and provide new insight into the molecular architecture of this
transcriptional pathway.

PMID: 14532269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 15;171(8):3919-27.

Specific inhibition of Stat5a/b promotes apoptosis of IL-2-responsive primary and
tumor-derived lymphoid cells.

Behbod F(1), Nagy ZS, Stepkowski SM, Karras J, Johnson CR, Jarvis WD, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Stat5a/b exhibits 96% homology and are required for normal immune function. The
present studies examined Stat5a/b function in lymphoid cells by specific and
simultaneous disruption of both proteins using novel
phosphorothioate-2'-O-methoxyethyl antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (asODN).
Efficient delivery was confirmed by the presence of fluorescent TAMRA-labeled ODN
in >or=55 and 95% in human primary and tumor cell lines, respectively. Acute
asODN administration reduced levels of Stat5a (90%) in 6 h, whereas Stat5b
required nearly 48 h to attain the same inhibition, suggesting that the apparent 
turnover rate for Stat5a was 8-fold higher than that for Stat5b. Expression of
the closely related Stat3 protein was unchanged after asODN treatment, however.
Molecular ablation of Stat5a/b promoted apoptotic cell death in a significant
population of primary PHA-activated T cells (72%) and lymphoid tumor cell line
(e.g., YT; 74%) within 24 h, as assessed by 1) visualization of karyolytic
nuclear degeneration and other generalized cytoarchitectural alterations, 2)
enzymatic detection of TdT-positive DNA degradation, and 3) automated cytometric 
detection of annexin V translocation. Contrary to findings from Stat5a/b-null
mice, cell cycle progression did not appear to be significantly affected.
Interestingly, IL-2-insensitive and unprimed T cells and Jurkat cells remained
mostly unaffected. Finally, evidence is provided that the cytotoxicity associated
with Stat5a/b ablation may derive from activation of caspase-8, an initiator
protease that contributes to apoptotic cell commitment. We propose that in
lymphoid cells competent to activate Stat5a and Stat5b, both proteins
preferentially mediate an antiapoptotic survival influence.

PMID: 14530308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Genes Dev. 2003 Oct 1;17(19):2465-79.

Beta1 integrins regulate chondrocyte rotation, G1 progression, and cytokinesis.

Aszodi A(1), Hunziker EB, Brakebusch C, Fässler R.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Department for Molecular Medicine,
82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Beta1 integrins are highly expressed on chondrocytes, where they mediate adhesion
to cartilage matrix proteins. To assess the functions of beta1 integrin during
skeletogenesis, we inactivated the beta1 integrin gene in chondrocytes. We show
here that these mutant mice develop a chondrodysplasia of various severity.
beta1-deficient chondrocytes had an abnormal shape and failed to arrange into
columns in the growth plate. This is caused by a lack of motility, which is in
turn caused by a loss of adhesion to collagen type II, reduced binding to and
impaired spreading on fibronectin, and an abnormal F-actin organization. In
addition, mutant chondrocytes show decreased proliferation caused by a defect in 
G1/S transition and cytokinesis. The G1/S defect is, at least partially, caused
by overexpression of Fgfr3, nuclear translocation of Stat1/Stat5a, and
up-regulation of the cell cycle inhibitors p16 and p21. Altogether these findings
establish that beta1-integrin-dependent motility and proliferation of
chondrocytes are mandatory events for endochondral bone formation to occur.

PMCID: PMC218082
PMID: 14522949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Prolif. 2003 Oct;36(5):265-78.

The influence of STAT5 antisense oligonucleotides on the proliferation and
apoptosis of selected human leukaemic cell lines.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Masiuk M, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin,
Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

The signal transducers and activators of transcription--STAT5A and STAT5B--take
part in the regulation of many essential physiopathological processes. They
influence the cell cycle, apoptosis and the proliferation of different types of
cell lines. The STAT5 proteins are induced in response to multiple haematopoietic
cytokines. Because they are constitutively active in certain haemato-oncologic
diseases, it is also suggested that they play an important role in
leukaemogenesis. However, function of these proteins in haematopoietic cell
transformation and proliferation is not clear. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the impact of perturbation of STAT5 expression [using
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) against STAT5 mRNA], on the clonogenicity and survival
of selected human leukaemic cell lines, HEL, HL-60, K562, TF-1. We analysed the
effect of ODN pre-treatment on the cell clonogenicity in methylcellulose cultures
according to the time and the temperature of exposure. Moreover, we attempted to 
estimate apoptosis induced in examined cells, by flow cytometry using combined
Annexin V-PI staining and the TUNEL method. We also applied the RT-PCR method to 
analyse Bax and Bcl-xL gene expression. We found that the perturbation of STAT5
expression with antisense oligonucleotides caused a decrease in the proliferative
potential of human K562 and TF-1 cell lines. Also, we observed higher induction
of apoptotic cell death in the K562 and TF-1 cells incubated with the antisense
STAT5A ODNs. We did not notice any impact of ODNs on the HL-60 and HEL cells. Our
studies using STAT5 antisense oligonucleotides showed that these proteins may be 
critical in the regulation of growth and apoptosis of some types of leukaemic
blasts.

PMID: 14521520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Dec;17(12):2494-508. Epub 2003 Sep 11.

Constitutively active signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 can
replace the requirement for growth hormone in adipogenesis of 3T3-F442A
preadipocytes.

Shang CA(1), Waters MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The 
University of Queensland, Queensland 4072 Brisbane, Australia.

Although it is the best characterized in vitro model of GH action, the mechanisms
used by GH to induce differentiation of murine 3T3-F442A preadipocytes remain
unclear. Here we have examined the role of three transcriptional regulators in
adipogenesis. These regulators are either rapidly induced in response to GH
[Stra13, signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)3] or of central 
importance to GH signaling (Stat5). Retroviral transfection of 3T3-F442A
preadipocytes was used to increase expression of Stra13, Stat3, and Stat5a. Only 
Stat5a transfection increased the expression of adipogenic markers peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma, CCAAT enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP)alpha, and adipose protein 2/fatty acid-binding protein in response to GH,
as determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Transfection with constitutively active
Stat3 and Stat5a revealed that constitutively active Stat5a but not Stat3 was
able to replace the GH requirement for adipogenesis. Constitutively active Stat5a
but not Stat3 was able to increase the formation of lipid droplets and expression
of alpha-glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase toward levels seen in mature
adipocytes. Constitutively active Stat5a was also able to increase the expression
of transcripts for C/EBPalpha to similar levels as GH, and of C/EBPbeta,
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, and adipose protein 2/fatty
acid-binding protein transcripts to a lesser extent. An in vivo role for GH in
murine adipogenesis is supported by significantly decreased epididymal fat depot 
size in young GH receptor-deleted mice, before manifestation of the lipolytic
actions of GH. We conclude that Stat5 is a critical factor in GH-induced, and
potentially prolactin-induced, murine adipogenesis.

PMID: 12970402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cancer Sci. 2003 Sep;94(9):791-5.

Svi3: A provirus common integration site in c-myc in SL/Kh pre-B lymphomas.

Jin G(1), Tsuruyama T, Yamada Y, Hiai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Spontaneous pre-B lymphomas in SL/Kh mice occur by somatic acquisition of a
provirus genome of endogenous murine leukemia virus (MuLV). Inverse PCR
amplification and sequence analyses of a provirus and its host flanking fragment 
revealed a proviral insertion into c-myc in 3 out of 60 SL/Kh pre-B lymphomas,
named Svi3 lymphomas (SL/Kh virus integration site-3). Southern blot analysis
revealed that two lymphomas had clonal integration in c-myc exon 1 and the other,
in the promoter region. In 2 out of 3 Svi3 lymphomas, a fusion transcript of
provirus 3' long terminal repeat and c-myc and a normal full-length c-myc
transcript were obtained, but in one Svi3 lymphoma, only the normal transcript
was obtained. All three Svi3 lymphomas had increased c-myc expression, producing 
normal 67-kDa c-Myc protein. Svi3 lymphomas had more mature phenotypes in the
steps of early B-cell differentiation than Svi1 lymphomas, in which c-myc
expression was indirectly up-regulated by provirus integration into Stat5a.

PMID: 12967477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5257-68. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Impaired differentiation and lactational failure of Erbb4-deficient mammary
glands identify ERBB4 as an obligate mediator of STAT5.

Long W(1), Wagner KU, Lloyd KC, Binart N, Shillingford JM, Hennighausen L, Jones 
FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, Louisiana
70112-2699, USA.

The ERBB family of type 1 receptor tyrosine kinases and their ligands have
crucial functions during mammopoiesis, but the signaling networks that ultimately
regulate ERBB activity in the breast have remained elusive. Here, we show that
mice with Cre-lox mediated deletions of both Erbb4 alleles within the developing 
mammary gland (Erbb4(Flox/Flox)Wap-Cre) fail to accumulate lobuloalveoli or
successfully engage lactation at parturition owing, in part, to impaired
epithelial proliferation. Analysis of the mammary differentiation factor STAT5 by
immunohistochemistry and western blot revealed a complete ablation of STAT5
activation in Erbb4(Flox/Flox)Wap-Cre mammary epithelium at parturition.
Consistent with disrupted STAT5 function, Erbb4(Flox/Flox)Wap-Cre mammary glands 
at parturition failed to express the mammary epithelial differentiation marker
NPT2B. Defects in epithelial functional differentiation at parturition were
accompanied by a profound reduction in expression of the STAT5-regulated milk
genes casein beta and whey acidic protein. We propose that ERBB4 functions as an 
essential mediator of STAT5 signaling, and that loss of STAT5 activity
contributes to the impaired functional differentiation of mammary glands observed
in mice containing conditional Erbb4 deletions.

PMID: 12954715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45340-51. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

NCoA-1/SRC-1 is an essential coactivator of STAT5 that binds to the FDL motif in 
the alpha-helical region of the STAT5 transactivation domain.

Litterst CM(1), Kliem S, Marilley D, Pfitzner E.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse
42-44, 60596 Frankfurt, Germany.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a transcription
factor that activates prolactin (PRL)-dependent gene expression in the mammary
gland. For the activation of its target genes, STAT5 recruits coactivators like
p300 and the CREB-binding protein (CBP). In this study we analyzed the function
of p300/CBP-associated members of the p160/SRC/NCoA-family in STAT5-mediated
transactivation of beta-casein expression. We found that only one of them,
NCoA-1, acts as a coactivator for both STAT5a and STAT5b. The two coactivators
p300/CBP and NCoA-1 cooperatively enhance STAT5a-mediated transactivation. For
NCoA-1-dependent coactivation of STAT5, both the activation domain 1 and the
amino-terminal bHLH/PAS domain are required. The amino-terminal region mediates
the interaction with STAT5a in cells. A motif of three amino acids in an
alpha-helical region of the STAT5a-transactivation domain is essential for the
binding of NCoA-1 and for the transcriptional activity of STAT5a. Moreover we
observed that NCoA-1 is involved in the synergistic action of the glucocorticoid 
receptor and STAT5a on the beta-casein promoter. These findings support a model
in which STAT5, in concert with the glucocorticoid receptor, recruits a
multifunctional coactivator complex to initiate the PRL-dependent transcription.

PMID: 12954634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):46171-8. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

Receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand induction via Jak2 and Stat5a in mammary
epithelial cells.

Srivastava S(1), Matsuda M, Hou Z, Bailey JP, Kitazawa R, Herbst MP, Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0576, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) is the primary hormone that, in conjunction with local factors,
leads to lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy. Recently, receptor
activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) has been identified as one of the effector 
molecules essential for lobuloalveolar development. The molecular mechanisms by
which PRL may induce RANKL expression have not been carefully examined. Here we
report that RANKL expression in the mammary gland is developmentally regulated
and dependent on PRL and progesterone, whereas its receptor RANK (receptor
activator of NF-kappaB) and decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG) are
constitutively expressed at all stages in both normal (PRL+/-) and prolactin
knockout (PRL-/-) mice. In vitro, PRL markedly increased RANKL expression in
primary mammary epithelial cells and RANKL-luciferase reporter activity in CHOD6 
cells, which constitutively express the PRL receptor. We identified a
gamma-interferon activation sequence (GAS) in the region between residues -965 to
-725 of the RANKL promoter, which conferred a PRL response. Using dominant
negative mutants of recombinant Jak2 and Stat5 in CHOD6 cells, and by
reconstituting the Jak2/Stat5 pathway in COS7 cells, we determined that Jak2 and 
Stat5a are essential for the PRL-induced RANKL expression in mammary gland.

PMID: 12952963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2003;8(3):831-40.

The DNA-binding capacity of genetic variants of the bovine STAT5A transcription
factor.

Flisikowski K(1), Szymanowska M, Zwierzchowski L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Wólka Kosowska, Poland.

The STATs are a family of transcription factors. STAT5A, previously known as MGF,
transduces prolactin signals to the milk protein genes. Here, we describe the
detection of nucleotide sequence polymorphism in exon 16 of the bovine STAT5A
gene, coding for the SH2 domain. SSCP was found in a 281-bp PCR amplified gene
fragment, lying between positions 12,525 and 12,806, and encompassing parts of
intron 15 and exon 16 of the bovine STAT5A gene (GenBank AJ 237937). Three SSCP
patterns (genotypes) were identified in a group of 108 animals of different
cattle breeds. The DNA sequencing showed that they differed by a CCT deletion at 
position from 12,549 in intron 15, and a T-->C substitution at position 12,743 in
exon 16. The latter mutation changes an amino acid sequence in the STAT5A protein
- a Val/Ala substitution at position 686. Since T-->C substitution creates a new 
MslI site, genetic variants in the bovine STAT5A gene can be distinguished with
RFLP analysis. The frequency of alleles T and C varied between the different
cattle breeds studied; the CC genotype was the least frequent and the frequency
of alleles T and C was 0.842 and 0.158, respectively. Proteins were extracted
from the cell nuclei of liver tissues derived from bulls of different STAT5A
genotypes and subjected to EMSA in order to study if the amino acid substitution 
might change the DNA-binding capacity of STAT5A transcription factor.
Statistically significant (p<0.05) differences in nuclear protein binding to DNA 
were observed between genotypes TT and CC; nuclear proteins derived from CC
animals always showed less DNA protein complexing than those of TT animals. EMSA 
competition experiments confirmed that STAT5 transcription factors take part in
the formation of the DNA-protein complexes.

PMID: 12949622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 22;308(2):325-30.

Role of Stat5 in type I interferon-signaling and transcriptional regulation.

Uddin S(1), Lekmine F, Sassano A, Rui H, Fish EN, Platanias LC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology-Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Type I interferons are pleiotropic cytokines that transduce signals via
activation of multiple downstream signaling cascades, including the Jak-Stat
pathway. Although the roles of Stat1 and Stat2 in Type I interferon signaling are
well established, the roles that other Stat-family members play in the induction 
of IFN-responses remain to be defined. In previous studies, we have shown that
Stat5 associates with the CrkL adapter and forms a signaling complex that binds
DNA. In the present study, we provide evidence that Stat5 is phosphorylated on
serines 725/730 in an IFNalpha- and IFNbeta-dependent manner, providing direct
evidence that serine phosphorylation of the protein is a component of an
interferon signaling cascade. Such serine phosphorylation of Stat5 is Map kinase-
and PI 3(')-kinase independent, while the activation of the serine kinase that
phosphorylates Stat5 is regulated by upstream tyrosine kinase activity. Using
mouse embryonic fibroblasts with targeted disruption of the Stat5a and Stat5b
genes, we demonstrate that full activation of Stat5 is required for Type I
interferon-dependent gene transcription via GAS elements. Altogether, our data
provide evidence that Stat5 plays an important role in IFN-signaling and
participates in the induction of Type I IFN-dependent responses. Furthermore, our
results strongly suggest that, in addition to phosphorylation on tyrosine
residues, phosphorylation on serine residues exhibits regulatory effects on the
transcriptional capacity of Stat5.

PMID: 12901872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cytometry A. 2003 Aug;54(2):75-88.

Immunoreactivity of Stat5 phosphorylated on tyrosine as a cell-based measure of
Bcr/Abl kinase activity.

Jacobberger JW(1), Sramkoski RM, Frisa PS, Ye PP, Gottlieb MA, Hedley DW, Shankey
TV, Smith BL, Paniagua M, Goolsby CL.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106-4944, USA. jwj@cwru.edu

BACKGROUND: Stat5(1) (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5) is
normally phosphorylated and activated by Janus kinases. In cells transformed with
BCR/ABL, Stat5 is constitutively activated by promiscuous phosphorylation.
Cytometry of intracellular antigens can be used to evaluate cell treatments
affecting gene expression, because it precisely provides the fraction of affected
cells and the quantitative change in expression. Here, we asked whether we could 
measure a phosphorylated epitope on Stat5 by cytometry, and whether that
measurement would respond to Bcr/Abl inhibition.
METHODS: Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cell lines or control
Bcr/Abl-negative cells were treated or not with imatinib mesylate, fixed and
permeabilized with formaldehyde followed by methanol; reacted with rabbit
polyclonal and mouse monoclonal antibodies against an epitope including tyrosine 
694 of Stat5a (pSTAT5); reacted with antibodies that mark mitotic cells;
counterstained with secondary fluorescent antibodies and
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI); and then subjected to flow cytometry.
Western blotting was performed with pSTAT5 and Stat5 antibodies.
RESULTS: Optimal fixation and staining parameters were established for pSTAT5
antibodies with K562 cells. These cells displayed high levels of immunoreactivity
with pSTAT5 probes that could be inhibited uniformly with imatinib mesylate in a 
dose-response and time-dependent manner. The IC50 for downregulation of pSTAT5
immunoreactivity for K562 cells by cytometry was approximately 70 nM. The
inhibition half-time was approximately 1 min. At micromolar doses this reactivity
remained minimal for up to 7 days. Cultured cells also displayed a population of 
negative cells that increased under conditions related to cessation of cell
growth (media nutrient depletion). This study also showed quantitatively that a
rabbit polyclonal antibody that cross-reacted with an additional epitope could be
used successfully as a measure of Bcr/Abl activity.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a sensitive cytometric assay for Bcr/Abl kinase
activity in human hematopoietic cell lines.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12879454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Oct;17(10):1910-20. Epub 2003 Jul 17.

Two tandemly linked interferon-gamma-activated sequence elements in the promoter 
of glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion molecule 1 gene synergistically respond 
to prolactin in mouse mammary epithelial cells.

Hou Z(1), Srivastava S, Mistry MJ, Herbst MP, Bailey JP, Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0576, USA.

Previously, we reported that glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion molecule 1
(GlyCAM 1) was a novel target for prolactin (PRL) in the mouse mammary gland.
However, the signaling pathway by which PRL regulates GlyCAM 1 expression has not
been specified. In the present study, we showed that PRL induced GlyCAM 1
expression in primary mammary epithelial cells of mice through the Janus kinase
2/signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) pathway. Deletion
and site-directed mutagenesis analyses of the GlyCAM 1 promoter demonstrated that
the two tandemly linked Stat5 binding sites [interferon-gamma-activated sequence 
1 and -2 (GAS1 and GAS2)] in the proximal promoter region were crucial and
synergistically responded to PRL. GAS2, a consensus GAS site, was essential and, 
by itself, weakly responded to PRL, whereas GAS1, a nonconsensus site, failed to 
respond to PRL but was indispensable for the maximal activity of the GlyCAM 1
promoter. Gel shift assays showed that probe containing GAS1 and GAS2 bound two
Stat5 complexes, which represent Stat5 dimer and tetramer, respectively, while
GAS2, by itself, bound Stat5 as a dimer only, and GAS1 showed no apparent binding
activity. Interruption of tetramer formation by mutation of a tryptophan to
alanine (W37A), and a leucine to serine (L83S) in the N terminus of Stat5A
attenuated the synergistic effect between the two tandemly linked GAS sites.
Overexpression of W37A and L83S mutants in primary mammary epithelial cells
suppressed endogenous GlyCAM 1 expression.

PMID: 12869589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003 Aug;285(2):H476-82.

STAT signaling in ischemic heart: a role of STAT5A in ischemic preconditioning.

Yamaura G(1), Turoczi T, Yamamoto F, Siddqui MA, Maulik N, Das DK.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 
Farmington, CT 06030-1110, USA.

We recently demonstrated that ischemic preconditioning (PC) induced by cyclic
episodes of short duration of ischemia and reperfusion potentiates a signal
transduction cascade involving Janus kinase (JAK) 2 and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). A rapid activation of JAK and several
STATs, including STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT6 also occurred during myocardial
ischemia and reperfusion. This study sought to examine whether STAT5A and STAT6
were also involved in PC. Two different animal models were used: isolated
perfused working rat hearts and STAT5A and STAT6 knockout mouse hearts. The
results of our study indicated phosphorylation of STAT 5A and STAT6 in the
preconditioned myocardium. Tyrphostin AG490, a JAK2 inhibitor, or
4-amino-5-(4-methylphenyl)-7-(t-butyl)-pyrazolo-3,4-d-pyrimidine (PPI), a Src
kinase blocker, blocked STAT5A phosphorylation, whereas STAT6 phosphorylation was
blocked only with tyrphostin. As expected, significant cardioprotection was
achieved in the preconditioned heart as evidenced by reduced myocardial infarct
size and decreased number of apoptotic cardiomyocytes. PC-mediated
cardioprotection was partially abolished when hearts were pretreated with
tyrphostin, PPI, or LY-294002, a phosphatidylinositol (PI)-3 kinase inhibitor.
Studies with STAT5A and STAT6 knockout mouse hearts revealed that STAT6 knockout 
mouse hearts, and not STAT5A knockout mouse hearts, were resistant to myocardial 
ischemia-reperfusion injury. The hearts from STAT5A knockout mice could not be
preconditioned, whereas those from STAT6 knockout mice were easily
preconditioned. The results of the present study demonstrate that STAT5A, and not
STAT6, plays a role in ischemic PC. For the first time, the results also
indicated a role of Src kinase pathway in STAT5A PC and PI-3 kinase-Akt pathways 
appear to be the downstream regulator for STAT5A-STAT6 signaling pathway.

PMID: 12860560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Exp Med. 2003 Jul 7;198(1):79-89. Epub 2003 Jun 30.

Stat5 synergizes with T cell receptor/antigen stimulation in the development of
lymphoblastic lymphoma.

Kelly JA(1), Spolski R, Kovanen PE, Suzuki T, Bollenbacher J, Pise-Masison CA,
Radonovich MF, Lee S, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Morse HC 3rd, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart and Blood Institute,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent
transcription factors that mediate a wide range of actions induced by cytokines, 
interferons, and growth factors. We now report the development of thymic T cell
lymphoblastic lymphomas in transgenic mice in which Stat5a or Stat5b is
overexpressed within the lymphoid compartment. The rate of lymphoma induction was
markedly enhanced by immunization or by the introduction of TCR transgenes.
Remarkably, the Stat5 transgene potently induced development of CD8+ T cells,
even in mice expressing a class II-restricted TCR transgene, with resulting CD8+ 
T cell lymphomas. These data demonstrate the oncogenic potential of dysregulated 
expression of a STAT protein that is not constitutively activated, and that TCR
stimulation can contribute to this process.

PMCID: PMC2196089
PMID: 12835478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 29;278(35):32929-35. Epub 2003 Jun 20.

Threonine 391 phosphorylation of the human prolactin receptor mediates a novel
interaction with 14-3-3 proteins.

Olayioye MA(1), Guthridge MA, Stomski FC, Lopez AF, Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and Bone Marrow Research
Laboratories, 1G Royal Parade, Victoria 3050, Australia.

The prolactin receptor (PrlR) is a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily
that lacks an intrinsic kinase domain and relies on the cytoplasmic Jak tyrosine 
kinases to transduce signals. Prolactin-induced Jak2 activation and consequent
tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor and downstream signaling molecules have 
been studied, but phosphorylation of the PrlR on serine or threonine residues has
not been reported. Here we describe a novel interaction between the PrlR and the 
phosphoserine/phosphothreonine-binding 14-3-3 proteins. This association is
mediated by the KCST391WP motif, which occurs in the major functional isoform of 
the human receptor and is conserved among a wide variety of species. Mutagenesis 
of threonine 391 to alanine significantly impaired 14-3-3 binding to the PrlR in 
both glutathione S-transferase pulldown and coimmunoprecipitation assays. In
breast carcinoma and mouse mammary epithelial cell lines, the endogenous receptor
was found to associate with glutathione S-transferase-14-3-3 proteins independent
of prolactin stimulation. A phospho-specific peptide antibody was generated and
used to demonstrate phosphorylation of Thr391 in vivo. Phosphorylation of this
site was found to be sensitive to okadaic acid, a specific inhibitor of
serine/threonine protein phosphatases. Interestingly, the T391A PrlR mutant
exhibited increased basal and prolactin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation compared
with the wild-type receptor. This was accompanied by a ligand-induced increase in
protein kinase B and Erk activation but not that of Stat5a. Phosphorylation of
the receptor on Thr391 may therefore provide a new mechanism by which prolactin
signaling is attenuated.

PMID: 12819209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2003;8(2):317-31.

The role of STAT5 proteins in the regulation of normal hematopoiesis in a cord
blood model.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Masiuk M, Czajka R, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Al. Powstanców
Wlkp.72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

The signal transducers and activators of transcription - STAT5A and STAT5B - are 
responsible for the control of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, via 
their effect on gene expression. They are activated by the binding of many
cytokines, growth factors and hormones to their receptors on the cell surface.
Many of these cytokines regulate hematopoietic cell development; therefore, STAT5
proteins are suggested to play an important role in hematopoiesis. There are
numerous contradictory reports available in the literature on the role of STAT5
in normal hematopoietic cell development; hence, the question of the real
function of STAT5 proteins clearly requires further studies. The aim of our study
was to evaluate the role of STAT5 in normal hematopoiesis using
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) strategy against STAT5 mRNA. We employed the RT-PCR
method to study STAT5 mRNA expression in cells after their incubation with ODNs. 
We analyzed the effect of blocking STAT5 proteins on the viability and
clonogenecity of the CFU-GM (Colony Forming Unit of Granulocyte-Macrophages) and 
the BFU-E (Burst Forming Unit of Erythrocytes) obtained from human cord blood
(CB). The clonogenic growth of the cells was assessed in methylcellulose cultures
according to the type of oligodeoxynucleotides. We also attempted to estimate the
level of apoptosis induced in cord blood mononuclear and CD34+ cells by employing
different assays: i) Annexin V staining using flow cytometry (FACSCalibur); ii)
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL); iii)
analysis of Bax and Bcl-X(L) gene expression by RT-PCR. Perturbation of STAT5
expression with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides had no impact on the viability,
clonogenecity and apoptosis of CB hematopoietic cells. Our results showed that
STAT5 proteins do not play a significant role in the regulation of proliferation 
of normal hematopoietic cells derived from cord blood.

PMID: 12813566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 19;22(25):3875-87.

Activation of beta-catenin in prostate epithelium induces hyperplasias and
squamous transdifferentiation.

Bierie B(1), Nozawa M, Renou JP, Shillingford JM, Morgan F, Oka T, Taketo MM,
Cardiff RD, Miyoshi K, Wagner KU, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is critical for normal mammalian
development, the specification of epidermal cells and neoplastic transformation
of intestinal epithelium. However, precise molecular information regarding
cell-specific responses to beta-catenin signaling has been limited. This question
was addressed using a mouse model in which exon 3 of the beta-catenin gene was
deleted in several cell types with loxP-mediated recombination utilizing a Cre
transgene under control of the mouse mammary tumor virus-long terminal repeat
(MMTV-LTR). The stabilization of beta-catenin in prostate epithelium resulted in 
hyperplasias and extensive transdifferentiation into epidermal-like structures,
which expressed keratins 1 and 6, filaggrin, loricrin and involucrin. The
cell-specific loss of NKCC1 protein and reduced nuclear Stat5a is further
suggestive of a loss of prostate epithelial characteristics. In addition to the
prostate, hyperplasias and squamous metaplasias were detected in epithelia of the
epididymis, vas deferens, coagulating gland, preputial gland and salivary gland. 
However, and in contrast to a recent study, no lesions reminiscent of high-grade 
prostate intraepithelial neoplasia were detected. Since beta-catenin was
activated in several cell types and impinged upon the viability of these mice, it
was not possible to evaluate the cumulative effect over more than 3 months. To
assess long-term consequences of beta-catenin activation, mutant and control
prostate tissues were transplanted into the mammary fat pads of wild-type males. 
Notably, squamous metaplasias, intra-acinous hyperplasia and possible neoplastic 
transformation were observed after a total of 18 weeks of beta-catenin
stimulation. This suggests that the transdifferentiation into squamous
metaplasias is an early response of endoderm-derived cells to beta-catenin, and
that the development of intra-acinous hyperplasias or neoplastic foci is a later 
event.

PMID: 12813461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Appl Genet. 2003;44(2):185-9.

Polymerase chain reaction-heteroduplex (PCR-HD) polymorphism within the bovine
STAT5A gene.

Flisikowski K(1), Zwierzchowski L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Wólka Kosowska, Poland.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are transcription
factors mediating signals of various hormones and cytokines. STAT5A, previously
known as the mammary gland factor (MGF), mediates the action of prolactin on milk
protein gene expression in mammary epithelial cells. We used polymerase chain
reaction-heteroduplex (PCR-HD) and sequencing methods for detection of nucleotide
sequence polymorphism in intron 15 of the bovine STAT5A gene. A 281-bp gene
fragment, from nt 12525 to nt 12806 (GenBank AJ 237937), was amplified with PCR, 
denatured and subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis to detect PCR-HD
polymorphism. Three genotypes and two alleles were identified. DNA samples
derived from homozygotes AA and BB were sequenced. A trinucleotide CCT deletion
was found in the variant B of the STAT5A gene at position 12549. In a group of 72
beef bulls of various breeds and 49 Friesian bulls genotyped by PCR-HD mostly the
AA genotype was found (from 83 to 61% depending on breed). The frequency of
allele A varied between 0.91 and 0.77. Animals of genotype BB were found in
Charolaise and Limousine breeds only.

PMID: 12773796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):29145-52. Epub 2003 May 20.

The neuropeptide galanin augments lobuloalveolar development.

Naylor MJ(1), Ginsburg E, Iismaa TP, Vonderhaar BK, Wynick D, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Development Group, Cancer Research Program and Neurobiology Program, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales
2010, Australia.

Mammary lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy is controlled by ovarian sex 
steroids and pituitary prolactin release. In organ culture these hormones are
incapable of reproducing the density and size of lobuloalveoli seen in mice,
suggesting the existence of other undiscovered factors. We showed previously that
galanin knockout mice fail to lactate sufficiently for pup survival following
their first pregnancy. Here we demonstrate that prolactin treatment of galanin
knockout mice allows pup survival but does not completely rescue lobuloalveolar
development or reduced milk protein expression. When galanin was used in
combination with prolactin in mammary organ culture, larger and more numerous
lobules were produced than with prolactin alone. Galanin alone produced sustained
activation of STAT5a and the induction of milk protein expression but did not
induce lobulogenesis. Examination of the transcriptional interaction between
galanin and prolactin using oligonucleotide microarrays demonstrated synergistic 
and antagonistic modes of interaction between these hormones. These data
establish a new role for galanin as a hormone augmenting mammary development
during pregnancy in concert with prolactin.

PMID: 12759342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Cell Biol. 2003 May 12;161(3):583-92. Epub 2003 May 5.

Essential functions of p21-activated kinase 1 in morphogenesis and
differentiation of mammary glands.

Wang RA(1), Vadlamudi RK, Bagheri-Yarmand R, Beuvink I, Hynes NE, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Although growth factors have been shown to influence mammary gland development,
the nature of downstream effectors remains elusive. In this study, we show that
the expression of p21-activated kinase (Pak)1, a serine/threonine protein kinase,
is activated in mammary glands during pregnancy and lactation. By targeting an
ectopic expression of a kinase-dead Pak1 mutant under the control of ovine
beta-lactoglobulin promoter, we found that the mammary glands of female mice
expressing kinase-dead Pak1 transgene revealed incomplete lobuloalveolar
development and impaired functional differentiation. The expression of whey
acidic protein and beta-casein and the amount of activated Stat5 in the nuclei of
epithelial cells in transgenic mice were drastically reduced. Further analysis of
the underlying mechanisms revealed that Pak1 stimulated beta-casein promoter
activity in normal mouse mammary epithelial cells and also cooperated with
Stat5a. Pak1 directly interacted with and phosphorylated Stat5a at Ser 779, and
both COOH-terminal deletion containing Ser 779 of Stat5a and the Ser 779 to Ala
mutation completely prevented the ability of Pak1 to stimulate beta-casein
promoter. Mammary glands expressing inactive Pak1 exhibited a reduction of Stat5a
Ser 779 phosphorylation. These findings suggest that Pak1 is required for
alveolar morphogenesis and lactation function, and thus, identify novel functions
of Pak1 in the mammary gland development.

PMCID: PMC2172951
PMID: 12732616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncogene. 2003 May 1;22(17):2568-72.

Chemoprevention of mammary carcinogenesis in a transgenic mouse model by
alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in the diet is associated with decreased
cyclin D1 activity.

Li M(1), Ren S, Tilli MT, Flaws JA, Lubet R, Grubbs CJ, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Mechanisms underlying the chemopreventive effect of difluoromethylornithine
(DFMO) on the development of mammary cancer were investigated utilizing the whey 
acidic protein promoter-T antigen transgenic mouse model of breast cancer
progression. Mice were exposed to four different doses of DFMO in the diet (3.5, 
4.9, 7.0 and 10 g/kg diet). Tumor latency was increased in a dose-dependent
manner. DFMO at the highest dose significantly delayed tumor onset (131 days as
compared to 109 days in control unexposed mice, P=0.018). Analyses of
preneoplastic mammary tissue collected 1 month after DFMO treatment demonstrated 
that DFMO (10 g/kg diet) significantly increased the ratio of apoptotic to
proliferative indices (P=0.013) and significantly reduced the percentage of cells
demonstrating nuclear localized cyclin D1 (P=0.013). Nuclear localizations of
p27, p21 and Stat5a were not affected. Inhibitory effects of DFMO on cell growth 
and survival were lost as the cells progressed to cancer. In conclusion, the
chemopreventive effects of DFMO on mammary cancer progression were mediated by
changes in both apoptosis and cell proliferation in preneoplastic cells.
Alterations in cyclin D1 activity in preneoplastic cells could represent an early
biomarker of chemopreventive action and are consistent with a mechanistic role
for cyclin D1 in progression of mammary cancer.

PMID: 12730671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 2003 Aug 15;102(4):1290-7. Epub 2003 Apr 24.

Stat5 expression is critical for mast cell development and survival.

Shelburne CP(1), McCoy ME, Piekorz R, Sexl V, Roh KH, Jacobs-Helber SM, Gillespie
SR, Bailey DP, Mirmonsef P, Mann MN, Kashyap M, Wright HV, Chong HJ, Bouton LA,
Barnstein B, Ramirez CD, Bunting KD, Sawyer S, Lantz CS, Ryan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23284-2012, USA.

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) and stem cell factor (SCF) are important mast cell growth
and differentiation factors. Since both cytokines activate the transcription
factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5), a known
regulator of proliferation and survival, we investigated the effects of Stat5
deficiency on mast cell development and survival. Bone marrow-derived mast cell
(BMMC) populations cultured from Stat5A/B-deficient mice survived in IL-3 + SCF, 
but not in either cytokine alone. These cells demonstrated reduced expression of 
Bcl-2, Bcl-x(L), cyclin A2, and cyclin B1, with increased apoptosis and delayed
cell cycle progression during IL-3 or SCF culture. Finally, the absence of Stat5 
resulted in loss of in vivo mast cell development, as judged by assessments of
Stat5-deficient mice and transplantation of Stat5-deficient bone marrow cells to 
mast cell-deficient recipient mice. These results indicate that Stat5A and Stat5B
are critical regulators of in vitro and in vivo mast cell development and
survival.

PMID: 12714518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Endocrinology. 2003 May;144(5):1847-53.

Epidermal growth factor increases cortisol production and type II 3
beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Delta(5)-Delta(4)-isomerase expression in human
adrenocortical carcinoma cells: evidence for a Stat5-dependent mechanism.

Feltus FA(1), Kovacs WJ, Nicholson W, Silva CM, Nagdas SK, Ducharme NA, Melner
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

We tested the ability of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to regulate a key enzyme
in the adrenal synthesis of glucocorticoids: human type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/Delta(5)-Delta(4)-isomerase (3 beta HSD). EGF treatment (25 ng/ml) 
of human adrenocortical carcinoma cells (H295R) resulted in a 5-fold increase in 
cortisol production and a corresponding 2-fold increase in 3 beta HSD mRNA.
Experiments were performed to determine whether EGF is acting through a
previously identified signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(Stat5)-responsive element located from -110 to -118 in the human type II 3 beta 
HSD promoter. A Stat5 expression construct was cotransfected with a 3 beta
HSD-chloramphenol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter construct comprised of
nucleotides -301-->+45 of the human type II 3 beta HSD promoter linked to the CAT
reporter gene sequence. The addition of EGF at doses as low as 10 ng/ml resulted 
in an 11- to 15-fold increase in CAT activity. The introduction of 3-bp point
mutations into critical nucleotides in the Stat5 response element obviated the
EGF response. Either Stat5a or Stat5b isoforms induced CAT reporter expression
upon treatment with EGF. These results demonstrate the ability of EGF to regulate
the expression of a critical enzyme (3 beta HSD) in the production of cortisol
and suggest a molecular mechanism by which this regulation occurs.

PMID: 12697691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Apr;30(2):139-50.

The role of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 in the inhibitory 
effects of GH on adipocyte differentiation.

Richter HE(1), Albrektsen T, Billestrup N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Signal Transduction, Novo Nordisk A/S, Novo Allé, DK-2880
Bagsvaerd, Denmark.

GH inhibits primary rat preadipocyte differentiation and expression of late genes
required for terminal differentiation. Here we show that GH-mediated inhibition
of fatty acid-binding protein aP2 gene expression correlates with the activation 
of the Janus kinase-2/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5
signalling pathway. Within minutes of treatment, GH induced the tyrosine
phosphorylation, nuclear localization and DNA binding of STAT5. Importantly,
there was no evidence that STAT5 acted via an interaction with peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma. To further understand the mechanism of
STAT5 action, we reconstituted the inhibition of aP2 in a non-adipogenic cell
line. Using this system, we showed that the ability of GH to inhibit a 520 bp aP2
reporter was largely dependent upon the presence of either STAT5A or STAT5B.
Mutant analysis confirmed that the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 was
essential for this signalling. However, STAT5's C-terminal transactivation domain
was fully dispensable for this inhibition. Taken together, these data confirm a
key regulatory role of STAT5 in adipose tIssue and point to STAT5 as the
repressing modulator of GH-mediated inhibition in primary preadipocytes.

PMID: 12683938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Apr;14(3):118-23.

Prolactin regulation of estrogen receptor expression.

Frasor J(1), Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612,
USA.

The ability of the rat corpus luteum to respond to estrogen requires prolactin
(PRL), which can stimulate the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER). This
review will focus on the signaling mechanisms by which this occurs. Transcription
of the genes encoding both ERalpha (Esr1) and ERbeta (Esr2) is stimulated by PRL 
through the Jak2-Stat5 pathway and Stat5-response elements that are located in
each of the Esr promoters. A single nucleotide difference between these two
response elements is responsible for the observation that either Stat5a or Stat5b
can stimulate Esr1 transcription, whereas only Stat5b can activate transcription 
of Esr2. The tyrosine kinase Jak2 is required for PRL activation of Esr1 promoter
activity; however, additional pathways are involved in PRL-induced Stat5b
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation and DNA binding. In addition to the corpus
luteum, PRL-induced ER expression might provide a mechanism for fine-tuning the
responsiveness of other target tissues, such as the decidua and mammary gland, to
these two hormones.

PMID: 12670737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2003;13(2):85-92.

STAT5a regulates the GlcNAc-1-phosphate transferase gene transcription and
expression.

Zhang XL(1), Qu XJ, Vijay IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P.R.
China. zhangxl65@hotmail.com

The dolichyl-phosphate alpha-N-acetylglucosaminephosphotransferase 2 (Dpagt2)
gene in the mouse has a housekeeping promoter, and its expression is regulated
during the development and hormonally modulated lactogenesis of the mammary
gland. Previous studies showed that the transcription of the mouse mammary Dpagt2
gene is stimulated by the lactogenic hormones, insulin, glucocorticoid receptor
(GR), and prolactin. Transcription factors which bind to the Dpagt2 gene promoter
region can influence the expression level of the Dpagt2 gene. It is supposed that
the Dpagt2 gene promoter region (bases pairs -1462 to -5) maybe contain 10
putative STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) binding sites:
TTN (5/6) AA. In order to identify the STAT factors involved in the transcription
of the GPT gene, 32P labeling probes and lactating mouse nuclear extracts were
prepared. Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays (EMSA) show that the region
(bases pairs -386 to -322, where there is a STAT binding site, TTTCAAAAA) binds
to STAT5a, not to glucocorticoid receptor (GR) or other STAT factors. The
involvement of STAT5a in regulating the expression of the mouse Dpagt2 gene was
further investigated by transient transfections of various Dpagt2
promoter/luciferase (Luc) constructs into COS 7 cells. The results showed that
co-transfection of STAT5a or prolactin receptor can enhance Dpagt2 promoter
activities in the promoter construct pGL-MX6 (from base pairs -386 to -5), but
not in the promoter construct pGL-MX7 (from base pairs -322 to -5). This paper
first reports that STAT5a is involved in the binding between -386 and -322 base
pairs of the Dpagt2 gene promoter and stimulates the expression of the Dpagt2
gene transcription in the mouse lactating mammary gland.

PMID: 12649593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jul;285(1):E63-72. Epub 2003 Mar 18.

Sepsis-induced muscle growth hormone resistance occurs independently of STAT5
phosphorylation.

Hong-Brown LQ(1), Brown CR, Cooney RN, Frost RA, Lang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, 
USA. lqh10@psu.edu

Growth hormone (GH) stimulates insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) synthesis in 
both liver and muscle. During sepsis, proinflammatory cytokines inhibit GH action
in liver, but it is unknown whether sepsis also produces GH resistance in muscle.
Sepsis was induced by cecal ligation and puncture, and 18 h later the effect of
GH on signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) phosphorylation and
IGF-I mRNA content was assessed in rat gastrocnemius and liver. The relative
abundance of phosphorylated (p)STAT5a, pSTAT5b, pSTAT3, and pSTAT1 was increased 
in liver from control rats after GH. Sepsis alone also increased hepatic pSTAT5a,
pSTAT3, and pSTAT1. Sepsis dramatically impaired the ability of GH to stimulate
the phosphorylation of STAT5a and -5b, as well as to increase IGF-I mRNA in
liver. In muscle from control rats, GH increased pSTAT5a and -5b, whereas content
of pSTAT3 and pSTAT1 was not affected. Sepsis increased basal content of pSTAT3
but not pSTAT5a, pSTAT5b, or pSTAT1 in muscle. The GH-induced increase of pSTAT5a
and -5b in muscle from septic rats was not inhibited, suggesting that muscle was 
not GH resistant. In contrast to these changes in pSTAT5, the ability of GH to
increase IGF-I mRNA was completely absent in muscle from septic rats. Because the
suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins may function as negative
regulators of GH signaling, we examined the content of these proteins. Sepsis
produced small (30-50%), albeit statistically significant, increases in SOCS-1,
-2, and -3 protein in muscle. In contrast to muscle, the SOCS proteins in the
liver did not change under the various experimental conditions, suggesting that
these proteins are not responsible for the impaired phosphorylation of STAT5 by
GH. In conclusion, sepsis produces GH resistance in both muscle and liver, with
the locus of this impairment in muscle differing from that in liver and being
independent of a defect in STAT5 phosphorylation.

PMID: 12644450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Oncogene. 2003 Mar 20;22(11):1638-52.

Naturally occurring dominant-negative Stat5 suppresses transcriptional activity
of estrogen receptors and induces apoptosis in T47D breast cancer cells.

Yamashita H(1), Iwase H, Toyama T, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. hiroko@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5 regulates growth,
differentiation, and survival of mammary and hematopoietic cells. The role of
Stat5 in breast cancer has not been established, although Stat5 is critical for
some hematopoietic malignancies. We detected for the first time that Stat5b is
constitutively activated in human breast cancer cell lines, and analysed the role
of Stat5 in estrogen receptor(ER)-positive breast cancer cell lines using
dominant-negative variants of Stat5. Two distinct carboxyl-truncated Stat5a
derivatives were generated. Stat5aDelta740 corresponded to a naturally occurring 
alternative splice variant, and Stat5aDelta713 was analogous to an 80 kDa Stat5a 
product of a nuclear protease. Stat5aDelta740 and Stat5aDelta713 displayed
comparable dominant-negative properties and suppressed transcriptional activity
of wild-type Stat5a and Stat5b equally well. Cotransfection experiments revealed 
that Stat5aDelta740 completely blocked transcriptional activity of endogenous
estrogen receptor in T47D and MCF7 cells, and of both ER alpha and ER beta in
COS-7 cells. Stat5aDelta740 was selected for adenoviral delivery, and
high-efficiency expression of tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5aDelta740 was achieved
in infected cells. Adenoviral-mediated Stat5aDelta740 induced apoptosis in T47D
cells but not in caspase-3-negative MCF7 cells. The present study indicates that 
overexpression of a dominant-negative variant of Stat5 suppresses ER
transcriptional activity and induces apoptosis in estrogen-responsive breast
cancer tissue culture cells.

PMID: 12642867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Exp Eye Res. 2003 Apr;76(4):421-31.

Expression and activation of STAT proteins during mouse retina development.

Zhang SS(1), Wei JY, Li C, Barnstable CJ, Fu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, 310 Cedar Street,
BML 117, New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA. shao-min.zhang@yale.com

Cytokines and growth factors play important roles in mammalian ocular development
and maintenance. Recent studies have indicated that some of these ligands can
activate signal transducer and activator of transcription factors (STATs) and
modulate gene transcription. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
expression and activation of STAT proteins in the developing mouse retina.
Anti-STAT and anti-phosphorylated STAT antibodies were used to detect the
expression and activation of STATs in embryonic and postnatal neuronal retina,
ciliary margin, and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). In situ hybridization and
Western blot were also employed. In embryonic stages, all STAT proteins were
expressed in the neuronal retina in distinct cell populations at different
embryonic stages. For example, Stat3 expression and activation gradually
increased in the inner neuroblast layer and ciliary margin during development. In
adult retina, Stat3 was detected in the inner nuclear layer and ganglion cells
layers. Stat1 was strongly expressed in both outer and inner plexiform layers.
Stat5a was clearly expressed in the outer/inner nuclear layer, the ganglion cell 
layer, and the inner plexiform layer. Strong expression of Stat3, Stat5a, and
Stat6 was observed in the RPE. Activated Stat3 and Stat5a were found in the
neural retina and the RPE. Distinct STAT proteins were present in different cell 
populations in neuronal retina and RPE suggesting multiple functions of STATs in 
mammalian eye development. Studies of STAT signal pathways in the eye may
contribute to the understanding of molecular mechanisms in control of ocular
development and pathogenesis.

PMID: 12634107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. EMBO J. 2003 Mar 17;22(6):1325-35.

GRIM-19, a death-regulatory gene product, suppresses Stat3 activity via
functional interaction.

Lufei C(1), Ma J, Huang G, Zhang T, Novotny-Diermayr V, Ong CT, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 30 Medical Drive, Singapore 117609.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) is a latent
cytoplasmic transcription factor that can be activated by cytokines and growth
factors. Stat3 plays important roles in cell growth, anti-apoptosis and cell
transformation, and is constitutively active in various cancers. We examined its 
potential regulators by yeast two-hybrid screening. GRIM-19, a gene product
related to interferon-beta- and retinoic acid-induced cancer cell death, was
identified and demonstrated to interact with Stat3 in various cell types. The
interaction is specific for Stat3, but not for Stat1 and Stat5a. The interaction 
regions in both proteins were mapped, and the cellular localization of the
interaction was examined. GRIM-19 itself co-localizes with mitochondrial markers,
and forms aggregates at the perinulear region with co-expressed Stat3, which
inhibits Stat3 nuclear translocation stimulated by epidermal growth factor (EGF).
GRIM-19 represses Stat3 transcriptional activity and its target gene expression, 
and also suppresses cell growth in Src-transformed cells and a Stat3-expressing
cell line. Our data suggest that GRIM-19 is a novel negative regulator of Stat3.

PMCID: PMC151078
PMID: 12628925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17218-27. Epub 2003 Mar 5.

Signal transduction pathways regulated by prolactin and Src result in different
conformations of activated Stat5b.

Kabotyanski EB(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030-3498, USA.

Stat5 is activated by a broad spectrum of cytokines, as well as non-receptor
tyrosine kinases, such as Src. In this study, the DNA binding properties of the
two closely related Stat5 proteins, Stat5a and Stat5b, induced either by
prolactin (Prl) or by Src were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
using several different Stat5 binding sites. Src-induced Stat5b-DNA binding
complexes consistently displayed a slightly faster mobility than those induced by
Prl, as well as differences in their ability to be supershifted by anti-Stat5
antibodies. IP-Westerns performed using specific antibodies directed at the N and
C termini of Stat5b suggested that depending on the activating stimulus, Stat5b
exhibited different conformations, which influenced antibody accessibility at its
C terminus. These conformational differences may in part be due to differential
effects of Prl and Src on Stat5b tyrosine phosphorylation, since Src induced
several additional sites of tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5b at residues other 
than Tyr-699, including Tyr-724 and Tyr-679. The latter Tyr-679 is conserved in
all mammalian Stat5bs, but is not present in Stat5a. A Stat 5bY679F mutant
induced by Src kinase exhibited an altered pattern of nuclear localization as
compared with wild-type Stat5b. Furthermore, this mutation inhibited
v-Src-induced cyclin D1-luciferase reporter activity in transient transfection
assays performed in Stat5a/b-deficient MEFs, suggesting that Tyr-679
phosphorylation may play a role in v-Src induced proliferation. Thus, depending
on the signal transduction pathway responsible for activation, different
conformations of activated Stat5 may result in selective biological responses.

PMID: 12621061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):16520-7. Epub 2003 Mar 3.

Identification of Shp-2 as a Stat5A phosphatase.

Chen Y(1), Wen R, Yang S, Schuman J, Zhang EE, Yi T, Feng GS, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Research Institute, The Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Stat5A, a member of the signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat)
family, is activated upon a single tyrosine phosphorylation. Although much is
known about the activation process, the mechanism by which the
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat5A proteins are inactivated is largely unknown. In
this report, we demonstrate that down-regulation of the tyrosine-phosphorylated
Stat5A was via dephosphorylation. Using tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides derived 
from Stat5A, we were able to purify protein-tyrosine phosphatase Shp-2 from cell 
lysates. Shp-2, but not Shp-1, specifically interacted with Stat5A in vivo, and
the interaction was tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent. Moreover, Shp-2 was able 
to accelerate Stat5A dephosphorylation, and dephosphorylation of Stat5A was
dramatically delayed in Shp-2-deficient cells. Therefore, we conclude that Shp-2 
is a Stat5A phosphatase, which down-regulates the active Stat5A in vivo.

PMID: 12615921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17421-9. Epub 2003 Feb 28.

Activating transcription factor 4 overexpression inhibits proliferation and
differentiation of mammary epithelium resulting in impaired lactation and
accelerated involution.

Bagheri-Yarmand R(1), Vadlamudi RK, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M D
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. ryarmand@manderson.org

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 20;288(38):27517.

The basic leucine zipper containing activating transcription factors (ATFs)
modulates the expression of growth-regulating genes. In this study, we sought to 
determine specifically the consequences of ATF4 expression on mammary gland
development in transgenic mice. Overexpression of ATF4 severely impaired normal
development of the mammary gland, which was associated with reduced proliferation
and differentiation of mammary alveolar epithelium and up-regulation of p21(WAF1)
and p27(Kip1). In addition, there was also impaired lactation accompanied by
decreased expression of alpha-lactoalbumin, whey acidic protein, and beta-casein,
possibly because of the down-regulation of STAT5a tyrosine phosphorylation.
Mammary gland involution in ATF4-transgenic mice was accelerated, compared with
wild type littermates by whole mount analysis. In addition, day 18 of lactation
in transgenic mice was phenotypically equivalent to day 3 of involution in wild
type mice, as determined by the TUNEL assay and expression of Bax. The
concentration of the proapoptotic molecule caspase-3 was increased during
lactation in ATF4-transgenic animal. Mammary glands from ATF4-transgenic mice
also showed significant nuclear translocation of activated STAT3 and
up-regulation of one of its target genes, insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein-5, which is thought to facilitate apoptosis by sequestering insulin-like 
growth factor. Together, these findings suggest that ATF4 may play a role during 
mammary gland development and that down-regulation of ATF4 may be important for
the onset of involution in the mammary gland.

PMID: 12611881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Clin Exp Immunol. 2003 Mar;131(3):422-7.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 envelope glycoproteins and anti-CD4 antibodies
inhibit interleukin-2-induced Jak/STAT signalling in human CD4 T lymphocytes.

Kryworuchko M(1), Pasquier V, Thèze J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunogénétique Cellulaire, Département de Medecine Moleculaire,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection leads to a profound T cell
dysfunction well before the clinical onset of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS). We have been accumulating evidence that one of the mechanisms responsible
for this T cell deficiency may be the dysregulation of signal transduction via
the interleukin (IL)-2/IL-2 receptor (R) complex. In CD4 T cells, we have
observed previously that viral envelope (env) glycoproteins induce IL-2
unresponsiveness and the down-regulation of the three chains making up the IL-2R 
(alpha, beta, gamma) in vitro. We have now established further that this
disruption of the IL-2/IL-2R system manifests itself in defective signal
propagation via the Janus kinase (Jak)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) pathway in response to IL-2. The treatment of CD4 T cells
with HIV env or surface ligation of CD4 with anti-CD4 monoclonal antibodies
inhibited the IL-2-induced activation of Jak-1 and Jak-3, as well as their
targets, STAT5a and STAT5b. This Jak/STAT deficiency may contribute to the
crippling of CD4 T cell responses to a cytokine central to the immune response by
HIV.

PMCID: PMC1808643
PMID: 12605694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Eur J Biochem. 2003 Jan;270(2):239-52.

Genomic structure, expression and characterization of a STAT5 homologue from
pufferfish (Tetraodon fluviatilis).

Sung SC(1), Fan TJ, Chou CM, Leu JH, Hsu YL, Chen ST, Hsieh YC, Huang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan.

The STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5) gene was isolated 
and characterized from a round-spotted pufferfish genomic library. This gene is
composed of 19 exons spanning 11 kb. The full-length cDNA of Tetraodon
fluviatilis STAT5 (TfSTAT5) contains 2461 bp and encodes a protein of 785 amino
acid residues. From the amino acid sequence comparison, TfSTAT5 is most similar
to mouse STAT5a and STAT5b with an overall identity of 76% and 78%, respectively,
and has < 35% identity with other mammalian STATs. The exon/intron junctions of
the TfSTAT5 gene were almost identical to those of mouse STAT5a and STAT5b genes,
indicating that these genes are highly conserved at the levels of amino acid
sequence and genomic structure. To understand better the biochemical properties
of TfSTAT5, a chimeric STAT5 was generated by fusion of the kinase-catalytic
domain of carp Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) to the C-terminal end of TfSTAT5. The fusion
protein was expressed and tyrosine-phosphorylated by its kinase domain. The
fusion protein exhibits specific DNA-binding and transactivation potential toward
an artificial fish promoter as well as authentic mammalian promoters such as the 
beta-casein promoter and cytokine inducible SH2 containing protein (CIS) promoter
when expressed in both fish and mammalian cells. However, TfSTAT5 could not
induce the transcription of beta-casein promoter via rat prolactin and Nb2
prolactin receptor. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing
detailed biochemical characterization of a STAT protein from fish.

PMID: 12605675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 May;17(5):945-58. Epub 2003 Feb 13.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation is sufficient to
drive transcriptional induction of cyclin D2 gene and proliferation of rat
pancreatic beta-cells.

Friedrichsen BN(1), Richter HE, Hansen JA, Rhodes CJ, Nielsen JH, Billestrup N,
Møldrup A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Islet Discovery Research, Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsvaerd, Denmark. 
bttm@novonordisk.com

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activation plays a
central role in GH- and prolactin-mediated signal transduction in the pancreatic 
beta-cells. In previous experiments we demonstrated that STAT5 activation is
necessary for human (h)GH-stimulated proliferation of INS-1 cells and hGH-induced
increase of mRNA-levels of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D2. In this study we
have further characterized the role of STAT5 in the regulation of cyclin D
expression and beta-cell proliferation by hGH. Cyclin D2 mRNA and protein levels 
(but not cyclin D1 and D3) were induced in a time-dependent manner by hGH in
INS-1 cells. Inhibition of protein synthesis by coincubation with cycloheximide
did not affect the hGH-induced increase of cyclin D2 mRNA levels at 4 h.
Expression of a dominant negative STAT5 mutant, STAT5aDelta749, partially
inhibited cyclin D2 protein levels. INS-1 cells transiently transfected with a
cyclin D2 promoter-reporter construct revealed a 3- to 5-fold increase of
transcriptional activity in response to hGH stimulation. Furthermore,
coexpression of a constitutive active STAT5 mutant (either CA-STAT5a or
CA-STAT5b) was sufficient to drive transactivation of the promoter. CA-STAT5b was
stably expressed in INS-1 cells under the control of a doxycycline-inducible
promoter. Gel retardation experiments using a probe representing a putative STAT5
binding site in the cyclin D2 promoter revealed binding of the
doxycycline-induced CA-STAT5b. Furthermore, induction of CA-STAT5b stimulated
transcriptional activation of the cyclin D2 promoter and induced hGH-independent 
proliferation in these cells. In primary beta-cells, adenovirus-mediated
expression of CA-STAT5b profoundly stimulated DNA-synthesis (5.3-fold over
control) in the absence of hGH. Our studies indicate that STAT5 activation is
sufficient to drive proliferation of the beta-cells and that cyclin D2 may be a
critical target gene for STAT5 in this process.

PMID: 12586844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Diabetes. 2003 Feb;52(2):308-14.

STAT5A promotes adipogenesis in nonprecursor cells and associates with the
glucocorticoid receptor during adipocyte differentiation.

Floyd ZE(1), Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
70803, USA.

The differentiation of adipocytes is regulated by the activity of a variety of
transcription factors, including peroxidase proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)-gamma and C/EBPalpha. Our current study demonstrates that ectopic
expression of STAT5A, such as that of PPAR-gamma and C/EBPalpha, promotes
adipogenesis in two nonprecursor fibroblast cell lines. Using morphologic and
biochemical criteria, we have demonstrated that STAT5A and the combination of
STAT5A and STAT5B are sufficient to induce the expression of early and late
adipogenic markers in BALB/c and NIH-3T3 cells. Yet, the ectopic expression of
STAT5B alone does not induce the expression of adipocyte genes, but enhances the 
induction of these genes in cells also expressing STAT5A. This finding suggests
that STAT5A and STAT5B do not function identically in adipocytes. In addition,
these studies demonstrate that the phosphorylation of STAT5 proteins may play a
role in adipogenesis. Moreover, we have shown that STAT5A is associated with the 
glucocorticoid receptor during adipogenesis in a highly regulated manner.

PMID: 12540601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Biol Cell. 2003 Jan;14(1):40-53.

STAT5a activation mediates the epithelial to mesenchymal transition induced by
oncogenic RhoA.

Benitah SA(1), Valerón PF, Rui H, Lacal JC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

The involvement of Rho GTPases in signal transduction pathways leading to
transcription activation is one of the major roles of this family of GTPases.
Thus, the identification of transcription factors regulated by Rho GTPases and
the understanding of the mechanisms of their activation and its biological
outcome are of great interest. Here, we provide evidence that Rho GTPases
modulate Stat5a, a transcription factor of the family of signal transducers and
activators of transcription. RhoA triggers tyrosine phosphorylation (Y696) of
Stat5a via a JAK2-dependent mechanism and promotes DNA-binding activity of
Stat5a. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5a is also stimulated physiologically by 
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) in a Rho-dependent manner. Simultaneously, RhoA
reduces serine phosphorylation of Stat5a at both serine residues S726 and S780,
resulting in a further increase of activity as defined by mutagenesis
experiments. Furthermore, serine dephosphorylation of Stat5a by RhoA does not
take place by down-modulation of either JNK1, MEK1, or p38 MAP kinases, as
determined by transfection experiments or chemical inhibition of both MEK1, p38, 
and JNK serine kinases. Thus, RhoA regulates Stat5a via tyrosine phosphorylation 
and via a yet to be determined novel down-modulating pathway that involves serine
dephosphorylation. Finally, we provide evidence for a role of Stat5a in
RhoA-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition with concomitant increase in
vimentin expression, E-cadherin down-regulation, and cell motility.

PMCID: PMC140226
PMID: 12529425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):210-7.

A role for Stat5 in CD8+ T cell homeostasis.

Kelly J(1), Spolski R, Imada K, Bollenbacher J, Lee S, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cytokine signals are known to contribute to CD8+ memory T cell homeostasis, but
an exact understanding of the mechanism(s) has remained elusive. We have now
investigated the role of Stat5 proteins in this process. Whereas Stat5a and
Stat5b KO mice have decreased numbers of CD8+ T cells, Stat5-transgenic mice have
an increased number of these cells. Stat5b-transgenic mice exhibit increased
Ag-induced cell death of CD4+ T cells and augmented proliferation and Bcl-2
expression in CD8+ T cells, providing a basis for this finding. Moreover, CD8+
memory T cells are substantially affected by Stat5 levels. These findings
identify Stat5 proteins as critical signaling mediators used by cytokines to
regulate CD8+ T cell homeostasis.

PMID: 12496402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cancer Res. 2002 Nov;1(1):32-47.

Overexpression and forced activation of stat5 in mammary gland of transgenic mice
promotes cellular proliferation, enhances differentiation, and delays
postlactational apoptosis.

Iavnilovitch E(1), Groner B, Barash I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet-Dagan, Israel.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) transduces
extracellular cytokine and growth factor signals to the nucleus of mammary
epithelial cells and thereby regulates gene transcription during pregnancy,
lactation, and weaning. Gene constructs were prepared which subject the wild-type
Stat5 or a constitutively active variant of Stat5 to the control of the
beta-lactoglobulin (BLG) regulatory sequences and direct it to the mammary
epithelium. The integrity and functionality of these constructs were confirmed
through introduction into cultured mammary epithelial cells and hormone induction
experiments. Expression levels and states of activity of Stat5 in mammary gland
tissue were manipulated by introducing Stat5 variants as transgenes into the
pronuclei of transgenic mice. The consequences of enhanced Stat5 expression and
activation on the development of alveoli, their differentiated functions, and on 
postlactational involution were investigated. As expected, the transgenic mouse
lines expressed the wild-type Stat5 construct (BLG/STAT5) and the constitutively 
active Stat5 variant (BLG/STAT5ca) exclusively in mammary epithelial cells during
pregnancy and lactation. BLG/STAT5 mice exhibited larger alveoli at mid-pregnancy
and a delayed onset of involution. Condensed alveoli, a high degree of cellular
proliferation, and delayed involution were associated with STAT5ca expression.
Elevated levels of beta-casein gene expression were found in BLG/STAT5 and
STAT5ca transgenic mice during late pregnancy and lactation, indicating a
limiting role for Stat5 under normal physiological conditions. This was
accompanied by higher levels of beta-casein secretion into the milk and enhanced 
growth of pups. Transgenic animals expressing the BLG/STAT5ca transgene were
predisposed to tumor formation in the mammary gland. This study extends the
functional observations made in cultured mammary epithelial cells and in gene
knockout mice. It identifies Stat5 as a multifunctional regulator of mammary cell
proliferation, milk protein gene expression, and postlactational apoptosis.

PMID: 12496367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. FEBS Lett. 2002 Dec 4;532(1-2):247-52.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 bind Stat5a and suppress its transcriptional activity.

Vidarsson H(1), Mikaelsdottir EK, Rafnar T, Bertwistle D, Ashworth A, Eyfjord JE,
Valgeirsdottir S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Research Laboratory, Icelandic Cancer Society,
Reykjavik, Iceland.

Germline mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2,
are thought to account for a large portion of familial breast cancer. The
increased risk of breast cancer in women carrying such mutations suggests that
these proteins play a critical role in the growth regulation of mammary
epithelial cells. Another protein, Stat5a, is known to be essential for growth
and terminal differentiation of breast epithelial cells. Here we show that Stat5a
forms a complex with both BRCA1 and BRCA2 in breast epithelial cells upon
stimulation with prolactin. In addition, we show that the activity of Stat5a on
the beta-casein promoter is modulated by both BRCA1 and BRCA2. This interaction
may be important during the expansion and terminal differentiation of breast
epithelial cells, as happens during pregnancy and lactation.

PMID: 12459499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Dec;16(12):2892-901.

Mammary epithelial cells are not able to undergo pregnancy-dependent
differentiation in the absence of the helix-loop-helix inhibitor Id2.

Miyoshi K(1), Meyer B, Gruss P, Cui Y, Renou JP, Morgan FV, Smith GH,
Reichenstein M, Shani M, Hennighausen L, Robinson GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases/NIH, Building 8, Room 101, 8 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mammary alveolar development during pregnancy is triggered by hormone signals.
The prolactin receptor/Jak2/signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Stat) 5 signal transduction pathway is the principal mediator of these cues and 
alveolar development is abrogated in its absence. The loss of the basic
helix-loop-helix protein inhibitor of differentiation (Id)2 results in a similar 
defect. To investigate the role of Id2 in mammary epithelium, we performed
structural and molecular analyses. Id2-null mammary epithelial cells were unable 
to form alveoli; the epithelial architecture was disorganized and dissimilar from
early stages of alveologenesis in wild-type glands. The epithelial cells retained
the ductal marker Na-K-Cl cotransporter (NKCC)1. Nuclear localization of Stat5a
and down-regulation of NKCC1 was observed in some areas, indicating a limited
response to pregnancy signals. The differentiation status of Id2-null tissue at
term was further characterized with cDNA microarrays enriched in mammary specific
sequences (mammochip). Some of the early differentiation markers for mammary
epithelium were expressed in the Id2-null tissue, whereas genes that are
expressed at later stages of pregnancy were not induced. From these results, we
conclude that, in the absence of Id2, mammary epithelial development is arrested 
at an early stage of pregnancy.

PMID: 12456807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Nov 29;197(1-2):153-65.

Morphogenic and tumorigenic potentials of the mammary growth hormone/growth
hormone receptor system.

van Garderen E(1), Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
e.van.garderen@crucell.com

Due to the characteristics of the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle in the dog,
which spans a prolonged time period, this species is a suitable model to study
the role of progestins in both normal morphogenic and abnormal tumorigenic
processes in the mammary gland. It has been convincingly shown that progestins,
including endogenous progesterone, induce the synthesis of growth hormone (GH) in
the normal and the tumorous canine mammary gland. The growth hormone receptor
(GHR) is also expressed in normal and tumorous canine mammary tissues and in this
concise overview we highlight recent advances in our understanding of the
significance of the GH/GHR system for mammary gland (patho)biology. In an attempt
to unravel the cellular and molecular mechanisms associated with the GH/GHR
system, we were able to show that both GH and GHR are differentially expressed in
normal canine mammary tissues. Maximum expression of both GH and GHR occurs
during the proliferation phase of the tissue, which links the progestin-induced
mammary GH synthesis to the progestin-associated proliferation of epithelial
cells in the mammary gland. Expression of the GH/GHR system is also present in
most canine mammary tumors, albeit that GHR expression may be downregulated in
undifferentiated mammary carcinomas. Upon GH stimulation of the GHR-positive
CMT-U335 canine mammary tumor cell line, the transcription factors STAT5A and
STAT5B become phosphorylated on their tyrosine residues, which is likely to
reflect the significance of mammary GH in vivo. Molecular analysis of the canine 
mammary GHR transcripts by RT-PCR provided evidence for normal and alternative
processing of the GHR primary transcript encoding the full-length plasma membrane
GHR and at least four putative GH binding proteins (GHBPs), respectively. The
translation products from the alternatively spliced GHR transcripts indicate an
intact N-terminal ligand binding domain and an unique C-terminal portion, lacking
the transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail. Thus, these proteins are
considered to be able to bind GH, but have lost their signaling potential. The
exact biological role of these GHBPs remains to be established, but GHBPs may
have a transport function in the endocrine route, regulate the level of
biologically available GH locally, or dominant-negatively influence the
full-length plasma membrane GHR. In dog mammary cancer specimens strongly reduced
levels of alternatively spliced GHR transcripts were found compared to the
non-malignant mammary tissue. Notably, expression of both GH and GHR in mammary
cancer cells is not restricted to dogs. Recent experiments generated evidence for
GH and GHR expression in human breast cancer cells, and also in human prostate
cancer cells, which represents another highly prevalent hormone-sensitive human
malignancy. In agreement with our findings in the dog, the expression of the
hGH-N gene in human mammary cancer cells seemed to correlate positively with
their progesterone receptor status, which warrants, in our opinion, a
reconsideration of the role of progestins in breast cancer of women. In human
prostate cancer cells four different hGH-N transcripts were detected, which
encode classical 22 kDa GH and GH-related proteins. Consistent with the findings 
on the canine GHR, different GHR transcripts in human mammary cancer cells and
prostate cancer cells were detected encoding the full-length plasma membrane GHR 
and putative GHBPs.

PMID: 12431808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Sep;82(1):55-63.

Glucocorticoids enhance activation of the human type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/Delta5-Delta4 isomerase gene.

Feltus FA(1), Cote S, Simard J, Gingras S, Kovacs WJ, Nicholson WE, Clark BJ,
Melner MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of OB/GYN, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 
37232, USA. yaqona2@yahoo.com

Glucocorticoids indirectly alter adrenocortical steroid output through the
inhibition of ACTH secretion by the anterior pituitary. However, previous studies
suggest that glucocorticoids can directly affect adrenocortical steroid
production. Therefore, we have investigated the ability of glucocorticoids to
affect transcription of adrenocortical steroid biosynthetic enzymes. One
potential target of glucocorticoid action in the adrenal is an enzyme critical
for adrenocortical steroid production: 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/Delta5-Delta4 isomerase (3beta-HSD). Treatment of the
adrenocortical cell line (H295R) with the glucocorticoid agonist dexamethasone
(DEX) increased cortisol production and 3beta-HSD mRNA levels alone or in
conjunction with phorbol ester. This increase in 3beta-HSD mRNA was paralleled by
increases in Steroidogenic Acute Regulatory Protein (StAR) mRNA levels. The human
type II 3beta-HSD promoter lacks a consensus palindromic glucocorticoid response 
element (GRE) but does contain a Stat5 response element (Stat5RE) suggesting that
glucocorticoids could affect type II 3beta-HSD transcription via interaction with
Stat5. Transfection experiments show enhancement of human type II 3beta-HSD
promoter activity by coexpression of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and Stat5A 
and treatment with 100nM dexamethasone. Furthermore, removal of the Stat5RE
either by truncation of the 5' flanking sequence in the promoter or introduction 
of point mutations to the Stat5RE abolished the ability of DEX to enhance
3beta-HSD promoter activity. These studies demonstrate the ability of
glucocorticoids to directly enhance the expression of an adrenal steroidogenic
enzyme gene albeit independent of a consensus palindromic glucocorticoid response
element.

PMID: 12429139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int Immunol. 2002 Nov;14(11):1263-71.

Serine phosphorylation of Stat5 proteins in lymphocytes stimulated with IL-2.

Xue HH(1), Fink DW Jr, Zhang X, Qin J, Turck CW, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.

Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates cytokine-induced dimerization of STAT
proteins. Serine phosphorylation has also been found to occur in a number of STAT
proteins, including Stat1, Sat3, Stat4, Stat5a, Stat5b and Stat6, and was shown
to be important for maximal transcriptional activation mediated by Stat1, Stat3
and Stat4, but not for Stat5a or Stat5b. As these latter proteins were studied in
transiently transfected COS-7 cells stimulated with prolactin, we sought to
further investigate the significance of their serine phosphorylation in a more
physiologically based system in response to IL-2. Both Stat5a and Stat5b were
rapidly phosphorylated on serine in response to IL-2 and the phosphorylation site
in Stat5a was mapped to Ser780, which is not conserved in Stat5b. In vitro
studies with reporter constructs, and experiments in which wild-type and mutant
Stat5a retroviruses were used to transduce Stat5a-deficient splenocytes revealed 
that the serine mutant constructs were not diminished in their ability to mediate
IL-2 signaling and if anything exhibited augmented proliferative capability.
Thus, in contrast to the apparent importance of serine phosphorylation for
transcriptional activation by Stat1, Stat3 and Stat4 in response to IFN, IL-6 and
IL-12 respectively, serine phosphorylation of Stat5a does not enhance
Stat5a-mediated signaling in response to IL-2.

PMID: 12407017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Blood. 2003 Jan 1;101(1):134-42. Epub 2002 Aug 15.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) is required for
eosinophil differentiation of human cord blood-derived CD34+ cells.

Buitenhuis M(1), Baltus B, Lammers JW, Coffer PJ, Koenderman L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) have been reported to 
play a critical role in the differentiation of several myeloid cell lines,
although the importance of STATs in the differentiation of primary human
hematopoietic cells remains to be established. Terminal eosinophil
differentiation is induced by interleukin-5 (IL-5), which has also been
demonstrated to activate STAT5. We have investigated whether STAT5 plays a
critical role during eosinophil differentiation using umbilical cord
blood-derived CD34(+) cells. In this ex vivo system, STAT5 expression and
activation are high early during differentiation, and STAT5 protein expression is
down-regulated during the final stages of eosinophil differentiation. Retroviral 
transductions were performed to ectopically express wild-type and
dominant-negative STAT5a (STAT5aDelta750) in CD34(+) cells. Transduction of cells
with STAT5a resulted in enhanced proliferation compared with cells transduced
with empty vector alone. Interestingly, ectopic expression of STAT5a also
resulted in accelerated differentiation. In contrast, ectopic expression of
STAT5aDelta750 resulted in a block in differentiation, whereas proliferation was 
also severely inhibited. Similar results were obtained with dominant-negative
STAT5b. Forced expression of STAT5a enhanced expression of the STAT5 target genes
Bcl-2 and p21(WAF/Cip1), suggesting they may be important in STAT5a-mediated
eosinophil differentiation. These results demonstrate that STAT5 plays a critical
role in eosinophil differentiation of primary human hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 12393707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Blood. 2002 Dec 15;100(13):4401-9. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

IL-3-induced enhancement of retinoic acid receptor activity is mediated through
Stat5, which physically associates with retinoic acid receptors in an
IL-3-dependent manner.

Si J(1), Collins SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA.

The regulation of hematopoiesis involves the interaction of specific
hematopoietic cytokines with lineage-specific transcription factors, but little
is known about how these cytokines might regulate the expression/activity of
these different transcription factors. Here we identify the critical signal
transduction pathways that mediate the interleukin 3 (IL-3)-induced enhancement
of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) transcriptional activity that accompanies the
IL-3-mediated commitment of the multipotent, stem cell factor (SCF)-dependent EML
cell line to granulocyte/monocyte progenitors. We observe that the addition of
IL-3 to EML cells induces activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase,
mitogen-activated protein kinase, and Jak/Stat pathways and that Jak2 activation 
is the critical "proximal" mediator of the IL-3-induced enhancement of RAR
activity. Constitutively active Stat5 constructs enhance both the transcriptional
activity of RARs in EML cells and the commitment of these cells to
granulocyte/monocyte progenitors, whereas dominant-negative Stat5 constructs
inhibit this IL-3-induced enhancement of RAR transcriptional activity. We observe
that the retinoic acid response element (RARE) used in our RA responsive reporter
harbors overlapping Stat/RAR-binding sites. Moreover, coimmunoprecipitation
studies indicate an interaction between Stat5 and RARs that is IL-3 dependent.
Thus, Stat5 is an important mediator of the IL-3-induced enhancement of RAR
transcriptional activity that accompanies the commitment of immature EML cells to
the granulocyte/monocyte lineage. Cytokine-mediated physical and functional
interactions between Stat5 and RARs may play critical roles in regulating
different stages of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 12393611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Blood. 2002 Dec 1;100(12):3983-9. Epub 2002 Jul 25.

Cell intrinsic defects in cytokine responsiveness of STAT5-deficient
hematopoietic stem cells.

Bradley HL(1), Hawley TS, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department and the Flow Cytometry Facility, American Red Cross
Holland Laboratory, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

Secreted growth factors are integral components of the bone marrow (BM) niche and
can regulate survival, proliferation, and differentiation of committed
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, downstream genes activated in HSCs by
early-acting cytokines are not well characterized. To better define intracellular
cytokine signaling in HSC function, we have analyzed mice lacking expression of
both signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b
(STAT5ab(-/-)). These studies specifically avoided possible autoimmune and/or
splenomegaly disease-mediated indirect effects on HSC function by using 2
independent approaches: (1) by crossing onto the C57Bl/6 RAG2(-/-) background,
and (2) by generation of wild-type chimeric mice reconstituted with transplanted 
STAT5ab(-/-) BM cells. These experiments demonstrated that STAT5-deficient HSCs
have cell autonomous defects in competitive long-term repopulating activity.
Furthermore, in the chimeric mice, injected wild-type BM cells showed a
progressive multilineage competitive repopulating advantage in vivo,
demonstrating that steady-state hematopoiesis was also highly STAT5-dependent.
Consistent with the in vivo repopulating deficiency, when Sca-1(+)c-kit(+)lin(-) 
(KLS) cells were isolated and stimulated with growth factors in vitro, up to a
13-fold reduced expansion of total nucleated cells was observed in response to
cocktails containing interleukin 3 (IL-3), IL-6, stem cell factor (SCF), Flt3
ligand, and thrombopoietin. Notably, a 10-fold reduction in expansion was
observed with IL-3 and SCF. However, STAT5 activation was not required for
regeneration of the KLS pool in vivo following transplant or for secondary
repopulating ability. These studies support a major role for STAT5 activation as 
a cellular determinant of cytokine-mediated HSC repopulating potential but not
self-renewal capacity.

PMID: 12393407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Oct;13(10):3416-30.

Caveolin-1-deficient mice show accelerated mammary gland development during
pregnancy, premature lactation, and hyperactivation of the Jak-2/STAT5a signaling
cascade.

Park DS(1), Lee H, Frank PG, Razani B, Nguyen AV, Parlow AF, Russell RG, Hulit J,
Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

It is well established that mammary gland development and lactation are tightly
controlled by prolactin signaling. Binding of prolactin to its cognate receptor
(Prl-R) leads to activation of the Jak-2 tyrosine kinase and the
recruitment/tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5a. However, the mechanisms for
attenuating the Prl-R/Jak-2/STAT5a signaling cascade are just now being
elucidated. Here, we present evidence that caveolin-1 functions as a novel
suppressor of cytokine signaling in the mammary gland, akin to the SOCS family of
proteins. Specifically, we show that caveolin-1 expression blocks
prolactin-induced activation of a STAT5a-responsive luciferase reporter in
mammary epithelial cells. Furthermore, caveolin-1 expression inhibited
prolactin-induced STAT5a tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding activity,
suggesting that caveolin-1 may negatively regulate the Jak-2 tyrosine kinase.
Because the caveolin-scaffolding domain bears a striking resemblance to the SOCS 
pseudosubstrate domain, we examined whether Jak-2 associates with caveolin-1. In 
accordance with this homology, we demonstrate that Jak-2 cofractionates and
coimmunoprecipitates with caveolin-1. We next tested the in vivo relevance of
these findings using female Cav-1 (-/-) null mice. If caveolin-1 normally
functions as a suppressor of cytokine signaling in the mammary gland, then Cav-1 
null mice should show premature development of the lobuloalveolar compartment
because of hyperactivation of the prolactin signaling cascade via disinhibition
of Jak-2. In accordance with this prediction, Cav-1 null mice show accelerated
development of the lobuloalveolar compartment, premature milk production, and
hyperphosphorylation of STAT5a (pY694) at its Jak-2 phosphorylation site. In
addition, the Ras-p42/44 MAPK cascade is hyper-activated. Because a similar
premature lactation phenotype is observed in SOCS1 (-/-) null mice, we conclude
that caveolin-1 is a novel suppressor of cytokine signaling.

PMCID: PMC129955
PMID: 12388746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Oct;72(4):819-28.

Interleukin-2 family cytokines stimulate phosphorylation of the Pro-Ser-Pro motif
of Stat5 transcription factors in human T cells: resistance to suppression of
multiple serine kinase pathways.

Nagy ZS(1), Wang Y, Erwin-Cohen RA, Aradi J, Monia B, Wang LH, Stepkowski SM, Rui
H, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, 77030, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a and Stat5b are critical
for normal immune function. Progression of T cells through G(1)-S phase of cell
cycle requires T cell receptor (TCR)- and/or cytokine-inducible tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5a/b. Stat5a/b may also, in a cell-dependent manner, be
constitutively or cytokine-inducibly phosphorylated on a Pro-Ser-Pro (PSP) motif 
located within the transcriptional activation domain. Phosphorylation of the PSP 
motif is needed for maximal transcriptional activation by Stat5, at least in
certain promoter contexts. The basal and cytokine-inducible serine
phosphorylation state of Stat5a/b has not been determined in T cells. Using
primary human T cells and T lymphocytic cell lines coupled with novel
phospho-specific antibodies to this conserved phosphoserine motif in Stat5a or
Stat5b, we report that: Stat5a and Stat5b were unphosphorylated on the PSP motif 
under basal conditions and became markedly phosphorylated in response to several 
T cell growth factor stimuli, including interleukin (IL)-2, -7, -9, and -15 and
phorbol ester 12-myristate 13-acetate but not TCR engagement; inducible Stat5a/b 
serine phosphorylation differed quantitatively and temporally; and Stat5a/b
serine phosphorylation was, in contrast to inducible Stat3 serine
phosphorylation, insensitive to inhibitors of mitogen-activated protein kinase,
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, and mammalian target of rapamycin or deletion of
Raf-A, -B, or -C by antisense oligonucleotides. We conclude that IL-2 family
cytokines tightly control Stat5 serine phosphorylation through a kinase distinct 
from the Stat3 serine kinase.

PMID: 12377952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Carcinogenesis. 2002 Oct;23(10):1561-8.

cDNA microarray profiling of rat mammary gland carcinomas induced by
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine and
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene.

Shan L(1), He M, Yu M, Qiu C, Lee NH, Liu ET, Snyderwine EG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

cDNA microarray analysis was used to examine gene expression profiles in normal
female Sprague-Dawley rat mammary gland and in carcinomas induced by the cooked
meat-derived carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP)
and the potent experimental carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA).
Nine tubulopapillary carcinomas (five from PhIP-treated rats and four from
DMBA-treated rats) and normal mammary gland from virgin, pregnant and lactating
rats were examined on a rat 6.9k cDNA microarray. Although histologically
identical, PhIP- and DMBA-induced carcinomas could be distinguished by
hierarchical clustering and multi-dimensional scaling analyses of cDNA
expression. In addition, the expression of 21 clones was statistically different 
between PhIP- and DMBA-induced carcinomas (F-test, P < 0.05). The data indicate
that distinct chemical carcinogens induce unique gene expression patterns in
mammary gland carcinomas. The specific chemical carcinogen-associated cDNA array 
profiles found in carcinomas may ultimately be applicable to better understanding
cancer etiology. PhIP- and DMBA-induced carcinomas also shared similarities in
cDNA expression profiles. By comparing the expression in carcinomas (PhIP plus
DMBA induced) with normal rat mammary gland (at any stage of differentiation),
172 clones were found to be differentially expressed. Genes showing increased
expression in carcinomas by cDNA microarray analysis (and further validated by
immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis) include cyclin D1, PDGF-A chain, 
retinol binding protein 1, prohibitin and the transcription factor STAT5A. The
similarities in gene expression between PhIP- and DMBA-induced carcinomas raise
the possibility that several molecular pathways for rat mammary gland
transformation are maintained irrespective of the carcinogenic initiating agent.

PMID: 12376462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 4;297(4):811-7.

The nuclear isoform of protein-tyrosine phosphatase TC-PTP regulates
interleukin-6-mediated signaling pathway through STAT3 dephosphorylation.

Yamamoto T(1), Sekine Y, Kashima K, Kubota A, Sato N, Aoki N, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

In the previous study, we demonstrated that the nuclear isoform of T-cell
protein-tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) dephosphorylated and deactivated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b, thereby
negatively regulating prolactin (PRL)-mediated signaling pathway. In this study, 
we examined the involvement of the nuclear isoform of TC-PTP in interleukin-6
(IL-6)-mediated signaling pathway. IL-6 is a multifunctional cytokine that plays 
important roles in the immune system, hematopoiesis, and acute phase reactions,
and has also implicated in IL-6-related diseases. Here, we demonstrate that
IL-6-induced tyrosine-phosphorylation and activation of STAT3 were suppressed by 
overexpression of the nuclear isoform of TC-PTP in 293T cells.
Tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT3 directly interacted with a substrate-trapping
mutant of TC-PTP. Furthermore, retrovirus-mediated overexpression of the nuclear 
isoform of TC-PTP suppressed the IL-6-induced growth arrest of myeloid leukemia
M1 cells. Endogenous TC-PTP complexed with STAT3 in the nucleus of M1 cells.
These results strongly suggest that the nuclear isoform of TC-PTP may serve as a 
negative regulator of IL-6-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 12359225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Immunol. 2002 Sep;38(16-18):1187-91.

Stat5: an essential regulator of mast cell biology.

Shelburne CP(1), McCoy ME, Piekorz R, Sexl VV, Gillespie SR, Bailey DP, Gharse A,
Mirmonsef P, Mann MN, Kashyap M, Wright HV, Chong HJ, Bouton LA, Ramirez CD,
Lantz CS, Ryan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23284-2012, USA. jjryan@saturn.vcu.edu

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) and stem cell factor (SCF) are important mast cell growth
and differentiation factors. Since both cytokines activate the transcription
factor Stat5, a known regulator of proliferation and survival, we investigated
the effects of Stat5 deficiency on mast cell development and survival. This
article will review data presented at The Fourth International Workshop on Signal
Transduction in the Activation and Development of Mast Cells and Basophils. The
full set of data is now in preparation for publication. We find that the absence 
of Stat5 A and B results in a total loss of in vivo mast cell development. Bone
marrow-derived mast cell (BMMC) populations can be cultured and maintained from
Stat5-deficient mice in IL-3+SCF, but not in either cytokine alone. The absence
of Stat5 resulted in aberrant control of Bcl-2, Bcl-x(L) and cyclin A2, with
increased apoptosis and delayed cell cycle progression after IL-3 or SCF
stimulation. These results indicate that Stat5 A and B are critical regulators of
in vitro and in vivo mast cell biology.

PMID: 12217382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Exp Med. 2002 Sep 2;196(5):605-17.

Nuclear factor kappaB-dependent gene expression profiling of Hodgkin's disease
tumor cells, pathogenetic significance, and link to constitutive signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a activity.

Hinz M(1), Lemke P, Anagnostopoulos I, Hacker C, Krappmann D, Mathas S, Dörken B,
Zenke M, Stein H, Scheidereit C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany.

Constitutive nuclear nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB activity is observed in a variety
of hematopoietic and solid tumors. Given the distinctive role of constitutive
NF-kappaB for Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cell viability, we performed
molecular profiling in two Hodgkin's disease (HD) cell lines to identify
NF-kappaB target genes. We recognized 45 genes whose expression in both cell
lines was regulated by NF-kappaB. The NF-kappaB-dependent gene profile comprises 
chemokines, cytokines, receptors, apoptotic regulators, intracellular signaling
molecules, and transcription factors, the majority of which maintain a
marker-like expression in HRS cells. Remarkably, we found 17 novel NF-kappaB
target genes. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation we demonstrate that NF-kappaB
is recruited directly to the promoters of several target genes, including signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5a, interleukin-13, and CC
chemokine receptor 7. Intriguingly, NF-kappaB positively regulates STAT5a
expression and signaling pathways in HRS cells, and promotes its persistent
activation. In fact, STAT5a overexpression was found in most tumor cells of
tested patients with classical HD, indicating a critical role for HD. The gene
profile underscores a central role of NF-kappaB in the pathogenesis of HD and
potentially of other tumors with constitutive NF-kappaB activation.

PMCID: PMC2194004
PMID: 12208876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Aug;29(1):73-88.

STAT5 binding contributes to lactational stimulation of promoter III expressing
the bovine acetyl-CoA carboxylase alpha-encoding gene in the mammary gland.

Mao J(1), Molenaar AJ, Wheeler TT, Seyfert HM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for the Biology of Farm Animals, Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2,
18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

Activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC)-alpha is rate limiting for de novo
synthesis of fatty acids. The encoding gene is expressed by three different
promoters. We characterized promoter III (PIII) from cow, previously only known
from sheep. Quantitation of transcripts by RNAse protection assays and real time 
PCR revealed that PIII is primarily expressed and strongly induced (
approximately 28-fold) in the lactating mammary gland. PIII transcripts are
expressed in mammary epithelial cells (MEC) as shown by in situ hybridization. A 
2999 bp segment of the PIII promoter conferred prolactin and dexamethasone
inducibility to a luciferase reporter gene in stably transfected mouse MEC cells.
Lactogenic induction was abolished if a unique signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-binding site at position -797 was inactivated by two point
mutations. An oligonucleotide probe harboring this STAT-site specifically bound
nuclear proteins from the lactating mammary gland. Binding was abolished by those
two point mutations and super-shift analyses showed that STAT5A factors are
present in this complex. Hence, prolactin, acting through STAT5, contributes to
the activation of ACC expression in the milk producing cells of the lactating
mammary gland. We discuss that STAT5 might be important in determining the milk
composition by coordinating fatty acid and protein synthesis during lactation.

PMID: 12200230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Sep;16(9):2019-33.

CPAP is a novel stat5-interacting cofactor that augments stat5-mediated
transcriptional activity.

Peng B(1), Sutherland KD, Sum EY, Olayioye M, Wittlin S, Tang TK, Lindeman GJ,
Visvader JE.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research & Rotary Bone Marrow
Research Laboratories, Post Office Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria 3050,
Australia.

Stat5, a member of the signal transducer and activators of transcription (Stat)
protein family, is a primary mediator of prolactin (PRL) signaling in the mammary
gland. There are two distinct Stat5 genes, Stat5a and Stat5b. The Stat5a isoform 
has been demonstrated to have an essential role in mammary epithelial
differentiation, whereas Stat5b is required for dimorphic sexual growth. To
search for proteins that interact with the C terminus of Stat5a, a highly
divergent region amongst Stat family members, we performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen of HBL100 and primary breast adenocarcinoma libraries. This led to the
identification of a protein that had previously been isolated as a centrosomal
P4.1-associated protein (CPAP). CPAP was shown to specifically interact with
Stat5a and Stat5b but not with Stat1 or Stat3. Both the tyrosine phosphorylated
and unphosphorylated forms of Stat5, as well as Stat5a/Stat5b heterodimers, could
associate with CPAP. CPAP was expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and the
developing mammary gland as well as in other tissues. Indirect immunofluorescence
and cellular fractionation studies revealed that CPAP was predominantly
cytoplasmic, with low levels in the nucleus. Nuclear levels of CPAP increased
substantially upon activation of the PRL pathway, most likely reflecting
cotranslocation of this protein with activated Stat5. Furthermore, CPAP was found
to augment Stat5-mediated transcription. Thus, we have identified CPAP as a novel
coactivator of Stat5 proteins in the PRL (and probably other) pathways.

PMID: 12198240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Leukemia. 2002 Aug;16(8):1535-40.

Selective apoptosis of tandemly duplicated FLT3-transformed leukemia cells by
Hsp90 inhibitors.

Minami Y(1), Kiyoi H, Yamamoto Y, Yamamoto K, Ueda R, Saito H, Naoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

An internal tandem duplication of the juxtamembrane (JM) domain of FLT3, a family
of ligand-activated receptor tyrosine kinases, has been found in 20% of cases of 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and this mutation is correlated with leukocytosis
and a poor prognosis. As a therapeutic approach, we previously reported that
herbimycin A (HA) inhibited the growth of tandemly duplicated FLT3
(TDFLT3)-transformed cells (Leukemia 2000; 14: 374). Here, we have investigated
the mechanism behind the cytotoxicity of HA, an ansamycin derivative which is now
known to target Hsp90. The treatment with HA or another Hsp90 inhibitor,
radicicol, induced selective apoptosis in TDFLT3-transformed 32D cells
(TDFLT3/32D). The tyrosine-phosphorylation of TDFLT3 was inhibited by HA, whereas
FLT3 ligand-induced phosphorylation of wild-type FLT3 (WtFLT3) was not. The
downstream signal molecules MAPK, Akt and STAT5a were also dephosphorylated by HA
in TDFLT3/32D. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that TDFLT3 but not WtFLT3
formed a complex with Hsp90, and that the HA treatment dissociated TDFLT3 from
the Hsp90 chaperone complex. These findings imply that targeting of Hsp90 will
facilitate the development of anti-TDFLT3 therapy, and that Hsp90 is closely
involved in the oncogenic activation of FLT3.

PMID: 12145695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Exp Hematol. 2002 Jul;30(7):697-702.

Pim-1 expression is sufficient to induce cytokine independence in murine
hematopoietic cells, but is dispensable for BCR-ABL-mediated transformation.

Nosaka T(1), Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoietic Factors, Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. tenosaka@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: BCR-ABL is a unique oncoprotein of which sole expression can cause
cancer. A number of signaling molecules were shown to be activated by BCR-ABL.
One of the important molecules that contributes to BCR-ABL-mediated cell
proliferation is signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5. To
elucidate the mechanism of BCR-ABL-mediated leukemogenesis, a role of pim-1, one 
of the important target genes of STAT5, was investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A temperature-sensitive mutant of p210(BCR-ABL) was
introduced in interleukin-3-dependent murine hematopoietic cell line Ba/F3 cells,
and downstream signaling after activation of BCR-ABL was investigated. Effects of
the expression of a dominant-negative (dn) Pim-1 and a dn STAT5A in
BCR-ABL-driven cell proliferation also were studied in Ba/F3 cells.
RESULTS: We found that pim-1 was markedly up-regulated following activation of
BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase with activation of STAT5. Overexpression of pim-1 alone
induced cytokine-independent cell growth of Ba/F3 cells in a dose-dependent
manner. However, expression of the dn Pim-1 did not affect growth of Ba/F3 cells 
transformed by BCR-ABL, whereas that of the dn STAT5A did suppress it.
CONCLUSION: Pim-1 is one of the redundant molecules that contributes to induction
of autonomous cell growth and is dispensable for leukemogenesis by BCR-ABL.

PMID: 12135666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):34879-84. Epub 2002 Jul 9.

1Alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits GH-induced expression of SOCS-3 and CIS
and prolongs growth hormone signaling via the Janus kinase (JAK2)/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT5) system in osteoblast-like
cells.

Morales O(1), Faulds MH, Lindgren UJ, Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge Hospital,
S-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Growth hormone (GH) and 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1,25-(OH)(2)D(3)) are
regulators of bone growth and bone metabolism. In target cells, GH activates
several signaling pathways, among them the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers 
and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway. GH mainly activates JAK2 and
STAT5a and b. The effects of 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) are mediated via a nuclear
receptor, the vitamin D receptor, which, when bound by 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3),
activates the transcription of target genes. In earlier studies (Morel, G.,
Chavassieux, P., Barenton, B., Dubois, P. M., Meunier, P. J., and Boivin, G.
(1993) Cell Tissue Res. 273, 279-286) synergistic interaction between
1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) and GH regarding expression of osteoblastic markers has been
described. The UMR 106 cell line is a rat osteosarcoma cell line with
osteoblast-like properties. We have recently shown (Morales, O., Lindgren, U.,
and Haldosen, L. A. (2000) J. Bone Miner. Res. 15, 2284-2290) that UMR 106 cells 
express a GH-responsive JAK2/STAT5 signaling system. These cells also express the
vitamin D receptor and respond to 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3). In the present study we have 
investigated whether 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) influences GH signaling via the JAK2/STAT5 
pathway in UMR 106 cells. We found that 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) prolonged GH signaling
via the JAK2/STAT5 pathway. Pretreatment of cells with 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) was also 
necessary in order to detect GH-induced STAT5 transcriptional response.
Furthermore, the pretreatment of cells with 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) rendered to the
cells the capacity to respond to repetitive GH-stimulation. In UMR 106 cells, GH 
induced the expression of the JAK/STAT negative regulatory proteins SOCS-3 and
CIS. Interestingly, pretreatment with 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) inhibited GH-induced
expression of these proteins. From these results we propose that 1,25-(OH)(2)D(3)
has an inhibitory effect on negative regulatory pathways acting on JAK2 and/or
STAT5 in UMR 106 cells and that this, in all or partly, explains the effects of
1,25-(OH)(2)D(3) on GH-signaling via the JAK/STAT pathway.

PMID: 12107179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Am J Transplant. 2002 Jan;2(1):31-40.

Effect of anti-IL-2Ralpha antibody on IL-2-induced Jak/STAT signaling.

Tkaczuk J(1), Yu CL, Baksh S, Milford EL, Carpenter CB, Burakoff SJ, McKay DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Acute allograft rejection is driven by production of cytokines such as
interleukin-2 (IL-2) that activate and expand alloreactive T cells by ligating
high-affinity IL-2 receptors composed of three subunit chains: alpha, beta, gamma
The alpha chain, expressed only on activated T cells, has become an important
therapeutic target. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that bind IL-2Ralpha chains
significantly decrease transplant rejection. We examined the ability of the
humanized anti-IL-2Ralpha antibody daclizumab to block high-affinity IL-2Rs and
interrupt T-lymphocyte signaling. Our evaluation focused on a pathway critical
for T-cell proliferation, the Jak/STAT pathway. Daclizumab markedly inhibited
phosphorylation of the Jak1, Jak3 and STAT5a/b components of the IL-2R-dependent 
pathway. Suppression by daclizumab was associated with internalization of
IL-2Ralpha but not IL-2Rbetagamma chains. High IL-2 doses overcame
daclizumab-induced blockade of Jak/STAT phosphorylation despite absent cell
surface highaffinity IL-2Rs. Under these circumstances, IL-2-mediated Jak/STAT
pathway activation might be generated through residual intermediate affinity
IL-2Rbetagamma receptors, and this was demonstrated by complete blockade of
signaling when anti-IL-2Rbeta monoclonal antibody was added. Humanized antibodies
are an important part of strategies to induce alloantigen tolerance.
Understanding the molecular events associated with their beneficial clinical
effect is critical to design of future immunosuppressive strategies.

PMID: 12095053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Blood. 2002 Jul 15;100(2):467-73.

Prostaglandin-E2 enhances EPO-mediated STAT5 transcriptional activity by serine
phosphorylation of CREB.

Boer AK(1), Drayer AL, Rui H, Vellenga E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University Hospital Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.

Erythroid colony formation in response to erythropoietin (EPO) stimulation is
enhanced by costimulating the cells with prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2). The present
study further analyzed the underlying mechanisms and demonstrated that
EPO-mediated STAT5 transactivation in the erythroid AS-E2 cell line was enhanced 
6-fold by PGE2 (10 microM), without affecting the STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation 
or STAT5-DNA binding. Moreover, the PGE2-enhancing effect was independent of
STAT5 serine phosphorylation. In AS-E2 cells STAT5 is constitutively
phosphorylated on Ser780 (STAT5A) and EPO-dependently phosphorylated on
Ser726/731 (STAT5A/STAT5B), but overexpression of STAT5 serine mutants did not
affect STAT5 transactivation. In addition, PGE2 did not affect STAT5 serine
phosphorylation. Instead, the stimulatory effect of PGE2 on STAT5 signaling could
be mimicked by dibutyryl-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and the
phosphodiesterase inhibitor IBMX, suggesting that the effect was mediated by
cAMP. Activation of the cAMP pathway resulted in cAMP-response element binding
protein (CREB) phosphorylation, which was sustained in the presence of EPO plus
PGE2 and transient on EPO stimulation alone. The costimulatory effect of PGE2 on 
EPO-mediated STAT5 transactivation was inhibited by overexpression of serine-dead
CREB or protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor (PKI), in contrast to EPO-mediated
transactivation, which was PKA independent. Furthermore, CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 was shown to be involved in EPO-mediated STAT5 transactivation, and a 
CBP mutant with increased affinity for CREB resulted in an additional enhancement
of the PGE2 effect. Finally, we demonstrated that the STAT5 target genes Bcl-X,
SOCS2, and SOCS3 were up-regulated by costimulation with PGE2. In summary, these 
studies demonstrate that PGE2 enhancement of EPO-induced STAT5 transactivation is
mediated by the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway.

PMID: 12091337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1696-710.

Synergistic action of prolactin (PRL) and androgen on PRL-inducible protein gene 
expression in human breast cancer cells: a unique model for functional
cooperation between signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 and
androgen receptor.

Carsol JL(1), Gingras S, Simard J.

Author information: 
(1)Canada Research Chair in Oncogenetics, Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology
Research Center, Laval University Medical Center and Laval University, Québec,
Canada G1V 4G2.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) has been shown to 
cooperate with some nuclear receptors. However, an interaction has never been
demonstrated with the androgen receptor (AR). Given that the PRL-inducible
protein/gross cystic disease fluid-15 (PIP/GCDFP-15) is both a PRL-controlled and
an androgen-controlled protein, we used its promoter region to investigate the
potential interaction between Stat5 and androgen receptor. Dihydrotestosterone or
PRL alone slightly modulated or did not modulate the luciferase activity of all
reporter gene constructs. In contrast, a maximal increase was observed using the 
-1477+42 reporter gene construct after exposure to both dihydrotestosterone and
PRL. The requirement of half-site androgen-responsive elements and two consensus 
Stat5-binding elements, Stat5#1 and Stat5#2, was determined by site-directed
mutagenesis. Activated Stat5B binds with a higher affinity to Stat5#2 than to
Stat5#1. Stat5ADelta749 and Stat5BDelta754 mutants demonstrated that the Stat5
trans-activation domain is involved in the hormonal cooperation. The cooperation 
depends on the PRL-induced phosphorylation on Tyr(694) in Stat5A and Tyr(699) in 
Stat5B, as demonstrated using the Stat5AY694F and Stat5BY699F proteins. The use
of AR Q798E, C619Y, and C784Y mutants showed that trans-activation, DNA-binding, 
and ligand-binding domains of AR are essential. Our study thus suggests a
functional cooperation between AR and Stat5.

PMID: 12089361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1598-611.

Possible involvement of truncated signal transducer and activator of
transcription-5 in the GH pattern-dependent regulation of CYP2C12 gene expression
in rat liver.

Helander H(1), Gustafsson JA, Mode A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, NOVUM, S-141 86
Huddinge, Sweden. Hanna.Helander@mednut.ki.se

The transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Stat)5a and Stat5b have been implicated in the GH regulation of CYP2C genes in
rodent liver. In addition to full-length Stat5 isoforms, truncated Stat5 proteins
(Stat5beta), lacking the transactivating domain, have been demonstrated. In this 
study we found that Stat5beta can be formed by proteolytic cleavage in rat liver 
nuclei and that the activity of the protease is independent of GH. The GH
regulation of the female-specific CYP2C12 gene has recently been shown to be
conveyed by two adjacent Stat5-binding elements in the 5'-upstream region. We
found that binding of Stat5 in liver nuclear extracts to this site involved
simultaneous binding of two Stat5 dimers, most likely both Stat5b homodimers and 
Stat5a/Stat5b heterodimers. We also investigated Stat5 binding to a potential
composite Stat5 element in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of CYP2C12. Several
Stat5 complexes were formed on this element including Stat5beta-containing
complexes. In transient transfection experiments we could demonstrate that the
3'-UTR element reduced GH activation of a CYP2C12-luciferase reporter construct
harboring the 5'-Stat5 elements. We speculate that binding of Stat5beta to the
3'-UTR element could be of relevance for the GH-dependent and sex-specific
expression of CYP2C12.

PMID: 12089354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1565-76.

Stimulation of 3T3-L1 adipogenesis by signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5.

Nanbu-Wakao R(1), Morikawa Y, Matsumura I, Masuho Y, Muramatsu MA, Senba E, Wakao
H.

Author information: 
(1)Helix Research Institute, 1532-3 Yana Kisarazu-shi Chiba, 292-0812 Japan.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) mediates signaling of 
many cytokines and growth factors. Here we show that Stat5 functions as an
initial mediator of adipogenesis. The preadipocyte cell line 3T3-L1 undergoes
adipocyte differentiation upon appropriate hormonal induction. We found that
Stat5A and Stat5B were strongly activated at an early stage of 3T3-L1
differentiation. To investigate physiological roles of Stat5 in adipogenesis, we 
have constructed 3T3-L1 cell lines in which either an exogenous wild type (wt) or
dominant negative (dn) form of Stat5A expression was controlled under the
doxycycline-regulatable promoter. Precocious induction of wt-Stat5A in adipocyte 
differentiation promoted accumulation of triglycerides within the cells. In
contrast, induction of dn-Stat5A attenuated lipid accumulation. Northern blot
analyses revealed that the expression of proadipogenic transcription factors was 
influenced in a complementary fashion by ectopic expression of either wt- or
dn-Stat5A. Notably, Stat5 regulated expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, which plays crucial roles in adipogenesis.
We have also generated transgenic mice in which dn-Stat5A is expressed in an
adipose tissue-specific fashion and found attenuation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma and of many adipocyte-related genes. These 
results highlight a novel role of Stat5 in adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 12089351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 20;21(27):4335-9.

Loss of Stat5a delays mammary cancer progression in a mouse model.

Ren S(1), Cai HR, Li M, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC 20007, USA.

A genetic study was conducted to determine if activated Stat5a contributes to
mammary carcinogenesis and to evaluate the mechanism. Similar to human breast
cancers, a proportion of mammary adenocarcinomas in the WAP-TAg transgenic mouse 
model demonstrate constitutive Stat5a/b and Stat3 activation. Stat5a activation
is linked to mammary epithelial cell survival and differentiation, and
proliferation in hematopoetic cell lineages. Breeding WAP-TAg mice to mice
carrying germ-line deletions of the Stat5a gene generated mice with reduced
levels of Stat5a. Hemizygous loss of the Stat5a allele significantly reduced
levels of Stat5a expression without altering mammary gland development or
transgene expression levels. In comparison to mice carrying two wild-type Stat5a 
alleles, hemizygous loss of the Stat5a allele reduced the number of mice with
palpable tumors at 7 months of age (67% from 100%, P<0.05), resulted in smaller
tumors at 7 months of age (3.8 cm3 from 7.6 cm3, P=0.003), delayed first tumor
appearance (208 days from 188 days, P=0.01), and increased the apoptotic index in
the adenocarcinomas (4.3+/-0.3 from 1.2+/-0.2, P=0.016). Neither cell
proliferation nor differentiation in the cancers was altered. Decreasing Stat5a
activation levels could be a therapeutic approach for reducing survival of breast
cancer cells.

PMID: 12082622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 20;21(27):4289-300.

Expression and transactivating functions of the bZIP transcription factor GADD153
in mammary epithelial cells.

Talukder AH(1), Wang RA, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, TX 77030, USA.

Heregulin-beta1 (HRG), a combinatorial ligand for human epidermal growth factor
receptor 3 (HER3) and HER4, is a regulatory polypeptide having distinct
biological effects, such as growth stimulation, differentiation, invasiveness,
and migration in mammary epithelial cells. The mechanism underlying the diverse
functions of HRG is not well established but is believed to depend on induced
changes in the expression of specific cellular gene products, their modification,
or both. Here, we identified the basic leucine zipper transcription factor, the
growth-arrest and DNA-damage 153 (GADD153)/CCAAT-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
homologous protein (CHOP) as one of the HRG-inducible genes. We demonstrated that
HRG stimulation of mammary epithelial cells induces the expression of GADD153
mRNA and protein and transcription of GADD153 promoter. The transcriptional
activity of the GADD153 promoter as well as transcription from the
C/EBP-activating transcription factor (ATF) composite motif in the GADD153
promoter was also stimulated by HRG-inducible ATF-4 and activated HER2 but not
wild-type HER2. GADD153 expression was upregulated by the lactogenic hormones
insulin and progesterone and associated with differentiation of normal mammary
epithelial cells. Consistent with its role as transcriptional modifier, GADD153
stimulated transcription of beta-casein promoter activity in a STAT5a-sensitive
manner in mammary epithelial cells. Analysis of mouse mammary gland development
revealed that GADD153 expression was predominantly restricted in the early
lactating stages. Because cyclic AMP responsive element and ATF binding sites are
present in a variety of growth-regulating cellular genes, these findings suggest 
that stimulation of GADD153 expression and its transactivating functions may
constitute an important mechanism of regulation of putative genes having diverse 
functions during cell growth and differentiation.

PMID: 12082616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):31107-14. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

Prolactin induces SHP-2 association with Stat5, nuclear translocation, and
binding to the beta-casein gene promoter in mammary cells.

Chughtai N(1), Schimchowitsch S, Lebrun JJ, Ali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Molecular Oncology Group,
Royal Victoria Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, 687 Pine Avenue,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.

The Src homology 2 (SH2) domain containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2
contributes to prolactin receptor (PRLR) signal transduction to beta-casein gene 
promoter activation. We report for the first time that SHP-2 physically
associates with the signal transducer and activator of transcription-5a (Stat5a),
an important mediator of PRLR signaling to milk protein gene activation, in the
mouse mammary HC11 and the human breast cancer T47D cells when stimulated with
prolactin (PRL) and human growth hormone, respectively. In addition,
overexpression studies indicate that the carboxyl-terminal SH2 domain of SHP-2 is
required to maintain tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5 and its interaction with
SHP-2. Furthermore, we demonstrate by nuclear co-immunoprecipitation and indirect
immunofluorescence studies that PRL stimulation of mammary cells leads to the
nuclear translocation of SHP-2 as a complex with Stat5a. This process was found
to involve the catalytic activity of the phosphatase. Finally, using the Stat5
GAS (gamma-activated sequence) element of the beta-casein gene promoter in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we demonstrate that PRL induces the
SHP-2-Stat5a complex to bind to DNA. The presence of the phosphatase in the
protein-bound DNA complex was verified by using polyclonal antisera to SHP-2. Our
studies indicate a tight physical and functional interaction between SHP2 and
Stat5 required for regulation and perpetuation of PRL-mediated signaling in
mammary cells and suggest a potential role for SHP-2 in the nucleus.

PMID: 12060651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2581-8.

Regulated expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription, Stat5, 
and its enhancement of PRL expression in human endometrial stromal cells in
vitro.

Mak IY(1), Brosens JJ, Christian M, Hills FA, Chamley L, Regan L, White JO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Wolfson and Weston
Research Centre for Family Health, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College of
Science Technology and Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 ONN, United
Kingdom.

Differentiation of human endometrium during the secretory phase of the menstrual 
cycle is characterized by expression of a variety of genes implicated in the
establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. An increased abundance of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stats) in the secretory phase
suggests Stat5 as a component of the differentiation of endometrium in response
to ovarian hormone stimulation in vivo. Decidualization is initiated in a subset 
of endometrial stromal cells (ESC) in vivo during the secretory phase, but it is 
unclear whether regulated expression of Stat5 is a feature of these cells. Here, 
therefore, the abundance and subcellular distribution of Stat5 in ESC after a
decidualization stimulus of cAMP plus medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) has been 
investigated in vitro. Western blotting revealed an increase in the apparent
abundance of Stat5a and Stat5b, in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions, at 2, 3, 
and 4 d after stimulation. The potential functional relevance of this increase in
Stat5 is suggested by the ability of transiently transfected Stat5a or Stat5b to 
significantly enhance the response of the decidual PRL promoter to cAMP/MPA and
attenuation of the response to cAMP/MPA by dominant negative Stat5. Recent
evidence suggests endometrial differentiation, including PRL production, as a
possible target of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) prevalent in recurrent
miscarriage. Monoclonal antibody, ID2, which has similar reactivity as human aPL,
significantly decreased the apparent abundance of nuclear Stat5b in response to
cAMP/MPA and was associated with decreased decidual PRL promoter activation and
PRL secretion. Regulated expression of Stat5 is therefore a component of decidual
differentiation of human ESC and contributes significantly to activation of the
decidual PRL promoter. Alteration of this process by an aPL component suggests
decidual differentiation as a potential clinical target in recurrent early
miscarriages.

PMID: 12050218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mech Dev. 2002 Jul;115(1-2):53-62.

E-cadherin is a survival factor for the lactating mouse mammary gland.

Boussadia O(1), Kutsch S, Hierholzer A, Delmas V, Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

The Ca(++)-dependent cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin is expressed throughout
mouse development and in adult tissues. Classical gene targeting has demonstrated
that E-cadherin-deficient embryos die at the blastocyst stage. To study the
involvement of E-cadherin in organogenesis, a conditional gene inactivation
scheme was undertaken using the bacteriophage P1 recombinase Cre/loxP system.
Mice with homozygous loxP sites in both alleles of the E-cadherin (Cdh1) gene
were generated and these mice were crossed with transgenic mice with the Cre
recombinase under the control of the hormone-inducible MMTV promoter. This
resulted in deletion of the E-cadherin gene in the differentiating alveolar
epithelial cells of the mammary gland. The mutant mammary gland developed
normally up to 16-18 days of pregnancy but exhibited a dramatic phenotype around 
parturition. The production of milk proteins was so drastically reduced that
adult mutant mothers could not suckle their offspring. Thus, the lack of
E-cadherin affected the terminal differentiation program of the lactating mammary
gland. In concordance with this finding, the prolactin-dependent activation of
the transcription factor Stat5a was initiated but not maintained in the mutant
gland. Instead, without E-cadherin massive cell death was observed at parturition
and the mutant mammary gland at this stage resembled that of the involuted gland 
normally seen after weaning. These results demonstrate an essential role for
E-cadherin in the function of differentiated alveolar epithelial cells. No tumors
were detected in mutant glands lacking E-cadherin.

PMID: 12049767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jun 11;99(12):8253-8. Epub 2002 Jun 4.

Constitutive activation of Stat5a by retrovirus integration in early pre-B
lymphomas of SL/Kh strain mice.

Tsuruyama T(1), Nakamura T, Jin G, Ozeki M, Yamada Y, Hiai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1 Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

We found that the second intron of Stat5a was one of the common integration sites
of the endogenous ecotropic murine leukemia virus, i.e., SL/Kh virus
integration-1 (Svi1), in early pre-B lymphomas in SL/Kh mice. The high expression
of STAT5A induced by Svi1 integration and activation accelerated the
transcription of its target genes such as c-Myc. Transfection of the
constitutively active Stat5a mutant cDNA, but not of the wild-type cDNA, to the
bone marrow cells induced colony formation of pre-B cells in a methylcellulose
medium and escaped from dependence on IL-7. Such growth depended on a genetic
factor in the SL/Kh strain. Consitutively high expression of Stat5a either by
retrovirus integration or transfection of active mutant cDNA can be lymphomagenic
to early pre-B cells in collaboration with a certain genetic background factor of
mice.

PMCID: PMC123054
PMID: 12048235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Gene. 2002 Feb 20;285(1-2):311-8.

The structure of human STAT5A and B genes reveals two regions of nearly identical
sequence and an alternative tissue specific STAT5B promoter.

Ambrosio R(1), Fimiani G, Monfregola J, Sanzari E, De Felice N, Salerno MC,
Pignata C, D'Urso M, Ursini MV.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics (IIGB-CNR), Via G. Marconi,
10, 80125, Naples, Italy.

STAT5A and STAT5B genes belong to the signal transducer and activators of
transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors. They show a high degree of 
sequence homology at levels of mRNA, however, in spite of their supposed
redundancy, each STAT5 has distinct biological functions mainly related to the
immune system, hematopoiesis, growth and mammary development. We isolated and
sequenced both STAT5A and STAT5B encoding human genes finding that they are
segmented in 20 and 19 exons, respectively, of comparable size except for the
extreme 5' exons and the 3' exons. Two CpG islands, 23.2% CpG for STAT5A and
30.2% for STAT5B, are present at the 5' of both STAT5 genes covering the 5'
untranslated regions. More surprisingly, the two genes share two major regions of
almost identical sequence which diverge between the different species indicating 
an intra-species specific mechanism of preservation. Furthermore, we identified
two alternative 5' exons in STAT5B genes and thus two alternative promoters. The 
second putative promoter is not embedded in a CpG island and it shows a tissue
specific pattern of expression. Finally, the STAT5B gene was assessed as a
candidate gene in a human disorder related to growth failure.

PMID: 12039059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 May;16(5):1108-24.

Basal activation of transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat5) in nonpregnant mouse and human breast epithelium.

Nevalainen MT(1), Xie J, Bubendorf L, Wagner KU, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)United States Military Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20852, USA.

Transcription factor Stat5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription) is 
essential for PRL-induced terminal differentiation of mouse mammary epithelial
cells during pregnancy and lactation and has been implicated in mammary
tumorigenesis. A new and sensitive immunological method to detect active,
tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5 in situ revealed that Stat5 is continuously
activated in luminal epithelial cells of mouse and human breast, not only during 
pregnancy and lactation, but also outside of pregnancy. Examination of virgin
Stat5a or Stat5b null mice suggested that Stat5a was the primary isoform
activated in mammary epithelial cells. Basal activation of Stat5 in mammary
epithelium of virgin wild-type mice was continuous throughout estrous cycle and
was also detected in 17 of 17 normal human breast tissue specimens analyzed. PRL 
was identified as the principal factor maintaining basal activation of Stat5 in
mammary epithelium of nonpregnant mice based on several lines of evidence. First,
administration of PRL, but not GH or epidermal growth factor, uniformly enhanced 
basal activation of Stat5 in luminal mammary epithelial cells. Second,
hypophysectomy disrupted basal activation of Stat5, an effect that was completely
reversed by administration of PRL, but only partially by GH. Third, knock-out of 
the PRL receptor gene markedly reduced basal activation of Stat5, an effect that 
was maintained in a normalized endocrine environment after transplanting PRL
receptor null mammary epithelium into wild-type mice. Continuous activation of
Stat5 indicates a role of this transcription factor in normal, nonpregnant breast
epithelial cells, and may shed new light on Stat5 involvement in breast tumor
promotion.

PMID: 11981045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. EMBO J. 2002 May 1;21(9):2159-67.

JAK2, complemented by a second signal from c-kit or flt-3, triggers extensive
self-renewal of primary multipotential hemopoietic cells.

Zhao S(1), Zoller K, Masuko M, Rojnuckarin P, Yang XO, Parganas E, Kaushansky K, 
Ihle JN, Papayannopoulou T, Willerford DM, Clackson T, Blau CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Defining signals that can support the self-renewal of multipotential hemopoietic 
progenitor cells (MHPCs) is pertinent to understanding leukemogenesis and may be 
relevant to developing stem cell-based therapies. Here we define a set of
signals, JAK2 plus either c-kit or flt-3, which together can support extensive
MHPC self-renewal. Phenotypically and functionally distinct populations of MHPCs 
were obtained, depending on which receptor tyrosine kinase, c-kit or flt-3, was
activated. Self-renewal was abrogated in the absence of STAT5a/b, and in the
presence of inhibitors targeting either the mitogen-activated protein kinase or
phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase pathways. These findings suggest that a simple
two-component signal can drive MHPC self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC125991
PMID: 11980713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2846-53.

Differential function of STAT5 isoforms in head and neck cancer growth control.

Leong PL(1), Xi S, Drenning SD, Dyer KF, Wentzel AL, Lerner EC, Smithgall TE,
Grandis JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
and The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Up-regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is critical for the 
loss of growth control in a variety of human cancers, including squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). Stimulation of EGFR results in activation
of mitogenic signaling pathways including Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription (STATs). Stat5 activation has been primarily demonstrated in
hematopoietic malignancies. Gene disruption studies suggest potentially distinct 
functions of the Stat5 isoforms, Stat5a and Stat5b, which are encoded by two
genes closely linked on human chromosome 17. To determine the function of Stat5
in SCCHN growth control, we studied the expression and constitutive activation of
Stat5a and Stat5b in normal and transformed human squamous epithelial cells.
Increased constitutive activation of Stat5 was detected in transformed compared
with normal squamous cells. Blockade of TGF-alpha or EGFR, abrogated Stat5
activation. Targeting of Stat5b using antisense oligonucleotides inhibited SCCHN 
growth. In addition, SCCHN cells stably transfected with dominant negative mutant
Stat5b failed to proliferate in vitro. In contrast, targeting of Stat5a using
either antisense or dominant negative strategies had no effect on cell growth.
These results suggest that TGF-alpha/EGFR-mediated autocrine growth of
transformed epithelial cells is dependent on activation of Stat5b but not Stat5a.

PMID: 11973644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 11;21(16):2555-63.

Mechanism of constitutive activation of FLT3 with internal tandem duplication in 
the juxtamembrane domain.

Kiyoi H(1), Ohno R, Ueda R, Saito H, Naoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8560, Japan. kiyoi@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Internal tandem duplication (ITD) of the juxtamembrane (JM) domain of FLT3 is the
most frequent mutation in human acute myeloid leukemia, and is significantly
associated with leukocytosis and a poor prognosis. Previously we reported that
FLT3 with ITD (FLT3/ITD) formed a homodimer and was autophosphorylated on
tyrosine residues, while the mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we
elucidated the role of the JM domain in FLT3 activation. Mutant FLT3 with not
only ITD but also an elongating or shortening JM domain transformed murine
IL3-dependent myeloid progenitor cell line 32D regardless of the tyrosine
residues in the JM domain. These mutant FLT3s were constitutively tyrosine
phosphorylated and activated signal-transduction molecules such as SHC, MAP
kinase and STAT5a. Notably, co-transfection of the truncated FLT3/ITD lacking
kinase and C-terminal domains with the wild type (Wt)-FLT3 into 32D cells
resulted in the autonomous proliferation. In these cells, truncated FLT3/ITD
generated a hetero-complex with Wt-FLT3 and Wt-FLT3 was constitutively tyrosine
phosphorylated. These findings indicate that the FLT3 JM domain plays an
important role in receptor activation, and that the length-mutated JM domain
induces ligand-independent receptor activation but also activates Wt-FLT3 in a
trans-manner.

PMID: 11971190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biol Reprod. 2002 May;66(5):1471-6.

Concurrent pregnancy retards mammary involution: effects on apoptosis and
proliferation of the mammary epithelium after forced weaning of mice.

Capuco AV(1), Li M, Long E, Ren S, Hruska KS, Schorr K, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Evaluation and Mapping Laboratory, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
acapuco@anri.barc.usda.gov

The effect of pregnancy on postweaning mammary gland involution was investigated 
in mice. On the third day after forced weaning at Lactation Day 10, the apoptotic
index was 56% lower in mammary tissue of mice that were pregnant at the time of
weaning than in nonpregnant mice. Conversely, the bromodeoxyuridine-labeling
index was increased sevenfold in pregnant mice compared to nonpregnant controls
(3.5% vs. 0.5%, respectively). Structure of mammary alveoli was largely
maintained in postweaning pregnant mice. The effect of pregnancy on three
specific mammary epithelial cell survival pathways was also examined. First,
pregnancy blocked the loss of Stat5a phosphorylation during involution.
Significantly, loss of Stat5a phosphorylation during involution was not
correlated with loss of Stat5a nuclear localization. Second, pregnancy maintained
nuclear-localized progesterone receptor during lactation. Third, pregnancy was
associated with increased expression of bfl-1 during involution but had little
effect on the expression of other bcl-2 family members. The data indicate that
pregnancy inhibits mammary cell apoptosis after weaning while permitting
proliferation of the mammary epithelium, and they support the hypothesis that
Stat5a and progesterone-signaling pathways act in concert to mediate this effect.

PMID: 11967212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Kidney Int. 2002 May;61(5):1605-16.

Angiotensin II activation of the JAK/STAT pathway in mesangial cells is altered
by high glucose.

Amiri F(1), Shaw S, Wang X, Tang J, Waller JL, Eaton DC, Marrero MB.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912-2500, USA.

BACKGROUND: Both high glucose (HG) and angiotensin II (Ang II) causes glomerular 
mesangial cell (GMC) growth and increased synthesis of matrix proteins like
collagen IV contributing to diabetic nephropathy. We have recently found that
exposure of vascular smooth muscle cells to HG augments the Ang II activation of 
the growth promoting JAK/STAT pathway. We hypothesized that Ang II activation of 
the JAK/STAT pathway is altered by HG in GMC, and that this pathway might be
linked to the Ang II-induced growth and overproduction of collagen IV in GMC in
HG conditions.
METHODS: GMC were cultured under normal glucose (NG; 5.5 mmol/L) and HG (25
mmol/L) for 48 hours and stimulated with Ang II (0.1 micromol/L) for various
times. GMC lysate was then immunoprecipitated and/or immunoblotted with SHP-1,
SHP-2 and phosphospecific JAK2 and STAT antibodies. The HG and Ang II induced
growth and collagen IV synthesis studies were performed in GMC transfected with
JAK2 antisense or JAK2 sense. GMC growth was monitored via [3H]-thymidine
incorporation, and collagen IV synthesis via ELISA.
RESULTS: We found that Ang II-induced JAK2, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A/B and SHP-2
phosphorylations were enhanced by HG, whereas that of SHP-1 was reduced. Ang
II-induced growth and collagen IV synthesis also were increased under HG
conditions. Transfection of GMC with JAK2 antisense oligonucleotides blocked the 
Ang II-induced growth and collagen IV synthesis in both NG and HG conditions.
CONCLUSION: These results provide evidence that activation of the JAK/STAT
pathway by HG or/and Ang II may be of importance in the increased GMC cell growth
and collagen IV synthesis that is seen in diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 11967010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Apr;16(4):774-84.

PRL activates the cyclin D1 promoter via the Jak2/Stat pathway.

Brockman JL(1), Schroeder MD, Schuler LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

PRL promotes cell growth and differentiation in the mammary gland, which has
implications for breast cancer as well as normal development. Our data
demonstrate that PRL significantly increases proliferation of mammary carcinoma
cells. PRL also increases cyclin D1 levels 2-fold, which can be inhibited by
actinomycin D, suggesting that transcriptional increases in cyclin D1 are
important. Using a defined Chinese hamster ovary cell model system, we
demonstrate that the activity of a cyclin D1 promoter-luciferase construct
increases after PRL treatment. Furthermore, this increase in promoter activity is
predominantly mediated by the Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway. The cyclin D1
promoter contains two consensus sequences for PRL-induced Stat binding (GAS
sites). Disruption of Stat binding to the distal GAS site destroys PRL-induced
promoter activity, whereas disruption of the proximal site has no effect. We have
shown by EMSA that PRL induces Stat5a and 5b to bind to the distal GAS site, and 
immunoprecipitation and subsequent Western analysis of nuclear extracts from
PRL-treated cells indicate that Stat5a and 5b can interact as a heterodimer in
this system. These data suggest that cyclin D1 may be a target gene for PRL in
normal lobuloalveolar development, as well as in the development and/or
progression of mammary cancer.

PMID: 11923474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2472-86.

Enhanced endotoxin sensitivity in fps/fes-null mice with minimal defects in
hematopoietic homeostasis.

Zirngibl RA(1), Senis Y, Greer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's University Cancer Research
Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L-3N6, Canada.

The fps/fes proto-oncogene encodes a cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinase
implicated in growth factor and cytokine receptor signaling and thought to be
essential for the survival and terminal differentiation of myeloid progenitors.
Fps/Fes-null mice were healthy and fertile, displayed slightly reduced numbers of
bone marrow myeloid progenitors and circulating mature myeloid cells, and were
more sensitive to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These phenotypes were rescued using a
fps/fes transgene. This confirmed that Fps/Fes is involved in, but not required
for, myelopoiesis and that it plays a role in regulating the innate immune
response. Bone marrow-derived Fps/Fes-null macrophages showed no defects in
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-, interleukin 6 (IL-6)-, or
IL-3-induced activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(Stat3) and Stat5A or LPS-induced degradation of I kappa B or activation of p38, 
Jnk, Erk, or Akt.

PMCID: PMC133716
PMID: 11909942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16347-50. Epub 2002 Mar 20.

A biotin analog inhibits acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity and adipogenesis.

Levert KL(1), Waldrop GL, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase catalyzes the first committed step in the synthesis of
long chain fatty acids. In this study, we observed that treatment of 3T3-L1 cells
with biotin chloroacetylated at the 1' nitrogen reduced the enzymatic activity of
cytosolic acetyl-CoA carboxylase and concomitantly inhibited the differentiation 
of 3T3-L1 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Treatment with chloroacetylated
biotin blocked the induction of PPARgamma, STAT1, and STAT5A expression that
normally occurs with adipogenesis. Moreover, addition of chloroacetylated biotin 
inhibited lipid accumulation, as judged by Oil Red O staining. Our results
support recent studies that indicate that acetyl-CoA carboxylase may be a
suitable target for an anti-obesity therapeutic.

PMID: 11907024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;16(3):563-70.

Jak2 is an essential tyrosine kinase involved in pregnancy-mediated development
of mammary secretory epithelium.

Shillingford JM(1), Miyoshi K, Robinson GW, Grimm SL, Rosen JM, Neubauer H,
Pfeffer K, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA. jonshi@helix.nih.gov

The PRL receptor (PrlR) and the signal transducer and activator of transcription 
5a (Stat5a) are essential for the proliferation and differentiation of mammary
epithelium during pregnancy. Based on tissue culture cell experiments, Jak2 is
the tyrosine kinase responsible for the phosphorylation of both the PrlR and
Stat5. We have now used a genetic approach to test the role of Jak2 in the
mammary gland, a PrlR-responsive tissue. Because Jak2-null embryos die at E12.5, 
we transplanted Jak2-null mammary anlagen into cleared fat pads of wild-type mice
and investigated epithelial development during pregnancy. In the absence of Jak2,
no secretory alveoli were present at parturition, and epithelial cell
proliferation was reduced by 95% after an acute hormone treatment. Furthermore,
the Na-K-Cl cotransporter, a ductal marker, was maintained in Jak2-null
epithelium and the sodium-phosphate cotransporter type IIb, a secretory cell
marker, was absent. Nuclear Stat5a was only observed in a few epithelial cells in
Jak2-null glands at pregnancy and parturition compared with most epithelial cells
in wild-type glands. Taken together, our results demonstrate that Jak2 is a
critical tyrosine kinase that conveys intracellular signals necessary for
proliferation and differentiation of mammary epithelium during pregnancy.

PMID: 11875116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):17359-66. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

Regulation of erythropoietin-induced STAT serine phosphorylation by distinct
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Haq R(1), Halupa A, Beattie BK, Mason JM, Zanke BW, Barber DL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of 
Toronto, Canada.

The STAT proteins are a family of latent transcription factors that are activated
by a wide variety of cytokines. Upon receptor engagement, STATs become tyrosine
phosphorylated, translocate to the nucleus, and induce expression of target
genes. In addition to tyrosine phosphorylation, maximal activation of some STAT
proteins requires serine phosphorylation within the transactivation domain. Here 
we focus on STAT phosphorylation after engagement of the erythropoietin receptor 
(EPO-R). In Ba/F3-EPO-R cells, EPO induces tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of
STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B. Identical regions of the EPO-R couple to both
tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of each cognate STAT protein. A proximal
region of the EPO-R lacking cytoplasmic tyrosines couples to STAT1 and STAT3
phosphorylation as well as ERK and p38(HOG) activation, but not JNK/SAPK. STAT1
serine phosphorylation was perturbed by inhibition of ERK and p38 pathways,
whereas only inhibition of ERK activation blocked STAT3 serine phosphorylation in
response to EPO. STAT5A/B phosphorylation is downstream of EPO-R Tyr(343),
however, STAT5A/B serine phosphorylation is unaffected by either ERK or p38
inhibition. Physiological responses induced by EPO may depend on regulation of
serine phosphorylation of the STAT molecules by p38(HOG) and the ERK family of
kinases as well as additional serine/threonine kinases.

PMID: 11875080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Mar;71(3):511-9.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced STAT5
activation and target-gene expression during human monocyte/macrophage
differentiation.

Lehtonen A(1), Matikainen S, Miettinen M, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology,
National Public Health Institute, Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-0300 Helsinki,
Finland. Anne.Lehtonen@ktl.fi

GM-CSF signals through JAK2 and STAT5 and stimulates the expression of STAT5
target genes, such as pim-1 and CIS. Analyzed by EMSA, GM-CSF stimulation led to 
much stronger STAT5 DNA-binding to pim-1 or CIS GAS elements in primary human
monocytes compared with mature macrophages. Similarly, GM-CSF-induced expression 
of pim-1 and CIS mRNAs was much stronger in monocytes. These differencies were
not a result of downregulation of the GM-CSF receptor system or STAT5 expression,
because monocytes and macrophages readily expressed GM-CSF receptor, JAK2,
STAT5A, and STAT5B mRNAs and proteins. Monocytes expressed significant amounts of
truncated STAT5 forms that took part in STAT5-DNA complex formation in
GM-CSF-stimulated monocytes. This resulted in faster moving STAT5 complexes
compared with macrophages in EMSA. Our results demonstrate that STAT5 isoform
expression, GM-CSF-induced STAT5 activation, and STAT5 target-gene expression are
altered significantly during monocyte/macrophage differentiation.

PMID: 11867689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Histochem Cytochem. 2002 Mar;50(3):365-83.

An immunohistochemical approach to monitor the prolactin-induced activation of
the JAK2/STAT5 pathway in pancreatic islets of Langerhans.

Brelje TC(1), Svensson AM, Stout LE, Bhagroo NV, Sorenson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

This study examined whether an immunohistochemical method examining the
subcellular localization of STAT5 could be used to characterize the activation of
the JAK2/STAT5 pathway by prolactin (PRL) in intact cells or tissues. In the
Ins-1 beta-cell line, STAT5A and STAT5B were distributed almost equally in the
cytoplasm and the nucleus in unstimulated cells. STAT5A was also detected along
the border of cells and in the perinuclear region. After exposure to PRL, the
redistribution from the cytoplasm to the nucleus was much higher for STAT5B
compared to STAT5A. This translocation represented 12% of the STAT5A and 22% of
the STAT5B originally located in the cytoplasm before stimulation. In isolated
rat islets of Langerhans, PRL stimulated the nuclear translocation of both STAT5A
and STAT5B only in beta-cells. The expression of the PRL receptor only by
beta-cells was confirmed with a rabbit polyclonal antiserum raised against the
rat PRL receptor. It was estimated that 4% of STAT5A and 9% of STAT5B originally 
located in the cytoplasm was translocated to the nucleus after stimulation. The
presence of a functional JAK2/STAT5 signaling pathway in all islet cells was
demonstrated by the nuclear translocation of STAT5B in all islet cells (i.e.,
alpha-, beta-, and delta-cells) after stimulation with fetal calf serum. The
nuclear translocation and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5B was biphasic, with
an initial peak within 30 min, a nadir between 1 and 3 hr, and prolonged
activation after 4 hr. In contrast, the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A was
also biphasic but its nuclear translocation peaked within 30 min and was then
reduced to a level slightly above that observed before PRL stimulation. This
method is able to detect changes in STAT5 activation as small as 2% of the total 
cell content. These observations demonstrate the utility of this approach for
studying the activation of STAT5 in a mixed population of cells within tissues or
organs. In addition, the dose response for the nuclear translocation of STAT5B in
normal beta-cells was similar to those for changes in proliferation and insulin
secretion in isolated rat islets. Therefore, the subcellular localization can be 
used to monitor the activation of STAT5 and it may be a key event in the
upregulation of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans during pregnancy.

PMID: 11850439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Endocrinology. 2002 Feb;143(2):386-94.

Cytokine-inducible SH2 protein up-regulation is associated with desensitization
of GH signaling in GHRH-transgenic mice.

González L(1), Miquet JG, Sotelo AI, Bartke A, Turyn D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas, Facultad de Farmacia y
Bioquímica, Junín 956, 1113 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The effects of continuous high GH levels on GH signal transduction through the GH
receptor (GHR)/Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) pathway as well as the desensitization of this pathway by
suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) were studied in transgenic mice
overexpressing GHRH. In transgenic mice, hepatic GHR levels were 4.5-fold higher 
than in normal animals, whereas the protein contents of JAK2, STAT5a, and STAT5b 
did not vary. This same pattern was found for basal tyrosine phosphorylation
(PY-): PY-GHR was 4.5-fold increased in transgenic mice, whereas there were no
differences in PY-JAK2 and PY-STATs between normal and transgenic animals. After 
GH administration, tyrosine phosphorylation of GHR, JAK2, and STAT5s increased 3-
to 7-fold in normal mice, but no significant changes were found in transgenic
mice, indicating a decreased GH sensitivity in these animals. The content of
cytokine-inducible SH2 protein, a member of the SOCS family, was 18-fold higher
in GHRH-transgenic than in normal mice. Conversely, SOCS-3, present in normal
mice, was hardly seen in transgenic animals, whereas SOCS-2 levels did not vary. 
These findings suggest that cytokine-inducible SH2 protein, significantly induced
by continuously elevated GH levels, may be the SOCS protein responsible for the
GH signaling desensitization in transgenic animals.

PMID: 11796490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Clin Invest. 2002 Jan;109(1):111-9.

Diabetic LDL inhibits cell-cycle progression via STAT5B and p21(waf).

Brizzi MF(1), Dentelli P, Pavan M, Rosso A, Gambino R, Grazia De Cesaris M,
Garbarino G, Camussi G, Pagano G, Pegoraro L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna Università di Torino, Torino, Italy.

Modified LDL is a major cause of injury to the endothelium in diabetes. In the
present study, we analyzed the effects on endothelial cells of LDL recovered from
type 2 diabetic patients (dm-LDL) or from nondiabetic subjects (n-LDL). Treatment
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells with dm-LDL, but not n-LDL, led to the 
accumulation of cells in G1. To dissect the molecular mechanisms of this effect, 
we analyzed the expression and function of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
p21(waf), a cell cycle regulator known to be a target of the signal transducers
and activators of transcription (STATs). dm-LDL led to transient STAT5
phosphorylation and the formation of a STAT5-containing complex and activated
p21(waf) expression at the transcriptional level. Expression of the
dominant-negative form of STAT5B, but not of STAT5A, significantly decreased both
p21(waf) expression and the fraction of cells in G1. Finally, immunofluorescence 
analysis demonstrated that activated STAT5 is expressed in newly formed
intraplaque vessels and in endothelial cells lining the luminal side of the
plaque. Similarly, p21(waf) immunoreactivity was found in the neointimal
vasculature. Our results suggest a role of STAT5B as a regulator of gene
expression in diabetes-associated vascular disease.

PMCID: PMC150820
PMID: 11781356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Blood. 2002 Jan 15;99(2):479-87.

Reduced lymphomyeloid repopulating activity from adult bone marrow and fetal
liver of mice lacking expression of STAT5.

Bunting KD(1), Bradley HL, Hawley TS, Moriggl R, Sorrentino BP, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department, American Red Cross Holland Laboratory, Rockville,
MD, USA. buntingk@usa.redcross.org

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are intracellular
mediators of cytokine receptor signals. Because many early-acting growth factors 
have been implicated in STAT5 activation, this study sought to investigate
whether STAT5 may be a transcriptional regulator of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
long-term repopulating activity. To test this possibility, bone marrow (BM) and
fetal liver (FL) cells from mice containing homozygous deletions of both STAT5a
and STAT5b genes (STAT5ab(-/-)) were characterized for hematopoietic repopulating
activities. BM and FL grafts were capable of repopulating lymphoid and myeloid
lineages of lethally irradiated primary and secondary hosts, with defects
observed primarily in T-lymphocyte engraftment. Because only a fraction of normal
HSC function is required to reconstitute hematopoiesis, competitive repopulation 
assays of adult BM or FL cells were used against wild type adult BM or FL cells
to quantitate stem cell function. In these analyses, average 25-, 28-, 45-, and
68-fold decreases in normal repopulating activity were evident in granulocyte
(Gr-1(+)), macrophage (Mac-1(+)), erythroid progenitor (Ter119(+)), and
B-lymphocyte (B220(+)) populations, respectively, with T lymphocytes (CD4(+))
always undetectable from the STAT5ab(-/-) graft. Consistent with previous reports
of divergence between stem cell phenotype and function in cases of perturbed
hematopoiesis, the absolute number of cells within Sca-1(+)c-kit(+)lin(-) or
lin(-) Hoechst 33342 side population fractions was not significantly different
between wild type and STAT5ab(-/-) BM or FL cells. These results demonstrate that
a significant proportion of the growth factor signals required for multilineage
reconstitution potential of HSCs is STAT5 dependent.

PMID: 11781228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8076-82. Epub 2002 Jan 4.

Functional cooperation among Ras, STAT5, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is
required for full oncogenic activities of BCR/ABL in K562 cells.

Sonoyama J(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Satoh Y, Zhang X, Kataoka Y, Takai E, Mizuki 
M, Machii T, Wakao H, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase generated from the chromosomal translocation t(9;22)
causes chronic myelogenous leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. To examine 
the roles of BCR/ABL-activated individual signaling molecules and their
cooperation in leukemogenesis, we inducibly expressed a dominant negative (DN)
form of Ras, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and STAT5 alone or in combination in 
p210 BCR/ABL-positive K562 cells. The inducibly expressed DN Ras (N17), STAT5
(694F), and DN phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (Delta p85) inhibited the growth by 
90, 55, and 40%, respectively. During the growth inhibition, the expression of
cyclin D2 and cyclin D3 was suppressed by N17, 694F, or Delta p85; that of cyclin
E by N17; and that of cyclin A by Delta p85. In addition, N17 induced apoptosis
in a small proportion of K562, whereas 694F and Delta p85 were hardly effective. 
In contrast, coexpression of two DN mutants in any combinations induced severe
apoptosis. During these cultures, the expression of Bcl-2 was suppressed by N17, 
694F, or Delta p85, and that of Bcl-XL by N17. Furthermore, although K562 was
resistant to interferon-alpha- and dexamethasone-induced apoptosis, disruption of
one pathway by N17, 694F, or Delta p85 sensitized K562 to these reagents. These
results suggested that cooperation among these molecules is required for full
leukemogenic activities of BCR/ABL.

PMID: 11779872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):58-69.

A nuclear protein tyrosine phosphatase TC-PTP is a potential negative regulator
of the PRL-mediated signaling pathway: dephosphorylation and deactivation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a and 5b by TC-PTP in nucleus.

Aoki N(1), Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan. naoki@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Retraction in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Nov;27(11):1982.

In the present study we examined involvement of nuclear protein tyrosine
phosphatase TC-PTP in PRL-mediated signaling. TC-PTP could dephosphorylate signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b, but the
apparent dephosphorylation activity of TC-PTP was weaker than that of cytosolic
PTP1B 30 min after PRL stimulation in transfected COS-7 cells, whereas both
STAT5a and STAT5b were dephosphorylated to the same extent by recombinant TC-PTP 
and PTP1B in vitro. Tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5 was coimmunoprecipitated with
substrate trapping mutants of TC-PTP, suggesting that STAT5 is a specific
substrate of TC-PTP. These observations were further extended in mammary
epithelial COMMA-1D cells stably expressing TC-PTP. A time-course study revealed 
that dephosphorylation of STAT5 by TC-PTP was delayed compared with that by
cytosolic PTP1B due to nuclear localization of TC-PTP throughout PRL stimulation 
in mammary epithelial cells. Endogenous beta-casein gene expression and
beta-casein gene promoter activation in COS-7 cells were largely suppressed by
TC-PTP wild type as well as catalytically inactive mutants, suggesting that
stable complexes formed between STAT5 and TC-PTP in the nucleus. Taken together, 
we conclude that TC-PTP is catalytically competent with respect to
dephosphorylation and deactivation of PRL-activated STAT5 in the nucleus.

PMID: 11773439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Blood. 2002 Jan 1;99(1):95-101.

STAT5 promotes multilineage hematolymphoid development in vivo through effects on
early hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Snow JW(1), Abraham N, Ma MC, Abbey NW, Herndier B, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

The transcription factor signal transducers and activators of transcription 5
(STAT5) is activated by numerous cytokines that orchestrate blood cell
development. Multilineage peripheral blood cytopenias were observed in adult mice
lacking both isoforms of STAT5 (STAT5A and STAT5B) as well as accelerated rates
of apoptosis in the bone marrow. Although the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
population was preserved in a number of these mice, the post-HSC progenitor
populations were diminished and a marked reduction in functional progenitors
(spleen colony-forming units) was detected. Competitive bone marrow
transplantation studies in vivo revealed a profound impairment of repopulation
potential of STAT5-null HSCs, leading to complete lack of contribution to the
myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid lineages. These abnormalities were associated
with heightened proliferation activity in the HSC fraction, suggesting the action
of homeostatic mechanisms to maintain sufficient levels of diverse blood cell
types for viability. Thus, STAT5 normally sustains the robust hematopoietic
reserve that contributes to host viability through crucial survival effects on
early progenitor cells.

PMID: 11756158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Endocrinology. 2002 Jan;143(1):228-38.

PRL signal transduction in the epithelial compartment of rat prostate maintained 
as long-term organ cultures in vitro.

Ahonen TJ(1), Härkönen PL, Rui H, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)United States Military Cancer Institute, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Using long-term organ cultures of rat prostate tissue explants, we previously
demonstrated that PRL both stimulates proliferation and acts as an
androgen-independent suppressor of apoptosis in prostate epithelial cells,
leading to epithelial hyperplasia. In this work we delineate intracellular
signaling molecules activated by PRL in prostate tissue to identify candidate
signaling proteins that are responsible for maintaining survival and
proliferation of prostate epithelium in androgen-deprived growth environment. We 
now show that signal transducer and activator of transcription-5a (Stat5a) and
Stat5b become tyrosine phosphorylated in response to PRL stimulation in rat
prostate using prostate organ culture as an experimental model. Stat5 was
translocated to the nuclei of epithelial cells of prostate tissue as demonstrated
by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, EMSA showed PRL-inducible binding of Stat5a
homodimers and Stat5a/5b heterodimers to the PRL response element of the
beta-casein gene promoter. Signaling molecules Stat3, Stat1, MAPK, or protein
kinase B, which can be activated by PRL in other target cells, were not activated
by PRL in prostate tissue. Furthermore, we show that Stat5a and Stat5b are
continuously phosphorylated in rat prostate in vivo, although they are expressed 
to varying degree in separate lobes of rat prostate. Collectively, our results
suggest that PRL signaling in rat prostate tissue is primarily transduced via
Stat5a and Stat5b. The Stat5 pathway represents one candidate signaling
mechanism, used by PRL and possibly other growth factors and cytokines, that
supports the viability of prostate epithelial cells during long-term androgen
deprivation.

PMID: 11751614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Dec;12(12):649-56.

2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) modulates lactogenic
hormone-mediated differentiation and gene expression in HC11 mouse mammary
epithelial cells.

Shan L(1), Rouhani SA, Schut HA, Snyderwine EG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis,
Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) is a mammary gland
carcinogen in cooked meat. Using the HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cell line, a
well-characterized model for hormone-mediated differentiation, we examined
whether PhIP altered the expression of genes regulated by lactogenic hormones
dexamethasone, insulin, and prolactin (DIP). When HC11-Lux cells (stably
transfected with a beta-casein promoter luciferase construct) were cultured in
DIP-containing medium, PhIP (100 microM) enhanced luciferase activity 11-fold
over that observed in DIP medium alone. The effect of PhIP on augmenting
luciferase activity was observed only when lactogenic hormones were included in
the medium. Expression of the endogenous beta-casein gene was also higher in HC11
cells treated with PhIP in hormone-enriched medium. With the increased expression
of beta-casein gene, the level of phospho-signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5A (phospho-STAT5A), the transcription factor regulating
beta-casein gene expression, was elevated in PhIP-exposed HC11 cells. AG490, a
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-specific inhibitor, blocked the effect of PhIP on
beta-casein gene expression. PhIP-treated cells also showed higher expression of 
Bcl-2 and lower expression of Bax, consistent with a possible antiapoptotic
action of PhIP. The findings indicate that PhIP modulates lactogenic
hormone-mediated gene expression in mammary epithelial cells, apparently via
enhanced phosphorylation of STAT5A. The findings have implications for a novel
mechanism of action of the mammary gland carcinogen PhIP.

PMID: 11751460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Genomics. 2001 Dec;78(3):129-34.

The Stat3/5 locus encodes novel endoplasmic reticulum and helicase-like proteins 
that are preferentially expressed in normal and neoplastic mammary tissue.

Cui Y(1), Li M, Walton KD, Sun K, Hanover JA, Furth PA, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA. Yongzhic@intra.niddk.nih.gov

The signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 5 and 3 are
critical for mammary alveolar development during pregnancy and remodeling during 
involution. In the mouse, STAT3, STAT5a, and STAT5b are encoded by adjacent genes
on chromosome 11 (60.5 cM). To identify additional genes in the Stat3/5 locus
that may participate in normal and neoplastic development of the mammary gland,
we have cloned and sequenced 500 kb and searched for genes preferentially
expressed in mammary tissue. We identified six known genes and cloned two new
genes, termed D11Lgp1 and D11Lgp2. Both genes are most highly expressed in normal
mammary tissue and mammary tumors from several transgenic mouse models. LGP1
consists of 532 and 530 amino acids in mouse and human, respectively (88%
similarity). A region in the carboxy-terminal half of LGP1 has limited homology
with Arabidopsis thaliana GH3-like proteins. Immunofluorescence studies
demonstrated that LGP1 is located in the nuclear envelope and the endoplasmic
reticulum. LGP2 is a cytoplasmic protein of 678 amino acids.

PMID: 11735219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Dec;15(12):2172-81.

Differential roles for signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a and 
5b in PRL stimulation of ERalpha and ERbeta transcription.

Frasor J(1), Park K, Byers M, Telleria C, Kitamura T, Yu-Lee LY, Djiane J,
Park-Sarge OK, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

PRL has been shown to stimulate mRNA expression of both ERalpha and ERbeta in the
rat corpus luteum and decidua of pregnancy. To investigate whether PRL may
stimulate ER expression at the level of transcription and which transcription
factors may mediate this stimulation, we have cloned the 5'-flanking regions of
both rat ER genes. A constitutively active PRL receptor (PRL-R(CA)) stimulated
both ERalpha and ERbeta promoter activity, indicating that PRL is acting to
stimulate ER transcription. Putative signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)5 response elements were identified at -189 in the ERalpha
promoter and at -330 in the ERbeta promoter. Mutation of these response elements 
or overexpression of dominant negative Stat5 prevented stimulation of ERalpha and
ERbeta promoter activity, indicating that PRL regulation of ER expression
requires both intact Stat5 binding sites as well as functional Stat5.
Interestingly, either Stat5a or Stat5b could stimulate ERalpha transcription
while stimulation of ERbeta occurred only in the presence of Stat5b. Through
mutational analysis, a single nucleotide difference between the ERalpha and
ERbeta Stat5 response elements was shown to be responsible for the lack of
Stat5a-mediated stimulation of ERbeta. These findings indicate that PRL
stimulation of ER expression occurs at the level of transcription and that PRL
regulation of ERalpha can be mediated by either Stat5a or Stat5b, while
regulation of ERbeta appears to be mediated only by Stat5b.

PMID: 11731618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Dec;15(12):2157-71.

Serine phosphorylation of GH-activated signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b: impact on STAT5 transcriptional activity.

Park SH(1), Yamashita H, Rui H, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b), the major
liver-expressed STAT5 form, is phosphorylated on both tyrosine and serine in
GH-stimulated cells. Although tyrosine phosphorylation is known to be critical
for the dimerization, nuclear translocation, and activation of STAT5b DNA-binding
and transcriptional activities, the effect of STAT5b serine phosphorylation is
uncertain. Presently, we identify Ser730 as the site of STAT5b serine
phosphorylation in GH-stimulated liver cells. We additionally show that the
serine kinase inhibitor H7 partially blocks the GH-stimulated formation of
(Ser,Tyr)-diphosphorylated STAT5b without inhibiting STAT5b nuclear
translocation. Evaluation of the functional consequences of STAT5b serine
phosphorylation by mutational analysis revealed an approximately 50% decrease in 
GH-stimulated luciferase reporter gene activity regulated by an isolated
STAT5-binding site when STAT5b Ser730 was mutated to alanine and under conditions
where STAT5 DNA-binding activity was not diminished. No decrease in GH-stimulated
reporter activity was seen with the corresponding STAT5a-Ser725Ala mutant;
however, a decrease in reporter activity occurred when the second established
STAT5a serine phosphorylation site, serine 779, was additionally mutated to
alanine. Unexpectedly, STAT5a-Ser725,779Ala and STAT5b-Ser730Ala displayed
approximately 2-fold higher GH- or PRL-stimulated transcriptional activity
compared with wild-type STAT5b when assayed using an intact beta-casein
promoter-luciferase reporter. Finally, STAT5b-stimulated gene transcription was
abolished in cells treated with H7, but in a manner unrelated to the inhibitory
effects of H7 on STAT5b Ser730 phosphorylation. These findings suggest that the
effects of STAT5b and STAT5a serine phosphorylation on STAT-stimulated gene
transcription can be modulated by promoter context. Moreover, in the case of
STAT5a, phosphorylation of serine 779, but not serine 725, may serve to regulate 
target gene transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11731617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. EMBO J. 2001 Dec 3;20(23):6836-44.

Functional interaction of STAT5 and nuclear receptor co-repressor SMRT:
implications in negative regulation of STAT5-dependent transcription.

Nakajima H(1), Brindle PK, Handa M, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA. hnakajim@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) play a central role in
cytokine signaling. Activating and repressing gene transcription is a dynamic
process involving chromatin remodeling by histone acetylases and deacetylases,
yet the role of this process in STAT-dependent transcription remains largely
unknown. In a search for STAT5-interacting proteins by yeast two-hybrid
screening, we identified the nuclear receptor co-repressor SMRT (silencing
mediator for retinoic acid receptor and thyroid hormone receptor) as a potential 
STAT5-binding partner. SMRT binds to both STAT5A and 5B, and strongly repressed
STAT5-dependent transcription in vitro. SMRT binds to the N-terminal coiled-coil 
domain of STAT5 and a mutation within this region previously found to render
STAT5 hyperactive in response to cytokines abolished the interaction with SMRT.
Overexpression of SMRT suppressed the induction of STAT5 target genes by
interleukin-3, whereas the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
effectively enhanced and prolonged their expression. Together, these findings
illuminate the potential role of SMRT in down-regulating STAT5 activity, with a
consequent reduction of STAT5 target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC125765
PMID: 11726519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Blood. 2001 Dec 1;98(12):3261-73.

Ineffective erythropoiesis in Stat5a(-/-)5b(-/-) mice due to decreased survival
of early erythroblasts.

Socolovsky M(1), Nam H, Fleming MD, Haase VH, Brugnara C, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Erythropoietin (Epo) controls red cell production in the basal state and during
stress. Epo binding to its receptor, EpoR, on erythroid progenitors leads to
rapid activation of the transcription factor Stat5. Previously, fetal anemia and 
increased apoptosis of fetal liver erythroid progenitors were found in
Stat5a(-/-)5b(-/-) mice. However, the role of Stat5 in adult erythropoiesis was
not clear. The present study shows that some adult Stat5a(-/-)5b(-/-) mice have a
near-normal hematocrit but are deficient in generating high erythropoietic rates 
in response to stress. Further, many adult Stat5a(-/-)5b(-/-) mice have
persistent anemia despite a marked compensatory expansion in their erythropoietic
tissue. Analysis of erythroblast maturation in Stat5a(-/-)5b(-/-) hematopoietic
tissue shows a dramatic increase in early erythroblast numbers, but these fail to
progress in differentiation. Decreased expression of bcl-x(L) and increased
apoptosis in Stat5a(-/-)5b(-/-) early erythroblasts correlate with the degree of 
anemia. Hence, Stat5 controls a rate-determining step regulating early
erythroblast survival.

PMID: 11719363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Nov;33(11):1929-36.

Role of STAT3 in ischemic preconditioning.

Hattori R(1), Maulik N, Otani H, Zhu L, Cordis G, Engelman RM, Siddiqui MA, Das
DK.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 
Farmington, CT 06030-1110, USA.

We recently demonstrated that ischemic preconditioning (IPC) induced by cyclic
episodes of short durations of ischemia and reperfusion potentiates a signal
transduction cascade involving protein tyrosine kinases and MAP kinases. A rapid 
activation of janus kinase (JAK) and several signal transducers and activators of
the transcription (STATs) including STAT3, STAT5A and STAT6 has been shown to
occur during myocardial ischemia and reperfusion. This study sought to examine if
JAK/STAT signaling pathway play any role in classical early phase of IPC.
Isolated working rat hearts were perfused for 15 min with KHB buffer in the
absence or presence of a JAK kinase inhibitor tyrphostin AG490 (5 microm)
followed by IPC, 30 min global ischemia and 2 h of reperfusion. The results
demonstrated extensive phosphorylation of JAK2 and STAT3 in the IPC hearts which 
was almost completely abolished by an inhibitor of JAK2, AG490. IPC displayed
cardioprotection as evidenced by improved post-ischemic contractile recovery,
decreased myocardial infarct size and reduced number of apoptotic cardiomyocytes.
AG490 blocked IPC-mediated cardioprotection by altering the IPC-mediated survival
signal into death signal. Thus, IPC-induced upregulation of antiapoptotic gene
bcl-2 and downregulation of pro-apoptotic gene bax are decreased and increased,
respectively, in the AG490 treated hearts. The results suggest that early phase
of IPC potentiates JAK/STAT signaling by activating STAT3 which transmits a
survival signal to the myocardium.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11708838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Cell Biol. 2001 Nov 12;155(4):531-42. Epub 2001 Nov 12.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5 controls the
proliferation and differentiation of mammary alveolar epithelium.

Miyoshi K(1), Shillingford JM, Smith GH, Grimm SL, Wagner KU, Oka T, Rosen JM,
Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. mammary@nih.gov

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2002;4(6):209-12.

Functional development of mammary epithelium during pregnancy depends on
prolactin signaling. However, the underlying molecular and cellular events are
not fully understood. We examined the specific contributions of the prolactin
receptor (PrlR) and the signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a and
5b (referred to as Stat5) in the formation and differentiation of mammary
alveolar epithelium. PrlR- and Stat5-null mammary epithelia were transplanted
into wild-type hosts, and pregnancy-mediated development was investigated at a
histological and molecular level. Stat5-null mammary epithelium developed ducts
but failed to form alveoli, and no milk protein gene expression was observed. In 
contrast, PrlR-null epithelium formed alveoli-like structures with small open
lumina. Electron microscopy revealed undifferentiated features of organelles and 
a perturbation of cell-cell contacts in PrlR- and Stat5-null epithelia.
Expression of NKCC1, an Na-K-Cl cotransporter characteristic for ductal
epithelia, and ZO-1, a protein associated with tight junction, were maintained in
the alveoli-like structures of PrlR- and Stat5-null epithelia. In contrast, the
Na-Pi cotransporter Npt2b, and the gap junction component connexin 32, usually
expressed in secretory epithelia, were undetectable in PrlR- and Stat5-null mice.
These data demonstrate that signaling via the PrlR and Stat5 is critical for the 
proliferation and differentiation of mammary alveoli during pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC2198867
PMID: 11706048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 8;277(6):4465-76. Epub 2001 Nov 1.

Identification of novel targets of immunosuppressive agents by cDNA-based
microarray analysis.

Cristillo AD(1), Bierer BE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Biology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The immunosuppressive agents cyclosporin A (CsA) and tacrolimus (FK506) bind to
unrelated intracellular immunophilin receptors, cyclophilin (CyP) and
FK506-binding protein (FKBP), respectively. The complexes of CsA-CyP and of
FK506-FKBP both bind to and inhibit the activity of the
calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine phosphatase calcineurin. We used
cDNA microarray analysis to characterize early human peripheral blood T cell
transcriptional responses following antigen receptor stimulation in the absence
or presence of CsA or FK506, hoping to identify novel targets dependent upon
calcineurin or immunophilins or, perhaps, specific targets of either CyP or FKBP 
inhibitable by one drug alone. The array data failed to identify genes uniquely
sensitive to only one drug, suggesting that transcriptionally regulated,
immunophilin-dependent but calcineurin-independent targets fell below the limits 
of detection in this system. In contrast, transcript profiling identified and
mRNA and protein analysis confirmed novel as well as known genes reproducibly
induced or inhibited by both immunosuppressive agents. In this context, we show
that transcriptional activation of Stat5a and repression of the cytokine
interleukin-16 are regulated by T cell receptor engagement and dependent upon
drug-immunophilin complexes and, presumably, calcineurin activity.

PMID: 11694517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):1941-52.

PRL-induced ERalpha gene expression is mediated by Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) while
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) phosphorylation
involves Jak2 and a second tyrosine kinase.

Frasor J(1), Barkai U, Zhong L, Fazleabas AT, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

In the rat corpus luteum of pregnancy, PRL stimulation of ER expression is a
prerequisite for E2 to have any luteotropic effect. Previous work from our
laboratory has established that PRL stimulates ERalpha expression at the level of
transcription and that the transcription factor Stat5 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5) mediates this stimulation. Since it is well
established that PRL activates Stat5 through the tyrosine kinase, Janus kinase 2 
(Jak2), the role of Jak2 in PRL regulation of ERalpha expression was
investigated. In primary luteinized granulosa cells, the general tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors, genistein and AG18, and the Jak2 inhibitor, AG490, prevented PRL
stimulation of ERalpha mRNA levels, suggesting that PRL signaling to the ERalpha 
gene requires Jak2 activity. However, using an antibody that recognizes the
tyrosine-phosphorylated forms of both Stat5a and Stat5b (Y694/Y699), it was found
that AG490 could inhibit PRL-induced Stat5a phosphorylation only and had little
or no effect on Stat5b phosphorylation. These effects of AG490 were confirmed in 
COS cells overexpressing Stat5b. Also in COS cells, a kinase-negative Jak2
prevented PRL stimulation of ERalpha promoter activity and Stat5b phosphorylation
while a constitutively active Jak2 could stimulate both in the absence of PRL.
Furthermore, kinase-negative-Jak2, but not AG490, could inhibit Stat5b nuclear
translocation and DNA binding. Therefore, it seems that in the presence of AG490,
Stat5b remains phosphorylated, is located in the nucleus and capable of binding
DNA, but is apparently transcriptionally inactive. These findings suggest that
PRL may activate a second tyrosine kinase, other than Jak2, that is capable of
phosphorylating Stat5b without inducing transcriptional activity. To investigate 
whether another signaling pathway is involved, the src kinase inhibitor PP2 and
the phosphoinositol-3 kinase inhibitor (PI3K), LY294002, were used. Neither
inhibitor alone had any major effect on PRL regulation of ERalpha promoter
activity or on PRL-induced Stat5b phosphorylation. However, the combination of
AG490 and LY294002 largely prevented PRL-induced Stat5b phosphorylation. These
findings indicate that PRL stimulation of ERalpha expression requires Jak2 and
also that PRL can induce Stat5b phosphorylation through two tyrosine kinases,
Jak2 and one downstream of PI3K. Furthermore, these results suggest that the role
of Jak2 in activating Stat5b may be through a mechanism other than simply
inducing Stat5b phosphorylation.

PMID: 11682625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):1929-40.

Cross-talk between ERs and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 is 
E2 dependent and involves two functionally separate mechanisms.

Faulds MH(1), Pettersson K, Gustafsson JA, Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, S-14186
Huddinge, Sweden.

Steroid hormone receptors and signal transducers and activators of transcription 
(STAT) factors constitute two distinct families of transcription factors
activated by different signaling pathways. In previous reports, cross-talk
between STAT5 and several steroid receptors has been demonstrated. We
investigated putative cross-talk between ERalpha and ERbeta and STAT5. ERalpha
and ERbeta were found to potently repress PRL-induced STAT5 transcriptional
activity on a beta-casein promoter construct in a ligand-dependent manner. This
down-regulation was found to rely on direct physical interaction between the ERs 
and STAT5, mediated via the ER DNA-binding domain (DBD). The contact between the 
ER DBD and STAT5 is highly specific; the interaction is abolished if the ERalpha 
DBD is replaced with the DBD of a closely related steroid receptor. The physical 
interaction, however, is insufficient to confer the repression of STAT5 activity,
which in addition requires the ligand-activated C-terminal part of the ERs,
although these domains are not in direct contact with STAT5. Negative cross-talk 
between ERs and STAT5 is thus mediated via several functionally separated domains
of the ERs. Our findings may enhance the understanding of mechanisms of
regulation of the different hormonal signaling pathways occurring during
different functional events in tissues coexpressing ERs and STAT5.

PMID: 11682624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 1;167(9):5018-26.

Essential role of Stat5 for IL-5-dependent IgH switch recombination in mouse B
cells.

Horikawa K(1), Kaku H, Nakajima H, Davey HW, Hennighausen L, Iwamoto I, Yasue T, 
Kariyone A, Takatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

IL-5 stimulation of CD38-activated murine splenic B cells induces mu-gamma1 CSR
at the DNA level leading to a high level of IgG1 production. Further addition of 
IL-4 in the system enhances IL-5-dependent mu-gamma1 CSR. Although some of the
postreceptor signaling events initiated by IL-5 in activated B cells have been
characterized, the involvement of Stat in IL-5 signaling has not been thoroughly 
evaluated. In this study, we examined the activation of Stat5 and
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) in CD38-activated murine splenic B
cells by IL-5. The role of Stat5a and Stat5b in IL-5-induced mu-gamma1 CSR and
also IgG1 and IgM production was documented, as IL-5 does not act on
CD38-stimulated splenic B cells from Stat5a(-/-) and Stat5b(-/-) mice. Expression
levels of CD38-induced germline gamma1 transcripts and AID in Stat5a(-/-) and
Stat5b(-/-) B cells upon IL-5 stimulation were comparable to those of wild-type B
cells. The impaired mu-gamma1 CSR by Stat5b(-/-) B cells, but not by Stat5a(-/-) 
B cells, was rescued in part by IL-4, as the addition of IL-4 to the culture of
CD38- and IL-5-stimulated B cells induced mu-gamma1 CSR leading to IgG1
production. Analysis of cell division cycle number of wild-type B cells revealed 
that mu-gamma1 CSR was observed after five or six cell divisions. Stat5a(-/-) and
Stat5b(-/-) B cells showed similar cell division cycles, but they did not undergo
mu-gamma1 CSR. Our data support the notion that both Stat5a and Stat5b are
essential for IL-5-dependent mu;-gamma1 CSR and Ig secretion; however, their
major target may not be AID. Stat5a and Stat5b are not redundant, but rather are 
at least partially distinctive in their function.

PMID: 11673510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 4;20(45):6643-50.

Src directly tyrosine-phosphorylates STAT5 on its activation site and is involved
in erythropoietin-induced signaling pathway.

Okutani Y(1), Kitanaka A, Tanaka T, Kamano H, Ohnishi H, Kubota Y, Ishida T,
Takahara J.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kagawa Medical University, Kagawa
761-0793, Japan.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins are
transcription factors activated by phosphorylation on tyrosine residues after
cytokine stimulation. In erythropoietin receptor (EPOR)-mediated signaling, STAT5
is tyrosine-phosphorylated by EPO stimulation. Although Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2) is 
reported to play a crucial role in EPO-induced activation of STAT5, it is unclear
whether JAK2 alone can tyrosine-phosphorylate STAT5 after EPO stimulation.
Several studies indicate that STAT activation is caused by members of other
families of protein tyrosine kinases such as the Src family. We previously
reported that reduction of Src by induction of antisense src RNA expression
suppressed EPO-promoted erythroid differentiation in K562 cells. In the present
study, we explored the function of Src downstream of the EPOR-initiated
signaling. Reduction of Src diminished tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 in K562 
cells regardless of EPO treatment. The tyrosine phosphorylation level of STAT5
induced by EPO in F-36P cells was reduced in the presence of PP1 or PP2 selective
Src inhibitor. In addition, the expression of dominant negative Src in F-36P
cells reduced the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5. When Src and STAT5 were
co-expressed in COS7 cells, tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 was observed, and
tyrosine residue 694 (Tyr 694) of STAT5A was identified as the major
phosphorylation site by Src. In vitro kinase assay revealed that GST-STAT5 fusion
protein with the conserved C-terminal, but not the C-terminal-truncated mutant
which lacks Tyr 694, was tyrosine-phosphorylated by Src. Src can thus directly
tyrosine-phosphorylate the activation site of STAT5 (Tyr 694 in STAT5A), and Src 
may contribute to EPO-induced signal transduction via STAT5.

PMID: 11641791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Oct 25;183(1-2):151-63.

Role of serine phosphorylation of Stat5a in prolactin-stimulated beta-casein gene
expression.

Yamashita H(1), Nevalainen MT, Xu J, LeBaron MJ, Wagner KU, Erwin RA, Harmon JM, 
Hennighausen L, Kirken RA, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)United States Military Cancer Institute, Department of Pathology, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Milk production remains suppressed in mammals during late pregnancy despite high 
levels of lactogenic polypeptide hormones. At parturition, associated with a
precipitous fall in circulating progesterone, rising glucocorticoid levels
synergize with prolactin to initiate copious milk production. This synergy is
mediated at least in part through the coordinated activation of glucocorticoid
receptors and transcription factor Stat5, particularly Stat5a. Here we show that 
two proline-juxtaposed serine residues within the transactivation domain of
Stat5a are phosphorylated in the mammary gland during late gestation and
lactation, and that these phosphorylation sites inhibit the transcriptional
activity of Stat5a in the absence of glucocorticoid receptor costimulation.
Specifically, transfection assays revealed that phosphorylation of residues S725 
and S779 of Stat5a cooperatively suppressed prolactin-stimulated transcription
from the beta-casein promoter in both COS-7 kidney and MCF-7 mammary cells. This 
suppression was associated with shortened duration and reduced amplitude of
nuclear DNA binding activity of wild type Stat5a relative to that of the serine
phosphorylation-defective Stat5 mutant. However, costimulation of glucocorticoid 
receptors completely reversed the suppressive effect of Stat5a serine
phosphorylation on beta-casein gene transcription. We propose that serine
phosphorylation within the transactivation domain may limit the activity of
Stat5a in the absence of proper coactivation by glucocorticoid receptors.

PMID: 11604235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Oct 25;183(1-2):101-12.

Specific DNA binding and transactivation potential of recombinant, purified
Stat5.

Beisenherz-Huss C(1), Mundt M, Herrala A, Vihko P, Schubert A, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy, University of Freiburg, Albertstr. 23, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany.

The signal transducers and activators of transcriptions (Stats) are central
mediators of cytokine responses especially in hematopoietic cells. The detailed
molecular mechanisms of Stat activation, particularly the role of
post-translational modifications and co-operation with cellular transcription
factors are subject to intense investigation. The phosphorylation of a tyrosine
residue in the carboxyl terminal domain is a common characteristic for the
biologically active state of all known Stats. We studied the biological potential
of purified recombinant murine Stat5a and Stat5b. These proteins were expressed
in Sf9 insect cells upon infection with Stat5 encoding baculoviruses. We also
obtained the tyrosine phosphorylated, activated forms of the Stat5 proteins by
expressing the tyrosine kinase Janus kinase2 (Jak) in the same cells through
co-infection with a kinase encoding virus. After purification, only the tyrosine 
phosphorylated form was able to bind specifically in vitro to the Stat5 DNA
response element. This activated form of Stat5 is also able to support specific
cell free in vitro transcription of a gene with a Stat5 response element in its
promoter region. The recombinant purified Stat5 proteins were treated with the
tyrosine specific protein phosphatase or with potato acidic phosphatase, which
removes phosphate groups from serine and tyrosine residues. Phosphatase treatment
resulted in the loss of specific DNA binding ability. This property could be
restored by an in vitro reaction with recombinant, purified EGF or PDGF receptor 
kinases. Tyrosine rephosphorylation in vitro also restored the transactivation
potential of Stat5. This modification is, therefore, a sufficient prerequisite
for transcriptional induction by Stat5.

PMID: 11604230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Oct 25;183(1-2):49-54.

Differential phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2, Stat5A and Stat5B in response to 
growth hormone in primary rat adipocytes.

Ridderstråle M(1), Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Lund University, Wallenberglaboratory, University
Hospital Malmö, S-205 02 Malmo, Sweden. martin.ridderstrale@endo.mas.lu.se

In vitro growth hormone (GH) stimulation of Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation has been detected in rat adipocytes where GH
exerts both chronic diabetogenic and acute insulin-like effects but not in
adipocytes where only chronic diabetogenic effects are exerted. The 95 kDa
transcription factor Stat5, which is tyrosine phosphorylated in response to GH in
both cases, is here identified as the 5A-isoform. Stat5B was not tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to GH in adipocytes but subject to a gel supershift
indicating regulation by serine and/or threonine phosphorylation. The
differential tyrosine phosphorylation of these proteins suggests involvement of a
kinase other than Jak2 in Stat5A activation. However, in adipocytes where GH
exerts both diabetogenic and insulin-like effects, and both Jak2 and Stat5A were 
activated, their phosphorylation kinetics and downregulation of tyrosine
phosphorylation were almost identical. We conclude that Stat5A is important for
the diabetogenic actions of GH and that Jak2 still is the most probable candidate
kinase for Stat5A in primary adipocytes.

PMID: 11604224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):45722-8. Epub 2001 Sep 27.

The Stat1 binding motif of the interferon-gamma receptor is sufficient to mediate
Stat5 activation and its repression by SOCS3.

Woldman I(1), Varinou L, Ramsauer K, Rapp B, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9,
A1030 Vienna, Austria.

Signal transduction via the interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) receptor requires the
tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stats). Whereas tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1 occurs in all cells,
activation of Stat5 by IFN-gamma is cell type-restricted. Here we investigated
the mechanism of Stat5 activation by the IFN-gamma receptor. In transfection
assays both Stat5 isoforms, Stat5a and Stat5b, were phosphorylated on tyrosine in
response to IFN-gamma. Stat5 activation required the presence of tyrosine 420
(Tyr-420) in the murine IFNGR1 receptor chain, which also serves as the Stat1
binding site. Moreover, a peptide including Tyr-440, the Stat1 binding site of
the human IFNGR1 chain, conferred the ability upon a synthetic receptor to
activate Stat5. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) inhibited the
activation of Stat5 by the IFN-gamma receptor, and the Tyr-440-containing peptide
stretch was sufficient for repression. SOCS3 expression had little effect on the 
activity of Jak kinases not associated with cytokine receptors. In
IFN-gamma-treated, Stat1-deficient fibroblasts Stat5 was inefficient in inducing 
transcription of a Stat-dependent reporter gene, suggesting it does not per se
make a major contribution to the expression of IFN-gamma-responsive genes.

PMID: 11577084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(20):6859-69.

Differential interactions of specific nuclear factor I isoforms with the
glucocorticoid receptor and STAT5 in the cooperative regulation of WAP gene
transcription.

Mukhopadhyay SS(1), Wyszomierski SL, Gronostajski RM, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The distal region (-830 to -720 bp) of the rat whey acidic protein (WAP) gene
contains a composite response element (CoRE), which has been demonstrated
previously to confer mammary gland-specific and hormonally regulated WAP gene
expression. Point mutations in the binding sites for specific transcription
factors present within this CoRE have demonstrated the importance of both nuclear
factor I (NFI) and STAT5 as well as cooperative interactions with the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in the regulation of WAP gene expression in the
mammary gland of transgenic mice. This study reports the characterization of NFI 
gene expression during mammary gland development and the identification and
cloning of specific NFI isoforms (NFI-A4, NFI-B2, and NFI-X1) from the mouse
mammary gland during lactation. Some but not all of these NFI isoforms
synergistically activate WAP gene transcription in cooperation with GR and STAT5,
as determined using transient cotransfection assays in JEG-3 cells. On both the
WAP CoRE and the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat promoter, the
NFI-B isoform preferentially activated gene transcription in cooperation with
STAT5A and GR. In contrast, the NFI-A isoform suppressed GR and STAT
cooperativity at the WAP CoRE. Finally, unlike their interaction with the NFI
consensus binding site in the adenovirus promoter, the DNA-binding specificities 
of the three NFI isoforms to the palindromic NFI site in the WAP CoRE were not
identical, which may partially explain the failure of the NFI-A isoform to
cooperate with GR and STAT5A.

PMCID: PMC99863
PMID: 11564870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 1;167(7):3652-60.

STAT5 induces macrophage differentiation of M1 leukemia cells through activation 
of IL-6 production mediated by NF-kappaB p65.

Kawashima T(1), Murata K, Akira S, Tonozuka Y, Minoshima Y, Feng S, Kumagai H,
Tsuruga H, Ikeda Y, Asano S, Nosaka T, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoietic Factors, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

We recently demonstrated that STAT5 can induce a variety of biological functions 
in mouse IL-3-dependent Ba/F3 cells; STAT5-induced expression of pim-1,
p21(WAF/Cip1), and suppressor of cytokine signaling-1/STAT-induced STAT
inhibitor-1/Janus kinase binding protein is responsible for induction of
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, respectively. In the present
study, using a constitutively active STAT5A (STAT5A1*6), we show that STAT5
induces macrophage differentiation of mouse leukemic M1 cells through a distinct 
mechanism, autocrine production of IL-6. The supernatant of STAT5A1*6-transduced 
cells contained sufficient concentrations of IL-6 to induce macrophage
differentiation of parental M1 cells, and STAT3 was phosphorylated on their
tyrosine residues in these cells. Treatment of the cells with anti-IL-6 blocking 
Abs profoundly inhibited the differentiation. We also found that the STAT5A1*6
transactivated the IL-6 promoter, which was mediated by the enhanced binding of
NF-kappaB p65 (RelA) to the promoter region of IL-6. These findings indicate that
STAT5A cooperates with Rel/NF-kappaB to induce production of IL-6, thereby
inducing macrophage differentiation of M1 cells in an autocrine manner. In
summary, we have shown a novel mechanism by which STAT5 induces its pleiotropic
functions. Cytokines

PMID: 11564778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Neurochem Res. 2001 Jun;26(6):629-37.

IL-5 induces proliferation and activation of microglia via an unknown receptor.

Liva SM(1), de Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Mental Retardation Research Center, Brain Research
Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

While the effects of interleukin-3 (IL-3) and granulocyte macrophage-colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) on microglia are well documented, very little is
known about the effects of a related cytokine, interleukin-5 (IL-5). We therefore
undertook studies to determine how IL-5 alters various aspects of microglial
functioning. Treatment of microglia with IL-5 resulted in the induction of
proliferation at levels similar to those induced by GM-CSF. IL-5 also increased
cellular metabolism of microglial cells. To determine whether increased
metabolism correlated with activation of microglia, we measured levels of
nitrite, a breakdown product of nitric oxide. Treatment of microglial cultures
with IL-5 increased nitrite levels, while GM-CSF treatment had no effect.
Treatment of microglia with IL-5 did not cause activation of the signal
transduction pathways linked to the classical IL-5 receptor, STAT5A/5B and ERK1
and ERK2. It is therefore likely that the effects of IL-5 on microglia are not
mediated via the classical IL-5 receptor, but rather via a novel receptor.

PMID: 11523538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Cell Biochem. 2001;82(3):371-86.

Extracellular matrix regulates alpha s1-casein gene expression in rabbit primary 
mammary cells and CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) binding activity.

Jolivet G(1), Meusnier C, Chaumaz G, Houdebine LM.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement et Biotechnologies, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, 78352 Jouy en Josas, France. gjolivet@biotec.jouy.inra.fr

Previous studies have shown that both the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) and the CCAAT enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are
involved in the regulation of casein gene expression by mammary epithelial cells.
Prolactin (Prl) activation of STAT5 is necessary for casein gene expression. The 
extracellular matrix (ECM) regulates also casein gene expression. Here, we have
investigated whether ECM regulates C/EBPs activity in primary rabbit mammary
epithelial cells. Isolated primary mammary cells were cultured on plastic or on
floating collagen I gel. Prolactin induced alphas 1-casein gene expression when
cells were cultured on collagen but not on plastic. It is noteworthy that
activated STAT5 was detected in both culture conditions. Several STAT5 isoforms
(STAT5a, STAT5b, and other STAT5 related isoforms, some with lower molecular
weight than the full-length STAT5a and STAT5b) were detected under the different 
culture conditions. However, their presence was not related to the expression of 
alphas 1-casein gene. The binding of nuclear factors to a C/EBP specific binding 
site and the protein level of C/EBPbeta differed in cells cultured on plastic or 
on collagen but these parameters were not modified by Prl. This suggests that
C/EBP binding activity was regulated by ECM and not by Prl. Interestingly, these 
modifications were correlated to the expression of the alphas 1-casein gene.
Hence, the activation of the alphas 1-casein gene expression depends on two
independent signals, one delivered by Prl via the activation of STAT5, the other 
delivered by ECM via C/EBP.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11500914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Immunity. 2001 Jul;15(1):159-72.

The basis for IL-2-induced IL-2 receptor alpha chain gene regulation: importance 
of two widely separated IL-2 response elements.

Kim HP(1), Kelly J, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) chain is an essential component of 
high-affinity IL-2 receptors. Accordingly, IL-2Ralpha expression helps to
regulate T cell growth and other lymphoid functions. Lineage-restricted and
activation-dependent IL-2Ralpha transcription is controlled by three upstream
positive regulatory regions (PRRs). We now describe an additional IL-2 response
element, PRRIV, within intron 1, in humans and mice. PRRIV activity requires GAS 
motifs that bind Stat5 proteins and additional upstream HMG-I(Y) binding sites.
Moreover, IL-2 induces the binding of HMG-I(Y), Stat5a, and Stat5b in vivo to
PRRIV and PRRIII, which also functions as an IL-2 response element. Thus, the
IL-2 inducibility of the IL-2Ralpha gene is unexpectedly mediated by two widely
separated regulatory Stat5-dependent elements, located both upstream and
downstream of the transcription initiation sites.

PMID: 11485747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 31;98(16):9050-5.

An essential role of the JAK-STAT pathway in ischemic preconditioning.

Xuan YT(1), Guo Y, Han H, Zhu Y, Bolli R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Laboratory, Division of Cardiology, University of
Louisville and the Jewish Hospital Heart and Lung Institute, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

The goal of this study was to determine the role of the Janus tyrosine kinase
(JAK)-signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway in the
late phase of ischemic preconditioning (PC). A total of 230 mice were used. At 5 
min after ischemic PC (induced with six cycles of 4-min coronary occlusion/4-min 
reperfusion), immunoprecipitation with anti-phosphotyrosine (anti-pTyr)
antibodies followed by immunoblotting with anti-JAK antibodies revealed increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1 (+257 +/- 53%) and JAK2 (+238 +/- 35%),
indicating rapid activation of these two kinases. Similar results were obtained
by immunoblotting with anti-pTyr-JAK1 and anti-pTyr-JAK2 antibodies. Western
analysis with anti-pTyr-STAT antibodies demonstrated a marked increase in nuclear
pTyr-STAT1 (+301 +/- 61%) and pTyr-STAT3 (+253 +/- 60%) 30 min after ischemic PC,
which was associated with redistribution of STAT1 and STAT3 from the cytosolic to
the nuclear fraction and with an increase in STAT1 and STAT3 gamma-IFN activation
site DNA-binding activity (+606 +/- 64%), indicating activation of STAT1 and
STAT3. No nuclear translocation or tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT2, STAT4,
STAT5A, STAT5B, or STAT6 was observed. Pretreatment with the JAK inhibitor AG-490
20 min before the six occlusion/reperfusion cycles blocked the enhanced tyrosine 
phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2 and the increased tyrosine phosphorylation,
nuclear translocation, and enhanced DNA-binding activity of STAT1 and STAT3. The 
same dose of AG-490 abrogated the protection against myocardial infarction and
the concomitant up-regulation of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) protein and
activity observed 24 h after ischemic PC. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that ischemic PC induces isoform-selective activation of JAK1, JAK2, 
STAT1, and STAT3, and that ablation of this response impedes the up-regulation of
iNOS and the concurrent acquisition of ischemic tolerance. This study
demonstrates that the JAK-STAT pathway plays an essential role in the development
of late PC. The results reveal a signaling mechanism that underlies the
transcriptional up-regulation of the cardiac iNOS gene and the adaptation of the 
heart to ischemic stress.

PMCID: PMC55371
PMID: 11481471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):171-4.

Cloning and developmental expression of STAT5 in Xenopus laevis.

Pascal A(1), Riou JF, Carron C, Boucaut JC, Umbhauer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, Groupe
Biologie Expérimentale, UMR CNRS 7622, Université Paris VI, 9 quai Saint-Bernard,
75005, Paris, France.

Transcription factors of the signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) family are required for cellular responses to multiple signalling
molecules. After ligand binding-induced activation of cognate receptors, STAT
proteins are phosphorylated, hetero- or homodimerize, and enter the nucleus. STAT
dimers bind to specific DNA elements and alter the transcriptional activity of
the signal-responsive genes. We report the cloning and developmental pattern of
expression of XSTAT5, a Xenopus laevis member of the STAT family, closely related
to the mammalian STAT5A and STAT5B. XSTAT5 is expressed maternally and
zygotically. With the onset of neurulation, XSTAT5 RNA are clearly localized in
the anterior neural plate and subsequently in the neural structures of the
developing eye, the pineal gland and the cement gland anlage. At late tailbud
stages, a faint expression is detected in a ventral location that might
correspond to the ventral blood islands.

PMID: 11472851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2001 Jan;6(1):115-27.

Stat transcription factors in mammary gland development and tumorigenesis.

Watson CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.
cjw53@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

Two members of the Stat family of transcription factors play a vital role in
mouse mammary gland development. Stat5a was originally described as a regulator
of milk protein gene expression and was subsequently shown to be essential for
mammary development and lactogenesis. In contrast, Stat3 is an essential mediator
of apoptosis and post-lactational regression. Other members of the Stat family
may have specific, but as yet undemonstrated, functions in mammary development.
However, since Stat1 activity is regulated during mammary development in a
pattern different from Stats 3 and 5, this factor too may have a functional role.
Although both Stat4 and Stat6 are expressed in mammary tissue, it seems unlikely 
that they will have a significant function as each of these Stats is activated in
response to a limited number of cytokines. Given the essential regulatory roles
of Stat signaling molecules in mammary development, it was not surprising to
discover that constitutively activated Stat factors are a feature of human breast
cancers. Sustained Stat activity has also been described in a variety of tumors
including leukemias. The cause of this sustained activation is not clear but
probably involves mutation of one of the many Stat regulatory proteins or
dysregulation of other signaling pathways which modulate Stat activity. It is now
important to understand the mechanism of constitutive Stat activity and to
develop strategies which will abrogate aberrant Stat signaling in tumors in vivo.

PMID: 11467447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 17;276(33):31216-28. Epub 2001 Jun 18.

Transcription factor STAT5A is a substrate of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in B
cells.

Mahajan S(1), Vassilev A, Sun N, Ozer Z, Mao C, Uckun FM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Signal Transduction Laboratory, Parker Hughes Cancer Center and the 
Department of Biochemistry, Parker Hughes Institute, St. Paul, Minnesota 55113,
USA.

STAT5A is a molecular regulator of proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis 
in lymphohematopoietic cells. Here we show that STAT5A can serve as a functional 
substrate of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). Purified recombinant BTK was capable
of directly binding purified recombinant STAT5A with high affinity (K(d) = 44
nm), as determined by surface plasmon resonance using a BIAcore biosensor system.
BTK was also capable of tyrosine-phosphorylating ectopically expressed
recombinant STAT5A on Tyr(694) both in vitro and in vivo in a Janus kinase
3-independent fashion. BTK phosphorylated the Y665F, Y668F, and Y682F,Y683F
mutants but not the Y694F mutant of STAT5A. STAT5A mutations in the Src homology 
2 (SH2) and SH3 domains did not alter the BTK-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation. 
Recombinant BTK proteins with mutant pleckstrin homology, SH2, or SH3 domains
were capable of phosphorylating STAT5A, whereas recombinant BTK proteins with
SH1/kinase domain mutations were not. In pull-down experiments, only full-length 
BTK and its SH1/kinase domain (but not the pleckstrin homology, SH2, or SH3
domains) were capable of binding STAT5A. Ectopically expressed BTK kinase domain 
was capable of tyrosine-phosphorylating STAT5A both in vitro and in vivo.
BTK-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of ectopically expressed wild type (but not
Tyr(694) mutant) STAT5A enhanced its DNA binding activity. In BTK-competent
chicken B cells, anti-IgM-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 protein
was prevented by pretreatment with the BTK inhibitor LFM-A13 but not by
pretreatment with the JAK3 inhibitor HI-P131. B cell antigen receptor ligation
resulted in enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 in BTK-deficient chicken B
cells reconstituted with wild type human BTK but not in BTK-deficient chicken B
cells reconstituted with kinase-inactive mutant BTK. Similarly, anti-IgM
stimulation resulted in enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A in
BTK-competent B cells from wild type mice but not in BTK-deficient B cells from
XID mice. In contrast to B cells from XID mice, B cells from JAK3 knockout mice
showed a normal STAT5A phosphorylation response to anti-IgM stimulation. These
findings provide unprecedented experimental evidence that BTK plays a
nonredundant and pivotal role in B cell antigen receptor-mediated STAT5A
activation in B cells.

PMID: 11413148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 May 15;176(1-2):39-48.

Stat5 phosphorylation status and DNA-binding activity in the bovine and murine
mammary glands.

Wheeler TT(1), Broadhurst MK, Sadowski HB, Farr VC, Prosser CG.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science, AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Private Bag 3123,
Hamilton, New Zealand. tom.wheeler@agresearch.co.nz

The transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b are mediators of prolactin signalling
in mammary epithelial cells, and are thought to play a role in lactogenesis. In
cultured cells, activation of Stat5 activity through phosphorylation results in
Stat5 binding to the promoters of at least some of the milk protein genes,
thereby stimulating their transcription. However, the mammary biology of Stat5
differs between species, and the role of Stat5 in the bovine mammary gland is not
fully understood. We have generated an antibody that specifically recognises the 
phosphorylated forms of Stat5a and Stat5b and used it to compare the levels of
phosphorylated Stat5 with Stat5 DNA-binding activity in bovine and murine mammary
tissue. Both Stat5 DNA-binding activity and phosphorylation status in the bovine 
mammary gland were at near-maximal levels at late pregnancy (27-35 days prior to 
calving), when at least three of the major milk proteins are not highly
expressed. In addition, these studies revealed significant animal-to-animal
variation in the level of Stat5 activity in both species. The results are
consistent with a role in terminal differentiation of mammary epithelial cells.
They also suggest that the stimulation of high-level expression of milk protein
genes in the bovine mammary gland is not through activation of the prolactin
receptor-Jak2-Stat5 pathway.

PMID: 11369441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 19;20(17):2080-90.

Constitutively active STAT5 variants induce growth and survival of hematopoietic 
cells through a PI 3-kinase/Akt dependent pathway.

Santos SC(1), Lacronique V, Bouchaert I, Monni R, Bernard O, Gisselbrecht S,
Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire (ICGM), Institut National de la Santé
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM U363), Hôpital Cochin, 27 rue du Fbg St
Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STATs) are important mediators 
of cytokine and growth factor-induced signal transduction. STAT5A and STAT5B have
been shown to play a role in survival and proliferation of hematopoietic cells
both in vitro and in vivo and to contribute to the growth and viability of cells 
transformed by the TEL-JAK2 oncoprotein. In this study, we investigated the
molecular mechanisms by which constitutively active STAT5 proteins induce cell
proliferation and survival of Ba/F3 cell lines expressing either dominant
positive STAT5A or STAT5B variants or TEL-JAK2 or TEL-ABL fusion proteins. Our
results showed that active STAT5 constitutively interacted with p85, the
regulatory subunit of the PI 3-kinase. A constitutive activity of the PI
3-kinase/Akt pathway was observed in these cells and required for their cell
cycle progression. In contrast, while activity of the PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway was
required for survival of Ba/F3 cells expressing the constitutively active forms
of STAT5A or STAT5B, it was dispensable for cells transformed by TEL-JAK2 or
TEL-ABL fusion proteins, suggesting that additional survival pathways take place 
in these transformed cells.

PMID: 11360192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Exp Clin Immunogenet. 2001;18(2):86-95.

Gab2 is phosphorylated on tyrosine upon interleukin-2/interleukin-15 stimulation 
in mycosis-fungoides-derived tumor T cells and associates inducibly with SHP-2
and Stat5a.

Brockdorff JL(1), Gu H, Mustelin T, Kaltoft K, Geisler C, Röpke C, Ødum N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Mass, USA.

Cutaneous T cell lymphomas (CTCLs) often show abnormal interleukin-2 (IL-2)
receptor signaling. In this study, we investigated the role of Gab2, a recently
identified adaptor molecule involved in IL-2 receptor signaling in CTCLs. We show
that Gab2 was transiently phosphorylated by tyrosine in human mycosis fungoides
(MF) tumor T cells upon IL-2 stimulation and that SHP2 as well as Stat5a
associated inducibly with Gab2. IL-15, but not IL-4, also induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of Gab2, suggesting that the IL-2 receptor beta-chain is
important for IL-2-induced Gab2 phosphorylation. Preincubation of cells with the 
Src family kinase inhibitor, PP1, surprisingly increased the IL-2- and
IL-15-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Gab2, indicating that an Src family
kinase member negatively regulates IL-2 receptor signaling in MF T cells. Thus,
although Gab2 seems to function normally in MF T cells compared to normal T
cells, Gab2 itself might be abnormally regulated by an Src family kinase.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11340297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2001 Feb;20(2):123-35.

Growth hormone induces tyrosyl phosphorylation of the transcription factors
Stat5a and Stat5b in CMT-U335 canine mammary tumor cells.

van Garderen E(1), Swennenhuis JF, Hellmén E, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. e.vangarderen@vet.uu.nl

It has now been well documented that the normal and tumorous canine mammary
glands can be extra-pituitary sites of substantial growth hormone (GH) synthesis.
Until now, attempts to reproduce the GH synthesis in-vitro using canine mammary
explants or mammary tumor cells have not been successful. Therefore, the response
of CMT-U335 canine mammary tumor cells to administered porcine GH (pGH) was
investigated as an in-vitro model to study the possible effects of GH synthesis
on this site. CMT-U335 cells spontaneously express the growth hormone receptor
(GHR) as well as the prolactin receptor (PRLR). Twenty five minutes after
administration, GH induced, in a dose-dependent manner, phosphorylation of the
transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b. Clear phosphorylation was induced by
10(-7) M and 10(-8) M pGH, with virtually no phosphorylation at 10(-9) M pGH. A
similar dose-dependent phosphorylation of Stat5a by ovine prolactin was found in 
these cells. Although at high concentrations binding of pGH to the canine PRLR
can occur (albeit with a low pKa), the similar dose-dependent effect of oPRL on
Stat5a phosphorylation indicated that pGH signaled through the GHR. Remarkably,
pGH induced a moderately decreased proliferation of CMT-U335 tumor cells, which
may indicate that GH induces differentiation in these tumor cells. The GH-induced
activation of Stat5a and Stat5b in these cells, as part of the JAK/Stat signal
transduction pathway, is consistent with mammary GH playing a role in autocrine
and/or paracrine stimulation of (tumorous) mammary cells.

PMID: 11311850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biol Chem. 2001 Feb;382(2):343-51.

Experimental regulation of STAT gene expression reveals an involvement of STAT5
in interleukin-4-driven cell proliferation.

Friedrich K(1), Wietek S.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biocenter), Department of
Physiological Chemistry II, Würzburg, Germany.

The precise roles of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs)
in cytokine-triggered control of cell physiology are not sufficiently well
understood. We have established cell lines in which the individual functional
contributions of STAT6 and STAT5a/b to interleukin-(IL-) 3 and -4-dependent
processes can be readily studied. Mutants of STAT6, STAT5a and 5b lacking the
transcriptional transactivation domain were fused to the green fluorescent
protein (GFP) and expressed in the murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3 in a regulatable 
fashion. The expression of these truncated STAT variants could be tightly
controlled over a wide range by doxycycline in the medium. They specifically
bound to cognate DNA elements upon cytokine stimulation and acted
dominant-negatively on the transcription of respective reporter genes in response
to IL-3 and -4. The system was applied to the question of STAT contributions to
cytokine-dependent cell proliferation. Expression of dominant-negative STAT6 had 
no significant effect on cell growth in response to both IL-3 and IL-4. In
contrast, truncated STAT5 interfered with cell proliferation in response to IL-3,
and, interestingly, also to IL-4. The results support our earlier findings on a
role of STAT5 in IL-4-induced intracellular signaling and indicate that STAT5b in
particular is involved in IL-4 receptor-triggered control of cell proliferation.

PMID: 11308032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Blood. 2001 Apr 15;97(8):2358-65.

Stat5a regulates T helper cell differentiation by several distinct mechanisms.

Kagami S(1), Nakajima H, Suto A, Hirose K, Suzuki K, Morita S, Kato I, Saito Y,
Kitamura T, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

We have previously shown that CD4(+) T cell-mediated allergic inflammation is
diminished in signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a-deficient
(Stat5a(-/-)) mice. To determine whether Stat5a regulates T helper cell
differentiation, we studied T helper (Th)1 and Th2 cell differentiation of
Stat5a(-/-)CD4(+) T cells at single-cell levels. First, Th2 cell differentiation 
from antigen-stimulated splenocytes was significantly decreased in Stat5a(-/-)
mice as compared with that in wild-type mice. Further, Th2 cell differentiation
was also impaired in Stat5a(-/-) mice even when purified CD4(+) T cells were
stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies in the presence of
interleukin-4. Moreover, the retrovirus-mediated gene expression of Stat5a in
Stat5a(-/-)CD4(+) T cells restored the Th2 cell differentiation at the similar
levels to that in wild-type CD4(+) T cells. In addition, interleukin-4 normally
phosphorylated Stat6 in CD4(+) T cells from Stat5a(-/-) mice. Second, the
development of CD4(+)CD25(+) immunoregulatory T cells was impaired in Stat5a(-/-)
mice, as indicated by a significant decrease in the number of CD4(+)CD25(+) T
cells in Stat5a(-/-) mice. Furthermore, the depletion of CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells
from wild-type splenocytes significantly decreased Th2 cell differentiation but
increased Th1 cell differentiation, whereas the depletion of CD4(+)CD25(+) T
cells from Stat5a(-/-) splenocytes had no significant effect on the Th1 and Th2
cell differentiation. Together, these results indicate that the intrinsic
expression of Stat5a in CD4(+) T cells is required for Th2 cell differentiation
and that Stat5a is involved in the development of CD4(+)CD25(+) immunoregulatory 
T cells that modulate T helper cell differentiation toward Th2 cells.

PMID: 11290598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(9):3137-43.

Gadd45gamma is dispensable for normal mouse development and T-cell proliferation.

Hoffmeyer A(1), Piekorz R, Moriggl R, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Gadd45gamma, a family member of the growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene
family 45 (Gadd45), is strongly induced by interleukin-2 (IL-2) in peripheral T
cells. While in most tissues all Gadd45 family members are expressed, Gadd45gamma
is the only member that is induced by IL-2. Here we show that the IL-2-induced
expression of Gadd45gamma is dependent on a signaling pathway mediated by the
tyrosine kinase Jak3 and the transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b (signal
transducer and activator of transcription). Previous studies with ectopically
overexpressed Gadd45gamma in various cell lines implicated its function in
negative growth control. To analyze the physiological role of Gadd45gamma we used
homologous recombination to generate mice lacking Gadd45gamma.
Gadd45gamma-deficient mice develop normally, are indistinguishable from their
littermates, and are fertile. Furthermore, hematopoiesis in mice lacking
Gadd45gamma is not impaired and Gadd45gamma-deficient T lymphocytes show normal
responses to IL-2. These data demonstrate that Gadd45gamma is not essential for
normal mouse development and hematopoiesis, possibly due to functional redundancy
among the Gadd45 family members. Gadd45gamma is also dispensable for IL-2-induced
T-cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC86941
PMID: 11287618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20703-10. Epub 2001 Mar 13.

Insulin Induction of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 mRNA expression in C2C12 Skeletal Muscle
Cells Is Mediated by Stat5*.

Sadowski CL(1), Choi TS, Le M, Wheeler TT, Wang LH, Sadowski HB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York, 10029, USA. henry.sadowski@mssm.edu

Previously, by a yeast 2-hybrid screen, we identified signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) as a substrate of the insulin receptor
(IR). We demonstrated that refeeding of fasted mice leads to rapid activation of 
Stat5 proteins in liver, skeletal muscle, and fat, suggesting that Stat5b is a
physiological target of insulin. Here, we show that injection of glucose or
insulin into fasted mice leads to robust activation of both Stat5a and Stat5b in 
skeletal muscle. In C2C12 myotubes, we find that insulin stimulates tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5b by 3-5-fold. This degree of Stat5 activation
in vitro is significantly lower than what we observe in vivo and inversely
correlates with IRS-1/2 levels. We can recapitulate robust insulin activation of 
Stat5 in C2C12 cells by stable overexpression of the human IR (hIR). To identify 
insulin-activated genes that are Stat5 targets, we also overexpressed an IR
mutant (LA-hIR) that signals normally for mitogen-activated protein kinase- and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent pathways but is deficient in Stat5
signaling in response to insulin. We demonstrate that insulin induces the
expression of SOCS-2 mRNA in the wild type hIR but not in the
LA-hIR-overexpressing cells. The induction of SOCS-3 by insulin is reduced but
not lost in the LA-hIR cells. Therefore, our results suggest that insulin
induction of SOCS-2, and in part SOCS-3 mRNA expression, is mediated by Stat5 and
can be independent of mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-signaling pathways.

PMID: 11279166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):17800-7. Epub 2001 Feb 15.

Bcl-XL expression correlates with primary macrophage differentiation, activation 
of functional competence, and survival and results from synergistic
transcriptional activation by Ets2 and PU.1.

Sevilla L(1), Zaldumbide A, Carlotti F, Dayem MA, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signalisation, Developmental Biology and Cancer, INSERM 470,
Centre de Biochimie, Université de Nice, Faculté des Sciences, 06108 Nice,
France.

Depriving primary bone marrow-derived macrophages of colony-stimulating factor-1 
(CSF-1) induces programmed cell death by apoptosis. We show that cell death is
accompanied by decreases in the expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-x(L) protein and
the Ets2 and PU.1 proteins of the Ets transcription factor family. Macrophages
require both priming and triggering signals independent of CSF-1 to kill
neoplastic cells or microorganisms, and this activation of macrophage competence 
is accompanied by increased expression of bcl-x(L), ets2, and PU.1. Furthermore, 
we show that only Ets2 and PU.1, but not Ets1, function in a synergistic manner
to transactivate the bcl-x promoter. The synergy observed between PU.1 and Ets2
is dependent on the transactivation domains of both proteins. Although other
transcription factors like Fos, c-Jun, Myc, STAT3, and STAT5a are implicated in
the activation of macrophage competence or in CSF-1 signaling, no synergy was
observed between Ets2 and these transcription factors on the bcl-x promoter. We
demonstrate that the exogenous expression of both Ets2 and PU.1 in macrophages
increases the number of viable cells upon CSF-1 depletion and that Ets2 and PU.1 
can functionally replace Bcl-x(L) in inhibiting Bax-induced apoptosis. Together, 
these results demonstrate that PU.1 and Ets2 dramatically increase bcl-x
activation, which is necessary for the cytocidal function and survival of
macrophages.

PMID: 11278399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 1;232(1):219-32.

Pecam-1 is a modulator of stat family member phosphorylation and localization:
lessons from a transgenic mouse.

Ilan N(1), Cheung L, Miller S, Mohsenin A, Tucker A, Madri JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, 06510, USA.

PECAM-1 (CD31) is a member of the immunoglobin (Ig) superfamily of cell adhesion 
molecules whose expression is restricted to hematopoietic and vascular cells.
PECAM-1 can recruit adapter and signaling molecules via its immunoreceptor
tyrosine activation motif (ITAM), suggesting that PECAM-1 plays a role in signal 
transduction pathways. To study the involvement of PECAM-1 in signaling cascades 
in vivo, we used the major histocompatibility (MHC) I gene promoter to target
ectopic PECAM-1 expression in transgenic mice. We noted an attenuation of mammary
gland development at early stages of virgin ductal branching morphogenesis.
STAT5a, a modulator of milk protein gene expression during lactation, was
localized to the nuclei of ductal epithelial cells of 6-week-old virgin PECAM-1
transgenics, but not in control mice. This correlated with decreases in ductal
epithelial cell proliferation and induction of p21, an inhibitor of cell cycle
progression. Using in vitro model systems we demonstrated PECAM-1/STAT5a
association and found that residue Y701 in PECAM-1's cytoplasmic tail is
important for PECAM-1/STAT5 association and that PECAM-1 modulates increases in
STAT5a tyrosine phosphorylation levels. We suggest that by serving as a
scaffolding, PECAM-1 can bring substrates (STAT5a) and enzymes (a kinase) into
close proximity, thereby modulating phosphorylation levels of selected proteins, 
as previously noted for beta-catenin.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11254359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):3724-32.

Concomitant inhibition of Janus kinase 3 and calcineurin-dependent signaling
pathways synergistically prolongs the survival of rat heart allografts.

Behbod F(1), Erwin-Cohen RA, Wang ME, Trawick BW, Qu X, Verani R, Kahan BD,
Stepkowski SM, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The cytoplasmic localized Janus tyrosine kinase 3 (Jak3) is activated by multiple
cytokines, including IL-2, IL-4, and IL-7, through engagement of the IL-2R common
gamma-chain. Genetic inactivation of Jak3 is manifested as SCID in humans and
mice. These findings have suggested that Jak3 represents a pharmacological target
to control certain lymphoid-derived diseases. Using the rat T cell line Nb2-11c, 
we document that tyrphostin AG-490 blocked in vitro IL-2-induced cell
proliferation (IC(50) approximately 20 microM), Jak3 autophosphorylation, and
activation of its key substrates, Stat5a and Stat5b, as measured by
tyrosine/serine phosphorylation analysis and DNA-binding experiments. To test the
notion that inhibition of Jak3 provides immunosuppressive potential, a 7-day
course of i.v. therapy with 5-20 mg/kg AG-490 was used to inhibit rejection of
heterotopically transplanted Lewis (RT1(l)) heart allografts in ACI (RT1(a))
recipients. In this study, we report that AG-490 significantly prolonged
allograft survival, but also acted synergistically when used in combination with 
the signal 1 inhibitor cyclosporin A, but not the signal 3 inhibitor, rapamycin. 
Finally, AG-490 treatment reduced graft infiltration of mononuclear cells and
Stat5a/b DNA binding of ex vivo IL-2-stimulated graft infiltrating of mononuclear
cells, but failed to affect IL2R alpha expression, as judged by RNase protection 
assays. Thus, inhibition of Jak3 prolongs allograft survival and also potentiates
the immunosuppressive effects of cyclosporin A, but not rapamycin.

PMID: 11238613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Jan;12(1):1-7.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5B potentiates v-Src-mediated 
transformation of NIH-3T3 cells.

Kazansky AV(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030-3498, USA.

Previously, we reported that whereas both signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) 5A and STAT5B can be activated with respect to tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding potential by Src kinase, only STAT5B was
translocated to the nucleus, where it presumably activates unique downstream
responses. To help elucidate the functional consequences of STAT5B activation by 
v-src, the properties of stably transfected NIH-3T3 cells containing both an
intact and a dominant negative, COOH-terminal-truncated isoform of STAT5B were
investigated. STAT5B enhanced the transforming potential of v-Src as reflected by
both an increase in focus formation and growth in soft agar. STAT5B also enhanced
v-Src-induced cell cycle progression and cell motility in NIH-3T3 cells.
Furthermore, the dominant negative, COOH-terminal-truncated isoform of STAT5B was
able to partially suppress v-Src-mediated cell transformation. These results
support the hypothesis that STAT5B may enhance Src/Abl-induced tumorigenesis.
Accordingly, the equilibrium between STAT5B and STAT5A and their naturally
occurring truncated forms may therefore play a key role in the etiology of
certain cancers.

PMID: 11205741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Br J Haematol. 2001 Feb;112(2):449-58.

The granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor supports erythroid
differentiation in the absence of the erythropoietin receptor or Stat5.

Millot GA(1), Svinarchuk F, Lacout C, Vainchenker W, Dumenil D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U362, Laboratoire Hématopoïèse et Cellules Souches, Institut Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France.

To evaluate the functional conservation of signal transduction mechanisms between
haematopoietic receptors and to characterize the molecules activated in this
phenomenon, we introduced granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR)
cDNA into mouse fetal liver cells using a retroviral vector. In semi-solid medium
assays, G-CSFR-infected cells gave rise to all types of colonies
[granulocyte-macrophage (GM), megakaryocyte (MK) and mixed lineage (GEMM)
colony-forming units (CFU) and erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-E)] in the
presence of G-CSF alone. The direct effect of G-CSF on erythroid differentiation 
of G-CSFR-transduced erythroid progenitors was demonstrated by the development of
erythroid colonies using G-CSFR-expressing Lin- cells cloned at one cell per well
in liquid culture in the presence of G-CSF. Interestingly, while Stat5, but not
Stat3, was activated in erythroid cells in response to erythropoietin (EPO), both
were activated in erythroid and granulocytic cells stimulated by G-CSF.
Furthermore, G-CSF induced the growth of erythroid colonies from
G-CSFR-expressing fetal liver cells from EPO receptor-/- (EPO-R-/-) or Stat5a-/- 
Stat5b-/- mice, demonstrating that erythroid differentiation can occur in the
absence of EPO-R or Stat5. These data show that forced expression of G-CSFR
allows G-CSF-dependent multilineage proliferation and differentiation of
haematopoietic progenitors and rescues EPO-R-/- erythroid cells. While G-CSF
induces Stat5 activation in G-CSFR-expressing erythroid cells, this activation is
not necessary for the terminal erythroid differentiation induced by G-CSF.

PMID: 11167846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 26;280(3):675-83.

Transcriptional and ERK1/2-dependent synergistic upregulation of p21(cip1/waf1)
associated with steel factor synergy in MO7e.

Lee Y(1), Mantel C, Anzai N, Braun SE, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, University of Indiana School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Steel factor (SLF) plus GM-CSF induces proliferative synergy in myeloid
progenitors and factor-dependent cell line MO7e. We previously reported that the 
protein level of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(cip1/waf1) (p21) increased
synergistically when MO7e cells were stimulated with SLF plus GM-CSF and that p21
induction was required for SLF synergistic responses. Here we show that this p21 
induction is regulated at the transcriptional level. Based on use of a multiprobe
RNase protection assay, the synergistic increase of p21 mRNA was unique among
many cell cycle regulators. While STAT5A and 5B were activated after stimulation 
with GM-CSF alone or SLF plus GM-CSF, there was no difference in activation
between the groups. p44/42 MAP kinase (ERK1/2) was synergistically activated by
SLF plus GM-CSF, but SAPK/JNK and p38 MAP kinase were not. Synergistic induction 
of p21 was significantly decreased with a MEK1 inhibitor, suggesting that the
ERK1/2 pathway is involved in the synergistic increase of p21 after GM-CSF plus
SLF stimulation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Genomics. 2001 Jan 15;71(2):150-5.

Structure of the mouse Stat 3/5 locus: evolution from Drosophila to zebrafish to 
mouse.

Miyoshi K(1), Cui Y, Riedlinger G, Robinson P, Lehoczky J, Zon L, Oka T, Dewar K,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Building 8, Room 101, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) are transcription
factors that can be activated by many cytokines. While Drosophila contains only
one Stat (d-Stat), mammals contain seven, with STATs 3, 5a, and 5b being the
closest functional relatives. To understand the evolutionary relationship between
d-Stat and vertebrate STATs 3 and 5, we isolated, sequenced, and analyzed the
zebrafish Stat3 (z-Stat3) gene and a 500-kb region spanning mouse chromosome 11, 
60.5 cM containing three Stat genes (m-Stats). Within this region we identified
the genes encoding m-Stats 3, 5a, and 5b, Cnp1, Hcrt/Orexin, Ptrf, GCN5, mDj11,
and four new genes. The 5' ends of the m-Stat5a and m-Stat5b genes are juxtaposed
to each other, and the 3' ends of the m-Stat3 and Stat5a genes face each other.
While the m-Stat5a and m-Stat3 genes have one promoter each, which are active in 
many tissues, the m-Stat5b gene acquired two distinct promoters. The distal
promoter is expressed ubiquitously, and transcription from the proximal promoter 
is restricted to liver, muscle, and mammary tissue. Through a comparison of
exon-intron boundaries from the m-Stat3, m-Stat5a, and m-Stat5b, z-Stat3, and
d-Stat genes, we deduced their evolutionary relationship. We propose that the
Stat3 and Stat5 lineages are derived from the duplication of a common primordial 
gene and that d-Stat is a part of the Stat5 lineage.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11161808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Immunol. 2001 Feb 15;166(4):2218-27.

NF-kappa B/Rel participation in the lymphokine-dependent proliferation of T
lymphoid cells.

Mora A(1), Youn J, Keegan A, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Proliferative responses of lymphoid cells to IL-2 and IL-4 depend on activation
of the cells, but the mechanism(s) by which activation enhances cellular
competence to respond to cytokines is not fully understood. The NF-kappaB/Rel
family represents one signal transduction pathway induced during such activation.
We show in this study that inhibition of NF-kappaB through the expression of an
IkappaBalpha (inhibitory protein that dissociates from NF-kappaB) mutant
refractory to signal-induced degradation (IkappaBalpha(DeltaN)) interfered with
the acquisition of competence to proliferate in response to IL-4 as well as IL-2.
Thymocytes and T cells from IkappaBalpha(DeltaN) transgenic mice expressed normal
levels of IL-2R subunits. However, transgenic cells exhibited a dramatic defect
in Stat5A activation treatment with IL-2, and a similar defect was observed for
IL-4-induced Stat5. In contrast, T lymphoid cells with inhibition of NF-kappaB
showed normal insulin receptor substrate-2 phosphorylation and only a modest
decrease in Stat6 activation and insulin receptor substrate-1 phosphorylation
after IL-4 stimulation. These results indicate that the
NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaBalpha system can regulate cytokine receptor capacitation
through effects on the induction of downstream signaling by the Stat
transcription factor family.

PMID: 11160275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Feb;15(2):228-40.

Cooperative effects of STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5)
and C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta) on beta-casein gene
transcription are mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor.

Wyszomierski SL(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030-3498, USA.

Beta-casein gene transcription is controlled primarily by a composite response
element (CoRE) that integrates signaling from the lactogenic hormones, PRL,
insulin, and hydrocortisone, in mammary epithelial cells. This CoRE contains
binding sites for STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5) and 
C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta) and several half-sites for
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). To examine how interactions among these three
transcription factors might regulate beta-casein gene transcription, a COS cell
reconstitution system was employed. Cooperative transactivation was observed when
all three factors were expressed, but unexpectedly was not seen between STAT5 and
C/EBPbeta in the absence of full-length, transcriptionally active GR.
Cooperativity required the amino-terminal transactivation domain of C/EBPbeta,
and neither C/EBPalpha nor C/EBPdelta was able to substitute for C/EBPbeta when
cotransfected with STAT5 and GR. Different GR determinants were needed for
transcriptional cooperation between STAT5 and GR as compared with those required 
for all three transcription factors. These studies provide some new insights into
the mechanisms responsible for high level, tissue-specific expression conferred
by the beta-casein CoRE.

PMID: 11158330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):10485-91. Epub 2000 Dec 22.

Conversion of threonine 757 to valine enhances Stat5a transactivation potential.

Gowri PM(1), Ganguly TC, Cao J, Devalaraja MN, Groner B, Vore M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0305, 
USA.

The growth hormone family of cytokines transduces intracellular signals through
the Jak2-Stat5 pathway to activate the transcription of target genes. Amino acids
within the C termini of Stats constitute the transactivation domain but also
regulate the time course of tyrosine phosphorylation and extent of DNA binding.
We mutated Thr(757) in the C-terminal of Stat5a (Thr-Stat5) to Val (Val-Stat5)
and Asp (Asp-Stat5) and examined the effect on nuclear translocation, DNA
binding, and prolactin-induced transcriptional activation of a Stat5-responsive
luciferase reporter gene. Val-Stat5 produced a 5-fold higher increase in
transcriptional activity relative to Thr-Stat5; Asp-Stat5 produced a similar
response to Thr-Stat5. The increased transactivation was ligand induced and was
not due to differences in basal expression of Val-Stat5 or to a constitutively
activated Stat5 protein. Similar rates of loss of DNA binding ability and
phosphorylation of Val- and Thr-Stat5 were observed following a single pulse of
prolactin, indicating that the dephosphorylation pathways were unaltered. The
serine-threonine kinase inhibitor H7 inhibited the transactivation potential of
Thr-, Val-, and Asp-Stat5 to a similar extent, eliminating phosphorylation of
Thr(757) as a regulatory mechanism. The results suggest that Thr(757) modulates
the transactivation potential of Stat5 by a mechanism(s) that is dependent on the
formation of Stat5 dimers and/or their nuclear translocation.

PMID: 11133982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cell Signal. 2000 Dec;12(11-12):721-30.

cDNA cloning and functional analysis of a truncated STAT5a protein from
autonomously growing FDCP-1 cells.

Bittorf T(1), Sasse T, Wright M, Jaster R, Otte L, Schneider-Mergener J, Brock J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute of Medical Biochemistry, University of Rostock,
Schillingallee 70, PF100888, 18055, Rostock, Germany.
thomas.bittorf@med.uni-rostock.de

The transcription factor STAT5 is activated by multiple hematopoietic cytokine
receptors and has been implicated in the induction of cellular processes such as 
differentiation, proliferation and antiapoptotic activities. Here, we report
cloning of the cDNA and characterization of a mutant STAT5a protein that is
expressed in interleukin-3 (IL-3)-independently growing FDCP-1 cells. Analysis of
the cDNA revealed a deletion of both the transactivation and the SH2 domains.
Stable expression of the protein in parental IL-3-dependent cells results in
elevated DNA binding activity of wild type (WT)-STAT5 in the nucleus, enhanced
growth rates and a reduced susceptibility to undergo apoptosis after withdrawal
of IL-3. Although the protein is not present in DNA/protein complexes in the
nucleus, we observed pronounced effects on IL-3-induced signal transduction. The 
results suggest competition of the mutant protein with cytosolic mechanisms
regulating STAT5 activity. In conclusion, the data support the hypothesis of an
involvement of STAT5 in mitogenic and antiapoptotic signaling.

PMID: 11152957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Dev Biol. 2001 Jan 1;229(1):163-75.

Prolactin, growth hormone, and epidermal growth factor activate Stat5 in
different compartments of mammary tissue and exert different and overlapping
developmental effects.

Gallego MI(1), Binart N, Robinson GW, Okagaki R, Coschigano KT, Perry J, Kopchick
JJ, Oka T, Kelly PA, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Prolactin (Prl)-induced phosphorylation of Stat (signal transducer and activator 
of transcription) 5 is considered a key event in functional mammary development
and differentiation. We now demonstrate that not only Prl, but also growth
hormone (GH) and epidermal growth factor (EGF), can activate Stat5 in mammary
tissue. We investigated the roles of these hormones in mammary development using 
mice in which the respective receptors had been inactivated. Although Prl
receptor (PrlR)-null mice are infertile, we were able to maintain pregnancies in 
a few mice by treatment with progesterone. Mammary tissue in these mice was
severely underdeveloped and exhibited limited differentiation as assessed by the 
phosphorylation status of Stat5 and the expression of milk protein genes. PrlR
+/- mice showed impaired mammary development and alveolar differentiation during 
pregnancy, which corresponded with reduced phosphorylation levels of Stat5a and
5b, and impaired expression of milk protein genes. Development of the glands in
these mice was arrested at around day 13 of pregnancy. While Prl activated Stat5 
only in the epithelium, GH and EGF activated Stat5 preferentially in the stroma. 
To assess the relevance of the GH receptor (GHR) in the mammary gland, we
transplanted GHR-null epithelium into cleared fat pads of wild-type mice. These
experiments demonstrated that the GHR in the epithelium is not required for
functional mammary development. Similarly, the EGFR in the epithelium is not
required for alveolar development. In contrast, epithelial PrlR is required for
mammary development and milk protein gene expression during pregnancy. Although
GH is not required for alveolar development, we were able to demonstrate its
lactogenic function in cultured mammary epithelium from PrlR-null mice. However, 
ductal development in GHR-null mice was impaired, supporting the notion that GH
signals through the stromal compartment. Our findings demonstrate that GH, Prl,
and EGF activate Stat5 in separate compartments, which in turn reflects their
specific roles in ductal and alveolar development and differentiation.

PMID: 11133161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Sep;212(1-2):171-5.

The role of Jak/STAT signaling in heart tissue renin-angiotensin system.

Mascareno E(1), Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle Research, Department of Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn 11203,
USA.

The involvement of the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) and the role of its primary
effector, angiotensin II (Ang II), in etiology of myocardial hypertrophy and
ischemia is well documented. In several animal models, the RAS is activated in
cardiac cell types that express the receptor AT1, and/or AT2, through which the
Ang II mediated effects are promoted. In this article, we briefly review recent
experimental evidence on the critical role of a prominent signaling pathway, the 
Jak/STAT pathway in activation and maintenance of the local RAS in cardiac
hypertrophy and ischemia. Recent studies in our laboratory document that the
promoter of the prohormone angiotensinogen (Ang) gene serves as the target site
for STAT proteins, thereby linking the Jak/STAT pathway to activation of heart
tissue autocrine Ang II loop. STAT5A and STAT6, are selectively activated when
the heart is subjected to ischemic injury, whereas activation of STAT3 and STAT5A
is involved in myocardial hypertrophy. Blockage of RAS activation by treatment
with specific inhibitor promotes a remarkable recovery in functional hemodynamics
of the myocardium. Thus, activation of selective sets of STAT proteins
constitutes the primary signaling event in the pathogenesis of myocardial
hypertrophy and ischemia.

PMID: 11108148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Anim Genet. 2000 Oct;31(5):339-40.

The STAT3-encoding gene resides within the 40 kbp gap between the STAT5A- and
STAT5B-encoding genes in cattle.

Molenaar A(1), Wheeler TT, McCracken JY, Seyfert HM.

Author information: 
(1)Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New Zealand.

PMID: 11105222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Bone Miner Res. 2000 Nov;15(11):2284-90.

Growth hormone-regulated intracellular signaling in UMR 106 osteosarcoma cells.

Morales O(1), Lindgren U, Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge Hospital,
Sweden.

Growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) are important growth
factors for postnatal longitudinal bone growth. Although many effects of GH on
bone growth are mediated by IGF-1, GH can directly influence bone cells. Limited 
knowledge exists regarding specific intracellular signaling pathways and genes
activated by GH in bone cells. GH is known to activate several intracellular
signaling pathways, among them the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) pathway. GH mainly activates JAK2 and both
isoforms of STAT5, A and B. STAT5 gene deletion experiments have shown the
importance of these transcription factors for growth. To understand the molecular
mechanism(s) behind this, different experimental models are needed. The UMR 106
cell line is a rat clonal osteosarcoma cell line with osteoblast-like phenotypic 
properties, one is the endogenous expression of GH receptor (GHR). The present
study focused on whether these cells express a functional GH-responsive
JAK2/STAT5 pathway. Analysis of cell extracts by immunoprecipitation and Western 
blot showed that physiological concentrations of GH activated JAK2. Western blot 
analysis of nuclear extracts from GH-stimulated UMR 106 cells showed that
physiological concentrations of GH induced nuclear translocation of both STAT5
isoforms, but with STAT5A being predominant. Both isoforms displayed similar
nuclear turnover after GH stimulation of cells. Gel electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (GEMSA) of nuclear extract revealed that both STAT5A and STAT5B
obtained DNA-binding capacity after GH stimulation. Thus, we have shown, for the 
first time, the expression and GH-induced activation of JAK2 and STAT5A/B in UMR 
106 osteoblast-like cells. This study also shows that this cell line is a
suitable experimental model to study unique GH effects in osteoblasts mediated by
STAT5.

PMID: 11092411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2000 Nov 1;16(16):1683-8.

Tax-dependent stimulation of G1 phase-specific cyclin-dependent kinases and
increased expression of signal transduction genes characterize HTLV type
1-transformed T cells.

Haller K(1), Ruckes T, Schmitt I, Saul D, Derow E, Grassmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Human T cell leukemia virus protein induces T cells to permanent IL-2-dependent
growth. These cells occasionally convert to factor independence. The viral
oncoprotein Tax acts as an essential growth factor of transformed lymphocytes and
stimulates the cell cycle in the G(1) phase. In T cells and fibroblasts Tax
enhances the activity of the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) CDK4 and CDK6. These 
kinases, which require binding to cyclin D isotypes for their activity, control
the G(1) phase. Coimmunoprecipitation from these cells revealed that Tax
associates with cyclin D3/CDK6, suggesting a direct activation of this kinase.
The CDK stimulation may account in part for the mitogenic Tax effect, which
causes IL-2-dependent T cell growth by Tax. To address the conversion to
IL-2-independent proliferation and to identify overexpressed genes, which
contribute to the transformed growth, the gene expression patterns of
HTLV-1-transformed T cells were compared with that of peripheral blood
lymphocytes. Potentially overexpressed cDNAs were cloned, sequenced, and used to 
determine the RNA expression. Genes found to be up-regulated are involved in
signal transduction (STAT5a, cyclin G(1), c-fgr, hPGT) and also glycoprotein
synthesis (LDLC, ribophorin). Many of these are also activated during T cell
activation and implicated in the regulation of growth and apoptosis. The
transcription factor STAT5a, which is involved in IL-2 signaling, was strongly
up-regulated only in IL-2-independent cells, thus suggesting that it contributes 
to factor-independent growth. Thus, the differentially expressed genes could
cooperate with the Tax-induced cell cycle stimulation in the maintenance of
IL-2-dependent and IL-2-independent growth of HTLV-transformed lymphocytes.

PMID: 11080810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 2;276(9):6675-88. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

DNA binding specificity of different STAT proteins. Comparison of in vitro
specificity with natural target sites.

Ehret GB(1), Reichenbach P, Schindler U, Horvath CM, Fritz S, Nabholz M, Bucher
P.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) 1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland. markus.nabholz@isrec.unil.ch

STAT transcription factors are expressed in many cell types and bind to similar
sequences. However, different STAT gene knock-outs show very distinct phenotypes.
To determine whether differences between the binding specificities of STAT
proteins account for these effects, we compared the sequences bound by STAT1,
STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6. One sequence set was selected from random
oligonucleotides by recombinant STAT1, STAT5A, or STAT6. For another set
including many weak binding sites, we quantified the relative affinities to
STAT1, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6. We compared the results to the binding sites in
natural STAT target genes identified by others. The experiments confirmed the
similar specificity of different STAT proteins. Detailed analysis indicated that 
STAT5A specificity is more similar to that of STAT6 than that of STAT1, as
expected from the evolutionary relationships. The preference of STAT6 for sites
in which the half-palindromes (TTC) are separated by four nucleotides (N(4)) was 
confirmed, but analysis of weak binding sites showed that STAT6 binds fairly well
to N(3) sites. As previously reported, STAT1 and STAT5 prefer N(3) sites;
however, STAT5A, but not STAT1, weakly binds N(4) sites. None of the STATs bound 
to half-palindromes. There were no specificity differences between STAT5A and
STAT5B.

PMID: 11053426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 1;165(9):5097-104.

Functional uncoupling of the Janus kinase 3-Stat5 pathway in malignant growth of 
human T cell leukemia virus type 1-transformed human T cells.

Kirken RA(1), Erwin RA, Wang L, Wang Y, Rui H, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. rkirken@farmr1.med.uth.tmc.edu

Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) transforms cytokine-dependent T
lymphocytes and causes adult T cell leukemia. Janus tyrosine kinase (Jak)3 and
transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b are essential for the proliferation of
normal T cells and are constitutively hyperactivated in both HTLV-1-transformed
human T cell lines and lymphocytes isolated from HTLV-1-infected patients;
therefore, a critical role for the Jak3-Stat5 pathway in the progression of this 
disease has been postulated. We recently reported that tyrphostin AG-490
selectively blocked IL-2 activation of Jak3/Stat5 and growth of murine T cell
lines. Here we demonstrate that disruption of Jak3/Stat5a/b signaling with AG-490
(50 microM) blocked the proliferation of primary human T lymphocytes, but
paradoxically failed to inhibit the proliferation of HTLV-1-transformed human T
cell lines, HuT-102 and MT-2. Structural homologues of AG-490 also inhibited the 
proliferation of primary human T cells, but not HTLV-1-infected cells. Disruption
of constitutive Jak3/Stat5 activation by AG-490 was demonstrated by inhibition of
1) tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak3, Stat5a (Tyr(694)), and Stat5b (Tyr(699)); 2)
serine phosphorylation of Stat5a (Ser(726)) as determined by a novel
phosphospecific Ab; and 3) Stat5a/b DNA binding to the Stat5-responsive
beta-casein promoter. In contrast, AG-490 had no effect on DNA binding by p50/p65
components of NF-kappaB, a transcription factor activated by the HTLV-1-encoded
phosphoprotein, Tax. Collectively, these data suggest that the Jak3-Stat5 pathway
in HTLV-1-transformed T cells has become functionally redundant for
proliferation. Reversal of this functional uncoupling may be required before
Jak3/Stat5 inhibitors will be useful in the treatment of this malignancy.

PMID: 11046040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2000 Aug;26(4):320-30.

Delineation and mapping of Stat5 isoforms activated by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor in myeloid cells.

Chakraborty A(1), Dyer KF, Tweardy DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a cytokine critical for
proliferation and differentiation of granulocytic precursors and neutrophil
functions that has previously been demonstrated to activate Stat3 and Stat5, two 
members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) protein
family. Stat3 has been identified to be critical for G-CSF receptor
(G-CSFR)-mediated signaling for granulocyte differentiation. Stat5 activation has
been mapped to the proximal portion of the cytosolic region of the G-CSFR.
However, delineation and mapping of the specific Stat5 isoforms activated by
G-CSF in myeloid cells have not been reported. In this study, we demonstrated
that G-CSF activated a Stat5 complex in human myeloid cells containing three
isoforms of Stat5: Stat5A, Stat5B, and Stat5 p80. Activation of Stat5A and Stat5B
maps to the proliferation-specific domain of the G-CSFR, whereas Stat5 p80 is
recruited by phosphotyrosine-704 within the region of G-CSFR required for
differentiation. G-CSF-activated Stat5A/B, but not Stat5 p80, formed a
heterodimer with Stat3. The Stat5A/B-Stat3 heterodimer can bind to specific DNA
sequences preferred by both Stat3 and Stat5. These findings are consistent with
the possibility that Stat5 p80 contributes to G-CSF-induced myeloid
differentiation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11042034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell. 2000 Sep;6(3):693-704.

Stat5 is essential for the myelo- and lymphoproliferative disease induced by
TEL/JAK2.

Schwaller J(1), Parganas E, Wang D, Cain D, Aster JC, Williams IR, Lee CK,
Gerthner R, Kitamura T, Frantsve J, Anastasiadou E, Loh ML, Levy DE, Ihle JN,
Gilliland DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

STAT5 is activated in a broad spectrum of human hematologic malignancies. We
addressed whether STAT5 activation is necessary for the myelo- and
lymphoproliferative disease induced by TEL/JAK2 using a genetic approach. Whereas
mice transplanted with bone marrow transduced with retrovirus expressing TEL/JAK2
develop a rapidly fatal myelo- and lymphoproliferative syndrome, reconstitution
with bone marrow derived from Stat5ab-deficient mice expressing TEL/JAK2 did not 
induce disease. Disease induction in the Stat5a/b-deficient background was
rescued with a bicistronic retrovirus encoding TEL/JAK2 and Stat5a. Furthermore, 
myeloproliferative disease was induced by reconstitution with bone marrow cells
expressing a constitutively active mutant, Stat5a, or a single Stat5a target,
murine oncostatin M (mOSM). These data define a critical role for Stat5a/b and
mOSM in the pathogenesis of TEL/JAK2 disease.

PMID: 11030348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Aug 30;166(2):89-99.

Growth hormone (GH) induces the formation of protein complexes involving Stat5,
Erk2, Shc and serine phosphorylated proteins.

Dinerstein-Cali H(1), Ferrag F, Kayser C, Kelly PA, Postel-Vinay M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 344, Endocrinologie Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine
Necker-Enfants Malades, 156 Rue de Vaugirard, 75015, Paris, France.

The aim of this study was to investigate the interaction of Stat5 with key
effector proteins Erk2 and Shc after activation by growth hormone (GH), using
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing the wild type rabbit growth
hormone receptor (GHR). In coimmunoprecipitation experiments, we show GH-induced 
formation of complexes consisting of Stat5a and Erk2, and Stat5a and Stat5b
association with the protein adaptor Shc. In CHO cells treated with GH, a rapid
association of tyrosine and serine phosphorylated Stat5a with activated Erk2 is
observed. In contrast, Shc proteins interact with non-phosphorylated forms of
Stat5. Using truncated and tyrosine mutants of the GHR, we identify a
carboxy-terminal domain of the receptor, which is critical for serine
phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5a/Erk2 complex formation. In addition,
tyrosine residues of this region of the GHR are not required for Stat5a/Erk2
interaction but are essential for Stat5a serine phosphorylation. Moreover, we
detect serine phosphorylated proteins associated with Erk2, Shc and Stat5: both
Stat5 isoforms interact with a serine phosphorylated protein of 63 kDa, which is 
shown to be related to the serine-threonine kinase Akt-1. Our results support the
importance of serine phosphorylation cascades in GH signaling and open another
pathway of GH signal transduction.

PMID: 10996427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39718-26.

A cytosolic protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B specifically dephosphorylates and 
deactivates prolactin-activated STAT5a and STAT5b.

Aoki N(1), Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan. naoki@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10888.

Prolactin (PRL) plays a central and crucial role in the regulation of milk
protein gene expression in mammary epithelial cells. PRL binding to its cognate
receptor leads to receptor dimerization and activation of the tyrosine kinase
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), associated with the membrane-proximal, intracellular
domain of the receptor. In turn, JAK2 phosphorylates and activates STAT5, a
member of the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family.
We have recently reported that 16 different protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTP)
were expressed in lactating mouse mammary gland and mammary epithelial cells
(Aoki, N., Kawamura, M., Yamaguchi-Aoki, Y., Ohira, S., and Matsuda, T. (1999) J.
Biochem. (Tokyo) 125, 669-675). We investigated the involvement of each PTP in
PRL signaling. Among the 12 phosphatases including SHP-2 examined, a cytosolic
phosphatase PTP1B was found to specifically dephosphorylate STAT5a and STAT5b in 
transfected COS7 and in vitro. Nuclear translocation of STAT5a and STAT5b was
largely inhibited upon overexpression of PTP1B. The PRL-dependent transcriptional
activation of the beta-casein gene promoter was also inhibited by PTP1B.
Furthermore, retrovirus-mediated overexpression of PTP1B resulted in
dephosphorylation of endogenous STAT5 and down-regulation of beta-casein gene
expression in mammary epithelial COMMA-1D cells when the cells were treated with 
lactogenic hormones. Endogenous tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5 proteins in mammary
epithelial COMMA-1D cells as well as tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5a and STAT5b
expressed in COS7 cells were co-precipitated by substrate-trapping mutants of
recombinant PTP1B. These results strongly suggest that PTP1B dephosphorylates
PRL-activated STAT5a and STAT5b, thereby negatively regulating PRL-mediated
signaling pathway.

PMID: 10993888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2000 Apr;10 Suppl B:S1-8.

Pulsatility of growth hormone (GH) signalling in liver cells: role of the
JAK-STAT5b pathway in GH action.

Choi HK(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The intracellular signalling molecule and transcriptional activator STAT5b is a
key mediator of the effects of intermittent plasma growth hormone (GH) pulses on 
the male-specific pattern of liver gene expression and pubertal body growth rates
in rodents. Experiments with Stat5b gene-knockout mice have revealed that these
GH-regulated, male-specific phenotypes are a direct consequence of GH
pulse-dependent STAT5b activation and that loss of function of STAT5b cannot be
compensated for by the closely related signalling molecule STAT5a. Physiological 
plasma GH pulses are required to obtain the high levels of activated STAT5b seen 
in the livers of males, and down-regulation of the GH receptor (GHR)-JAK-STAT5b
pathway in hepatocytes exposed to GH in a near-continuous fashion underlies the
low level of liver STAT5b activity that is characteristic of adult female rats.
Termination of nuclear STAT5b signalling occurs at the conclusion of a plasma GH 
pulse, with STAT5b deactivation catalysed by a tyrosine phosphatase. In males,
termination of the intracellular signalling stimulated by a plasma GH pulse is
proposed to be additionally facilitated by GH-STAT5b-inducible SOCS-CIS proteins,
which block the further activation of STAT5b by binding to and inhibiting the
action of the GHR-JAK2 complex via multiple mechanisms. In this manner, the liver
cell is rendered temporarily unresponsive to further GH-signalling events.
SOCS-CIS proteins synthesized in liver cells stimulated continuously with GH may 
also contribute to the apparent down-regulation of STAT5b signalling that is
observed in the female rat liver.

PMID: 10984246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Blood. 2000 Sep 15;96(6):2277-83.

Stat5a/b contribute to interleukin 7-induced B-cell precursor expansion, but abl-
and bcr/abl-induced transformation are independent of stat5.

Sexl V(1), Piekorz R, Moriggl R, Rohrer J, Brown MP, Bunting KD, Rothammer K,
Roussel MF, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Departments of Biochemistry, Tumor Cell
Biology, Immunology, and Experimental Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The cytokines interleukin 7 (IL-7) and interleukin 4 (IL-4) regulate lymphoid
differentiation and function and activate the transcription factor Stat5. Using
mice deficient for the 2 highly related transcription factors, Stat5a and Stat5b 
(Stat5a/b(-/-)), we investigated the role of Stat5 for B-cell differentiation,
expansion, and function. Peripheral blood B cells of Stat5-deficient mice are
significantly reduced, but no proliferation defects in response to various
mitogenic stimuli are found. Also, IgM and IgG1 antibody production and
immunoglobulin class switching are not affected. Pre- and pro-B cells of
Stat5-deficient animals were found to have reduced responses to IL-7. Pro- and
pre-B cells are the target cells of the abl oncogene and numerous studies have
suggested that Stat5a/b is essential for transformation by derivatives of the
Abelson (abl) gene. To assess the role of Stat5a/b in transformation, we have
evaluated the ability of various abl derivatives to transform cells from
Stat5a/b-deficient mice in vitro or in vivo. We demonstrate that the absence of
Stat5a/b is not essential for the induction of lymphoid or myeloid tumors in vivo
or on the ability to transform bone marrow cells in vitro.

PMID: 10979977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Sep;14(9):1411-24.

Cross-talk between signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat5) and
thyroid hormone receptor-beta 1 (TRbeta1) signaling pathways.

Favre-Young H(1), Dif F, Roussille F, Demeneix BA, Kelly PA, Edery M, de Luze A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 344, Endocrinologie Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine Necker,
Paris, France.

PRL and T3 are involved in antagonistic regulations during various developmental 
processes in vertebrate species. We have studied cross-talk between transcription
factors activated by these signaling pathways, i.e. signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) and thyroid hormone receptor beta1
(TRbeta1). Liganded TRbeta1 in the presence of its heterodimeric partner,
retinoid X receptor gamma (RXRgamma), inhibited the PRL-induced Stat5a- and
Stat5b-dependent reporter gene expression by up to 60%. This T3-inhibitory effect
studied on Stat5 activity was partly reversed by overexpression of a TRbeta1
dominant negative variant mutated within its nuclear localization signal (TR2A). 
We next showed that TRbeta1 and TR2A in the presence of RXRgamma increased and
decreased, respectively, Stat5 localization into the nucleus regardless of
hormonal stimulation. Thus, our data suggest that TRbeta1 can be associated with 
Stat5 in the cytoplasm and may be involved in Stat5 nuclear translocation. In
PRL-treated cells overexpressing TRbeta1/RXRgamma, both Stat5 and TRbeta1 were
coimmunoprecipitated, indicating physical association of the two transcription
factors. In these cells, addition of T3 with ovine (o)PRL decreased the amounts
of total and tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat5 in the cytoplasm compared with
oPRL-treated cells. In the nucleus, no clear difference was observed on Stat5
DNA-binding after treatment with PRL and T3 vs. PRL alone in TRbeta1/RXRgamma
transfected cells. However, antibodies directed against TRbeta1 lowered Stat5-DNA
binding and addition of the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) relieved
T3 inhibition on Stat5 transcriptional activity. Thus, we postulated that the
negative cross-talk between TR and Stat5 on target genes could involve histone
deacetylase recruitment by liganded TRbeta1.

PMID: 10976919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Immunol. 2000 Sep 15;165(6):3239-49.

An intron transcriptional enhancer element regulates IL-4 gene locus
accessibility in mast cells.

Hural JA(1), Kwan M, Henkel G, Hock MB, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Immunology and Molecular Pathogenesis, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The cell type-specific expression of a gene is dependent on developmentally
regulated modifications in chromatin structure that allow accessibility of basal 
and inducible transcription factors. In this study, we demonstrate that a
cis-acting element in the second intron of the murine IL-4 gene has a dual
function in regulating transcription in mast cells as well as chromatin
accessibility of the IL-4 gene locus through its influence on the methylation
state of the gene. Previous studies have shown that mast cell-restricted
transcription factors GATA-1/2 and PU.1 associate with the intron element and
regulate its activity. In this study, we use DNase I footprinting and mutational 
analyses to identify two additional sites that contribute to the element's
ability to enhance transcription. One of these sites associates preferentially
with STAT5a and STAT5b. We also demonstrate that deletion of the element or
mutation of the GATA binding site in the context of a stably integrated IL-4
genomic construct prevents maintenance of a demethylated locus in IL-4-producing 
mast cells. These data indicate that, analogous to Ig and TCR intron regulatory
elements, the intron enhancer has an essential role in maintaining
developmentally regulated demethylation at the IL-4 gene locus. In addition, they
indicate that members of the GATA family of transcription factors likely play an 
important role in these processes.

PMID: 10975840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Exp Med. 2000 Sep 4;192(5):719-28.

Essential role of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a but
not Stat5b for Flt3-dependent signaling.

Zhang S(1), Fukuda S, Lee Y, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Spolski R, Leonard WJ, Broxmeyer
HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

The receptor tyrosine kinase Flt3 plays an important role in proliferation and
survival of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Although some post-receptor 
signaling events of Flt3 have been characterized, the involvement of the Janus
kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak/Stat) pathway in
Flt3 signaling has not been thoroughly evaluated. To this aim, we examined
whether Flt3 activates the Jak/Stat pathway in Baf3/Flt3 cells, a line stably
expressing human Flt3 receptor. Stat5a, but not Stats 1-4, 5b, or 6, was potently
activated by Flt3 ligand (FL) stimulation. Interestingly, FL did not activate any
Jaks. Activation of Stat5a required the kinase activity of Flt3. A selective role
for Stat5a in the proliferative response of primary hematopoietic progenitor
cells to FL was documented, as FL did not act on progenitors from marrows of
Stat5a(-/-) mice, but did stimulate/costimulate proliferation of these cells from
Stat5a(+/+), Stat5b(-/-), and Stat5b(+/+) mice. Thus, Stat5a is essential for at 
least certain effects of FL. Moreover, our data confirm that Stat5a and Stat5b
are not redundant, but rather are at least partially distinctive in their
function.

PMCID: PMC2193267
PMID: 10974037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Aug;14(8):1175-86.

Role of cyclophilin B in prolactin signal transduction and nuclear
retrotranslocation.

Rycyzyn MA(1), Reilly SC, O'Malley K, Clevenger CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

The pleiotropic actions of PRL are necessary for mammary growth and
differentiation and in vitro lymphoid proliferation. The proximal action of this 
ligand is mediated by its cell surface receptor via associated networks. PRL
action, however, is also associated with the internalization and translocation of
this hormone into the nucleus. To delineate the mechanism of this
retrotranslocation, a yeast two-hybrid screen was performed and revealed an
interaction between PRL and cyclophilin B (CypB). CypB is a peptidyl prolyl
isomerase (PPI) found in the endoplasmic reticulum, extracellular space, and
nucleus. The interaction between CypB and PRL was subsequently confirmed in vitro
and in vivo through the use of recombinant proteins and coimmunoprecipitation
studies. The exogenous addition of CypB potentiated the 3H-thymidine
incorporation of PRL-dependent cell lines up to 18-fold. CypB by itself was
nonmitogenic and did not potentiate the action of GH or other interleukins. CypB 
did not alter the affinity of the PRL receptor (PRLr) for its ligand, or increase
the phosphorylation of PRLr-associated Jak2 or Stat5a. The potentiation of
PRL-action by CypB, however, was accompanied by a dramatic increase in the
nuclear retrotranslocation of PRL. A CypB mutant, termed CypB-NT, was generated
that lacked the wild-type N-terminal nuclear localization sequence. Although
CypB-NT demonstrated levels of PRL binding and PPI activity equivalent to
wild-type CypB, it was incapable of mediating the nuclear retrotranslocation of
PRL or enhancing PRL-driven proliferation. These studies reveal CypB as an
important chaperone facilitating the nuclear retrotransport and action of the
lactogenic hormones.

PMID: 10935542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Lab Invest. 2000 Jul;80(7):993-1006.

Epithelial defect in prostates of Stat5a-null mice.

Nevalainen MT(1), Ahonen TJ, Yamashita H, Chandrashekar V, Bartke A, Grimley PM, 
Robinson GW, Hennighausen L, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
and National Institutes of Diabetes and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The transcription factor Stat5a critically mediates prolactin (PRL)-induced
mammary gland development and lactogenesis. PRL also stimulates growth and
differentiation of prostate tissue. Specifically, hyperprolactinemia gives rise
to prostate hyperplasia, and prostate size is reduced in PRL-deficient mice. We
therefore investigated the importance of Stat5a for prostate development and
function by examining Stat5a-null mice. The absence of Stat5a in mice was
associated with a distinct prostate morphology characterized by an increased
prevalence of local disorganization within acinar epithelium of ventral
prostates. Affected acini were typically filled with desquamated, granular
epithelial cells that had become embedded in dense, coagulated secretory
material. These features were reminiscent of acinar cyst formation and
degeneration frequently observed in human benign prostate hyperplasia, however,
cystic changes in prostate acini of Stat5a-deficient mice were not associated
with increased prostate size or morphologic hallmarks of epithelial hyperplasia. 
Instead, immunohistochemistry of the prostate-specific secretory marker,
probasin, suggested that hypersecretory function of the epithelium could underlie
local congestion and cyst formation in prostates of Stat5a-null mice. Serum
testosterone and PRL levels were normal in Stat5a knockout mice, but prostate PRL
receptor expression was reduced as determined by immunohistochemistry. Expression
levels or activation states of other PRL signal transduction proteins, including 
Stat5b, Stat3, Stat1, ERK1, and ERK2 were not altered. The present study offers
the first evidence for a direct role of Stat5a in the maintenance of normal
tissue architecture and function of the mouse prostate.

PMID: 10908145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Oncogene. 2000 May 15;19(21):2566-76.

The role of Stat5a and Stat5b in signaling by IL-2 family cytokines.

Lin JX(1), Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 10/Rm. 7N252, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda,
Maryland MD 20892-1674, USA.

The activation of Stat5 proteins (Stat5a and Stat5b) is one of the earliest
signaling events mediated by IL-2 family cytokines, allowing the rapid delivery
of signals from the membrane to the nucleus. Among STAT family proteins, Stat5a
and Stat5b are the two most closely related STAT proteins. Together with other
transcription factors and co-factors, they regulate the expression of the target 
genes in a cytokine-specific fashion. In addition to their activation by
cytokines, activities of Stat5a and Stat5b, as well as other STAT proteins, are
negatively controlled by CIS/SOCS/SSI family proteins. The outcome of Stat5
activation in regulating expression of target genes varies, depending upon the
complexity of the promoter region of target genes and the other signaling
pathways that are activated by each cytokine as well. Here, we mainly focus on
the IL2-/IL-2 receptor system, as it is one of the best-studied systems that
depend on Stat5-mediated signals. We will summarize what we have learned about
the molecular mechanisms of how Stat5 is activated by IL-2 family cytokines from 
in vitro biochemical studies as well as the role that is played by Stat5 in each 
of the cytokine signaling pathways from in vivo gene-targeting analyses. Oncogene
(2000).

PMID: 10851055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Shock. 2000 Jun;13(6):435-40.

Interleukin-6 signal transduction in human intestinal epithelial cells.

Pratt SL(1), Ogle CK, Mao JX, Zhao W, Lovell G, Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Ohio 45267-0576, USA.

The gut is an important source of inflammatory cytokines, but there is scant
information on the mechanisms of cytokine action in gut epithelium. We
hypothesized that in human Caco-2 cells, IL-6 acts directly through stimulation
of Stat phosphorylation and that bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) causes Stat
activation indirectly because of its ability to cause the autocrine secretion and
action of interleukin (IL)-6. Stat1, Stat5a, and Stat5b, but not Stat3, were
detected in Caco-2 cells. DNA-binding activity corresponding to activated Stat5
was stimulated in a biphasic manner by IL-6, with a transient early phase,
followed by sustained activation between 8 and 48 h. LPS also stimulated
Stat5-like binding, but there was no early phase of activation. Functional tests 
of Stat5 activation showed that IL-6 stimulated Stat5-dependent reporter gene
transcription but had no effect on Stat1-dependent transcription. LPS did not
stimulate Stat-dependent transcription, nor did it alter the transcriptional
response to IL-6. Tyrosine phosphorylation of both Stat5a and Stat5b was induced 
by IL-6. We infer from these data that IL-6 acts on intestinal epithelia through 
a Stat5-mediated transcriptional mechanism, whereas LPS does not induce gene
expression through autocrine activation of enterocyte Stat signaling. These data 
provide a basis for testing the in vivo regulation of gut signaling and the
interaction of gut reticuloendothelial cells with epithelial signal transduction.

PMID: 10847629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Mol Evol. 2000 Jun;50(6):550-61.

Molecular characterization of STAT5A- and STAT5B-encoding genes reveals extended 
intragenic sequence homogeneity in cattle and mouse and different degrees of
divergent evolution of various domains.

Seyfert HM(1), Pitra C, Meyer L, Brunner RM, Wheeler TT, Molenaar A, McCracken
JY, Herrmann J, Thiesen HJ, Schwerin M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for the Biology of Farm Animals, Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee-2,
18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

The STAT transcription factors form a family of signal transducers and activators
of transcription. We sequenced the bovine STAT5B cDNA and both STAT5-encoding
genes, STAT5A and STAT5B, representing the first complete description of any
STAT5-encoding gene. DNA fiber FISH hybridization revealed that the genes reside 
only 40 kbp apart on BTA19. Both genes are segmented into 19 exons and all but
two of the homologous exons are of equal size. The genes harbor a central block
of nearly identical DNA sequence (97.5% sequence identity over 3373 bp), spanning
from intron 5 to intron 9. Isolation and sequencing of the homologous segments
from mouse revealed the same unusually high degree of intronic sequence
conservation in these segments of the murine STAT5-encoding genes. However, the
respective sequences are completely divergent between the two species. A
comparison of the inter- and intragenic cDNA sequence preservation at
nonsynonymous sites reveals that the DNA-binding domain is under the strongest
selection pressure for both intergenic and factor-specific intragenic sequence
preservation. The so-called "SH3" segment of the linker domain, in contrast,
shows species-specific sequence identity in all but one amino acid residues in
both factors, in cattle, human, and mouse. This indicates that the same
species-specific selection pressure occurs on the linker domain from both
factors, STAT5A and STAT5B. Thus, the comparison of evolutionary selection
pressures resting on various domains suggests that the DNA-binding domain might
contribute to differential DNA binding of STAT5A and STAT5B factors, while both
might interact equally well with other cellular factors through a segment of the 
linker domain.

PMID: 10835485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jun;20(12):4371-80.

Hierarchy of protein tyrosine kinases in interleukin-2 (IL-2) signaling:
activation of syk depends on Jak3; however, neither Syk nor Lck is required for
IL-2-mediated STAT activation.

Zhou YJ(1), Magnuson KS, Cheng TP, Gadina M, Frucht DM, Galon J, Candotti F,
Geahlen RL, Changelian PS, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. zhouy@exchange.nih.gov

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) activates several different families of tyrosine kinases,
but precisely how these kinases interact is not completely understood. We
therefore investigated the functional relationships among Jak3, Lck, and Syk in
IL-2 signaling. We first observed that in the absence of Jak3, both Lck and Syk
had the capacity to phosphorylate Stat3 and Stat5a. However, neither supported
IL-2-induced STAT activation, nor did dominant negative alleles of these kinases 
inhibit. Moreover, pharmacological abrogation of Lck activity did not inhibit
IL-2-mediated phosphorylation of Jak3 and Stat5a. Importantly, ligand-dependent
Syk activation was dependent on the presence of catalytically active Jak3,
whereas Lck activation was not. Interestingly, Syk functioned as a direct
substrate of Jak1 but not Jak3. Additionally, Jak3 phosphorylated Jak1, whereas
the reverse was not the case. Taken together, our data support a model in which
Lck functions in parallel with Jak3, while Syk functions as a downstream element 
of Jaks in IL-2 signaling. Jak3 may regulate Syk catalytic activity indirectly
via Jak1. However, IL-2-mediated Jak3/Stat activation is not dependent on Lck or 
Syk. While the essential roles of Jak1 and Jak3 in signaling by gammac-utilizing 
cytokines are clear, it will be important to dissect the exact contributions of
Lck and Syk in mediating the effects of IL-2 and related cytokines.

PMCID: PMC85804
PMID: 10825200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 11;275(32):24407-13.

Constitutive activation of STAT5 by a point mutation in the SH2 domain.

Ariyoshi K(1), Nosaka T, Yamada K, Onishi M, Oka Y, Miyajima A, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Factors, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

We previously identified a constitutively active form of STAT (signal transducer 
and activator of transcription) 5A by polymerase chain reaction-driven random
mutagenesis followed by retrovirus-mediated expression screening, which had two
point mutations in the DNA-binding and transcriptional activation domains, and
was designated STAT5A1*6. STAT5A1*6 showed markedly elevated DNA binding and
transactivation activities with stable tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear
accumulation, and conferred autonomous cell growth on interleukin 3-dependent
Ba/F3 cells. We now report another constitutively active mutant, STAT5A-N642H
which has a single point mutation (N642H) in its SH2 domain, identified using the
same strategy as that used to identify STAT5A1*6. STAT5A-N642H showed identical
properties to those of STAT5A1*6 both biochemically and biologically.
Interestingly the mutation in STAT5A-N642H resulted in restoration of the
conserved critical histidine which is involved in the binding of phosphotyrosine 
in the majority of SH2-containing proteins. Introduction of an additional
mutation (Y694F) to STAT5A-N642H, which disrupted critical tyrosine 694 required 
for dimerization of STAT5, abolished all the activities manifested by the mutant 
STAT5A-N642H, which indicates that dimerization is required for the activity of
STAT5A-N642H as was the case for the wild-type STAT5A. The present findings also 
show that different mutations rendered STAT5A constitutively active, through a
common mechanism, which is similar to that of physiological activation.

PMID: 10823841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2000 Sep;11(3):199-207.

STAT family of transcription factors in cytokine-mediated biological responses.

Takeda K(1), Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, and
CREST of Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Osaka University, 3-1
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan. ktakeda@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) family, consisting of
seven members, is involved in cytokine signal transduction. Biological roles of
each STAT family protein have now been elucidated through studies of gene
targeted mice. Stat1 knockout mice are defective in interferon-mediated
functions. Stat4 and Stat6 knockout mice show defective responses to IL-12 and
IL-4, respectively. Analyses of Stat5a and Stat5b knockout mice reveal important 
roles in prolactin-mediated mammary gland development and growth hormone-mediated
induction of sexual dimorphism, respectively. Conditional knockout study of Stat3
demonstrates its critical roles in cytokine-mediated functions in several
tissues, including T cells, macrophages, skin, and mammary gland.

PMID: 10817963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. FASEB J. 2000 May;14(7):877-84.

Sustained mammary gland-directed, ponasterone A-inducible expression in
transgenic mice.

Albanese C(1), Reutens AT, Bouzahzah B, Fu M, D'Amico M, Link T, Nicholson R,
Depinho RA, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Developmental and Molecular
Biology, Department of Medicine and. Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The ability to regulate temporal- and spatial-specific expression of target genes
in transgenic mice will facilitate analysis of gene function and enable the
generation of murine models of human diseases. The genetic analysis of mammary
gland tumorigenesis requires the development of mammary gland-specific
transgenics, which are tightly regulated throughout the adult mammary epithelium.
Analysis of genes implicated in mammary gland tumorigenesis has been hampered by 
mosaic transgene expression and the findings that homozygous deletion of several 
candidate genes (cyclin D1, Stat5A, prolactin receptor) abrogates normal mammary 
gland development. We describe the development of transgenic mouse lines in which
sustained transgene expression was inducibly regulated, both specifically and
homogeneously, in the adult mammary gland epithelium. Transgenes encoding
RXRalpha and a chimeric ecdysone receptor under control of a modified MMTV-LTR,
which targets mammary gland expression, were used. These transgenic 'receptor'
lines were crossed with transgenic 'enhancer' lines in which the ecdysone/RXR
binding site induced ligand-dependent expression of transgenic
beta-galactosidase. Pharmacokinetic analysis of a highly bioactive ligand
(ponasterone A), identified through screening ecdysteroids from local plants,
demonstrated sustained release and transgene expression in vivo. This transgenic 
model with both tightly regulated and homogeneous transgene expression, which was
sustained in vivo using ligands readily extracted from local flora, has broad
practical applicability for genetic analysis of mammary gland disease.

PMID: 10783141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Novartis Found Symp. 2000;227:61-74; discussion 75-81.

Growth hormone pulse-activated STAT5 signalling: a unique regulatory mechanism
governing sexual dimorphism of liver gene expression.

Waxman DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, MA 02215, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) exerts sexually dimorphic effects on liver gene transcription
that are regulated by the temporal pattern of pituitary GH release; this release 
is intermittent in male rats and nearly continuous in females. Comparisons of
liver nuclear protein tyrosine phosphorylation in male and female rats have led
to the discovery that the liver transcription factor STAT5b is tyrosine
phosphorylated in male but not female rats in response to GH pulses. Intermittent
plasma GH pulses trigger a rapid and repeated tyrosine phosphorylation and
nuclear translocation of liver STAT5b in intact male rats, while the more
continuous pattern of GH exposure down-regulates the STAT5b signalling pathway in
female rat liver. The central importance of STAT5b for the physiological effects 
of GH pulses has been verified using a mouse gene knockout model. STAT5b gene
disruption leads to a major loss of multiple sexually differentiated responses
associated with the sexually dimorphic pattern of pituitary GH secretion.
Male-characteristic body growth rates and male-specific liver gene expression are
decreased to wild-type female levels in STAT5b-/- males, while female-predominant
liver gene products are increased in males to near female levels. STAT5b is thus 
a liver-expressed, latent cytoplasmic transcription factor that undergoes
repeated tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation in response to
intermittent plasma GH stimulation, and is a key intracellular mediator of the
stimulatory effects of GH pulses on male-specific liver gene transcription. Other
studies indicate, however, that STAT5a and STAT5b are both required for
constitutive expression in female, but not male liver, of certain GH-regulated
CYP enzymes. GH activation of both STAT5 proteins, which in turn form distinct
homodimeric and heterodimeric DNA-binding complexes, is thus an important
determinant of the sex-dependent and gene-specific effects that GH has on the
liver.

PMID: 10752065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16954-62.

Hydrophobic residues Phe751 and Leu753 are essential for STAT5 transcriptional
activity.

Callus BA(1), Mathey-Prevot B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. Bernard_Callus@dfci.harvard.edu

One facet of cytokine signaling is relayed to the nucleus by the activation,
through tyrosine phosphorylation, of latent cytoplasmic signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) family members. It has been demonstrated that 
the C termini of STATs contain the transactivation domain and are essential for
the transactivation of target genes. To better understand the function of the
STAT C terminus, we have generated a series of C-terminal mutants in STAT5a and
examined their effects on transactivation, tyrosine phosphorylation, and DNA
binding. Using GAL4 chimerae with the C terminus of STAT5, we have defined a
12-amino acid region essential for STAT5 transactivation. Surprisingly, deletion 
of these 12 amino acids in the context of the native STAT5 backbone preserved the
overall transcriptional activity of the protein. Further analysis revealed that
deletion of this region resulted in hyper-DNA binding activity, thus compensating
for the weakened transactivation domain. Using site-directed mutagenesis, we show
that within this 12-amino acid region the acidic residues were non-essential for 
transactivation. In contrast, the non-acidic residues were crucial for
transactivation. Mutating either Phe(751) or Leu(753) to alanine abolished
transactivation suggesting that these residues were essential for connecting
STAT5 to the basal transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 10748177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 7;275(14):10247-55.

Stat5a serine phosphorylation. Serine 779 is constitutively phosphorylated in the
mammary gland, and serine 725 phosphorylation influences prolactin-stimulated in 
vitro DNA binding activity.

Beuvink I(1), Hess D, Flotow H, Hofsteenge J, Groner B, Hynes NE.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, P. O. Box 2543, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.

The activity of transcription factors of the Stat family is controlled by
phosphorylation of a conserved, carboxyl-terminal tyrosine residue. Tyrosine
phosphorylation is essential for Stat dimerization, nuclear translocation, DNA
binding, and transcriptional activation. Phosphorylation of Stats on specific
serine residues has also been described. We have previously shown that in HC11
mammary epithelial cells Stat5a is phosphorylated on Tyr(694) in a
prolactin-sensitive manner, whereas serine phosphorylation is constitutive
(Wartmann, M., Cella, N., Hofer, P., Groner, B., Xiuwen, L., Hennighausen, L.,
and Hynes, N. E. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 31863-31868). By using mass
spectrometry and site-directed mutagenesis, we have now identified Ser(779),
located in a unique Stat5a SP motif, as the site of serine phosphorylation. By
using phospho-Ser(779)-specific antiserum, we have determined that Ser(779) is
constitutively phosphorylated in mammary glands taken from different
developmental stages. Stat5a isolated from spleen, heart, brain, and lung was
also found to be phosphorylated on Ser(779). Ser(725) in Stat5a has also been
identified as a phosphorylation site (Yamashita, H., Xu, J., Erwin, R. A.,
Farrar, W. L., Kirken, R. A., and Rui, H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273,
30218-30224). Here we show that mutagenesis of Ser(725), Ser(779), or a
combination of Ser(725/779) to an Ala had no effect on prolactin-induced
transcriptional activation of a beta-casein reporter construct. However,
following prolactin induction the Ser(725) mutant displayed sustained DNA binding
activity compared with that of wild type Stat5a. The results suggest that
Ser(725) phosphorylation has an impact on signal duration.

PMID: 10744710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1999 Jun;10(2):131-57.

Stat5a and Stat5b: fraternal twins of signal transduction and transcriptional
activation.

Grimley PM(1), Dong F, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20854, USA.

Stat5a and Stat5b are discretely encoded transcription factors that mediate
signals for a broad spectrum of cytokines. Their activation is often an integral 
component of redundant cytokine signal cascades involving complex cross-talk and 
pleiotropic gene regulation by Stat5 has been implicated in cellular functions of
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis with relevance to processes of
hematopoiesis and immunoregulation, reproduction, and lipid metabolism. Although 
Stat5a and Stat5b show peptide sequence similarities of > 90%, targeted gene
disruptions in mice yield distinctive phenotypes. Prolactin-directed mammary
gland maturation fails without functional Stat5a, while disruption of Stat5b in
males mitigates growth hormone effects on hepatic function and body mass. The
molecular basis for this biologic dichotomy is probably multifaceted. Limited
structural dissimilarities between the Stat5a and Stat5b transactivation domains,
or subtle differences in the DNA-binding affinities of Stat5 dimer pairs
undoubtedly influence gene regulation, but cell-dependent asymmetries in
availability of phosphorylated Stat5 can be an underlying factor. Differences in 
serine phosphorylation(s) of Stat5a and Stat5b, or Stat5 associations with
adaptor proteins or co-transcription factors are other potential sources of
functional disparity and the signal amplitude, frequency or duration also can be 
significant. In addition to Stat5 signal attenuation by phosphatase actions or
classical feedback inhibition, truncated forms of Stat5 lacking in
transactivation capacity may compete upstream for activation and diminish access 
of full length molecules to DNA binding sites.

PMID: 10743504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Int J Hematol. 2000 Jan;71(1):46-54.

Constitutively active STAT5A and STAT5B in vitro and in vivo: mutation of STAT5
is not a frequent cause of leukemogenesis.

Yamada K(1), Ariyoshi K, Onishi M, Miyajima A, Hayakawa F, Towatari M, Saito H,
Oka Y, Asano S, Nosaka T, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Factors, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We recently identified several constitutively active forms of signal transducers 
and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) using polymerase chain reaction-driven 
random mutagenesis followed by retrovirus-mediated expression screening. All
constitutively active STAT5 showed constitutive phosphorylation on their tyrosine
residues and induced factor-independent growth in a mouse interleukin-3-dependent
cell line, Ba/F3. Sequence analysis of these active STAT5 revealed two important 
mutations: S710F and N642H. The N642H mutation localized in the SH2 domain was
able to induce autonomous growth of Ba/F3 cells by itself, whereas S710F in the
effector domain was able to induce autonomous growth of Ba/F3 cells in concert
with a second mutation including H298R and E150G. Recently, constitutive
activation of STAT5 has been reported in patients' leukemic cells and is
implicated in leukemogenesis. We attempted to clarify whether leukemic cells
harbored activating mutations primarily in STAT5 proteins, and analyzed the
sequence of STAT5 derived from 49 leukemic patients. No mutations were found,
however, in the regions surrounding S710 and N642 of STAT5A and corresponding
residues of STAT5B. We also cloned full-length cDNAs for STAT5s from three
patients whose leukemic cells exhibited constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of 
the STAT5 protein and expressed the derived STAT5 proteins in Ba/F3 cells.
However, none of these clones exhibited constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation or 
gave rise to FI proliferation of Ba/F3 cells. These results indicate that
constitutive activation of STAT5 is a secondary event in most leukemias.

PMID: 10729993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Exp Hematol. 2000 Mar;28(3):294-304.

Thrombopoietin induces the generation of distinct Stat1, Stat3, Stat5a and Stat5b
homo- and heterodimeric complexes with different kinetics in human platelets.

Schulze H(1), Ballmaier M, Welte K, Germeshausen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Medical School Hannover,
Hannover, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the pivotal regulator of thrombocytopoiesis
and megakaryocytopoiesis, and binding to its receptor c-Mpl leads to activation
of at least two different signaling pathways: the Jak-Stat pathway and the
Ras-MAPK pathway. Our aim was to elucidate which Stat-complexes are formed in TPO
signal transduction in human blood platelets.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) in
order to analyze the formation of distinct Stat complexes on two distinct
oligonucleotide probes. Furthermore, we used immunoprecipitation and Western
blotting of protein lysates from TPO-stimulated platelets.
RESULTS: We found homodimers of Stat1alpha, Stat3, Stat5a, and Stat5b, as well as
heterodimers of Stat1/Stat3 and Stat5a/Stat5b, but no Stat1/Stat5 or Stat3/Stat5 
heterodimers are formed in platelets in response to TPO. Stat5 complexes bound to
labeled DNA with a fast kinetic followed by Stat3 and Stat1. The adapter protein 
CrkL is present in DNA-bound Stat5 complexes and predominantly bound to Stat5b.
The kinase ERK2 is also tyrosine phosphorylated after TPO-stimulation of
platelets but this activation does not modulate the phosphorylation of the serine
residues in the PXSP motif present in Stat1 and Stat3.
CONCLUSION: Our findings thus emphasize the differential regulation of Stat1,
Stat3, Stat5a, and Stat5b in platelets and may be an appropriate model of c-Mpl
signaling in mega-karyopoiesis.

PMID: 10720694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 21;19(8):1085-91.

Transforming growth factor alpha and mouse models of human breast cancer.

Humphreys RC(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Digestive, Diabetes and
Kidney Disease, Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, Building 8, Room 111,
Bethesda, Maryland, MD 20892, USA.

Transforming growth factor alpha (TGFalpha) is a principal molecule in the normal
and neoplastic development of the mammary gland. Binding of TGFalpha to the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), activates the EGFRs' endogenous tyrosine
kinase activity and stimulates growth of the epithelium in the virgin and
pregnant mouse mammary gland. TGFalpha expression can be detected in breast
cancer cells in vivo and in vitro and overexpression can elicit partial
transformation or immortalized human and rodent mammary epithelial cells. Despite
evidence implicating TGFalpha in the development of mammary neoplasia, the actual
mechanism of TGFalpha-induced transformation is unclear. Transgenic mouse models 
targeting heterologus TGFalpha to the mammary gland have established TGFalpha
overexpression can induce hyperproliferation, hyperplasia and occasional
carcinoma. These transgenic studies demonstrated a facilitating, proliferative
role for TGFalpha in the development of neoplasia and implicated several
oncogenes that can cooperate with TGFalpha to transform the mammary epithelium.
From studies of EGFR signaling pathways, inhibitory and modulating agents such as
anti-EGFR antibodies and specific kinases inhibitors have been used to block the 
action of this pathway and prevent the development of TGFalpha-induced neoplasia 
and tumor formation. Studies in Stat5a knockout mice have established that the
JAK2/Stat5a pathway can facilitate the survival of the mammary epithelium and can
impact the progression of TGFalpha-mandated mammary tumorigenesis. Together these
experiments indicate that TGFalpha and the EGFR signaling pathway are potentially
amenable to therapies for treatment of human breast disease.

PMID: 10713694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 21;19(8):1077-84.

Prolactin gene-disruption arrests mammary gland development and retards
T-antigen-induced tumor growth.

Vomachka AJ(1), Pratt SL, Lockefeer JA, Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio, OH 45267-0576, USA.

Prolactin (PRL), interacting with other hormones from the pituitary, gonad, and
placenta, activates specific signals that drive the appropriately timed
morphological and functional development of the mammary gland. A mouse model of
isolated PRL deficiency (PRL-/-) was created by gene disruption in an effort to
further understand the molecular basis of mammary gland development and breast
cancer. Whereas primary ductal growth was normal in PRL-/- mice, ductal
arborization was minimal (branches/mm2=1.5+/-0.5), and lobular budding was
absent. Replacement therapy with PRL injections stimulated a modest degree of
lobular budding and ductal arborization (3.75+/-0.9). Pituitary transplants to
the kidney capsule of PRL-/- mice restored lobular budding and ductal
arborization, to the full extent of that seen in control animals (20. 3+/-5.5).
Pregnancy, established by mating progesterone-treated PRL-/- females with PRL-/- 
males, led to complete morphological development of the mammary gland,
appropriate to the gestational stage. PRL treatment stimulated tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding activity of Stat5a, but not Stat1 in PRL-/- or
PRL+/- females, and Stat5a, but not Stat1, was elevated by estradiol within 24 h.
PRL-deficient mice were crossed with mice expressing a dominant oncogene (polyoma
middle-T antigen driven by the MMTV promoter, PyVT mice). Palpable (1 mm3) tumors
were detected an average of 9 days earlier in hormonally normal females
(PRL+/-:PyVT) compared with littermates that were PRL-deficient (PRL-/-:PyVT).
The growth rate of PyVT-induced tumors was 30% faster in PRL+/-, than in PRL-/-
females.

PMID: 10713693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):8114-20.

Yin-yang 1 and glucocorticoid receptor participate in the Stat5-mediated growth
hormone response of the serine protease inhibitor 2.1 gene.

Bergad PL(1), Towle HC, Berry SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

A growth hormone-inducible nuclear factor complex (GHINF), affinity-purified
using the growth hormone response element (GHRE) from the promoter of rat serine 
protease inhibitor 2.1, was found to contain Stat5a and -5b, as well as
additional components. The ubiquitous transcription factor yin-yang 1 (YY1) is
present in GHINF. An antibody to YY1 inhibited the formation of the GHINF.GHRE
complex in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Furthermore, Stat5 was
co-immunoprecipitated from rat hepatic nuclear extracts with antibodies to YY1.
An examination of the GHRE shows that, in addition to two gamma-activated sites, 
it contains a putative YY1 binding site between the two gamma-activated sites,
overlapping them both. Mutation of this putative YY1 site results in a decrease
of GHINF.GHRE complex formation in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay and a 
corresponding decrease in growth hormone (GH) response in functional assays. The 
glucocorticoid receptor was also present in GHINF, and Stat5
co-immunoprecipitates with glucocorticoid receptor in hepatic nuclear extracts
from rats treated with GH. GH activation of serine protease inhibitor 2.1
requires the unique sequence of the GHRE encompassing the recognition sites of
several transcription factors, and the interaction of these factors enhances the 
assembly of the transcription complex.

PMID: 10713133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Blood. 2000 Mar 15;95(6):2076-83.

Transforming properties of chimeric TEL-JAK proteins in Ba/F3 cells.

Lacronique V(1), Boureux A, Monni R, Dumon S, Mauchauffé M, Mayeux P, Gouilleux
F, Berger R, Gisselbrecht S, Ghysdael J, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)U434 INSERM, Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH), Paris, France.

The involvement of the cytokine signaling pathway in oncogenesis has long been
postulated. Recently, rearrangements of the gene encoding the tyrosine Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2) have been reported in human leukemias indicating a direct
JAK-signal transduction and activator of transcription (STAT)-mediated leukemic
process. The leukemia-associated TEL-JAK2 fusion protein is formed by the
oligomerization domain of the translocated ets leukemia (TEL) protein fused to
the catalytic domain of JAK2. TEL-mediated oligomerization results in a
constitutive tyrosine kinase activity that, in turn, is able to confer growth
factor independence to the murine hematopoietic interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent
Ba/F3 cell line. Results of the present study indicate that fusion proteins
containing the oligomerization domain of TEL and the tyrosine kinase domains of
Jak1, Jak2, JAK3, or TYK2 share similar properties and are able to efficiently
substitute for the survival and mitogenic signals controlled by IL-3, without
concomitant activation of the IL-3 receptor. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrated Stat5 as the only activated Stat factor in TEL-Jak2- and
TEL-Jak1-expressing cells, whereas other Stats, namely Stat1 and Stat3, could be 
detected in TEL-JAK3-, TEL-TYK2-, and also in TEL-ABL-expressing Ba/F3 cells.
High levels of expression of the Stat5-target genes pim-1, osm, and Cis were
observed in all the cytokine-independent cell lines. Furthermore, the expression 
of a dominant negative form of Stat5A markedly interfered with the growth factor 
independence process mediated by TEL-Jak2 in Ba/F3 cells. Because the BCR-ABL and
TEL-PDGFbetaR oncoproteins also activate Stat5, activation of this factor should 
be a crucial step in activated tyrosine kinase-mediated leukemogenesis. (Blood.
2000;95:2076-2083)

PMID: 10706877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 1;164(5):2533-41.

The IL-2 receptor promotes lymphocyte proliferation and induction of the c-myc,
bcl-2, and bcl-x genes through the trans-activation domain of Stat5.

Lord JD(1), McIntosh BC, Greenberg PD, Nelson BH.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Mason Research Center, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

Studies assessing the role of Stat5 in the IL-2 proliferative signal have
produced contradictory, and thus inconclusive, results. One factor confounding
many of these studies is the ability of IL-2R to deliver redundant mitogenic
signals from different cytoplasmic tyrosines on the IL-2R beta-chain (IL-2Rbeta).
Therefore, to assess the role of Stat5 in mitogenic signaling independent of any 
redundant signals, all cytoplasmic tyrosines were deleted from IL-2Rbeta except
for Tyr510, the most potent Stat5-activating site. This deletion mutant retained 
the ability to induce Stat5 activation and proliferation in the T cell line
CTLL-2 and the pro-B cell line BA/F3. A set of point mutations at or near Tyr510 
that variably compromised Stat5 activation also compromised the proliferative
signal and revealed a quantitative correlation between the magnitude of Stat5
activation and proliferation. Proliferative signaling by a receptor mutant with a
weak Stat5 activating site could be rescued by overexpression of wt Stat5a or b. 
Additionally, the ability of this receptor mutant to induce c-myc, bcl-x, and
bcl-2 was enhanced by overexpression of wt Stat5. By contrast, overexpression of 
a version of Stat5a lacking the C-terminal trans-activation domain inhibited the 
induction of these genes and cell proliferation. Thus, Stat5 is a critical
component of the proliferative signal from Tyr510 of the IL-2R and regulates
expression of both mitogenic and survival genes through its trans-activation
domain.

PMID: 10679091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Blood. 2000 Feb 15;95(4):1370-7.

Both stat5a and stat5b are required for antigen-induced eosinophil and T-cell
recruitment into the tissue.

Kagami Si(1), Nakajima H, Kumano K, Suzuki K, Suto A, Imada K, Davey HW, Saito Y,
Takatsu K, Leonard WJ, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Chiba, Japan.

Antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment into the airways of sensitized mice is
mediated by CD4(+) T cells and their cytokines, especially IL-5. In this study,
we found that the antigen-induced airway eosinophilia was diminished in
Stat5a-deficient (Stat5a(-/-)) mice and Stat5b-deficient (Stat5b(-/-)) mice. We
also found that antigen-induced CD4(+) T-cell infiltration and IL-5 production in
the airways were diminished in Stat5a(-/- )mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice. Moreover,
antigen-induced proliferation of splenocytes was diminished in Stat5a(-/- )mice
and Stat5b(-/-) mice, suggesting that the generation of antigen-primed T cells
may be compromised in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice and this defect may
account for the diminished antigen-induced T-cell infiltration into the airways. 
Interestingly, IL-4 and IL-5 production from anti-CD3-stimulated splenocytes was 
diminished in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice. However, antigen-specific
IgE and IgG1 production was diminished in Stat5a(-/-) mice but not in Stat5b(-/-)
mice, whereas antigen-specific IgG2a production was increased in Stat5a(-/-)
mice, suggesting the enhanced Th1 responses in Stat5a(-/-) mice. Finally, we
found that eosinophilopoiesis induced by the administration of recombinant IL-5
was also diminished in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice. Together, these
results indicate that both Stat5a and Stat5b are essential for induction of
antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment into the airways and that the defects in
antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice
result from both impaired IL-5 production in the airways and diminished IL-5
responsiveness of eosinophils. (Blood. 2000;95:1370-1377)

PMID: 10666213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Genes Dev. 2000 Jan 15;14(2):232-44.

Antiapoptotic activity of Stat5 required during terminal stages of myeloid
differentiation.

Kieslinger M(1), Woldman I, Moriggl R, Hofmann J, Marine JC, Ihle JN, Beug H,
Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Stat5 is activated by multiple receptors of hematopoietic cytokines. To study its
role during hematopoiesis, we have generated primary chicken myeloblasts
expressing different dominant-negative (dn) alleles of Stat5. This caused a
striking inability to generate mature cells, due to massive apoptosis during
differentiation. Bcl-2 was able to rescue differentiating cells expressing
dnStat5 from apoptosis, suggesting that during cytokine-dependent differentiation
the main function of the protein is to ensure cell survival. Our findings with
dnStat5-expressing chicken myeloblasts were confirmed with primary hematopoietic 
cells from Stat5a/Stat5b-deficient mice. Bone marrow cells from these animals
displayed a strong increase in apoptotic cell death during GM-CSF-dependent
functional maturation in vitro. The antiapoptotic protein Bcl-x was induced by
GM-CSF and IL-3 in a Stat5-dependent fashion. Ectopic expression of Bcl-x rescued
Stat5-deficient bone marrow cells from apoptosis, indicating that Stat5 promotes 
the survival of myeloid progenitor cells through its ability to induce
transcription of the bcl-x gene. Finally, the recruitment of myeloid cells to
inflammatory sites was found strongly impeded in Stat5-deficient mice. Taken
together, our findings suggest that Stat5 may promote cytokine-dependent survival
and proliferation of differentiating myeloid progenitor cells in stress or
pathological situations, such as inflammation.

PMCID: PMC316353
PMID: 10652277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Dec 20;158(1-2):111-6.

STAT5b mediates the GH-induced expression of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 mRNA in the liver.

Davey HW(1), McLachlan MJ, Wilkins RJ, Hilton DJ, Adams TE.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, AgResearch, Ruakura, Hamilton, New Zealand.
daveyh@agresearch.cri.nz

Suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS) proteins act as part of a classical
negative feedback loop regulating cytokine signal transduction. Expression of
SOCS proteins is induced in response to cytokines and down-regulates the cytokine
signal by inhibiting the JAK/STAT pathway. Growth hormone (GH) was previously
shown to induce strong transient expression of SOCS-3 and to a lesser extent CIS,
SOCS-1 and SOCS-2 in mouse liver (Adams, T.E., Hansen, J.A., Starr, R., Nicola,
N.A., Hilton, D.J., Billestrup, N., 1998. Growth hormone preferentially induces
the rapid, transient expression of SOCS-3, a novel inhibitor of cytokine receptor
signalling. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 1285-1287.). In this work we have compared
GH-induced SOCS gene expression in wild-type and STAT5b-deficient mice, and show 
that STAT5b is required for the induction of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 in liver. In
contrast, the absence of STAT5b has no effect on the GH-induced expression of CIS
and SOCS-2 mRNA in the mammary gland. Suprisingly, there is no activation of
SOCS-3 expression in mammary glands of wild-type and STAT5b mutant mice following
GH administration. These results highlight both tissue- and factor-specific
differences in the regulation of SOCS gene expression by STAT5a/b.

PMID: 10630411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 31;464(3):159-63.

Insulin selectively activates STAT5b, but not STAT5a, via a JAK2-independent
signalling pathway in Kym-1 rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Storz P(1), Döppler H, Pfizenmaier K, Müller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Stuttgart, Allmandring 31, 70569,
Stuttgart, Germany. peter.storz@po.uni-stuttgart.de

The STAT multigene family of transcriptional regulators conveys signals from
several cytokines and growth factors upon phosphorylation by janus kinases (JAK).
Activation of STAT5 is typically mediated by JAK2, but more recent data indicate 
a direct activation by the insulin receptor kinase. STAT5 exists in two closely
homologous isoforms, STAT5a and b. We here describe the selective tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5b in Kym-1 cells in response to insulin. Blocking insulin
signalling by HNMPA-(AM)(3), an insulin receptor kinase inhibitor, resulted in
the loss of insulin-induced STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation, whereas the
inhibition of JAK2 by the JAK selective inhibitor tyrphostin AG490 had no effect.
By contrast, in the same cells, IFNgamma-induced STAT5b activation was
JAK2-dependent, indicating that this signal pathway is functional in Kym-1 cells.
We conclude from this rhabdomyosarcoma model that STAT5b, but not STAT5a is a
direct target of the insulin receptor kinase.

PMID: 10618497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Jan;30(1):59-68.

Association of STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5 proteins with the IL-2 receptor involves
different subdomains of the IL-2 receptor beta chain.

Delespine-Carmagnat M(1), Bouvier G, Bertoglio J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 461, Faculté de Pharmacie Paris-XI, Paris, France.

Upon IL-2 stimulation of T lymphocytes, the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) becomes
phosphorylated on specific tyrosine residues which serve as docking sites for
proteins containing SH2 or phosphotyrosine binding domains. To study the
interaction of the IL-2Rbeta chain with Shc and STAT proteins, subdomains of the 
IL-2Rbeta chain were expressed as tyrosine-phosphorylated glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins and used to pull-down interacting proteins from Kit
225 cell lysates. These experiments provide direct biochemical evidence that
binding to the IL-2R of the adaptor protein Shc requires phosphorylation of
Tyr-338 in the IL-2Rbeta acidic subdomain. In addition, we report that STAT
proteins that are activated by IL-2, i.e. STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5, indeed
associate with the IL-2Rbeta chain. Both the A and B isoforms of STAT5 were found
to associate with Tyr-510 of the IL-2Rbeta C-terminal region, depending on its
phosphorylation. In contrast, STAT1 and STAT3 associated with the IL-2Rbeta chain
through its acidic subdomain. These results indicate that the interaction between
IL-2Rbeta and STAT1 or 3 does not require either phosphorylation of the receptor 
or even the presence of tyrosine residues of IL-2Rbeta. Thus, the IL-2R recruits 
STAT proteins through different modes of interaction.

PMID: 10602027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(1):389-401.

DNA binding site selection of dimeric and tetrameric Stat5 proteins reveals a
large repertoire of divergent tetrameric Stat5a binding sites.

Soldaini E(1), John S, Moro S, Bollenbacher J, Schindler U, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
Maryland 20892, USA.

We have defined the optimal binding sites for Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers and
found that they share similar core TTC(T/C)N(G/A)GAA interferon gamma-activated
sequence (GAS) motifs. Stat5a tetramers can bind to tandemly linked GAS motifs,
but the binding site selection revealed that tetrameric binding also can be seen 
with a wide range of nonconsensus motifs, which in many cases did not allow
Stat5a binding as a dimer. This indicates a greater degree of flexibility in the 
DNA sequences that allow binding of Stat5a tetramers than dimers. Indeed, in an
oligonucleotide that could bind both dimers and tetramers, it was possible to
design mutants that affected dimer binding without affecting tetramer binding. A 
spacing of 6 bp between the GAS sites was most frequently selected, demonstrating
that this distance is favorable for Stat5a tetramer binding. These data provide
insights into tetramer formation by Stat5a and indicate that the repertoire of
potential binding sites for this transcription factor is broader than expected.

PMCID: PMC85094
PMID: 10594041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Anal Biochem. 1999 Dec 1;276(1):97-104.

A cellular reporter assay to monitor insulin receptor kinase activity based on
STAT 5-dependent luciferase gene expression.

Storz P(1), Döppler H, Horn-Müller J, Groner B, Pfizenmaier K, Müller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 
D-70569, Germany.

A highly sensitive method for determination of insulin receptor (IR) kinase
activity in whole cells, which is based on a STAT5 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5)-dependent reporter gene assay, has been developed. 
We show in Rat1 fibroblasts stably overexpressing the human IR (Rat1-HIR-cl5) an 
insulin-dependent direct association and phosphorylation of STAT5b by IR kinase. 
Rat1-HIR cells transfected with a luciferase gene reporter construct under
control of a STAT5-inducible promoter showed insulin-mediated induction of
STAT5-dependent luciferase activity, with peak activities around 8 h of insulin
treatment over a wide dose range. Transient STAT5b but not STAT5a cotransfection 
significantly enhanced reporter gene activity, yielding up to a fivefold
induction. Addition of the IR kinase inhibitor tyrphostin AG1024 down-regulated
luciferase induction in a dose-dependent manner. This is the first assay allowing
determination of IR kinase activity in intact cells in a 24-well culture and a
microtiter format. Kinetics of this cellular response, sensitivity range, and
signal amplitude make it well suited for automation and offer the potential for
establishing high-throughput screening systems for both insulin mimetic
substances and IR kinase antagonists in a simple nonradioactive assay.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10585749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Sep 10;155(1-2):37-49.

Prolactin and insulin synergize to regulate the translation modulator PHAS-I via 
mitogen-activated protein kinase-independent but wortmannin- and
rapamycin-sensitive pathway.

Barash I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, The Volcani Center, Bet-Dagan, Israel.
barashi@agri.huji.ac.il

The synergism between insulin and prolactin (PRL) in their effect on protein
synthesis in the mammary gland was studied in differentiating mammary epithelial 
CID-9 cells. Both hormones were needed to induce phosphorylation of PHAS-I which 
resulted in its dissociation from the eIF-4E translation initiation factor. This 
step is crucial for the initiation of translation. The induction of PHAS-I
phosphorylation was rapid and its rate matched that demonstrated for the
JAK2/STAT5a and the binding of STAT5a to its DNA binding motif. However, 120 min 
was needed for complete phosphorylation of the PHAS-I protein. In the presence of
insulin, PRL induced MAP kinase activity, initiated at a comparable rate to that 
of PHAS-I phosphorylation. However, a line of evidence suggested that although
this kinase phosphorylates PHAS-I in vitro, it does not actively participate in
its phosphorylation in vivo: (a) the level of insulin needed to enable
PRL-induced ERK-1/ERK-2 activation was one order of magnitude higher than that
needed for PHAS-I phosphorylation; and (b) PD 098059, a MEK-1 inhibitor,
completely inhibited insulin-dependent, PRL-induced ERK-1/ERK-2 activation but
had no effect on the PRL-induced PHAS-I phosphorylation. In contrast, wortmannin,
a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3'-kinase) inhibitor and the
immunosuppressant rapamycin abrogated PHAS-I phosphorylation and caused a
reciprocal shift between the fully phosphorylated PHAS-I gamma form and its
non-phosphorylated alpha form. Since the partly phosphorylated PHAS-I beta form
was not significantly affected by these inhibitors, it is possible that more than
a single kinase mediates the synergistic effect of prolactin and insulin on
PHAS-I phosphorylation.

PMID: 10580837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 1999 May;1(2):95-101.

Activation of a functionally distinct 80-kDa STAT5 isoform by IL-5 and GM-CSF in 
human eosinophils and neutrophils.

Caldenhoven E(1), van Dijk TB, Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW, Koenderman L, de Groot
RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Hospital Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5), IL-3, and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) are hematopoietic cytokines which signal through a common beta subunit
(betac) of a heterodimeric receptor. Among the intracellular signaling pathways
activated via betac is the JAK/STAT pathway. We show that different STAT5
isoforms are activated by IL-5 and GM-CSF in eosinophils, neutrophils, and
differentiated eosinophilic HL-60 cells. Whereas IL-5 activated the wild-type
STAT5A and STAT5B proteins in HL60-eos cells, a carboxyl-terminally truncated
80-kDa STAT5 isoform was activated in mature eosinophils and neutrophils.
Surprisingly, while both isoforms bind strongly to an element from the
beta-casein promoter, only p80 STAT5 binds to the ICAM1-IRE. Consequently, a
carboxyl-terminal truncated STAT5 is capable of blocking STAT3-mediated
transcription of an IREtkCAT reporter construct. The cell type-specific
expression of these functionally distinct STAT5 isoforms might contribute to the 
pleiotropic effects of IL-5 and GM-CSF on different target cells.

PMID: 10356357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 1;163(11):5971-7.

Requirement for stat5 in thymic stromal lymphopoietin-mediated signal
transduction.

Isaksen DE(1), Baumann H, Trobridge PA, Farr AG, Levin SD, Ziegler SF.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Mason Research Center, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) is a newly identified cytokine that uniquely 
promotes B lymphopoiesis to the B220+/IgM+ immature B cell stage. In addition,
TSLP shares many biological properties with the related cytokine IL-7. This can
be explained by the finding that the receptor complexes for TSLP and IL-7 both
contain the IL-7R alpha-chain; IL-7Ralpha is paired with the common gamma-chain
(gammac) in the IL-7 receptor complex and the unique TSLP-R chain in the TSLP
receptor complex. Although TSLP and IL-7 both induce tyrosine phosphorylation of 
the transcription factor Stat5, only IL-7-mediated signal transduction could be
associated with activation of Janus family kinases (Jaks). Because Stat5
phosphorylation following cytokine stimulation is generally mediated by Jaks, the
lack of Jak activation after TSLP treatment suggested the possibility that
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat5 may be nonfunctional. Herein, we demonstrate that
TSLP induces a functional Stat5 transcription factor in that TSLP stimulation
results in Stat5-DNA complex formation and transcription of the Stat5-responsive 
gene CIS. We also show that the TSLP receptor complex is functionally
reconstituted using TSLP-R and IL-7Ralpha and that TSLP-mediated signal
transduction requires Stat5. Moreover, TSLP-mediated signaling is inhibited by
suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-1 and a kinase-deficient version of Tec
but not by kinase-deficient forms of Jak1 and Jak2.

PMID: 10570284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Oct;10(10):685-94.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a influences mammary epithelial
cell survival and tumorigenesis.

Humphreys RC(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Digestive,
Diabetes and Kidney Disease, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
robinh@box-r.nih.gov

The mammary gland undergoes extensive tissue remodeling and cell death at the end
of lactation in a process known as involution. We present evidence that the
prolactin-activated transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (Stat5a) has a crucial role in the regulation of cell death
during mammary gland involution. In a transforming growth factor-alpha transgenic
mouse model that exhibited delayed mammary gland involution, the absence of
Stat5a facilitated involution-associated changes in morphology of the gland and
the extent and timing of programmed cell death. These Stat5a-dependent changes
also affected epidermal growth factor receptor-initiated mammary gland
tumorigenesis. Overexpression of the transforming growth factor alpha transgene
in the mammary epithelium reproducibly generated mammary hyperplasia and tumors. 
In the presence of the activated epidermal growth factor receptor, deletion of
Stat5a delayed initial hyperplasia and mammary tumor development by 6 weeks.
These observations demonstrate that Stat5a is a survival factor, and its presence
is required for the epithelium of the mammary gland to resist regression and
involution-mediated apoptosis. We also suggest that Stat5a is one of the
antecedent, locally acting molecules that initiate the process of epithelial
regression and reorganization during involution.

PMID: 10547072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Endocrinology. 1999 Nov;140(11):5126-35.

Growth hormone, but not prolactin, maintains, low-level activation of STAT5a and 
STAT5b in female rat liver.

Choi HK(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

STAT5b, a member of the signal transducers and activators of transcription
family, is activated in rat liver in response to the intermittent (pulsatile)
plasma pattern of GH that is characteristic of adult males. Previous studies have
shown that the near-continuous plasma GH pattern of adult female rats is
associated with a dramatic down-regulation of the STAT5 activation pathway. The
present study demonstrates the presence of a low-level STAT5 DNA-binding activity
in adult female rat liver and investigates the hormonal factors required for its 
maintenance. PRL is not responsible for this low-level STAT5 activity, as
demonstrated in experiments involving estrus cycle monitoring (to investigate a
possible role of the proestrus PRL surge), implantation of bromocriptine pellets 
(to eliminate PRL release by the pituitary), and direct injection of purified
PRL. Rather, the low-level STAT5 activity is shown to result from chronic plasma 
GH stimulation, as demonstrated by GH infusion studies carried out in
hypophysectomized rats. Furthermore, gel mobility supershift experiments
demonstrate that the same STAT5-containing DNA-binding complexes are formed by
both male and female adult rat liver extracts, albeit at approximately 10- to
20-fold lower levels by the female extracts. This DNA-binding activity is
primarily comprised of STAT5b but also contains STAT5a, which is shown to be
preferentially activated by the male plasma GH pattern in a manner similar to
STAT5b. Thus, the dominance of activated STAT5b, compared with STAT5a, in the
strong DNA-binding complexes formed in adult male rat liver nuclear extracts, is 
a reflection of the relative abundance in liver of the two STAT5 forms and is not
attributable to an intrinsic, preferential activation of STAT5b by plasma GH
pulses. The physiological significance of the low-level activated STAT5a and
STAT5b seen in female rat liver and its effects on liver gene expression are
uncertain but may involve the activation of female-expressed cytochromes P450 and
other liver genes.

PMID: 10537141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;19(11):7436-46.

Targeted disruption of the murine fps/fes proto-oncogene reveals that Fps/Fes
kinase activity is dispensable for hematopoiesis.

Senis Y(1), Zirngibl R, McVeigh J, Haman A, Hoang T, Greer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Laboratories, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6.

The fps/fes proto-oncogene encodes a cytoplasmic protein-tyrosine kinase that is 
functionally implicated in the survival and terminal differentiation of myeloid
progenitors and in signaling from several members of the cytokine receptor
superfamily. To gain further insight into the physiological function of fps/fes, 
we targeted the mouse locus with a kinase-inactivating missense mutation. Mutant 
Fps/Fes protein was expressed at normal levels in these mice, but it lacked
detectable kinase activity. Homozygous mutant animals were viable and fertile,
and they showed no obvious defects. Flow cytometry analysis of bone marrow showed
no statistically significant differences in the levels of myeloid, erythroid, or 
B-cell precursors. Subtle abnormalities observed in mutant mice included slightly
elevated total leukocyte counts and splenomegaly. In bone marrow hematopoietic
progenitor cell colony-forming assays, mutant mice gave slightly elevated numbers
and variable sizes of CFU-granulocyte macrophage in response to interleukin-3
(IL-3) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat3 and Stat5A in bone marrow-derived macrophages was
dramatically reduced in response to GM-CSF but not to IL-3 or IL-6. This suggests
a distinct nonredundant role for Fps/Fes in signaling from the GM-CSF receptor
that does not extend to the closely related IL-3 receptor.
Lipopolysaccharide-induced Erk1/2 activation was also reduced in mutant
macrophages. These subtle molecular phenotypes suggest a possible nonredundant
role for Fps/Fes in myelopoiesis and immune responses.

PMCID: PMC84737
PMID: 10523632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Oct;10(10):3463-71.

Integrin-mediated adhesion of endothelial cells induces JAK2 and STAT5A
activation: role in the control of c-fos gene expression.

Brizzi MF(1), Defilippi P, Rosso A, Venturino M, Garbarino G, Miyajima A, Silengo
L, Tarone G, Pegoraro L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Biology, and Biochemistry, University of
Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.

Integrin-mediated adhesion induces several signaling pathways leading to
regulation of gene transcription, control of cell cycle entry and survival from
apoptosis. Here we investigate the involvement of the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway in integrin-mediated
signaling. Plating primary human endothelial cells from umbilical cord and the
human endothelial cell line ECV304 on matrix proteins or on antibody to beta1- or
alphav-integrin subunits induces transient tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and
STAT5A. Consistent with a role for the JAK/STAT pathway in regulation of gene
transcription, adhesion to matrix proteins leads to the formation of
STAT5A-containing complexes with the serum-inducible element of c-fos promoter.
Stable expression of a dominant negative form of STAT5A in NIH3T3 cells reduces
fibronectin-induced c-fos mRNA expression, indicating the involvement of STAT5A
in integrin-mediated c-fos transcription. Thus these data present a new
integrin-dependent signaling mechanism involving the JAK/STAT pathway in response
to cell-matrix interaction.

PMCID: PMC25616
PMID: 10512880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Oct;65(4):959-65.

STAT5 signaling in sexually dimorphic gene expression and growth patterns.

Davey HW(1), Wilkins RJ, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New Zealand.
daveyh@agresearch.cri.nz

The past 10 years have seen enormous advances in our understanding of how
cytokine signals are mediated intracellularly. Of particular significance was the
discovery of a family of seven Signal Transducer and Activators of Transcription 
(STAT) proteins. Each of these has now been studied in detail, and appropriate
gene-disrupted mouse models are available for all except STAT2 (Leonard and
O'Shea 1998). Fetal lethality is observed in Stat3-deficient mice, and various
immunodeficiencies characterize mice with disrupted Stat1, Stat4, and Stat6
genes, which is consistent with impaired signaling from the specific cytokines
that activate each of these proteins. The recent characterization of
Stat5-deficient mice has led to several unanticipated findings that point to
diverse biological functions for the two STAT5 forms, STAT5a and STAT5b. These
include roles for one or both STAT5 forms in the immune system, hematopoiesis,
sexually dimorphic growth, mammary development, hair growth, deposition of
adipose tissue, and pregnancy. Here we review the hormone- and cytokine-activated
signaling pathways in which STAT5 participates and the extensive evidence, from
laboratory animals, that these factors are required for sex-specific aspects of
development, including control of body size. Finally, we consider human growth
disorders that may involve defects in STAT5-dependent signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC1288266
PMID: 10486314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 16;263(1):201-5.

Stimulation of lipolysis but not of leptin release by growth hormone is abolished
in adipose tissue from Stat5a and b knockout mice.

Fain JN(1), Ihle JH, Bahouth SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee,
Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA. jfain@utmem.edu

The present studies examined the effects of growth hormone (GH) on lipolysis and 
leptin release by adipose tissue from mice incubated for 24 h in primary culture.
In adipose tissue from control mice GH enhanced lipolysis without affecting
leptin release. The lipolytic action of GH was unaffected in adipose tissue from 
Stat5b-/- male mice but leptin release was enhanced by GH in fat from Stat5b-/-
mice. In adipose tissue from Stat5ab-/- female mice no significant lipolytic
action of GH was seen but leptin release was enhanced by GH. An insulin-like
effect of GH on glucose conversion to lactate was also seen in mice deficient in 
Stat5ab-/-. These results suggest that the lipolytic action of GH involves the
Stat5 proteins while the insulin-like effects of GH on glucose metabolism and
leptin release involve different mechanisms.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10486277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Immunity. 1999 Aug;11(2):225-30.

Stat5 activation is uniquely associated with cytokine signaling in peripheral T
cells.

Moriggl R(1), Sexl V, Piekorz R, Topham D, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The activation and subsequent proliferation of peripheral T cells requires the
engagement of the T cell and a cytokine receptor, typically the IL-2 or IL-4
receptors. Critical to understanding the regulation of peripheral T cells is the 
knowledge of the unique contributions of each receptor to full T cell activation 
and cell cycle progression. Mice deficient in Stat5a and Stat5b have demonstrated
the essential role that these highly related proteins play in cell cycle
progression following peripheral T cell activation. Here we demonstrate that
activation of the Stat5 proteins by tyrosine phosphorylation is uniquely
contributed by cytokine receptor signaling and specifically does not occur
through the T cell receptor complex.

PMID: 10485657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Virol. 1999 Oct;73(10):8669-76.

Transcription originating in the long terminal repeats of the endogenous mouse
mammary tumor virus MTV-3 is activated in Stat5a-null mice and picks Up
hitchhiking exons.

Stegalkina SS(1), Guerrero A, Walton KD, Liu X, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes, and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

The enhancer within the long terminal repeats (LTRs) of acquired somatic mouse
mammary tumor viruses (MMTV) can activate juxtaposed genes and induce mammary
tumors. In contrast, germ line proviral MMTV genomes are integrated in the host
genome and considered to be genetically confined transcription units. Here we
demonstrate that transcription initiated in an MMTV provirus proceeds into
flanking host sequences. We discovered multiple polyadenylated transcripts which 
are induced in Stat5a null mice. These range from 1.5 kb to more than 8 kb and
are specifically expressed in mammary tissue from pregnant and lactating mice
from the 129 but not C57BL/6 strain. The RNAs emanate from both LTRs of the
endogenous MTV-3 provirus on chromosome 11 and proceed at least 10 kb into the
juxtaposed genomic territory. Transcripts originating in the 5' LTR splice from
the native splice site within the MMTV envelope gene into at least six exons,
three of which contain functional internal splice sites. The combination of
alternative splicing and the use of several polyadenylation sites ensure the
generation of multiple transcripts. To date no significant open reading frame has
been discovered. Furthermore, we demonstrate that transcription from the MMTV 5' 
LTR is highly active in the absence of Stat5a, a transcription factor that had
been shown previously to be required for transcription from the MMTV LTR.

PMCID: PMC112887
PMID: 10482620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 3;274(36):25499-509.

Cellular physiology of STAT3: Where's the cytoplasmic monomer?

Ndubuisi MI(1), Guo GG, Fried VA, Etlinger JD, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New 
York 10595, USA.

In the standard model of cytokine-induced signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) protein family signaling to the cell nucleus, it is assumed 
that STAT3 is recruited to the cytoplasmic side of the cell surface receptor
complex from within a cytosolic monomer pool. By using Superose-6 gel-filtration 
chromatography, we have discovered that there is little monomeric STAT3 (91 kDa) 
in the cytosol of liver cells (human hepatoma Hep3B cell line and rat liver). The
bulk of STAT3 (and STAT1, STAT5a, and -b) was present in the cytosol as high
molecular mass complexes in two broad distributions in the size range 200-400 kDa
("statosome I") and 1-2 MDa ("statosome II"). Upon treatment of Hep3B cells with 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) for 30 min (i) cytosolic tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT3 was
found to be in complexes of size ranging from 200-400 kDa to 1-2 MDa; (ii) a
small pool of monomeric STAT3 and tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT3 eluting at 80-100
kDa was observed, and (iii) most of the cytoplasmic DNA-binding competent STAT3
(the so-called SIF-A "homodimer") co-eluted with catalase at 230 kDa. In order to
identify the protein components of the 200-400-kDa statosome I cytosolic
complexes, we used the novel technique of antibody-subtracted differential
protein display using anti-STAT3 antibody. Eight polypeptides in the size range
from 20 to 114 kDa co-shifted with STAT3; three of these (p60, p20a, and p20b)
were co-shifted in an IL-6-dependent manner. In-gel tryptic fragmentation and
mass spectroscopy identified the major IL-6-dependent STAT3-co-shifted p60
protein as the chaperone GRP58/ER-60/ERp57. Taken together, these data (i)
emphasize the absence of a detectable STAT3 monomer pool in the cytosol of
cytokine-free liver cells as posited by the standard model, and (ii) suggest an
alternative model for STAT signaling in which STAT3 proteins function in the
cytoplasm as heteromeric complexes with accessory scaffolding proteins, including
the chaperone GRP58.

PMID: 10464281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6396-407.

Suppression of STAT5 functions in liver, mammary glands, and T cells in
cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein 1 transgenic mice.

Matsumoto A(1), Seki Y, Kubo M, Ohtsuka S, Suzuki A, Hayashi I, Tsuji K, Nakahata
T, Okabe M, Yamada S, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, Kurume 839-0861, Japan.

Various cytokines utilize Janus kinase (JAK) and the STAT (signal transducers and
activators of transcription) family of transcription factors to carry out their
biological functions. Among STATs, two highly related proteins, STAT5a and
STAT5b, are activated by various cytokines, including prolactin, growth hormone, 
erythropoietin, interleukin 2 (IL-2), and IL-3. We have cloned a STAT5-dependent 
immediate-early cytokine-responsive gene, CIS1 (encoding cytokine-inducible
SH2-containing protein 1). In this study, we created CIS1 transgenic mice under
the control of a beta-actin promoter. The transgenic mice developed normally;
however, their body weight was lower than that of the wild-type mice, suggesting 
a defect in growth hormone signaling. Female transgenic mice failed to lactate
after parturition because of a failure in terminal differentiation of the mammary
glands, suggesting a defect in prolactin signaling. The IL-2-dependent
upregulation of the IL-2 receptor alpha chain and proliferation were partially
suppressed in the T cells of transgenic mice. These phenotypes remarkably
resembled those found in STAT5a and/or STAT5b knockout mice. Indeed, STAT5
tyrosine phosphorylation was suppressed in mammary glands and the liver.
Furthermore, the IL-2-induced activation of STAT5 was markedly inhibited in T
cells in transgenic mice, while leukemia inhibitory factor-induced STAT3
phosphorylation was not affected. We also found that the numbers of gamma delta T
cells, as well as those of natural killer (NK) cells and NKT cells, were
dramatically decreased and that Th1/Th2 differentiation was altered in transgenic
mice. These data suggest that CIS1 functions as a specific negative regulator of 
STAT5 in vivo and plays an important regulatory role in the liver, mammary
glands, and T cells.

PMCID: PMC84609
PMID: 10454585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 19;262(1):216-22.

PPARgamma ligand-dependent induction of STAT1, STAT5A, and STAT5B during
adipogenesis.

Stephens JM(1), Morrison RF, Wu Z, Farmer SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Life Sciences
Building, Room 508, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA. jsteph1@unix1.snce.lsu.edu

We have recently demonstrated that STAT1, STAT5A, and STAT5B are induced during
adipogenesis of cultured preadipocytes in a differentiation-dependent manner.
Members of the C/EBP and PPAR families of transcription factors have also been
shown to be induced during adipocyte differentiation and to play a significant
role in the regulation of fat-specific genes. In this investigation, we have
examined the ability of C/EBPs and PPARs to contribute to STAT protein expression
during conversion of non-precursor fibroblasts to functionally mature adipocytes.
For this study, NIH-3T3 fibroblasts engineered to ectopically co-express
C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta under the control of a tetracycline-responsive,
inducible expression system were utilized to assess STAT expression during
controlled adipogenesis. Data presented here demonstrate that STAT1, STAT5A, and 
STAT5B, but not STAT3 and STAT6, were induced in a tetracycline-responsive manner
during the differentiation of these engineered fibroblasts. The STAT protein
accumulation resulting from C/EBP expression was tightly coupled to the
morphological conversion of fibroblasts to adipocytes and represents an
expression profile identical to that reported for mature adipocytes in vivo. Data
are also presented demonstrating that STAT protein accumulation and adipocyte
conversion occurred only during controlled conditions leading to the expression
of PPARgamma and that the expression of these three STATs was tightly regulated
in a PPARgamma ligand dose-response fashion. These data illustrate that the
cascade of transcriptional events leading to adipogenesis regulate the STAT
family of transcription factors and that the differentiation-dependent
upregulation of STAT protein expression is regulated downstream of PPARgamma in a
ligand-dependent manner.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Anim Genet. 1999 Jun;30(3):232.

A single strand conformational polymorphism in the bovine gene STAT5A.

Antoniou E(1), Hirst BJ, Grosz M, Skidmore CJ.

Author information: 
(1)USDA-ARS, Fort Keogh Livestock and Range Research Laboratory, Miles City, MT
59301, USA. eric@larrl.ars.usda.gov

PMID: 10442998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 15;163(4):2151-9.

Human IL-3 stimulates endothelial cell motility and promotes in vivo new vessel
formation.

Dentelli P(1), Del Sorbo L, Rosso A, Molinar A, Garbarino G, Camussi G, Pegoraro 
L, Brizzi MF.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Fisiopatologia Clinica, Università di
Torino, Italy.

Angiogenesis is a critical process for growth of new capillary blood vessels from
preexisting capillaries and postcapillary venules, both in physiological and
pathological conditions. Endothelial cell proliferation is a major component of
angiogenesis and it is regulated by several growth factors. It has been
previously shown that the human hemopoietic growth factor IL-3 (hIL-3),
predominantly produced by activated T lymphocytes, stimulates both endothelial
cell proliferation and functional activation. In the present study, we report
that hIL-3 is able to induce directional migration and tube formation of HUVEC.
The in vivo neoangiogenetic effect of hIL-3 was also demonstrated in a murine
model in which Matrigel was used for the delivery of the cytokine, suggesting a
role of hIL-3 in sustaining neoangiogenesis. Challenge of HUVEC with hIL-3 lead
to the synthesis of platelet-activating factor (PAF), which was found to act as
secondary mediator for hIL-3-mediated endothelial cell motility but not for
endothelial cell proliferation. Consistent with the role of STAT5 proteins in
regulating IL-3-mediated mitogenic signals, we herein report that, in
hIL-3-stimulated HUVEC, the recruitment of STAT5A and STAT5B, by the beta common 
(betac) subunit of the IL-3R, was not affected by PAF receptor blockade.

PMID: 10438956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncogene. 1999 Jul 22;18(29):4191-9.

IL-3 dependent regulation of Bcl-xL gene expression by STAT5 in a bone marrow
derived cell line.

Dumon S(1), Santos SC, Debierre-Grockiego F, Gouilleux-Gruart V, Cocault L,
Boucheron C, Mollat P, Gisselbrecht S, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale (INSERM U363), Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Activation of the Jak/STAT pathway by cytokines has been shown to regulate
differentiation, proliferation or apoptosis in hematopoeitic cells. Among the
Stat proteins, STAT5 is activated by a broad range of cytokines. In order to
study the role of STAT5 in hematopoietic cells, we stably expressed a dominant
negative form of STAT5 (STAT5A delta749) in the IL-3 dependent bone marrow
derived Ba/F3 cell line. Ba/F3 cells expressing STAT5A delta749 were found to be 
more sensitive to apoptosis than parental or control Ba/F3 cells after IL-3
withdrawal. Analysis of the expression of the cell death regulators, Bcl-2 and
Bcl-x, revealed that the level of Bcl-x was lower in Ba/F3 cells expressing
STAT5A delta749 than in control cells. IL-3 regulation of Bcl-x expression at
protein and mRNA levels was impaired in these cells while that of Bcl-2
expression was unaffected. We further demonstrated that the Bcl-x gene promoter
contained a proximal STAT consensus sequence that bound STAT5. Transactivation of
a Bcl-x gene promoter reporter construct by STAT5 was observed in Ba/F3 cells.
Introduction of a mutation in the STAT binding site abolished this
transactivation. These data indicate that Bcl-x is probably a STAT5 target gene. 
They also support the involvement of STAT5 in hematopoietic cell survival.

PMID: 10435632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22484-92.

Differential effects of prolactin and src/abl kinases on the nuclear
translocation of STAT5B and STAT5A.

Kazansky AV(1), Kabotyanski EB, Wyszomierski SL, Mancini MA, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030-3498, USA.

In this study, DNA binding and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A and STAT5B were
compared with their subcellular localization determined using indirect
immunofluorescence microscopy. Following prolactin activation, both STAT5A and
STAT5B were rapidly translocated into the nucleus and displayed a
detergent-resistant, punctate nuclear staining pattern. Similar to prolactin
induction, src activation resulted in tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding of
both STAT5A and STAT5B. However, nuclear translocation of only STAT5B but not
STAT5A was observed. This selective nuclear translocation appears to be mediated 
via the carboxyl-terminal sequences in STAT5B. Furthermore, overexpression of a
dominant negative kinase-inactive mutant of JAK2 prevented prolactin-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT5A and STAT5B but did
not block src kinase activation and nuclear translocation of STAT5B. In
co-transfection assays, prolactin-mediated activation but not src kinase-mediated
activation of STAT5B resulted in the induction of a beta-casein promoter-driven
reporter construct. These results suggest that STAT5 activation by src may occur 
by a mechanism distinct from that employed in cytokine activation of the JAK/STAT
pathway, resulting in the selective nuclear translocation of STAT5B.

PMID: 10428824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cell. 1999 Jul 23;98(2):181-91.

Fetal anemia and apoptosis of red cell progenitors in Stat5a-/-5b-/- mice: a
direct role for Stat5 in Bcl-X(L) induction.

Socolovsky M(1), Fallon AE, Wang S, Brugnara C, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
USA.

The erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) is essential for production of red blood
cells; a principal function of EpoR is to rescue committed erythroid progenitors 
from apoptosis. Stat5 is rapidly activated following EpoR stimulation, but its
function in erythropoiesis has been unclear since adult Stat5a-/-5b-/- mice have 
normal steady-state hematocrit. Here we show that Stat5 is essential for the high
erythropoietic rate during fetal development. Stat5a-/-5b-/- embryos are severely
anemic; erythroid progenitors are present in low numbers, show higher levels of
apoptosis, and are less responsive to Epo. These findings are explained by a
crucial role for Stat5 in EpoR's antiapoptotic signaling: it mediates the
immediate-early induction of Bcl-X(L) in erythroid cells through direct binding
to the Bcl-X promoter.

PMID: 10428030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Int Immunol. 1999 Aug;11(8):1283-94.

Activation of STAT5 by IL-4 relies on Janus kinase function but not on receptor
tyrosine phosphorylation, and can contribute to both cell proliferation and gene 
regulation.

Friedrich K(1), Kammer W, Erhardt I, Brändlein S, Sebald W, Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biozentrum), Physiologische
Chemie II, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

We have investigated mechanisms and consequences of STAT5 activation through the 
human IL-4 receptor (IL-4R). By functionally expressing receptor mutants in the
murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3, we could show that phosphorylated tyrosine residues
within the IL-4R alpha chain are dispensable for IL-4-induced STAT5 activity.
However, disruption of a membrane-proximal proline-rich sequence motif ('box1')
in either subunit of the bipartite IL-4R abolished not only ligand-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinases JAK1 and JAK3, but also IL-4-triggered 
activation of STAT5 and concomitant cell proliferation. A dominant-negative
version of STAT5b, but not of STAT5a, interfered with IL-4-induced DNA synthesis 
in Ba/F3 cells, suggesting an involvement of STAT5b in the control of cell
proliferation through IL-4R. Reporter gene experiments finally showed that
transcription from promoters of STAT5 target genes can be specifically induced by
challenging cells with IL-4, and that both STAT5a and STAT5b can contribute to
IL-4-triggered transcriptional control.

PMID: 10421786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Blood. 1999 Aug 1;94(3):1108-12.

STAT5 activation by BCR-Abl contributes to transformation of K562 leukemia cells.

de Groot RP(1), Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW, Jove R, Koenderman L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Hospital Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. R.deGroot.hli.azu.nl

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) belong to a family of 
transcription factors that were originally identified as mediators of
cytokine-induced gene expression. Recent evidence, however, has shown that
certain members of the STAT family, including STAT3, are also involved in
cellular transformation. Here we show that STAT5 also plays a role in cellular
transformation by the BCR-Abl oncogene. In BCR-Abl transformed K562 cells, STAT5A
and 5B are constitutively phosphorylated on tyrosine and are transcriptionally
active. Moreover, expression of a dominant negative form of STAT5 shows that
active STAT5 is necessary for the growth in soft agar of these cells. These
results show that besides STAT3, STAT5 can also be involved in cellular
transformation.

PMID: 10419904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 1;212(1):1-11.

Impaired mammary gland development in Cyl-1(-/-) mice during pregnancy and
lactation is epithelial cell autonomous.

Fantl V(1), Edwards PA, Steel JH, Vonderhaar BK, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Carcinogenesis Laboratory, Histopathology Unit, Imperial Cancer Research
Fund, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

A specific defect of mice lacking cyclin D1 (Cyl-1(-/-)) is impaired development 
of the mammary gland during pregnancy. Here we show that when tissue from
Cyl-1(-/-) mammary gland was transplanted into empty mammary fat pad of wild-type
mice, the abnormal phenotype was maintained, indicating that it is epithelial
cell autonomous. Nevertheless, in pregnancy the early proliferative response,
which is characterized by extensive side branching, still occurs in the absence
of cyclin D1. However, the response is atypical due to a marked reduction in the 
formation of accompanying alveoli. This reduction and delay in alveolar
development persists throughout pregnancy. Moreover, although prolactin synthesis
and release appear to be normal, lactogenesis is severely compromised. Consistent
with the appearance of numerous side branches, progesterone receptor expression
was readily detected in the mammary tissue of pregnant Cyl-1(-/-) mice, although 
there was a significant change in the ratio of the two (A and B) receptor
isoforms. In Cyl-1(-/-) mammary glands during late pregnancy there was a decrease
in the abundance of total and phosphorylated Stat5a, as well as delayed onset and
substantial diminution of milk protein expression. The biochemical analysis
suggests that there is a cumulative delay in growth and differentiation of the
mammary gland during pregnancy that results in a severely compromised gland when,
at parturition, further development is curtailed by the abrupt change in hormonal
milieu.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10419681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Aug 1;74(2):278-91.

Ethanol inhibits prolactin-induced activation of the JAK/STAT pathway in cultured
astrocytes.

DeVito WJ(1), Stone S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Alcohol consumption has multiple effects in the central nervous system (CNS).
Whereas, alcohol is an immunosuppressive drug the effect of alcohol on the
neuroimmune system, remains unclear. In cultured astrocytes, prolactin (PRL)
induces mitogenesis and the expression of inflammatory cytokines, including tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF alpha). We have recently shown that whereas ethanol
does not inhibit PRL receptor binding, it markedly inhibits PRL-induced
mitogenesis and TNF alpha secretion in cultured astrocytes. It is clear that PRL 
activates the tyrosine phosphorylation of several proteins, including members of 
a novel family of protein tyrosine kinases, the Janus Kinases (JAKs). The aims of
this study were to characterize PRL-induced activation of the JAK/STAT (signal
transducers and activators of transcription) pathway, and to determine if ethanol
affects JAK/STAT activation in cultured astrocytes. We found that PRL
specifically increases the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, but not JAK1, JAK3, 
or Tyk2, and the subsequent phosphorylation of STAT1 alpha, STAT5a, and STAT5b.
Preincubation of astrocytes with ethanol markedly inhibited phosphorylation of
JAK2, STAT1 alpha, STAT5a, and STAT5b. In PRL-stimulated astrocytes, ethanol
inhibited binding of nuclear proteins to oligonucleotides corresponding to the
gamma-interferon activated sequence (GAS). Further, ethanol blocked PRL-induced
increases in interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) mRNA, a PRL/cytokine
inducible transcription factor involved in the regulation of a number of cytokine
inducible genes. The inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation by ethanol was not a 
general effect, however, as we found that ethanol increased basal and NGF-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of extracellular signal-activated protein kinase-1
(ERK-1). These data indicate that ethanol inhibits PRL-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of the JAK/STAT pathway resulting in decreased nuclear GAS DNA
binding and inhibition of the PRL inducible gene, IRF-1. Thus, suggesting that
ethanol-induced inhibition of JAK2 phosphorylation may be one mechanism though
which ethanol could after the brain's response to injury or infection.

PMID: 10404396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Immunol. 1999 Jul 15;163(2):787-93.

Activation of the Janus kinase 3-STAT5a pathway after CD40 triggering of human
monocytes but not of resting B cells.

Revy P(1), Hivroz C, Andreu G, Graber P, Martinache C, Fischer A, Durandy A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 429, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

CD40/CD40 ligand interactions play a key role in the immune responses of B
lymphocytes, monocytes, and dendritic cells. The signal transduction events
triggered by cross-linking of the CD40 receptor have been widely studied in B
cell lines, but little is known about signaling following CD40 stimulation of
monocytes and resting tonsillar B cells. Therefore, we studied the CD40 pathway
in highly purified human monocytes and resting B cells. After CD40 triggering, a 
similar activation of the NF-kappaB (but not of the AP-1) transcription factor
complex occurred in both cell preparations. However, the components of the
NF-kappaB complexes were different in monocytes and B cells, because p50 is part 
of the NF-kappaB complex induced by CD40 triggering in both monocytes and B
cells, whereas p65 was only induced in B cells. In contrast, although the Janus
kinase 3 tyrosine kinase was associated with CD40 molecules in both monocytes and
resting B cells, Janus kinase 3 phosphorylation induction was observed only in
CD40-activated monocytes, with subsequent induction of STAT5a DNA binding
activity in the nucleus. These results suggest that the activation signals in
human B cells and monocytes differ following CD40 stimulation. This observation
is consistent with the detection of normal CD40-induced monocyte activation in
patients with CD40 ligand+ hyper IgM syndrome in whom a defect in CD40-induced B 
cell activation has been reported.

PMID: 10395671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Glia. 1999 Jun;26(4):344-52.

Signal transduction pathways induced by GM-CSF in microglia: significance in the 
control of proliferation.

Liva SM(1), Kahn MA, Dopp JM, de Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Mental Retardation Research Center, Brain Research
Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90024-1759, USA.

Communication between cells of the central nervous system (CNS) and of the immune
system is accomplished by a network of cytokines and growth factors. Certain
cytokines and growth factors cause activation of microglia, contributing to
inflammatory states in the CNS. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) has numerous effects on microglia, ranging from induction of
proliferation to changes in morphology. GM-CSF is also a growth factor for cells 
of the myeloid lineage, and the signal tranduction induced by GM-CSF in these
cells has been extensively studied. Most notably, the importance of the Jak/STAT 
and MAP kinase pathways in mitogenesis has been shown in many different systems. 
We show here that primary microglia and a microglia cell line, BV-2, have a
Jak/STAT expression pattern and GM-CSF inducibility similar to that of monocytes 
and macrophages. Primary microglia and BV-2 cells expressed identical Jak/STATs: 
Jakl, Jak2, Jak3, Tyk2, STAT1alpha/beta, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6. In
addition, GM-CSF induced Jak2, STAT5A, and STAT5B in BV-2 cells, as it does in
monocytes and macrophages. Immunocytochemical analysis showed that STAT5
translocates to the nucleus following GM-CSF stimulation of microglia. We also
found the MAP kinases, ERK1 and ERK2, to be phosphorylated in microglia and BV-2 
cells following induction by GM-CSF. Jak2, STAT5A, STAT5B, and ERKs are known to 
be important in controlling cellular proliferation. Drugs that block these
pathways may become tools to control inflammation in the CNS by limiting
microglial proliferation.

PMID: 10383053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Leukoc Biol. 1999 Jun;65(6):891-9.

Tyrphostin AG-490 inhibits cytokine-mediated JAK3/STAT5a/b signal transduction
and cellular proliferation of antigen-activated human T cells.

Kirken RA(1), Erwin RA, Taub D, Murphy WJ, Behbod F, Wang L, Pericle F, Farrar
WL.

Author information: 
(1)IRSP, SAIC Frederick, Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center,
Maryland, USA. rkirken@farmr1.med.uth.tmc.edu

Janus kinase 3 (JAK3) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase required for T cell
development and activated by cytokines that utilize the interleukin-2 (IL-2)
receptor common gamma chain (gamma(c)). Genetic inactivation of JAK3 is
manifested as severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) in humans and mice.
These findings have suggested that JAK3 represents a pharmacological target to
control certain lymphoid-derived diseases. Here we provide novel evidence that
AG-490 potently inhibits the autokinase activity of JAK3 and tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a and 5b (STAT5a/b). Similar inhibitory effects were observed with
other cytokines that use gamma(c). AG-490 also inhibited IL-2-mediated
proliferative growth in human T cells with an IC50) = 25 microM that was
partially recoverable. Moreover, we demonstrate that this inhibitor prevented
tetanus toxoid antigen-specific T cell proliferation and expansion but failed to 
block activation of Zap70 or p56Lck after anti-CD3 stimulation of human T cells. 
Taken together, these findings suggest that AG-490 inhibits the JAK3-mediated
Type II signaling pathway but not the T cell receptor-derived Type I pathway and 
possesses therapeutic potential for T cell-derived pathologies such as
graft-versus-host disease, allergy, and autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 10380915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cell Signal. 1999 May;11(5):331-5.

Role of STAT5 in interferon-alpha signal transduction in Ba/F3 cells.

Jaster R(1), Tschirch E, Bittorf T, Brock J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Medical Faculty of the University Rostock, 
Germany. jaster@med.uni-rostock.de

In interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) signalling, the essential role of the
transcription factors STAT1 and STAT2 is well established. In contrast, the
involvement of other STAT proteins, including STAT5, is much less well
understood. Here we show that, in IFN-alpha-responsive Ba/F3 cells, this cytokine
stimulates the DNA-binding of STAT5A and B but that IL-3 is a much more potent
activator of both STAT5 isoforms. A stably expressed dominant-negative mutant of 
JAK2 suppressed the IL-3- but not the IFN-alpha-dependent DNA binding of STAT5,
suggesting independent mechanisms of its activation. Northern blots revealed that
IL-3 strongly induced the expression of two STAT5-regulated genes, pim-1 and
oncostatin-M, whereas IFN-alpha had a weak stimulatory effect on pim-1 expression
only. In summary our results suggest that, despite the capability of IFN-alpha to
stimulate DNA binding of STAT5, this transcription factor does not play a pivotal
role in IFN-alpha signalling in Ba/F3 cells.

PMID: 10376805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 25;274(26):18686-92.

Regulation of prolactin receptor (PRLR) gene expression in insulin-producing
cells. Prolactin and growth hormone activate one of the rat prlr gene promoters
via STAT5a and STAT5b.

Galsgaard ED(1), Nielsen JH, Møldrup A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensensvej 6,
DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. edg@hagedorn.dk

Expression of the prolactin receptor (PRLR) gene is increased in pancreatic
islets during pregnancy and in vitro in insulin-producing cells by growth hormone
(GH) and prolactin (PRL). The 5'-region of the rat PRLR gene contains at least
three alternative first exons that are expressed tissue-specifically because of
differential promoter usage. We show by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction analysis that both exon 1A- and exon 1C-containing PRLR transcripts are 
expressed in rat islets and that human (h)GH, ovine (o)PRL, and bovine (b)GH
increase exon 1A expression 6.5 +/- 0. 8-fold, 6.8 +/- 0.7-fold, and 3.9 +/-
0.7-fold and exon 1C expression 4.8 +/- 0.4-fold, 4.4 +/- 0.6-fold, and 2.5 +/-
0.7-fold, respectively. Expression of exon 1B was not detectable. The
transcriptional activities of reporter constructs containing the 1A, 1B, or 1C
promoter were found to be 22.8-fold, 2.7-fold, and 8. 0-fold, respectively, above
that of a promoterless reporter construct when transfected into the
insulin-producing INS-1 cells. The transcriptional activity of the 1A promoter
construct was increased 8.9 +/- 1.9-fold by 0.5 microgram/ml hGH. Responsiveness 
to hGH of the 1A promoter was localized to the region from -225 to +81 with
respect to the transcription start site. This region contains the sequence
TTCTAGGAA that by gel retardation experiments was shown to bind the transcription
factors STAT5a and STAT5b in response to stimulation by hGH, oPRL, or bGH.
Mutation of this gamma-activated sequence-like element completely abolished
transcriptional induction of the 1A promoter by hGH. Our results suggest that GH 
and PRL increase the levels of exon 1A- and 1C-containing PRLR mRNA species and
furthermore that the transcriptional activity of the 1A promoter is increased via
activation of STAT5a and STAT5b.

PMID: 10373481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood. 1999 Jun 15;93(12):4154-66.

Dominant negative mutants implicate STAT5 in myeloid cell proliferation and
neutrophil differentiation.

Ilaria RL Jr(1), Hawley RG, Van Etten RA.

Author information: 
(1)The Simmons Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School,
Dallas, TX, USA.

STAT5 is a member of the signal transducers and activation of transcription
(STAT) family of latent transcription factors activated in a variety of cytokine 
signaling pathways. We introduced alanine substitution mutations in highly
conserved regions of murine STAT5A and studied the mutants for dimerization, DNA 
binding, transactivation, and dominant negative effects on erythropoietin-induced
STAT5-dependent transcriptional activation. The mutations included two near the
amino-terminus (W255KR-->AAA and R290QQ-->AAA), two in the DNA-binding domain
(E437E-->AA and V466VV-->AAA), and a carboxy-terminal truncation of STAT5A
(STAT5A/triangle up53C) analogous to a naturally occurring isoform of rat STAT5B.
All of the STAT mutant proteins were tyrosine phosphorylated by JAK2 and
heterodimerized with STAT5B except for the WKR mutant, suggesting an important
role for this region in STAT5 for stabilizing dimerization. The WKR, EE, and VVV 
mutants had no detectable DNA-binding activity, and the WKR and VVV mutants, but 
not EE, were defective in transcriptional induction. The VVV mutant had a
moderate dominant negative effect on erythropoietin-induced STAT5 transcriptional
activation, which was likely due to the formation of heterodimers that are
defective in DNA binding. Interestingly, the WKR mutant had a potent dominant
negative effect, comparable to the transactivation domain deletion mutant,
triangle up53C. Stable expression of either the WKR or triangle up53C STAT5
mutants in the murine myeloid cytokine-dependent cell line 32D inhibited both
interleukin-3-dependent proliferation and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF)-dependent differentiation, without induction of apoptosis. Expression of 
these mutants in primary murine bone marrow inhibited G-CSF-dependent granulocyte
colony formation in vitro. These results demonstrate that mutations in distinct
regions of STAT5 exert dominant negative effects on cytokine signaling, likely
through different mechanisms, and suggest a role for STAT5 in proliferation and
differentiation of myeloid cells.

PMID: 10361113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):17209-18.

ErbB receptor-induced activation of stat transcription factors is mediated by Src
tyrosine kinases.

Olayioye MA(1), Beuvink I, Horsch K, Daly JM, Hynes NE.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, P.O. Box 2543, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) binding to its receptor, ErbB1, triggers various
signal transduction pathways, one of which leads to the activation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) factors. The mechanism
underlying ErbB1-induced Stat activation and whether Stats are downstream targets
of other ErbB receptors have not been explored. In this report we show that
ErbB2, ErbB3, and ErbB4 do not potentiate Stat5 phosphorylation by EGF. However, 
neu differentiation factor-induced heterodimers of ErbB2 and ErbB4 activated
Stat5. In A431 cells, Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5, were constitutively complexed with
ErbB1 and rapidly phosphorylated on tyrosine in response to EGF. Neither mutation
of the conserved tyrosine residue (Tyr694) nor inactivation of the Stat5a SH2
domain disrupted this association. However, an intact SH2 domain was necessary
for EGF-induced Stat5a phosphorylation. In contrast to prolactin, which induced
only Tyr694 phosphorylation of Stat5a, EGF promoted phosphorylation on Tyr694 and
additional tyrosine residue(s). Janus kinases (Jaks) were also constitutively
associated with ErbB receptors and were phosphorylated in response to EGF-related
ligands. However, we provide evidence that EGF- and neu differentiation
factor-induced Stat activation are dependent on Src but not Jak kinases. Upon EGF
stimulation, c-Src was rapidly recruited to Stat/ErbB receptor complexes.
Pharmacological Src kinase inhibitors and a dominant negative c-Src ablated both 
Stat and Jak tyrosine phosphorylation. However, dominant negative Jaks did not
affect EGF-induced Stat phosphorylation. Taken together, the experiments
establish two independent roles for Src kinases: (i) key molecules in ErbB
receptor-mediated Stat signaling and (ii) potential upstream regulators of Jak
kinases.

PMID: 10358079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):16965-72.

STAT protein recruitment and activation in c-Kit deletion mutants.

Brizzi MF(1), Dentelli P, Rosso A, Yarden Y, Pegoraro L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Turin, Turin 10126, Italy.

Stem cell factor (SCF) and its tyrosine kinase receptor, c-Kit, play a crucial
role in regulating migration and proliferation of melanoblasts, germ cells, and
hemopoietic cell progenitors by activating a number of intracellular signaling
molecules. Here we report that SCF stimulation of myeloid cells or fibroblasts
ectopically expressing c-Kit induces physical association with and tyrosine
phosphorylation of three signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STATs) as follows: STAT1alpha, STAT5A, and STAT5B. Other STAT proteins are not
recruited upon SCF stimulation. Recruitment of STATs leads to their dimerization,
nuclear translocation, and binding to specific promoter-responsive elements.
Whereas STAT1alpha, possibly in the form of homodimers, binds to the
sis-inducible DNA element, STAT5 proteins, either as STAT5A/STAT5B or
STAT5/STAT1alpha heterodimers, bind to the prolactin-inducible element of the
beta-casein promoter. The tyrosine kinase activity of Kit appears essential for
STAT activation since a kinase-defective mutant lacking a kinase insert domain
was inactive in STAT signaling. However, another mutant that lacked the
carboxyl-terminal region retained STAT1alpha activation and nuclear translocation
but was unable to fully activate STAT5 proteins, although it mediated their
transient phosphorylation. These results indicate that different intracellular
domains of c-Kit are involved in activation of the various STAT proteins.

PMID: 10358045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cell Signal. 1999 Mar;11(3):205-10.

Prolactin-independent modulation of the beta-casein response element by Erk2 MAP 
kinase.

Gao J(1), Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati, OH 
45267-0576, USA.

The MAP kinases have been suggested to play a role in intracellular signalling by
PRL. A reporter gene construct, PRE3-CAT, which manifests PRL responsiveness
through a Stat5-binding site (PRE), was induced by PRL in CHO cells expressing
the PRL-R. A fusion protein (Gal4-Stat5(695)), containing the C-terminal domain
of Stat5a (amino acids 695-794) linked to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4 (Gal4
DBD), strongly activated transcription of a luciferase reporter gene. Therefore, 
the Stat5 C-terminus, which contains a potential MAP kinase phosphorylation site,
exhibits a modular transactivating function. A kinase-defective mutant of Erk2
(iMAPK) caused a dose-dependent suppression of PRL-stimulated PRE3-CAT, and also 
inhibited the induction of PRE3-CAT by Jak2 over-expression. Correspondingly,
over-expression of the MAP kinase activator v-Src increased the PRL-stimulated
level of PRE3-CAT. Gal4-Stat5(695) activity was not modulated by PRL or Jak2,
consistent with the absence of the relevant tyrosine phosphorylation site at
residue 694. Gal4-Stat5(695) was not inhibited by iMAPK, indicating that the
C-terminal transactivation region of Stat5a is not sensitive to direct modulation
of a MAP kinase pathway. These results suggest that alteration of Erk2 activity
by growth factors may modulate PRL-induced gene expression by a mechanism
upstream of Stat5.

PMID: 10353695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Stem Cells. 1999;17(3):138-46.

Functional roles of STAT family proteins: lessons from knockout mice.

Akira S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, CREST of Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya.

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are activated 
in response to a large number of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. Upon
activation following the binding of ligands to their receptors, STAT proteins
dimerize, translocate to the nucleus, and bind to the promoters of specific
target genes. To date, seven mammalian members of the STAT family have been
identified. Although some cytokines and growth factors can activate multiple STAT
proteins, some STATs are activated with considerable specificity. The
physiological role of each individual STAT protein is now being examined through 
the study of "knockout" mice, harboring a null allele for the particular gene.
STAT1-deficient mice exhibit a selective signaling defect in response to
interferons. STAT4 and STAT6 are essential for Thl-and Th2-responses,
respectively. STAT5a-deficient mice exhibit defective mammary gland development. 
A study of STAT5b-deficient mice indicates that STAT5b mediates the sexually
dimorphic effects of growth hormone in the liver. STAT5a and 5b also play
different biological roles in the immune system. STAT3-deficient mice die during 
early embryogenesis, but the role of STAT3 in adult tissues can be assessed by
utilizing the CreloxP recombination system to ablate the gene later in life.
Analyses of tissue-specific STAT3-deficient mice indicate that STAT3 plays a
crucial role in a variety of biological functions, including cell growth,
suppression of apoptosis, and cell motility.

PMID: 10342556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Blood. 1999 Jun 1;93(11):3757-73.

Protein kinase B (c-Akt), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and STAT5 are activated 
by erythropoietin (EPO) in HCD57 erythroid cells but are constitutively active in
an EPO-independent, apoptosis-resistant subclone (HCD57-SREI cells).

Bao H(1), Jacobs-Helber SM, Lawson AE, Penta K, Wickrema A, Sawyer ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia campus 
of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

We found that erythropoietin (EPO) and stem cell factor (SCF) activated protein
kinase B (PKB/Akt) in EPO-dependent HCD57 erythroid cells. To better understand
signals controlling proliferation and viability, erythroid cells that resist
apoptosis in the absence of EPO were subcloned and characterized (HCD57-SREI
cells). Constitutive activations of PKB/Akt, STAT5a, and STAT5b were noted in
these EPO-independent cells. PI3-kinase activity was an upstream activator of
PKB/Akt because the PI3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 blocked both constitutive
PKB/Akt and factor-dependent PKB/Akt activity. The LY294002 study showed that
proliferation and viability of both HCD57-SREI and HCD57 cells correlated with
the activity of PKB/Akt; however, PKB/Akt activity alone did not protect these
cells from apoptosis. Treatment of HCD57 cells with SCF also activated PKB/Akt,
but did not protect from apoptosis. This result suggested that PKB/PI3-kinase
activity is necessary but not sufficient to promote viability and/or
proliferation. Constitutive STAT5 activity, activated through an unknown pathway 
not including JAK2 or EPOR, may act in concert with the constitutive
PI3-kinase/PKB/Akt pathway to protect the EPO-independent HCD57-SREI cells from
apoptosis and promote limited proliferation.

PMID: 10339482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2739-50.

Targeted inactivation of the EGF and amphiregulin genes reveals distinct roles
for EGF receptor ligands in mouse mammary gland development.

Luetteke NC(1), Qiu TH, Fenton SE, Troyer KL, Riedel RF, Chang A, Lee DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7295, USA.

Targeted mice lacking functional EGF or amphiregulin (AR) were derived and bred
to the TGFalpha-knockout to generate mice lacking various combinations of the
three ligands. In contrast to EGF receptor (EGFR) knockout mice, triple null mice
lacking half of the EGFR ligand family were healthy and fertile, indicative of
overlapping or compensatory functions among EGF family members. Nevertheless,
pups born to triple null dams frequently died or were runted, suggesting a
mammary gland defect. Comparison of individual and combinatorial knockouts
established that specific loss of AR severely stunted ductal outgrowth during
puberty, consistent with dramatic expression of AR transcripts in normal
developing ducts. Surprisingly, loss of all three ligands did not significantly
affect cellular proliferation, apoptosis, or ERK activation within terminal end
buds. Following pregnancy, most AR single null females, but few triple null
females could nurse their young, revealing collaborative roles for EGF and
TGFalpha in mammopoiesis and lactogenesis. In triple null glands, alveoli were
poorly organized and differentiated, and milk protein gene expression was
decreased. Additionally, Stat5a activation was frequently reduced in AR single
and combinatorial nulls in association with impaired lactation. Collectively, our
results provide genetic confirmation of a requirement for EGFR signaling
throughout the development of the mouse mammary gland, and reveal stage-dependent
activities for different EGFR ligands. Finally, the additional loss of growth
factors from pups nursed by triple null dams further worsened their survival and 
growth, establishing functions for both maternal- and neonatal-derived growth
factors.

PMID: 10331984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Apr;13(4):555-65.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) interacts with signal transducer and 
activator of transcription (STAT) 5a.

Pircher TJ(1), Petersen H, Gustafsson JA, Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Serine phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT) 1 and 3 modulates their DNA-binding capacity and/or transcriptional
activity. Earlier we suggested that STAT5a functional capacity could be
influenced by the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. In the present
study, we have analyzed the interactions between STAT5a and the MAPKs,
extracellular signal-regulated kinases ERK1 and ERK2. GH treatment of Chinese
hamster ovary cells stably transfected with the GH receptor (CHOA cells) led to
rapid and transient activation of both STAT5a and ERK1 and ERK2. Pretreatment of 
cells with colchicine, which inhibits tubulin polymerization, did not inhibit
STAT5a translocation to the nucleus and ERK1/2 activation. In vitro precipitation
with a glutathione-S-transferase-fusion protein containing the C-terminal
transactivation domain of STAT5a showed GH-regulated association of ERK1/2 with
the fusion protein, while this was not seen when serine 780 in STAT5a was changed
to alanine. In vitro phosphorylation of the glutathione-S-transferase-fusion
proteins using active ERK only worked when the fusion protein contained wild-type
STAT5a sequence. The same experiment, performed with full-length wild-type STAT5a
and the corresponding S780A mutant, showed that serine 780 is the only substrate 
in full-length STAT5a for active ERK. In coimmunoprecipitation experiments,
larger amounts of STAT5a-ERK1/2 complexes were detected in cytosol from untreated
CHOA cells than in cytosol from GH-treated cells, suggesting the presence of
preformed STAT5a-ERK1/2 complexes in unstimulated cells. Transfection experiments
with COS cells showed that kinase-inactive ERK1 decreased GH stimulation of
STAT5-regulated reporter gene expression. These observations show, for the first 
time, direct physical interaction between ERK and STAT5a and also clearly
identify serine 780 as a target for ERK. Furthermore, it is also established that
serine phosphorylation of STAT5a transactivation domain, via the MAPK pathway, is
a means of modifying GH-induced transcriptional activation.

PMID: 10194762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Immunol. 1999 Mar 1;162(5):2974-81.

TGF-beta does not inhibit IL-12- and IL-2-induced activation of Janus kinases and
STATs.

Sudarshan C(1), Galon J, Zhou Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. sudarshc@exchange.nih.gov

The immune system is an important target for the cytokine TGF-beta1, whose
actions on lymphocytes are largely inhibitory. TGF-beta has been reported to
inhibit IL-12- and IL-2-induced cell proliferation and IFN-gamma production by T 
cells and NK cells; however, the mechanisms of inhibition have not been clearly
defined. It has been suggested by some studies that TGF-beta blocks
cytokine-induced Janus kinase (JAK) and STAT activation, as in the case of IL-2. 
In contrast, other studies with cytokines like IFN-gamma have not found such an
inhibition. The effect of TGF-beta on the IL-12-signaling pathway has not been
addressed. We examined this and found that TGF-beta1 did not have any effect on
IL-12-induced phosphorylation of JAK2, TYK2, and STAT4 although TGF-beta1
inhibited IL-2- and IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production. Similarly, but in
contrast to previous reports, we found that TGF-beta1 did not inhibit
IL-2-induced phosphorylation of JAK1, JAK3, and STAT5A. Furthermore, gel shift
analysis showed that TGF-beta1 did not prevent activated STAT4 and STAT5A from
binding to DNA. Our results demonstrate that the inhibitory effects of TGF-beta
on IL-2- and IL-12-induced biological activities are not attributable to
inhibition of activation of JAKs and STATs. Rather, our data suggest the
existence of alternative mechanisms of inhibition by TGF-beta.

PMID: 10072548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Immunol. 1999 Mar 1;162(5):2785-90.

Role of a STAT binding site in the regulation of the human perforin promoter.

Yu CR(1), Ortaldo JR, Curiel RE, Young HA, Anderson SK, Gosselin P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA.

The pore-forming protein perforin is preferentially expressed in NK and cytotoxic
T cells. To investigate the molecular regulation of human perforin gene
transcription, the activity of the human perforin promoter was analyzed in human 
NK and T cell lines using various promoter fragments linked to a luciferase
reporter gene. A core promoter was identified within 55 bp upstream of the
transcription start site. This promoter region contains a guanine/cytosine box
and has basal activity in YT, Kit225-k6, and Jurkat cells. A strong enhancer
activity was identified between positions -1136 and -1076, a region that includes
a STAT-like element. This enhancer region was active in YT cells, which have
constitutive perforin expression and activated STAT3 protein, but not in
Kit225-k6 or Jurkat cells, which do not have constitutive perforin expression.
Mutation of the STAT binding site resulted in a dramatic down-regulation of
promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays, using a probe
containing the STAT element of the perforin promoter, indicated that this element
can bind STAT3 from YT cells. Moreover, the STAT element was shown to bind
STAT5a/b induced by IL-2 as well as STAT1alpha induced by IL-6 in human NK cells.
Together, these results suggest that STAT proteins play a key role in perforin
gene transcription and provide a model by which cytokines can regulate perforin
gene expression.

PMID: 10072525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Immunity. 1999 Feb;10(2):249-59.

Stat5 is required for IL-2-induced cell cycle progression of peripheral T cells.

Moriggl R(1), Topham DJ, Teglund S, Sexl V, McKay C, Wang D, Hoffmeyer A, van
Deursen J, Sangster MY, Bunting KD, Grosveld GC, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Many cytokines activate two highly homologous Stat proteins, 5a and 5b. Mice
deficient in both genes lack all growth hormone and prolactin functions but
retain functions associated with cytokines such as erythropoietin. Here, we
demonstrate that, while lymphoid development is normal, Stat5a/b mutant
peripheral T cells are profoundly deficient in proliferation and fail to undergo 
cell cycle progression or to express genes controlling cell cycle progression. In
addition, the mice lack NK cells, develop splenomegaly, and have T cells with an 
activated phenotype, phenotypes seen in IL-2 receptor beta chain-deficient mice. 
These phenotypes are not seen in mice lacking Stat5a or Stat5b alone. The results
demonstrate that the Stat5 proteins, redundantly, are essential mediators of IL-2
signaling in T cells.

PMID: 10072077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 1999 Jan-Jul;19(1-4):75-120.

The Jak-STAT pathway: cytokine signalling from the receptor to the nucleus.

Heim MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.

The Jak-STAT pathway was originally discovered through the study of interferon
induced intracellular signal transduction. Meanwhile, a large number of
cytokines, hormones and growth factors have been found to activate Jaks and
STATs. Jaks (Janus Kinases) are a unique class of tyrosine kinases that associate
with cytokine receptors. Upon ligand binding, they activate members of the Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STAT) family through phosphorylation
on a single tyrosine. Activated STATs form dimers, translocate to the nucleus,
bind to specific response elements in promotors of target genes, and
transcriptionally activate these genes. Both positive and negative regulations of
the Jak-STAT pathway have been identified. In a positive feedback loop,
interferons transcriptionally activate the genes for components of the interferon
stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). A number of cytokines that activate the
Jak-STAT pathway, e.g. IL-6, IL-4, LIF, G-CSF, have been shown to upregulate the 
expression of SOCS-JABs-SSIs, a recently discovered class of STAT inhibitors.
Targeted disruption of genes for a number of Jaks and STATs in mice have revealed
specific biological functions for many of them. Although most of the STATs are
activated in cell culture by many different ligands, STAT knockout mice mostly
show defects in a single or a few cytokine dependent processes. STAT1 knockout
mice have an impaired interferon signalling, STAT4 knockouts impaired IL-12
signalling, STAT5a knockouts impaired prolactin signalling, STAT5b knockouts
impaired growth hormone signalling, and STAT6 knockout impaired IL-4 and IL-13
signalling. Defects in the Jak-STAT pathway have already been identified in a
number of human diseases. Prominent amongst them are leukaemias, lymphomas and
inherited immunodeficiency syndromes. It can be expected that additional Jak-STAT
related diseases will be identified over the next years. To date, specific STAT
inhibitory drugs are not known, but a number of specific protein-protein
interactions in the Jak-STAT pathway are potential targets for pharmaceutical
interventions.

PMID: 10071751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Blood. 1999 Mar 15;93(6):1980-91.

Interferon-alpha activates multiple STAT proteins and upregulates
proliferation-associated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in human T cells.

Matikainen S(1), Sareneva T, Ronni T, Lehtonen A, Koskinen PJ, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
sampsa.matikainen@ktl.fi

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) is a pleiotropic cytokine that has antiviral,
antiproliferative, and immunoregulatory functions. There is increasing evidence
that IFN-alpha has an important role in T-cell biology. We have analyzed the
expression of IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in anti-CD3-activated human T
lymphocytes. The induction of these genes is associated with interleukin-2
(IL-2)-induced T-cell proliferation. Treatment of T lymphocytes with IFN-alpha,
IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 upregulated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 gene expression. 
IFN-alpha also sensitized T cells to IL-2-induced proliferation, further
suggesting that IFN-alpha may be involved in the regulation of T-cell
mitogenesis. When we analyzed the nature of STAT proteins capable of binding to
IL-2Ralpha, pim-1, and IRF-1 GAS elements after cytokine stimulation, we observed
IFN-alpha-induced binding of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4, but not STAT5 to all of
these elements. Yet, IFN-alpha was able to activate binding of STAT5 to the
high-affinity IFP53 GAS site. IFN-alpha enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, and STAT5b. IL-12 induced STAT4 and IL-2 and IL-15
induced STAT5 binding to the GAS elements. Taken together, our results suggest
that IFN-alpha, IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 have overlapping activities on human T
cells. These findings thus emphasize the importance of IFN-alpha as a T-cell
regulatory cytokine.

PMID: 10068671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 12;274(11):7421-30.

Distinctive roles of STAT5a and STAT5b in sexual dimorphism of hepatic P450 gene 
expression. Impact of STAT5a gene disruption.

Park SH(1), Liu X, Hennighausen L, Davey HW, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Stat5b gene disruption leads to an apparent growth hormone (GH) pulse
insensitivity associated with loss of male-characteristic body growth rates and
male-specific liver gene expression (Udy, G. B., Towers, R. P., Snell, R. G.,
Wilkins, R. J., Park, S. H., Ram, P. A., Waxman, D. J., and Davey, H. W. (1997)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 7239-7244). In the present study, disruption 
of the mouse Stat5a gene, whose coding sequence is approximately 90% identical to
the Stat5b gene, resulted in no loss of expression in male mice of several
sex-dependent, GH-regulated liver cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. By contrast, the
loss of STAT5b feminized the livers of males by decreasing expression of
male-specific CYPs (CYP2D9 and testosterone 16alpha-hydroxylase) while increasing
to female levels several female-predominant liver CYPs (CYP3A, CYP2B, and
testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase). Since STAT5a is thus nonessential for these male
GH responses, STAT5b homodimers, but not STAT5a-STAT5b heterodimers, probably
mediate the sexually dimorphic effects of male GH pulses on liver CYP expression.
In female mice, however, disruption of either Stat5a or Stat5b led to striking
decreases in several liver CYP-catalyzed testosterone hydroxylase activities.
Stat5a or Stat5b gene disruption also led to the loss of a female-specific,
GH-regulated hepatic CYP2B enzyme. STAT5a, which is much less abundant in liver
than STAT5b, and STAT5b are therefore both required for constitutive expression
in female but not male mouse liver of certain GH-regulated CYP steroid
hydroxylases, suggesting that STAT5 protein heterodimerization is an important
determinant of the sex-dependent and gene-specific effects that GH has on the
liver.

PMID: 10066807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. EMBO J. 1999 Mar 1;18(5):1367-77.

Transcriptional regulation of the cyclin D1 promoter by STAT5: its involvement in
cytokine-dependent growth of hematopoietic cells.

Matsumura I(1), Kitamura T, Wakao H, Tanaka H, Hashimoto K, Albanese C, Downward 
J, Pestell RG, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology/Oncology, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2,
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

STAT5 is a member of a family of transcription factors that participate in the
signal transduction pathways of many hormones and cytokines. Although STAT5 is
suggested to play a crucial role in the biological effects of cytokines, its
downstream target(s) associated with cell growth control is largely unknown. In a
human interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent cell line F-36P-mpl, the induced expression 
of dominant-negative (dn)-STAT5 and of dn-ras led to inhibition of IL-3-dependent
cell growth, accompanying the reduced expression of cyclin D1 mRNA. Also, both
constitutively active forms of STAT5A (1*6-STAT5A) and ras (H-rasG12V) enabled
F-36P-mpl cells to proliferate without added growth factors. In NIH 3T3 cells,
1*6-STAT5A and H-rasG12V individually and cooperatively transactivated the cyclin
D1 promoter in luciferase assays. Both dn-STAT5 and dn-ras suppressed
IL-3-induced cyclin D1 promoter activities in F-36P-mpl cells. Using a series of 
mutant cyclin D1 promoters, 1*6-STAT5A was found to transactivate the cyclin D1
promoter through the potential STAT-binding sequence at -481 bp. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, STAT5 bound to the element in response to 
IL-3. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of dn-STAT5 on IL-3-dependent growth was
restored by expression of cyclin D1. Thus STAT5, in addition to ras signaling,
appears to mediate transcriptional regulation of cyclin D1, thereby contributing 
to cytokine-dependent growth of hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC1171226
PMID: 10064602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):1910-8.

The significance of tetramerization in promoter recruitment by Stat5.

John S(1), Vinkemeier U, Soldaini E, Darnell JE Jr, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

Stat5a and Stat5b are rapidly activated by a wide range of cytokines and growth
factors, including interleukin-2 (IL-2). We have previously shown that these
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT proteins) are key
regulatory proteins that bind to two tandem gamma interferon-activated site (GAS)
motifs within an IL-2 response element (positive regulatory region III [PRRIII]) 
in the human IL-2Ralpha promoter. In this study, we demonstrate cooperative
binding of Stat5 to PRRIII and explore the molecular basis underlying this
cooperativity. We demonstrate that formation of a tetrameric Stat5 complex is
essential for the IL-2-inducible activation of PRRIII. Stable tetramer formation 
of Stat5 is mediated through protein-protein interactions involving a tryptophan 
residue conserved in all STATs and a lysine residue in the Stat5 N-terminal
domain (N domain). The functional importance of tetramer formation is shown by
the decreased levels of transcriptional activation associated with mutations in
these residues. Moreover, the requirement for STAT protein-protein interactions
for gene activation from a promoter with tandemly linked GAS motifs can be
relieved by strengthening the avidity of protein-DNA interactions for the
individual binding sites. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that a
dimeric but tetramerization-deficient Stat5 protein can activate only a subset of
target sites. For functional activity on a wider range of potential recognition
sites, N-domain-mediated oligomerization is essential.

PMCID: PMC83984
PMID: 10022878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jan;8(1):35-44.

A Lys644Glu substitution in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) causes
dwarfism in mice by activation of STATs and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.

Li C(1), Chen L, Iwata T, Kitagawa M, Fu XY, Deng CX.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Diseases Branch, 10/9N105, National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases National Institutes of Health, 10 Center 
Drive, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Missense mutations of human fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) result in
several skeletal dysplasias, including hypochondroplasia, achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia. To study the function of FGFR3 in bone growth and to
create animal models for the FGFR3-related inherited skeletal disorders, we
introduced a point mutation (Lys644Glu) into the murine FGFR3 genome using a
knock-in approach. We found that the Lys644Glu mutation resulted in retarded
endochondral bone growth with severity directly linked to the expression level of
the mutated Fgfr3. Mice heterozygous for the mutation ( Fgfr3(TD/+) ) expressed
the mutant allele at approximately 20% of the wild-type level and exhibited a
mild bone dysplasia. However, when the copy number of the mutant allele increased
from one (Fgfr3(TD/+) to two (Fgfr3(TD/TD), the retardation of bone growth became
more severe and showed phenotypes resembling those of achondroplasia patients,
characterized by a dramatically reduced proliferation of growth plate cartilage, 
macrocephaly and shortening of the long bones, which was most pronounced in the
femur. Molecular analysis revealed that expression of the mutant receptor caused 
the activation of Stat1, Stat5a and Stat5b, and the up-regulation of p16, p18 and
p19 cell cycle inhibitors, leading to dramatic expansion of the resting zone of
chondrocytes at the expense of the proliferating chondrocytes. The mutant growth 
plates consequently were in a less active state and generated fewer maturing and 
hypertrophic chondrocytes. These data provide direct genetic evidence that the
point mutations in FGFR3 cause human skeletal dysplasias and uncover a mechanism 
through which the FGFR3 signals regulate bone growth by modulating expression of 
Stats and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.

PMID: 9887329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Science. 1999 Jan 8;283(5399):222-5.

STAT5 interaction with the T cell receptor complex and stimulation of T cell
proliferation.

Welte T(1), Leitenberg D, Dittel BN, al-Ramadi BK, Xie B, Chin YE, Janeway CA Jr,
Bothwell AL, Bottomly K, Fu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The role of STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) proteins in T
cell receptor (TCR) signaling was analyzed. STAT5 became immediately and
transiently phosphorylated on tyrosine 694 in response to TCR stimulation.
Expression of the protein tyrosine kinase Lck, a key signaling protein in the TCR
complex, activated DNA binding of transfected STAT5A and STAT5B to specific STAT 
inducible elements. The role of Lck in STAT5 activation was confirmed in a
Lck-deficient T cell line in which the activation of STAT5 by TCR stimulation was
abolished. Expression of Lck induced specific interaction of STAT5 with the
subunits of the TCR, indicating that STAT5 may be directly involved in TCR
signaling. Stimulation of T cell clones and primary T cell lines also induced the
association of STAT5 with the TCR complex. Inhibition of STAT5 function by
expression of a dominant negative mutant STAT5 reduced antigen-stimulated
proliferation of T cells. Thus, TCR stimulation appears to directly activate
STAT5, which may participate in the regulation of gene transcription and T cell
proliferation during immunological responses.

PMID: 9880255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Dec 1;258(2):784-93.

Selective coupling of STAT factors to the mouse prolactin receptor.

Mayr S(1), Welte T, Windegger M, Lechner J, May P, Heinrich PC, Horn F, Doppler
W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Innsbruck,
Austria.

Prolactin has been reported to induce distinct sets of signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) in a cell-type-specific fashion. In the
mammary epithelium, although STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6 are present
in a latent form, only STAT5A and STAT5B are activated. This selective activation
of STAT5 by prolactin was also observed in COS-7 cells cotransfected with the
long form of the mouse prolactin receptor (PRL-R) and expression vectors for
STAT1, STAT3, STAT5 and STAT6. Mutated PRL-Rs and chimeric erythropoietin/gp130
(EPO/gp130) receptors with a tyrosine-containing motif attached at the carboxy
terminus were employed to determine the sites in the PRL-R required for the
specific activation of STAT5. The experiments revealed the importance of two
motifs containing Y477 and Y578 in the PRL-R. When linked to the EPO/gp130
receptor, these sequences were sufficient to specifically induce DNA binding of
STAT5 and to activate transcription from the beta-casein gene promoter. By
contrast, only weakly they induced DNA binding of STAT6 and STAT3 and did not
induce STAT1. A synthetic nonapeptide with phosphorylated Y477 was able to
disrupt STAT5 DNA binding in vitro. Our results define structural domains within 
the carboxy terminus of the PRL-R which recruit STAT5 for signalling and which
are capable of distinguishing STAT5 from other STAT proteins. The activity of
STAT5 forms with deletions of the carboxy terminus was induced more strongly than
that of their full-length counterparts 2 min after activation of the PRL-R. This 
effect was not dependent on the presence of Y477 and Y578 in the PRL-R,
indicating that facilitated activation of short STAT5 isoforms relies on
mechanisms other than increased coupling to specific regions of the PRL-R.

PMID: 9874248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 18;273(51):33936-41.

A single amino acid in the DNA binding regions of STAT5A and STAT5B confers
distinct DNA binding specificities.

Boucheron C(1), Dumon S, Santos SC, Moriggl R, Hennighausen L, Gisselbrecht S,
Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire (ICGM), INSERM U363, Hôpital Cochin, 
27 rue du Fbg St Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

STAT5A and STAT5B are two highly related transcription factors encoded by two
distinct genes. STAT5A and STAT5B are activated by a broad range of cytokines and
growth factors. Although they can be differentially activated, the functional
difference between these two molecules relative to their structure is not known. 
Here we demonstrated that STAT5A and STAT5B homodimers have distinct DNA binding 
preferences. Chimeric STAT5 molecules allowed us to identify a region between
amino acid 420 and 545 responsible for the DNA binding specificity. This region
is located in the previously characterized DNA binding region of STAT proteins.
Sequence comparison between STAT5A and STAT5B from different species showed a
difference of 5 amino acids in the region 420-545 between STAT5A and STAT5B.
Substitution of these amino acids demonstrated that a glycine residue at position
433 in STAT5B and a glutamic residue at a similar position in STAT5A determined
the DNA binding specificity. These data indicate that STAT5A and STAT5B
homodimers may have distinct function and probably regulate the expression of
common as well as distinct genes.

PMID: 9852045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Virol. 1999 Jan;73(1):368-76.

Mammary gland expression of mouse mammary tumor virus is regulated by a novel
element in the long terminal repeat.

Qin W(1), Golovkina TV, Peng T, Nepomnaschy I, Buggiano V, Piazzon I, Ross SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6142, USA.

Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) infects both lymphoid tissue and lactating
mammary gland during its infectious cycle, but some endogenous MMTVs are
transcribed only in lymphoid cells. We found a lymphoid cell-specific endogenous 
MMTV that was converted to a milk-borne, infectious virus through recombination
with an exogenously transmitted MMTV. The changed expression pattern correlated
with the alteration of a single base pair in the long terminal repeat of the
lymphoid cell-specific virus. Transgenic mice with the element from either the
milk-borne or lymphoid cell-specific virus upstream of the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene showed the same pattern of expression as the
virus from which the regulatory sequences were derived. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays with mammary cell extracts showed that the site from the milk-borne 
virus was preferentially bound by a prolactin-inducible factor that poorly bound 
the altered site from the lymphoid cell-specific virus. The complex that formed
on the milk-borne virus-specific oligonucleotide supershifted with anti-Stat5b
antibody. Mice lacking either Stat5a or Stat5b had dramatically reduced levels of
MMTV transcripts in mammary gland but not in lymphoid tissue. Thus, a member of
the STAT family of transcription factors is involved in the tissue-specific
expression of mouse mammary tumor virus in vivo. This is the first example of the
involvement of a member of the STAT family of transcription factors in the
control of tissue-specific expression.

PMCID: PMC103842
PMID: 9847341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Exp Med. 1998 Dec 7;188(11):2067-74.

Stat5b is essential for natural killer cell-mediated proliferation and cytolytic 
activity.

Imada K(1), Bloom ET, Nakajima H, Horvath-Arcidiacono JA, Udy GB, Davey HW,
Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

We have analyzed the immune system in Stat5-deficient mice. Although Stat5a-/-
splenocytes have a partial defect in anti-CD3-induced proliferation that can be
overcome by high dose interleukin (IL)-2, we now demonstrate that defective
proliferation in Stat5b-/- splenocytes cannot be corrected by this treatment.
Interestingly, this finding may be at least partially explained by diminished
expression of the IL-2 receptor beta chain (IL-2Rbeta), which is a component of
the receptors for both IL-2 and IL-15, although other defects may also exist.
Similar to the defect in proliferation in activated splenocytes, freshly isolated
splenocytes from Stat5b-/- mice exhibited greatly diminished proliferation in
response to IL-2 and IL-15. This results from both a decrease in the number and
responsiveness of natural killer (NK) cells. Corresponding to the diminished
proliferation, basal as well as IL-2- and IL-15-mediated boosting of NK cytolytic
activity was also greatly diminished. These data indicate an essential
nonredundant role for Stat5b for potent NK cell-mediated proliferation and
cytolytic activity.

PMCID: PMC2212377
PMID: 9841920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 27;252(3):779-86.

Association of CrkL with STAT5 in hematopoietic cells stimulated by
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor or erythropoietin.

Ota J(1), Kimura F, Sato K, Wakimoto N, Nakamura Y, Nagata N, Suzu S, Yamada M,
Shimamura S, Motoyoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemical Research Laboratory, Morinaga Milk Industry.

CrkL is an adapter protein comprising Src homology (SH) 2 and SH3 domains. We
investigated the molecule(s) associated with CrkL in factor-dependent cell lines.
In the granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-dependent cell
lines TF-1 and UT-7, an approximately 95-kDa tyrosine-phosphorylated protein was 
precipitated along with CrkL after GM-CSF stimulation. The same protein was also 
observed when we used the erythropoietin (EPO)-dependent cell line UT-7/EPO, in
an EPO stimulation-dependent manner. We identified it as STAT5 (signal transducer
and activator of transcription 5, 96 kDa) by STAT5-specific antibodies. The
direct binding of the SH2 domain of CrkL to STAT5 was demonstrated in far Western
blotting and pull-down experiments using the glutathione S-transferase (GST)
fusion construct CrkL-SH2. The addition of the oligopeptide containing
phosphotyrosine 694 in STAT5A impaired the association between GST-CrkL-SH2 and
STAT5. Furthermore, in a gel shift assay using prolactin-inducible element (PIE) 
as the probe, the DNA binding activity of STAT5 was inhibited by the interaction 
with GST-CrkL-SH2 in vitro. Finally, we found that STAT5 associated with CrkL did
not bind to PIE sequence. These results suggest that CrkL participates in the
Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT pathway by direct association with STAT5.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9837784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31317-26.

Convergence of progesterone with growth factor and cytokine signaling in breast
cancer. Progesterone receptors regulate signal transducers and activators of
transcription expression and activity.

Richer JK(1), Lange CA, Manning NG, Owen G, Powell R, Horwitz KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA. richer_j@defiance.uchsc.edu

STATS (signal transducers and activators of transcription) are latent
transcription factors activated in the cytoplasm by diverse cell surface
signaling molecules. Like progesterone receptors (PR), Stat5a and 5b are required
for normal mammary gland growth and differentiation. These two proteins are
up-regulated during pregnancy, a period dominated by high levels of progesterone.
We now show that progestin treatment of breast cancer cells regulates Stat5a and 
5b, Stat3, and Stat1 protein levels in a PR-dependent manner. In addition,
progestin treatment induces translocation of Stat5 into the nucleus, possibly
mediated by the association of PR and Stat5. Last, progesterone pretreatment
enhances the phosphorylation of Stat5 on tyrosine 694 induced by epidermal growth
factor. Functional data show that progestin pretreatment of breast cancer cells
enhances the ability of prolactin to stimulate the transcriptional activity of
Stat5 on a beta-casein promoter. Progesterone and epidermal growth factor
synergize to control transcription from p21(WAF1) and c-fos promoters. These data
demonstrate the convergence of progesterone and growth factor/cytokine signaling 
pathways at multiple levels, and suggest a mechanism for coordination of PR and
Stat5-mediated proliferative and differentiative events in the mammary gland.

PMID: 9813040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31222-9.

The interleukin-4 receptor activates STAT5 by a mechanism that relies upon common
gamma-chain.

Lischke A(1), Moriggl R, Brändlein S, Berchtold S, Kammer W, Sebald W, Groner B, 
Liu X, Hennighausen L, Friedrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biozentrum), Physiologische
Chemie II, Am Hubland, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany.

Interleukin (IL)-4 signaling proceeds via cytoplasmic activation of the Janus
kinases JAK1 and JAK3 and the signal transducer and activator of transcription
STAT6. We show that the IL-4 receptor, like other cytokine receptor systems
utilizing the common receptor gamma-chain (gammac), is also connected to a
signaling pathway that involves STAT5. Both STAT5a and STAT5b become
tyrosine-phosphorylated and acquire specific DNA-binding properties in response
to IL-4 receptor stimulation in the murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3. In preactivated
human T cells, STAT5 became activated in an IL-4-dependent fashion as assayed by 
IL-4-induced STAT5 translocation from the cytoplasm to the cell nucleus and by
binding to cognate DNA. Moreover, stimulation of preactivated human T cells by
IL-4 led to specific transcriptional up-regulation of STAT5 target genes. IL-4
receptor-mediated STAT5 activation is dependent on the presence of gammac and
JAK3 within the receptor complex. In COS-7 cells, the JAK/STAT pathway leading
from the IL-4 receptor to STAT5-dependent regulation of a reporter gene relied
largely on coexpression of JAK3. In Ba/F3 cells, studies on signal transduction
evoked by directed specific receptor homo- or heterodimerization revealed that
STAT5 activation can be triggered exclusively by IL-4R heterodimers containing
gammac.

PMID: 9813029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 13;273(46):30218-24.

Differential control of the phosphorylation state of proline-juxtaposed serine
residues Ser725 of Stat5a and Ser730 of Stat5b in prolactin-sensitive cells.

Yamashita H(1), Xu J, Erwin RA, Farrar WL, Kirken RA, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

Transcription factors of the Stat family are controlled by protein kinases.
Phosphorylation of a positionally conserved tyrosine residue is obligatory for
Stat dimerization, nuclear translocation, and specific DNA binding. Studies of
Stat1 and Stat3 have suggested that serine phosphorylation may also regulate
function. We now identify serine residues located in a conserved PSP motif of
Stat5a (Ser725) and Stat5b (Ser730) as major phosphorylation sites, using
mutagenesis, phosphoamino acid analysis, and site-specific
anti-Stat5-phosphoserine antibodies. Unexpectedly, phosphorylation control of
this PSP motif differed between the highly homologous Stat5a and Stat5b proteins.
Whereas Ser725 of Stat5a was constitutively phosphorylated both in COS-7 cells
and Nb2 lymphocytes, phosphorylation of Ser730 of Stat5b was markedly stimulated 
by prolactin. The data also suggested the existence of a second major serine
phosphorylation site in Stat5a. Interestingly, constitutive phosphorylation of
the PSP motif was suppressed by PD98059 but not by staurosporine under conditions
in which both agents inhibited mitogen-activated protein kinases. Furthermore,
pretreatment of cells with staurosporine, PD98059, H7, or wortmannin did not
prevent either Stat5a or Stat5b from becoming maximally serine-phosphorylated
after prolactin exposure. We propose that two pathways regulate Stat5 serine
phosphorylation, one that is prolactin-activated and PD98059-resistant and one
that is constitutively active and PD98059-sensitive and preferentially targets
Stat5a. Finally, phosphorylation of the PSP motif of Stat5a or Stat5b was not
essential for DNA binding or transcriptional activation of a beta-casein reporter
gene in COS-7 cells, suggesting that serine kinase control of Stat5 activity
differs from that of Stat1 and Stat3.

PMID: 9804779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cytokine. 1998 Mar;10(3):240.

INDUCTION OF DIFFERENTIATION BY IL-6-TYPE CYTOKINES IS IMPAIRED IN MYELOID
LEUKAEMIA CELLS UNABLE TO ACTIVATE Stat5a.

Piekorz RP(1), Hocke GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Biochemistry and Genetics, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany

PMID: 9782062  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


392. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Sep;9(9):795-803.

Functional rescue of Stat5a-null mammary tissue through the activation of
compensating signals including Stat5b.

Liu X(1), Gallego MI, Smith GH, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Prolactin induces mammopoiesis and lactogenesis through the Janus kinase-signal
transducers and activators of transcription pathway, with Stat5a being a
principal and obligate cytoplasmic and nuclear signaling molecule. Mice from
which the Stat5a gene has been deleted fail to develop functional mammary tissue 
during their first pregnancy. Lobuloalveolar outgrowth is curtailed, and
epithelial cells fail to progress to functional differentiation. Here, we
investigate whether the effect of Stat5a deficiency is restricted to the
epithelium and whether the gland has the capacity to activate alternative
signaling pathways that could restore development and function. Mammary gland
transplant experiments showed that Stat5a-deficient epithelium does not
differentiate in wild-type stroma, thus demonstrating a cell-autonomous role for 
Stat5a. The capacity of Stat5a-deficient mammary tissue to develop and secrete
milk was measured after consecutive pregnancies and with postpartum suckling.
Neither of these regimens could independently restore lactation. However, the
combination of several pregnancies and suckling stimuli resulted in a partial
establishment of lactation and an increase of Stat5b activity. These experiments 
demonstrate that the mammary gland has inherent plasticity that allows it to use 
different signals to achieve its ultimate purpose, the production of milk to
nurture newborn offspring.

PMID: 9751123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Sep 15;243(2):347-58.

EGF modulates expression of STAT5 in mammary epithelial cells.

Petersen H(1), Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Hudddinge, S-141
86, Sweden.

HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cells are capable of differentiating in vitro. By
growing cells in EGF-containing medium, and upon confluence withdrawing EGF,
these cells become competent at responding to lactogenic hormone treatment and
expressing milk proteins. We found that during proliferation and at confluence
STAT5A and STAT5B proteins were expressed at equal levels or with STAT5B being
predominant. In competent cells, expression levels of STAT5A and STAT5B increased
markedly with STAT5A now being the predominant form, an expression pattern
resembling the expression patterns of STAT5 proteins seen during mammary gland
differentiation in vivo. This suggests that EGF has a suppressive effect on STAT5
expression, in particular, STAT5A, which we conclude to be mediated through
ras/raf/MEK/MAPK pathway and to a lesser extent through a PI3-kinase-mediated
pathway. Furthermore, we also found that EGF regulated a nuclear phosphatase
capable of dephosphorylating tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5. Our data show that
HC11 cells have retained the expression patterns of STAT5 proteins seen in vivo. 
This makes HC11 cells useful for studying molecular mechanisms regulating
expression of STAT factors and their participation in differentiation processes
of mammary gland.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9743594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):5852-60.

A sequence of the CIS gene promoter interacts preferentially with two associated 
STAT5A dimers: a distinct biochemical difference between STAT5A and STAT5B.

Verdier F(1), Rabionet R, Gouilleux F, Beisenherz-Huss C, Varlet P, Muller O,
Mayeux P, Lacombe C, Gisselbrecht S, Chretien S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire (ICGM), Institut National de la Santé
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM U363), Hopital Cochin, Université René
Descartes, F75014 Paris, France.

Two distinct genes encode the closely related signal transducer and activator of 
transcription proteins STAT5A and STAT5B. The molecular mechanisms of gene
regulation by STAT5 and, particularly, the requirement for both STAT5 isoforms
are still undetermined. Only a few STAT5 target genes, among them the CIS
(cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein) gene, have been identified. We cloned
the human CIS gene and studied the human CIS gene promoter. This promoter
contains four STAT binding elements organized in two pairs. By electrophoretic
mobility shift assay studies using nuclear extracts of UT7 cells stimulated with 
erythropoietin, we showed that these four sequences bound to STAT5-containing
complexes that exhibited different patterns and affinities: the three upstream
STAT binding sequences bound to two distinct STAT5-containing complexes (C0 and
C1) and the downstream STAT box bound only to the slower-migrating C1 band. Using
nuclear extracts from COS-7 cells transfected with expression vectors for the
prolactin receptor, STAT5A, and/or STAT5B, we showed that the C1 complex was
composed of a STAT5 tetramer and was dependent on the presence of STAT5A. STAT5B 
lacked this property and bound with a stronger affinity than did STAT5A to the
four STAT sequences as a homodimer (C0 complex). This distinct biochemical
difference between STAT5A and STAT5B was confirmed with purified activated STAT5 
recombinant proteins. Moreover, we showed that the presence on the same side of
the DNA helix of a second STAT sequence increased STAT5 binding and that only
half of the palindromic STAT binding sequence was sufficient for the formation of
a STAT5 tetramer. Again, STAT5A was essential for this cooperative tetrameric
association. This property distinguishes STAT5A from STAT5B and could be
essential to explain the transcriptional regulation diversity of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC109171
PMID: 9742102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Aug;64(2):245-58.

Characterization of cytokine differential induction of STAT complexes in primary 
human T and NK cells.

Yu CR(1), Young HA, Ortaldo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, National Institutes of Health, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Cytokines, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-12, and IL-15 are key regulators of human
peripheral blood T and NK cell activation and differentiation but the precise
mechanisms that give rise to their differential activities within these cells are
not clear. Recent studies reveal that a family of transcription factors, signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) directly mediate many
cytokine signals. We analyzed the activation of STATs in primary human T and NK
cells by a variety of specific cytokines. We demonstrate that IL-12 induces STAT4
only in freshly isolated primary NK cells, but not in primary T cells, consistent
with the lack of the IL-12 receptor in resting T cells. In contrast, IL-4 induces
different C epsilon GAS DNA-protein binding complexes in both T and NK cells.
Moreover, IL-4 costimulation with IL-2 or IL-12 does not alter their own
preferential GAS-like DNA binding patterns when C epsilon-, Fc gamma RI-, and SIE
GAS motif containing oligonucleotide probes are compared, suggesting that
induction of GAS-like DNA-protein binding complexes by IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12 is
highly selective and represents one important factor in determining specific gene
activation. In addition, IL-6 and IL-2 synergistically induce homo- and
heterodimerized STAT1 alpha and STAT3 in both NK and T cells, consistent with
their reported synergism in modulating perforin gene expression. We further
demonstrated that IL-2, -7, and -15 induce multiple STAT proteins, including
STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT1 alpha, STAT3, and another unidentified Fc gamma RI GAS
DNA-binding protein. Finally, we observed that activated STAT5a and STAT5b
proteins form distinct Fc gamma RI GAS binding patterns in T and NK cells,
suggesting that they might have different roles in gene regulation. Our data
provide evidence that the differential responses in gene expression and cell
activation seen in primary NK and T cells on direct stimulation with different
cytokines may be a direct result of distinct activation of STAT transcription
factors.

PMID: 9715265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 15;161(4):1594-7.

Identification of an additional isoform of STAT5 expressed in immature
macrophages.

Lokuta MA(1), McDowell MA, Paulnock DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, Madison 53706-1532, USA.

We are interested in understanding the molecular basis of macrophage (Mphi)
differentiation and activation by cytokines. Recent reports have suggested that
the transcription factor STAT5 may play a role in Mphi differentiation. In the
experiments described here, we assessed the expression of STAT5-related molecules
in three Mphi cell lines, RAW 264.7, WEHI-3, and WEHI-3D+, which represent
different stages of Mphi maturation, and also in primary peritoneal and bone
marrow Mphi from BALB/c mice. The studies revealed that the previously
characterized STAT5a and STAT5b isoforms are detectable at both the mRNA and
protein levels in these Mphi populations. Additional STAT5-related proteins were 
detected by immunoblot analysis and were preferentially expressed in both the
immature WEHI-3 cell population and the adherent bone marrow population
containing immature Mphi. These results identify new isoforms of STAT5 and
demonstrate that distinct patterns of expression of STAT5-related proteins are
observed in Mphi at different stages of maturation.

PMID: 9712020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 14;273(33):20779-84.

Positive selection of apoptosis-resistant cells correlates with activation of
dominant-negative STAT5.

Bovolenta C(1), Testolin L, Benussi L, Lievens PM, Liboi E.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biological Chemistry, University of Verona, Verona 37134,
Milano, Italy.

The STAT5 activation has important roles in cell differentiation, cell cycle
control, and development. However, the potential implications of STAT5 in the
control of apoptosis remain unexplored. To evaluate any possible link between the
erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) JAK2/STAT5 transduction pathway and apoptosis, we 
have investigated apoptosis-resistant cells (ApoR) that arose from positive
selection of the erythroid-committed Ba/F3EpoR cells triggered to apoptosis by
ectopic expression of the HOX-B8 homeotic gene. We show that JAK2 is normally
activated by Epo in both Ba/F3EpoR and ApoR cells. In contrast, both STAT5a and
STAT5b isoforms are uniquely activated in a C-truncated form (86 kDa) only in
ApoR cells. Analysis of ApoR and Ba/F3EpoR subclones confirmed that the switch to
the truncated STAT5 isoform coincides with apoptosis survival and that ApoR do
not derive from preexisting cells with a shortened STAT5. In addition, ApoR cells
die in the absence of Epo. This indicates that resistance to apoptosis is not
because of a general defect in the apoptotic pathway of ApoR cells. Furthermore, 
we show that the 86-kDa STAT5 protein presents a dominant-negative (DN)
character. We hypothesize that the switch to a DN STAT5 may be part of a
mechanism that allows ApoR cells to be selectively advantaged during apoptosis.
In conclusion, we provide evidence for a functional correlation between a
naturally occurring DN STAT5 and a biological response.

PMID: 9694822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jun 16;1398(2):99-105.

Cloning and sequencing of the bovine STAT5A cDNA reveals significant sequence
divergence with ovine.

Schröder P(1), Meyer L, Wheeler TT, Thiesen HJ, Seyfert HM.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsinstitut für die Biologie landwirtschaftlicher Nutztiere,
Dummerstorf, Germany.

The transcription factors STAT5 mediates prolactin signals in mammary epithelial 
cells. The cDNA of bovine STAT5A was cloned, sequenced and compared to other
species. The encoded protein proves to be > 95% homologous to other mammals. We
show that the STAT5A mRNA of the closely related ovine species contains an
extended (by 130 nt) 5'-untranslated region, being encoded by an extra-exon, and 
accounts, possibly, for improved translation efficiency.

PMID: 9689910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Blood. 1998 Jul 15;92(2):443-51.

Erythropoietin induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2, STAT5A, and STAT5B in
primary cultured human erythroid precursors.

Oda A(1), Sawada K, Druker BJ, Ozaki K, Takano H, Koizumi K, Fukada Y, Handa M,
Koike T, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan.

We examined signaling by erythropoietin in highly purified human colony forming
unit-erythroid cells, generated in vitro from CD34(+) cells. We found that
erythropoietin induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2, STAT5A, and STAT5B.
Tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2 reaches a peak around 10 minutes after
stimulation and is maximum at 5 U/mL of erythropoietin. Tyrosine phosphorylation 
of STAT5 is accompanied by the translocation of activated STAT5 to the nucleus as
shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) using 32Pi-labeled STAT5
binding site in the beta-casein promoter. Tyrosine phosphorylation STAT1 or STAT3
was not detected in human erythroid precursors after stimulation with
erythropoietin. Crkl, an SH2/SH3 adapter protein, becomes coimmunoprecipitated
specifically with STAT5 from erythropoietin-stimulated erythroid cells; although 
it was shown to become associated with c-Cbl in the studies using cell lines.
Thus, human erythroid precursors can be expanded in vitro in sufficient numbers
and purity to allow its usage in signal transduction studies. This report sets a 
basis for further studies on signaling in primary cultured human erythroid
precursors, which in turn contribute to our better understanding in the
differentiation processes of erythrocytes and their precursors.

PMID: 9657743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 3;273(27):17128-37.

Colony-stimulating factor-1 stimulates the formation of multimeric cytosolic
complexes of signaling proteins and cytoskeletal components in macrophages.

Yeung YG(1), Wang Y, Einstein DB, Lee PS, Stanley ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Stimulation of macrophages with colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) results in
the protein tyrosine phosphorylation of the CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R) and many
other, primarily cytosolic, proteins. Stimulation by CSF-1 at 4 degreesC was used
to facilitate the purification and identification of the proteins of the
cytosolic anti-phosphotyrosine (PY)-reactive fraction (alphaPY-RF) involved in
downstream signaling pathways. Confocal microscopy revealed that the PY proteins 
are in close proximity to the CSF-1R at the plasma membrane. The alphaPY-RF
contained pre-existing complexes of PY proteins and non-PY proteins which
generally increased in size and PY protein content following CSF-1 stimulation.
PY proteins identified by microsequencing and Western blotting include Cbl,
STAT3, STAT5a, STAT5b, SHP-1, Shc, and two novel proteins pp57 and pp37. Other
proteins included cytoskeletal/contractile proteins (paxillin, vimentin,
elongation factor-1alpha, F-actin, tropomyosin, and myosin regulatory light
chain), Ras family signaling proteins (p85 (phosphoinositide 3-kinase), Vav,
Ras-GTPase-activating protein SH3 domain-binding protein, and Grb2), DnaJ-like
protein, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. CSF-1 induced the de novo 
recruitment of Cbl, STAT3, STAT5a, STAT5b, p85, SHP-1, Shc, vimentin, and Grb2 to
complexes and caused pre-existing complexes involving Vav, elongation
factor-1alpha, and F-actin to increase in size. These studies indicate that
CSF-1-induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation is associated with the
reorganization of complexes of cytoskeletal, signaling, and other proteins that
mediate CSF-1-regulated motility and growth.

PMID: 9642280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):3871-9.

Identification and characterization of a constitutively active STAT5 mutant that 
promotes cell proliferation.

Onishi M(1), Nosaka T, Misawa K, Mui AL, Gorman D, McMahon M, Miyajima A,
Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Signaling, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are
transcription factors which are activated by phosphorylation on tyrosine residues
upon stimulation by cytokines. Seven members of the STAT family are known,
including the closely related STAT5A and STAT5B, which are activated by various
cytokines. Except for prolactin-dependent beta-casein production in mammary gland
cells, the biological consequences of STAT5 activation in various systems are not
clear. We applied PCR-driven random mutagenesis and a retrovirus-mediated
expression screening system to identify constitutively active forms of STAT5. By 
this strategy, we have identified a constitutively active STAT5 mutant which has 
two amino acid substitutions; one is located upstream of the putative DNA binding
domain (H299R), and the other is located in the transactivation domain (S711F).
The mutant STAT5 was constitutively phosphorylated on tyrosine residues,
localized in the nucleus, and was transcriptionally active. Expression of the
mutant STAT5 partially dispenses with interleukin 3 (IL-3) as a growth stimulant 
of IL-3-dependent cell lines. Further analyses of the mutant STAT5 have
demonstrated that both of the mutations are required for nuclear localization,
efficient transcriptional activation, and induction of IL-3-independent growth of
an IL-3-dependent cell line, Ba/F3, and have indicated that a molecular basis for
the constitutive activation is the stability of the phosphorylated form of the
mutant STAT5.

PMCID: PMC108971
PMID: 9632771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Br J Haematol. 1998 Jun;101(3):521-8.

Differential constitutive activation between STAT-related proteins and MAP kinase
in primary acute myelogenous leukaemia.

Hayakawa F(1), Towatari M, Iida H, Wakao H, Kiyoi H, Naoe T, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Many cytokines and growth factors stimulate multiple signal transduction pathways
essential for proliferation in human acute leukaemia cells, including a
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway and a Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) pathway. We have previously 
shown constitutive activation of MAP kinase in approximately 50% of acute
myelogenous leukaemia (AML) samples. Recently, STAT proteins have been reported
to be constitutively activated in 10-20% of AML cases. STAT3 and STAT5 are the
main STAT proteins activated in haemopoietic progenitors in response to cytokines
such as IL-3, GM-CSF, erythropoietin and thrombopoietin. Although the possibility
of STAT1 protein as a substrate for MAP kinase at a serine residue has been
suggested, the cross-talk between STATs and MAP kinase pathways in vivo,
especially in leukaemia cells, remains unknown. We examined the phosphorylation
of STAT 3 and STAT 5 at the tyrosine residues in AML samples in which MAP kinase 
activity had already been found. 40/50 primary AML cases (80%) exhibited
constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay showed DNA binding activity of STAT5 correlated with tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5. Similarly, with respect to STAT3, 17/23 cases examined 
(74%) showed constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. In addition, we
examined the tyrosyl-phosphorylation of STAT5 isoforms, STAT5A and STAT5B, in 20 
AML cases, and found selective STAT5B phosphorylation in the absence of STAT5A
phosphorylation in three cases. Furthermore, in certain AML cases, constitutive
activation of MAP kinase and STAT proteins occurred independently. No significant
correlation of MAP kinase activation was observed with either tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT3/STAT5 or positive DNA binding of STAT proteins. These
results suggest that constitutive activation of STAT proteins occurs commonly and
that the causes of constitutive activation of these two major cascades are
heterogeneous in AML.

PMID: 9633897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Cell. 1998 May 29;93(5):841-50.

Stat5a and Stat5b proteins have essential and nonessential, or redundant, roles
in cytokine responses.

Teglund S(1), McKay C, Schuetz E, van Deursen JM, Stravopodis D, Wang D, Brown M,
Bodner S, Grosveld G, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

A variety of cytokines mediate the activation of Janus protein tyrosine kinases
(Jaks). The Jaks then phosphorylate cellular substrates, including members of the
signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) family of transcription
factors. Among the Stats, the two highly related proteins, Stat5a and Stat5b, are
activated by a variety of cytokines. To assess the role of the Stat5 proteins,
mutant mice were derived that have the genes deleted individually or together.
The phenotypes of the mice demonstrate an essential, and often redundant, role
for the two Stat5 proteins in a spectrum of physiological responses associated
with growth hormone and prolactin. Conversely, the responses to a variety of
cytokines that activate the Stat5 proteins, including erythropoietin, are largely
unaffected.

PMID: 9630227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Apr 24;1402(3):313-23.

Modulation of the activation status of Stat5a during LIF-induced differentiation 
of M1 myeloid leukemia cells.

Piekorz RP(1), Rinke R, Gouilleux F, Neumann B, Groner B, Hocke GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fúr Mikrobiologie, Biochemie und Genetik, University of
Erlangen-Nuernberg, Germany.

Treatment of M1 myeloid leukemia cells with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
causes activation of transcription factors Stat1, Stat3 and Stat5a (signal
transducers and activators of transcription). DNA-binding of Stat proteins was
detectable for extended periods of time in LIF-treated M1 cells, which
simultaneously underwent terminal differentiation. The relative composition of
Stat factors in the protein-DNA complexes changed during time. Whereas Stat3 was 
activated up to 36 h during treatment with LIF, Stat5a was activated only
short-termed. Similarly, high expression of the immediate early gene CIS
(cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein), a known target gene of Stat5 in
hematopoietic cells, occurred only during the onset of differentiation. This
suggests a role of Stat5a in the early phase of LIF-induced differentiation and
growth arrest of M1 cells.

PMID: 9606990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 May;12(5):675-87.

Binding of STAT5a and STAT5b to a single element resembling a
gamma-interferon-activated sequence mediates the growth hormone induction of the 
mouse acid-labile subunit promoter in liver cells.

Ooi GT(1), Hurst KR, Poy MN, Rechler MM, Boisclair YR.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Section, Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

After birth, the endocrine actions of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and -II 
become increasingly important. In postnatal animals, most of circulating IGFs
occur in 150-kDa complexes formed by association of an acid-labile subunit (ALS) 
with complexes of IGF and IGF-binding protein-3. ALS is synthesized almost
exclusively in liver. GH stimulates the transcription of the ALS gene, resulting 
in increased hepatic mRNA and circulating ALS levels. To map the GH response
element, a series of 5'-deletion fragments of the mouse ALS promoter (nt -2001 to
-49, A(+1)TG) were inserted in the luciferase reporter plasmid pGL3 and
transfected into the H4-II-E rat hepatoma cell line. GH stimulated the activity
of promoter fragments with 5'-ends between nucleotide (nt) -2001 and nt -653 by
1.9- to 2.7-fold. This stimulation was abolished by deletion of the region
located between nt -653 and nt -483. This region contains two sites, ALS-GAS1 and
ALS-GAS2, that resemble the gamma-interferon activated sequence (GAS). Mutation
of the ALS-GAS1 site, but not of the ALS-GAS2 site, eliminated the response to GH
when assessed in the context of a GH-responsive promoter fragment, indicating
that ALS-GAS1 was necessary for GH induction. Three tandem copies of ALS-GAS1
were sufficient to confer GH inducibility to the minimal promoter of the
thymidine kinase gene. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, ALS-GAS1 formed 
a specific, GH-dependent protein-DNA complex with nuclear extracts from H4-II-E
cells. Using antibodies directed against members of the family of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT), this complex was shown to be 
composed of STAT5a and STAT5b. Identical results were obtained when transfections
and mobility shift assays were performed in primary rat hepatocytes in which the 
endogenous ALS gene is expressed. Thus, the transcriptional activation of the
mouse ALS gene by GH is mediated by the binding of STAT5 isoforms to a single
GAS-like element.

PMID: 9605930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1998 Apr;30(4):751-61.

Angiotensin II activates Stat5 through Jak2 kinase in cardiac myocytes.

McWhinney CD(1), Dostal D, Baker K.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Hood Research Program, Weis Center for Research, Danville, Pennsylvania 
17822, USA.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) treatment was recently shown to activate Jak2, Stat1, and
Stat3 proteins in cardiac myocytes. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors have been shown to be an effective clinical treatment following
myocardial infarction, implying that inhibition of Ang II production is
beneficial in this pathological condition. Some of the effects of Ang II in
cardiac myocytes may be mediated by the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. The AT1
receptor was the first G-protein-coupled-receptor reported to activate the
JAK-STAT pathway. Recently, however, another G-protein-coupled-receptor (i.e.
serotonin) was also shown to signal through the JaK2 and STAT proteins in
myoblasts. We hypothesized that Ang II treatment might also activate Stat5
transcription factors in cardiac myocytes. In this study, we provide evidence
that the G-protein-coupled, Ang II type I (AT1) receptor couples to activation of
Stat5 through Jak2 kinase in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. Angiotensin II
induces a 1.5- to 10-fold increase in a Stat5 transcription complex, which binds 
to the prolactin-inducing element (PIE). By Western analysis, Stat5 protein
levels were shown to be tyrosine phosphorylated two- to three-fold over control, 
following. Ang II treatment of cardiac myocytes. Phosphorylation of Stat5a and
Stat5b proteins was rapid and sustained (30-60 min), and Jak2 kinase
co-immunoprecipitated with activated Stat5 proteins. In cardiac myocytes, Stat5
proteins co-immunoprecipitated with the AT1 receptor. Selective inhibition of
Jak2 kinase with AG-490 blocked formation of prolactin-inducing factor (PIF)
complexes by Ang II, suggesting that Jak2 kinase was required for the tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5 in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 9602424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Anim Genet. 1997 Dec;28(6):459.

A polymorphic TG repeat present within the bovine STAT5A gene.

McCracken JY(1), Molenaar AJ, Snell RJ, Davey HW, Wilkins RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New
Zealand.

PMID: 9589597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur J Immunol. 1998 Mar;28(3):805-10.

Jak-STAT pathway is involved in the induction of TNF-beta gene during stimulation
by IL-2.

Lu L(1), Zhu J, Zheng Z, Yan M, Xu W, Sun L, Theze J, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.

IL-2 is the major regulatory cytokine of the immune system. It plays a key role
in T cell survival, growth and activation. IL-2 may induce the expression of
multiple genes including some cytokine genes. The induction of these genes is
triggered by different signal pathways, one of them being the Jak-STAT signal
pathway. The genes regulated by this pathway remain to be determined. By studying
IL-2-inducible genes, we have confirmed that the TNF-beta gene is one of the
immediate early genes activated by IL-2. By analysis of the DNA sequences around 
180-300 bases upstream of the transcription initiation point of the mouse
TNF-beta gene, we demonstrate that there is a STAT5 binding site which is
essential to the inducibility of the TNF-beta gene. Furthermore, in BA/F3 cells
co-transfected with the STAT5A gene and IL-2R beta gene, the activation of the
TNF-beta gene promoter by IL-2 was greatly promoted, whereas the TNF-beta gene
promoter became IL-2-non-inducible if the STAT5A gene was substituted with a
dominant negative STAT5A, i.e. a C-terminally truncated mutant. Taken together,
our results show that the Jak-STAT signal pathway is involved in induction of the
TNF-beta gene in cells stimulated by IL-2.

PMID: 9541574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Immunol. 1998 Jan 1;160(1):28-31.

HIV-1 infection induces a selective reduction in STAT5 protein expression.

Pericle F(1), Pinto LA, Hicks S, Kirken RA, Sconocchia G, Rusnak J, Dolan MJ,
Shearer GM, Segal DM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

HIV-1 infection is accompanied by qualitative and quantitative defects in CD4+ T 
lymphocytes. Loss of immune function in HIV patients is usually associated with a
profound dysregulation of cytokine production. To investigate whether cytokine
signaling defects occur during HIV infection, PHA blasts from healthy human
donors were infected with two strains of HIV-1 and screened for the expression of
STAT proteins used in cytokine signaling. A selective decrease in STAT5B was seen
8 days after infection with the BZ167 dual-tropic HIV isolate, but not with the
Ba-L, M-tropic strain. Based on these findings, purified T cells from
HIV-infected patients in different stages of disease were also tested for STAT
expression; decreases in STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT1alpha were observed in all
patients. The reduction in STATs seen in vivo and in vitro after HIV infection
may contribute to the loss of T cell function in HIV disease.

PMID: 9551952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Apr;12(4):556-67.

Dominant negative variants of the SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase inhibit prolactin
activation of Jak2 (janus kinase 2) and induction of Stat5 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5)-dependent transcription.

Berchtold S(1), Volarevic S, Moriggl R, Mercep M, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center and
Department of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany.

PRL plays a central role in the regulation of milk protein gene expression in
mammary epithelial cells and in the growth and differentiation of lymphocytes. It
confers its activity through binding to a specific transmembrane, class I
hematopoietic receptor. Ligand binding leads to receptor dimerization and
activation of the tyrosine kinase Jak (janus kinase) 2, associated with the
membrane-proximal, intracellular domain of the receptor. Jak2 phosphorylates and 
activates Stat5, a member of the Stat (signal transducers and activators of
transcription) family. PRL receptor also activates SHP-2, a cytosolic tyrosine
phosphatase. We investigated the connection between these two signaling events
and derived a dominant negative mutant of SHP-2 comprising the two SH2 domains
[SHP-2(SH2)2]. An analogous variant of the SHP-1 phosphatase [SHP-1(SH2)2] was
used as a control. The dominant negative mutant of SHP-2 was found to inhibit the
induction of tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity of m-Stat5a,
m-Stat5b, and the carboxyl-terminal deletion variant m-Stat5adelta749, as well as
the transactivation potential of m-Stat5a and m-Stat5b. The dominant negative
mutant SHP-1(SH2)2 had no effect. The kinase activity of Jak2 is also dependent
on a functional SHP-2 phosphatase. We propose that SHP-2 relieves an inhibitory
tyrosine phosphorylation event in Jak2 required for Jak2 activity, Stat5
phosphorylation, and transcriptional induction.

PMID: 9544991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 1998 Mar 15;91(6):1901-8.

Carboxyl-truncated STAT5beta is generated by a nucleus-associated serine protease
in early hematopoietic progenitors.

Meyer J(1), Jucker M, Ostertag W, Stocking C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Virus Genetics, Heinrich-Pette-Institut fur
experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der Universitat Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany.

Hematopoiesis is tightly controlled by a family of cytokines that signal through 
a related set of receptors. The pleiotropic and overlapping response of a cell to
different cytokines is reflected in the number and complex pattern of activated
signal transducers. Of special interest is STAT5, which is stimulated by a large 
and diverse set of cytokines. In addition to the two highly homologous proteins, 
STAT5A and STAT5B, encoded by duplicated genes, expression and activation of a
dominant-negative, carboxyl-truncated form has also been described in early
hematopoietic progenitors. We show here that a protease expressed in early
hematopoietic cells cleaves the alpha forms of STAT5A/5B (p96/p94) to generate
carboxyl-truncated beta forms (p80/p77). Inhibition studies assigned this
protease to the serine class of endopeptidases. Cell fractionation experiments
showed that the protease is associated with the nucleus in a constitutively
activated form and does not require an activated STAT5 substrate. The ability of 
a protease to modulate the specificity of an activated transcription factor is
unprecedented and underlines the importance of proteases in regulation of cell
functions.

PMID: 9490672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):1783-92.

Characterization of Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers and heterodimers and their
association with the glucocortiocoid receptor in mammary cells.

Cella N(1), Groner B, Hynes NE.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

The lactogenic hormones, i.e., prolactin and glucocorticoids, act in concert to
stimulate transcription factors responsible for hormone-dependent milk protein
gene expression. In the mammary gland, prolactin activates Stat5a and Stat5b and 
glucocorticoids activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Immunoprecipitation
experiments revealed that in mammary cells, Stat5a, Stat5b, and the GR are
physically associated in vivo. The association is not dependent on lactogenic
hormone treatment and is evident at all stages of mammary gland development.
Immunodepletion experiments indicated that a fraction of GR and Stat5 proteins
are not associated, suggesting that there are different intracellular pools of
these proteins. Lactogenic hormone treatment of HC11 mammary cells resulted in
tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5b, dimerization, and rapid nuclear
translocation of both Stat5 proteins. Following hormone treatment, Stat5a-Stat5b 
heterodimers were detected by their coimmunoprecipitation. In addition,
immunodepletion experiments followed by gel shift analyses revealed the presence 
of active Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers. In mammary cells, Stat5b homodimers are
less abundant than Stat5a homodimers. Although the GR does not bind the Stat5 DNA
binding site directly, it could be detected with the Stat5-DNA complex. These
results suggest that glucocorticoids affect milk protein gene expression via
association of the GR with Stat5. Thus, there is a functional coupling between
Stat-dependent and nuclear hormone receptor-dependent gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC121408
PMID: 9528750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):1058-63.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-activated signaling pathways in 
human neutrophils. Selective activation of Jak2, Stat3, and Stat5b.

Al-Shami A(1), Mahanna W, Naccache PH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Rhumatologie et Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du
CHUL, and Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Ste-Foy,
Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) regulates many of the
biological functions of human neutrophils. This includes the stimulation of
protein synthesis and the tyrosine phosphorylation of various proteins among
which is JAK2. The present study was aimed at characterizing in detail the
pattern of activation by GM-CSF of the JAK/STAT pathway in human neutrophils. The
results obtained show that the stimulation of human neutrophils by GM-CSF
specifically led to tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and had no effect on JAK1,
JAK3, or TYK2. Furthermore, GM-CSF induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 
and STAT5 but not of STAT1, STAT2, STAT4, or STAT6. Tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT3 was transient reaching its maximum at 15 min. STAT5 presented a different
pattern of tyrosine phosphorylation. The anti-STAT5 antibodies identified two
proteins at 94 and 92 kDa. The 94-kDa STAT5 was constitutively tyrosine
phosphorylated and showed no change upon GM-CSF stimulation. On the other hand,
the 92-kDa STAT5 was tyrosine phosphorylated within 1 min of GM-CSF treatment and
this was maintained for at least 30 min. By the use of specific antibodies, it
was determined that only STAT5B, and not STAT5A, was tyrosine phosphorylated in
GM-CSF-treated neutrophils. Furthermore, GM-CSF treatment induced an increase in 
the ability of STAT3 and STAT5B, but not STAT5A, to bind DNA probes. The
specificity of the pattern of activation of the JAK/STAT pathway suggests that it
may be directly linked to the modulation of the functions of mature nondividing, 
human neutrophils by GM-CSF.

PMID: 9422769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 9;94(25):13850-5.

Distinct tyrosine phosphorylation sites in JAK3 kinase domain positively and
negatively regulate its enzymatic activity.

Zhou YJ(1), Hanson EP, Chen YQ, Magnuson K, Chen M, Swann PG, Wange RL,
Changelian PS, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. ZHOUY@arb.niams.nih.gov

Cytokines are critically important for the growth and development of a variety of
cells. Janus kinases (JAKs) associate with cytokine receptors and are essential
for transmitting downstream cytokine signals. However, the regulation of the
enzymatic activity of the JAKs is not well understood. Here, we investigated the 
role of tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK3 in regulating its kinase activity by
analyzing mutations of tyrosine residues within the putative activation loop of
the kinase domain. Specifically, tyrosine residues 980 and 981 of JAK3 were
mutated to phenylalanine individually or doubly. We found that JAK3 is
autophosphorylated on multiple sites including Y980 and Y981. Compared with the
activity of wild-type (WT) JAK3, mutant Y980F demonstrated markedly decreased
kinase activity, and optimal phosphorylation of JAK3 on other sites was dependent
on Y980 phosphorylation. The mutant Y980F also exhibited reduced phosphorylation 
of its substrates, gammac and STAT5A. In contrast, mutant Y981F had greatly
increased kinase activity, whereas the double mutant, YY980/981FF, had
intermediate activity. These results indicate that Y980 positively regulates JAK3
kinase activity whereas Y981 negatively regulates JAK3 kinase activity. These
observations in JAK3 are similar to the findings in the kinase that is closely
related to the JAK family, ZAP-70; mutations of tyrosine residues within the
putative activation loop of ZAP-70 also have opposing actions. Thus, it will be
important to determine whether this feature of regulation is unique to JAK3 or if
it is also a feature of other JAKs. Given the importance of JAKs and particularly
JAK3, it will be critical to fully dissect the positive and negative regulatory
function of these and other tyrosine residues in the control of kinase activity
and hence cytokine signaling.

PMCID: PMC28396
PMID: 9391116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):28-32.

Activation of the Jak2-Stat5 signaling pathway in Nb2 lymphoma cells by an
anti-apoptotic agent, aurintricarboxylic acid.

Rui H(1), Xu J, Mehta S, Fang H, Williams J, Dong F, Grimley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA. hrui@usuhs.mil

Biological effects of many hormones and cytokines are mediated through
receptor-associated Jak tyrosine kinases and cytoplasmic Stat transcription
factors, including critical physiological processes such as immunity,
reproduction, and cell growth and differentiation. Pharmaceuticals that control
Jak-Stat pathways are therefore of considerable interest. Here we demonstrate
that a single Jak-Stat pathway can be activated by aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA),
a negatively charged triphenylmethane derivative (475 Da) with anti-apoptotic
properties. In prolactin (PRL)-dependent Nb2 lymphocytes, ATA sustained cell
growth in the absence of hormone and mimicked rapid PRL-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of Jak2 and activation of Stat5a and Stat5b with tyrosine
phosphorylation, heterodimerization, DNA binding, and induction of the
Stat5-regulated pim-1 protooncogene. ATA also mimicked PRL activation of serine
kinases ERK1 and ERK2. However, unlike PRL, ATA did not regulate Stat1 or Stat3. 
ATA also did not affect Jak3, which is activated in these cells by interleukin-2 
family cytokines. Although the mechanism and specificity by which ATA activates
Jak2, Stat5, and ERKs in Nb2 cells are still unclear, the present study
demonstrates that certain hormone or cytokine effects on Jak-Stat pathways can be
discretely imitated by a low molecular weight, non-peptide pharmaceutical. The
results are also consistent with Stat5 involvement in lymphocyte growth and
survival.

PMID: 9417042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1997 Oct 20;133(2):169-76.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibition decreases growth hormone
stimulated transcription mediated by STAT5.

Pircher TJ(1), Flores-Morales A, Mui AL, Saltiel AR, Norstedt G, Gustafsson JA,
Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

We have investigated the possible involvement of the MAPK pathway in the growth
hormone(GH)-induced activation of one of the members of signal transducers and
activators of transcription, STAT5, by using the MAPK kinase (MEK) inhibitor
PD98059. PD98059 treatment of Chinese hamster ovarian cells, stably transfected
with the GH receptor (CHOA cells), abolished the GH-induced MAPK activity.
PD98059 decreased the amount of GH-induced STAT5 in nuclear extract with
DNA-binding capacity. Furthermore, GH dependent transcription of a STAT5
regulated reporter gene was inhibited by PD98059. The MEK inhibitor did not
reduce GH-stimulated nuclear translocation of STAT5. We also investigated if
PD98059 differentially influences the activation of the two STAT5 homologs,
STAT5a and STAT5b, which differ mainly at the C-terminal end, one of the
differences being the presence of a possible MAPK phosphorylation site in STAT5a.
Expression plasmids for these transcription factors were transfected into CHOA
cells together with a reporter gene. GH-stimulated fold induction of
transcription was reduced by PD98059 in STAT5a but not in STAT5b overexpressing
cells. A MAPK phosphorylation site-mutated version of STAT5a was also transfected
into CHOA cells. GH-stimulated fold induction of cotransfected reporter gene was 
not reduced by PD98059 in cells overexpressing mutant STAT5a. The above data show
that the MAPK pathway is required for the full activation of one of the STAT5
isoforms (STAT5a).

PMID: 9406863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1997 Oct 20;133(2):141-9.

Mammary Stat5 abundance and activity are not altered with lactation state in
cows.

Wheeler TT(1), Kuys YM, Broadhurst MM, Molenaar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, New Zealand Pastoral Agriculture Research Institute,
Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton. wheelert@agresearch.cri.nz

Stat5 is a key intracellular mediator of prolactin signalling and can activate
transcription of milk proteins in response to prolactin. Therefore, in animals
such as mice where lactation is dependent on prolactin, Stat5 is likely to play
an important role in establishing or maintaining lactation in the mammary gland. 
However, little is known about its role in lactation in the dairy cow. In order
to address this, the levels of Stat5a and Stat5b protein, mRNA and Stat5
DNA-binding activity were measured in mammary tissue from mice and cows at
different lactational states. In the cow, Stat5a and Stat5b protein and mRNA
levels, as well as Stat5 DNA-binding activity were unaltered between pregnancy
and established lactation. In contrast, in the mouse Stat5a and Stat5b protein,
as well as Stat5 DNA-binding activity were clearly increased during lactation
whereas Stat5a and Stat5b mRNA levels were highest during pregnancy as has been
previously described. In both species only a minority of the epithelial cell
nuclei were Stat5 positive during established lactation. These results suggest
that there are significant differences in the biological role of Stat5 in
controlling lactation between ruminants and rodents.

PMID: 9406860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Cell Immunol. 1997 Nov 1;181(2):172-81.

IL-2 and IL-7 induce heterodimerization of STAT5 isoforms in human peripheral
blood T lymphoblasts.

Rosenthal LA(1), Winestock KD, Finbloom DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4555, USA.

Despite differences in T cell responses induced by interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-7,
both cytokines modulate T cell functions by activation of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription (STAT) proteins. We examined the contribution of the 
two isoforms of STAT5, STAT5A and STAT5B, to IL-2- and IL-7-induced activation of
human peripheral blood T lymphoblasts. Both cytokines induced assembly of STAT5A 
and STAT5B containing complexes capable of binding to the interferon-gamma
activation sequence (GAS), and these complexes rapidly translocated (within 1
min) into the nucleus of IL-2- or IL-7-treated cells. The kinetics of this
translocation were delayed in IL-7-treated as compared to IL-2-treated cells.
IL-2 and IL-7 were equivalent in their ability to induce tyrosine phosphorylation
of STAT5A and STAT5B and to facilitate binding of these STATs to an immobilized
GAS element. Both IL-2 and IL-7 induced substantial amounts of STAT5A/STAT5B
heterodimerization. Moreover, we observed constitutive association of STAT3 with 
each STAT5 isomer. These data suggest that IL-2 and IL-7 induce assembly of STAT 
heterodimers in a similar manner and that subsequent cellular responses may be
driven by induction of similar sets of genes.

PMID: 9398404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Immunity. 1997 Nov;7(5):691-701.

An indirect effect of Stat5a in IL-2-induced proliferation: a critical role for
Stat5a in IL-2-mediated IL-2 receptor alpha chain induction.

Nakajima H(1), Liu XW, Wynshaw-Boris A, Rosenthal LA, Imada K, Finbloom DS,
Hennighausen L, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Stat5a was identified as a prolactin-induced transcription factor but also is
activated by other cytokines, including interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-7. We have
now analyzed the immune system of Stat5a-deficient mice. Stat5a-/- splenocytes
exhibited defective IL-2-induced expression of the IL-2 receptor alpha chain
(IL-2R alpha), a protein that together with IL-2R beta and the common cytokine
receptor gamma chain (gamma(c)) mediates high-affinity IL-2 binding.
Correspondingly, Stat5a-/- splenocytes exhibited markedly decreased proliferation
to IL-2, although maximal proliferation was still achieved at IL-2 concentrations
high enough to titrate intermediate-affinity IL-2R beta/gamma(c) receptors. Thus,
defective Stat5a expression results in diminished proliferation by an indirect
mechanism, resulting from defective receptor expression. Correspondingly, we show
that Stat5a is essential for maximal responsiveness to antigenic stimuli in vivo,
underscoring the physiological importance of IL-2-induced IL-2R alpha expression.

PMID: 9390692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Eur J Immunol. 1997 Oct;27(10):2737-40.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces a unique set of STAT
factors in murine dendritic cells.

Welte T(1), Koch F, Schuler G, Lechner J, Doppler W, Heufler C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, University of Innsbruck,
Austria.

Cytokine-mediated signaling pathways were studied in mouse dendritic cells (DC)
by analysis of the activation pattern of STAT factors. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays were performed to detect STAT isoform-specific complexes.
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) simultaneously induced 
complexes containing STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6. In non-DC, a similar
broad activation pattern of STAT factors by GM-CSF or other cytokines has not
been observed so far. By comparison, in peritoneal macrophages, GM-CSF induced a 
complex with the properties of a truncated form of STAT5. Other cytokines tested 
on DC either failed to induce STAT factors [interleukin (IL)-1 beta, IL-2,
IL-15], or activated the same STAT factors as observed in peritoneal macrophages 
(IL-4, IFN-gamma). Our results implicate a specific effect of GM-CSF on STAT
signaling in DC which might account for the cell type-specific effect of this
cytokine on development and function.

PMID: 9368634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cytokine. 1997 Sep;9(9):639-49.

Induction of differentiation by IL-6-type cytokines is impaired in myeloid
leukaemia cells unable to activate Stat5a.

Piekorz RP(1), Hocke GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Biochemistry and Genetics, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Cytokine 1998 Jan;10(1):73.
    Cytokine 1998 Mar;10(3):240.

The block of differentiation in myeloid leukaemia can be overcome by treatment
with a variety of agents including cytokines. Interleukin 6 (IL-6) and leukaemia 
inhibitory factor (LIF) induce macrophage differentiation and growth arrest
through activation of the Janus kinase (Jak)/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (Stat) signal pathway in murine M1 myeloid leukaemia cells.
Treatment of various other myeloid leukaemia lines with LIF or IL-6 did not lead 
to induction of differentiation. Several defects in the cytokine triggered
Jak/Stat signal pathway were striking in these lines. They expressed a decreased 
or undetectable amount of at least one of the components of the specific cytokine
receptor complexes. Three lines contained a constitutively activated Jak/Stat
signal cascade and in two of them, lines C and BMC-63, this cascade was inducible
by treatment with IL-6, despite of a very low density of IL-6-receptors. Apart
from the cytokine receptors, additional components of the Jak/Stat signal cascade
were altered in these lines. Expression and activation of the transcription
factor Stat5a and the tyrosine kinase Jak2 were markedly decreased compared to M1
cells, suggesting a role of activated Stat5a in the induction of differentiation.
These results demonstrate a direct correlation between alterations in the
Jak/Stat signal pathway and the inability to differentiate after cytokine
treatment of myeloid leukaemia cells.

PMID: 9325012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 24;272(43):26841-9.

Transcriptional inhibition by Stat5. Differential activities at growth-related
versus differentiation-specific promoters.

Luo G(1), Yu-Lee L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) induces transcriptional activation of not only growth-related
genes such as interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) but also
differentiation-specific genes such as beta-casein through a signaling cascade
consisting of Janus kinases and Stat (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) factors. To understand better the role of Stats in PRL signaling, 
we cloned rat Stat5b from a PRL-responsive T cell line Nb2. A Stat5b-specific
peptide antibody was generated. In PRL receptor reconstituted COS cells
cotransfected with Stat5b or Stat5a, both Stat5 proteins become tyrosine
phosphorylated and bind to the IRF-1 GAS (interferon-gamma activation sequence)
element in a PRL-inducible manner. Unexpectedly, both Stat5b and Stat5a inhibit
PRL induction of the IRF-1 promoter, but they mediate PRL stimulation of the
beta-casein promoter. Stat5-mediated inhibition was observed only at the native
IRF-1 promoter and not at the isolated IRF-1 GAS element linked to a heterologous
thymidine kinase promoter. Mutational analyses showed that the DNA binding
activity of Stat5b is not required, but the carboxyl-terminal transactivation
domain is essential for Stat5b to inhibit PRL induction of the IRF-1 promoter.
These results suggest that Stat5b mediates inhibition via protein-protein
interactions. In contrast, both DNA binding and transactivation domains of Stat5b
are required to mediate PRL induction of the beta-casein promoter. Furthermore, a
carboxyl-terminal truncated dominant negative Stat5b can reverse Stat5b
inhibition at the IRF-1 promoter. These studies suggest that Stat proteins can
act as not only positive but also negative regulators of gene transcription.
Further, Stat5 can modulate gene expression without binding to DNA but via
protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 9341115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Immunol. 1997 Sep 15;159(6):2580-5.

Immunocompromised tumor-bearing mice show a selective loss of STAT5a/b expression
in T and B lymphocytes.

Pericle F(1), Kirken RA, Bronte V, Sconocchia G, DaSilva L, Segal DM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Impaired immune responses are frequently observed in tumor-bearing hosts during
progression of tumor growth, but the molecular basis of these functional defects 
remains unclear. To investigate tumor-induced immunosuppression, we first
established that lymphocytes from mice bearing s.c. mammary adenocarcinoma (TS/A)
tumors were severely impaired in their ability to generate cellular and humoral
Ag-specific responses. Lymphocytes from these mice were then screened for
abnormalities in the expression of signal transducing proteins known to be
involved in the regulation of cellular immunity. Interestingly, purified T and B 
cells isolated from immunocompromised tumor-bearing mice displayed a marked
decrease in the transcription activators STAT5a and -b at the protein level and
to a lesser extent at the mRNA level. By contrast, no change in the expression of
STAT1, -3, and -6 or of the TCR itself were detected. The correlation in the loss
of T and B cell function with the selective decrease in STAT5a/b expression
suggests that regulation of the STAT5 signaling pathway may provide a molecular
mechanism for modulating the immune system.

PMID: 9300676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Blood. 1997 Sep 1;90(5):1768-76.

STAT5A-deficient mice demonstrate a defect in granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-induced proliferation and gene expression.

Feldman GM(1), Rosenthal LA, Liu X, Hayes MP, Wynshaw-Boris A, Leonard WJ,
Hennighausen L, Finbloom DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892-4555, USA.

Responses of cells to cytokines typically involve the activation of a family of
latent DNA binding proteins, referred to as signal transducers and activators of 
transcription (STAT) proteins, which are critical for the expression of early
response genes. Of the seven known STAT proteins, STAT5 (originally called
mammary gland factor) has been shown to be activated by several cytokines, such
as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-3
(IL-3), and IL-5, which are known to play important roles in growth and
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors. In this report we have used mice
that are deficient in STAT5A (one of two homologues of STAT5) to study the role
of STAT5A in GM-CSF stimulation of cells. When bone marrow-derived macrophages
were generated by differentiation with macrophage-CSF (M-CSF), exposure of cells 
from wild-type mice to GM-CSF resulted in a typical pattern of assembly of DNA
binding proteins specific for the gamma activation sequence (GAS) element within 
the beta-casein promoter. However, in cells from the STAT5A null mouse one of the
shifted bands was absent. Immunoblotting analysis in the null mice showed that
lack of STAT5A protein resulted in no alteration in activation of STAT5B by
tyrosine phosphorylation. Proliferation experiments revealed that, when exposed
to increasing concentrations of GM-CSF, cells derived from the null mice grew
considerably more slowly than cells derived from the wild-type mice. Moreover,
expression of GM-CSF-dependent genes, CIS and A1, was markedly inhibited in cells
derived from null mice as compared with those of wild-type mice. The decreased
expression observed with A1, a bcl-2 like gene, may account in part for the
suppression of growth in cells from the null mice. These data suggest that the
presence of STAT5A during the GM-CSF-induced assembly of STAT5 dimers is critical
for the formation of competent transcription factors that are required for both
gene expression and cell proliferation.

PMID: 9292509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mamm Genome. 1997 Sep;8(9):705-6.

STAT5A encoding gene maps to chromosome 19 in cattle and goat and to chromosome
11 in sheep.

Goldammer T(1), Meyer L, Seyfert HM, Brunner RM, Schwerin M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsbereich Molekularbiologie, Forschungsinstitut für die Biologie
landwirtschaftlicher Nutztiere, D 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

PMID: 9271683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 15;272(33):20954-60.

Promoter-dependent synergy between glucocorticoid receptor and Stat5 in the
activation of beta-casein gene transcription.

Lechner J(1), Welte T, Tomasi JK, Bruno P, Cairns C, Gustafsson J, Doppler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Innsbruck,
Fritz-Pregl-Strasse 3, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Steroid hormone receptors and Stat factors comprise two distinct families of
inducible transcription factors. Activation of a member of each family, namely
the glucocorticoid receptor by glucocorticoids and Stat5 by prolactin, is
required for the efficient induction of the expression of milk protein genes in
the mammary epithelium. We have studied the mode of interaction between Stat5 and
the glucocorticoid receptor in the activation of beta-casein gene transcription. 
The functional role of potential half-palindromic glucocorticoid receptor-binding
sites mapped previously in the promoter region was investigated. beta-Casein gene
promoter chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs containing mutations and
deletions in these sites were tested for their responsiveness to the synergistic 
effect of prolactin and dexamethasone employing COS-7 cells or HC11 mammary
epithelial cells. Synergism depended on promoter regions containing intact
binding sites for the glucocorticoid receptor and Stat5. The carboxyl-terminal
transactivation domains of Stat5a and Stat5b were not required for this
synergism. Our results suggest that in lactogenic hormone response elements
glucocorticoid receptor molecules bound to nonclassical half-palindromic sites
gain competence as transcriptional activators by the interaction with Stat5
molecules binding to vicinal sites.

PMID: 9252424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3426-34.

Growth hormone-induced tyrosyl phosphorylation and deoxyribonucleic acid binding 
activity of Stat5A and Stat5B.

Smit LS(1), Vanderkuur JA, Stimage A, Han Y, Luo G, Yu-Lee LY, Schwartz J,
Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
49109-0622, USA.

GH is known to activate JAK2 tyrosine kinase and members of the Stat family of
transcription factors, including Stats 1, 3, and 5. The recent observation that
at least two Stat5 proteins (Stat5A and Stat5B) exist in mouse and human, raises 
the question of whether GH activates both Stat5A and Stat5B and, if so, whether
the requirements for activation are the same. An initial report investigating
this issue demonstrated GH-dependent activation of Stat5A but not Stat5B. In this
paper, we demonstrate (in COS cells expressing rat GH receptor (rGHR) and either 
Stat5A or Stat5B, 3T3-F442A fibroblasts, and CHO cells expressing rGHR) that GH
induces tyrosyl phosphorylation of both Stat5A and Stat5B. Similar time courses
of phosphorylation were observed for the two proteins. Interestingly, the pattern
of observed bands differs for the two forms of Stat5. Two closely migrating
Stat5A bands can be detected in cells treated with or without GH. Both of these
bands become tyrosyl phosphorylated in response to GH. Three species of Stat5B
are observed in untreated cells. An additional, more slowly migrating Stat5B
band, appears upon treatment with GH. The three more slower migrating Stat5B
bands observed in response to GH contain phosphorylated tyrosyl residues. We
further demonstrate that GH induces binding of Stat5A and Stat5B, as well as
Stat1, to the GAS-like element in the beta-casein promoter. We and others have
demonstrated previously that specific regions of GHR are required for
GH-dependent activation of what is here identified as Stat5B. To gain insight
into the mechanism by which GH promotes tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5A,
GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5A was examined in CHO cells
expressing truncated and mutated rGHR. The results indicate that Stat5A and
Stat5B require the same regions of rGHR for maximal activation by GH: the
C-terminal half of the cytoplasmic domain; tyrosines 333 and/or 338 in the
N-terminal half of the cytoplasmic domain; and the regions required for JAK2
activation. To dissect further the mechanism by which GH activates Stat5A and B, 
the requirement for JAK2 in GH-dependent Stat5 tyrosyl phosphorylation was
assessed using JAK2-deficient cells expressing GHR (gamma2A-GHR) and the
wild-type parental cell line expressing GHR (2C4-GHR). GH-induced tyrosyl
phosphorylation of Stat5B in 2C4-GHR cells but not in the JAK2 deficient,
gamma2A-GHR cells, indicating that JAK2 is required for GH-dependent tyrosyl
phosphorylation of Stat5B. Western blotting revealed that Stat5A is not expressed
in this cell type. Taken together, these findings suggest that: 1) GH activates
both Stat5A and Stat5B in several cell types; 2) the pattern of bands observed
differs for Stat5A and Stat5B; 3) GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5A 
requires specific regions of GHR, and these requirements are the same as for
Stat5B; and 4) JAK2 kinase is required for GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation
of Stat5B and, most likely, Stat5A.

PMID: 9231797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jul 18;236(2):438-43.

Members of the family of IL-6-type cytokines activate Stat5a in various cell
types.

Piekorz RP(1), Nemetz C, Hocke GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Biochemistry and Genetics, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6)-type cytokines activate transcription factors Stat1 and
Stat3 (signal transducers and activators of transcription). Here we report that
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and IL-6 activate Stat5a in M1 myeloid leukemia 
cells in addition. In murine embryonal stem (ES) cells stably transfected with an
expression vector for Stat5a treatment with LIF resulted in tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA-binding of this transcription factor. Transfection of an 
expression construct for Stat5a in human hepatoma cells caused a dose-dependent
increase in LIF-triggered transcriptional activity. Our data demonstrate that
Stat5a is activated by IL-6-type cytokines and can mediate transcriptional
activity in addition to Stat1 and Stat3.

PMID: 9240457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7239-44.

Requirement of STAT5b for sexual dimorphism of body growth rates and liver gene
expression.

Udy GB(1), Towers RP, Snell RG, Wilkins RJ, Park SH, Ram PA, Waxman DJ, Davey HW.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, AgResearch, Ruakura, Private Bag 3123, Hamilton, New
Zealand.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription, STAT5b, has been implicated
in signal transduction pathways for a number of cytokines and growth factors,
including growth hormone (GH). Pulsatile but not continuous GH exposure activates
liver STAT5b by tyrosine phosphorylation, leading to dimerization, nuclear
translocation, and transcriptional activation of the STAT, which is proposed to
play a key role in regulating the sexual dimorphism of liver gene expression
induced by pulsatile plasma GH. We have evaluated the importance of STAT5b for
the physiological effects of GH pulses using a mouse gene knockout model. STAT5b 
gene disruption led to a major loss of multiple, sexually differentiated
responses associated with the sexually dimorphic pattern of pituitary GH
secretion. Male-characteristic body growth rates and male-specific liver gene
expression were decreased to wild-type female levels in STAT5b-/- males, while
female-predominant liver gene products were increased to a level intermediate
between wild-type male and female levels. Although these responses are similar to
those observed in GH-deficient Little mice, STAT5b-/- mice are not GH-deficient, 
suggesting that they may be GH pulse-resistant. Indeed, the dwarfism, elevated
plasma GH, low plasma insulin-like growth factor I, and development of obesity
seen in STAT5b-/- mice are all characteristics of Laron-type dwarfism, a human
GH-resistance disease generally associated with a defective GH receptor. The
requirement of STAT5b to maintain sexual dimorphism of body growth rates and
liver gene expression suggests that STAT5b may be the major, if not the sole,
STAT protein that mediates the sexually dimorphic effects of GH pulses in liver
and perhaps other target tissues. STAT5b thus has unique physiological functions 
for which, surprisingly, the highly homologous STAT5a is unable to substitute.

PMCID: PMC23803
PMID: 9207075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 13;272(24):15459-65.

Two discrete regions of interleukin-2 (IL2) receptor beta independently mediate
IL2 activation of a PD98059/rapamycin/wortmannin-insensitive Stat5a/b serine
kinase.

Kirken RA(1), Malabarba MG, Xu J, DaSilva L, Erwin RA, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Rui
H, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, 21702-1201,
USA.Kirken@mail.ncifcrf.gov

Many cytokines, hormones, and growth factors activate Janus kinases to tyrosine
phosphorylate select members of the Stat transcription factors. For full
transcriptional activation, Stat1 and Stat3 also require phosphorylation of a
conserved serine residue within a mitogen-activated protein kinase
phosphorylation consensus site. On the other hand, two recently identified and
highly homologous Stat5a and Stat5b proteins lack this putative mitogen-activated
protein kinase phosphorylation site. The present study set out to establish
whether Stat5a and Stat5b are under the control of an interleukin-2
(IL2)-activated Stat5 serine kinase. We now report that IL2 stimulated marked
phosphorylation of serine and tyrosine residues of both Stat5a and Stat5b in
human T lymphocytes and in several IL2-responsive lymphocytic cell lines. No
Stat5a/b phosphothreonine was detected. Phosphoamino acid analysis also revealed 
that Stat5a/b phosphotyrosine levels were maximized within 1-5 min of IL2
stimulation, whereas serine phosphorylation kinetics were slower. Interestingly, 
IL2-induced serine phosphorylation of Stat5a differed quantitatively and
temporally from that of Stat5b with Stat5a serine phosphorylation leveling off
after 10 min and the more pronounced Stat5b response continuing to rise for at
least 60 min of IL2 stimulation. Furthermore, we identified two discrete domains 
of IL2 receptor beta (IL2Rbeta) that could independently restore the ability of a
truncated IL2Rbeta mutant to mediate Stat5a/b phosphorylation and DNA binding to 
the gamma-activated site of the beta-casein gene promoter. These observations
demonstrated that there is no strict requirement for one particular IL2Rbeta
region for Stat5 phosphorylation. Finally, we established that the IL2-activated 
Stat5a/b serine kinase is insensitive to several selective inhibitors of known
IL2-stimulated kinases including MEK1/MEK2 (PD98059), mTOR (rapamycin), and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (wortmannin) as determined by phosphoamino acid and
DNA binding analysis, thus suggesting that a yet-to-be-identified serine kinase
mediates Stat5a/b activation.

PMID: 9182578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 30;272(22):14098-103.

Prolactin stimulates serine/tyrosine phosphorylation and formation of
heterocomplexes of multiple Stat5 isoforms in Nb2 lymphocytes.

Kirken RA(1), Malabarba MG, Xu J, Liu X, Farrar WL, Hennighausen L, Larner AC,
Grimley PM, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Transcription factors of the Stat gene family are selectively activated by many
hormones and cytokines. Stat5 originally was cloned as a prolactin-stimulated
DNA-binding protein, but is also activated by non-lactogenic cytokines in many
cell types. The recent identification of two distinct Stat5 genes, which encode a
94-kDa Stat5a and a 92-kDa Stat5b as well as several lower molecular weight
isoforms, suggests additional complexity and combinatorial possibilities for
transcriptional regulation. We now report a biochemical analysis of prolactin
activation of Stat proteins in Nb2 lymphocytes, which was associated with: 1)
rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5a, Stat5b, a COOH-terminally truncated
80-kDa Stat5 form, Stat1alpha, and Stat3; 2) rapid and selective formation of
Stat5a/b heterodimers, without involvement of Stat1alpha or Stat3; 3) marked
serine, but not threonine phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5b; and 4) the
appearance of two qualitatively distinct Stat5 protein complexes, which
discriminated between oligonucleotides corresponding to the prolactin response
elements of the beta-casein and interferon regulatory factor-1 gene promoters.
Collectively, our analyses showed that Stat5a and Stat5b respond similarly to
prolactin receptor activation, but also suggested that the two genes have evolved
unique properties that may contribute to the specificity of receptors that
utilize Stat5 signaling proteins.

PMID: 9162035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Biochem J. 1997 May 15;324 ( Pt 1):231-6.

Prolactin stimulates the JAK2 and focal adhesion kinase pathways in human breast 
carcinoma T47-D cells.

Canbay E(1), Norman M, Kilic E, Goffin V, Zachary I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Marlborough Street, Bristol BS2 8HW, U.K.

Treatment of T47-D human breast carcinoma cells with recombinant prolactin
(rhPRL) induced a concentration- and time-dependent increase in the
phosphotyrosine content of JAK2. rhPRL also stimulated JAK2 tyrosine
phosphorylation more weakly in three other breast carcinoma lines, MCF-7, ZR-75-1
and MDA-MB-231. Furthermore it stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of two
isoforms of the transcriptional activator STAT5, STAT5a and STAT5b. Surprisingly,
rhPRL treatment of T47-D cells also stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of focal 
adhesion kinase (FAK), as determined by immunoprecipitation with
anti-phosphotyrosine antibody followed by immunoblotting with a specific FAK
antibody. The effect of rhPRL was rapid and concentration-dependent, being
maximal at 5 ng/ml. At rhPRL concentrations above 25 ng/ml, FAK tyrosine
phosphorylation declined but remained above control levels at 100 ng/ml. rhPRL
also stimulated paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation in T47-D cells with similar
concentration- and time-dependence. In a second human breast carcinoma cell line,
MCF-7, rhPRL produced very similar effects on FAK and paxillin tyrosine
phosphorylation. These findings identify a new protein tyrosine kinase pathway in
the action of the lactogenic hormone rhPRL and represent the first report that a 
hormone acting through a member of the haemopoietin receptor superfamily can
regulate the FAK/paxillin pathway.

PMCID: PMC1218421
PMID: 9164861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Blood. 1997 May 1;89(9):3148-54.

CIS, a cytokine inducible SH2 protein, is a target of the JAK-STAT5 pathway and
modulates STAT5 activation.

Matsumoto A(1), Masuhara M, Mitsui K, Yokouchi M, Ohtsubo M, Misawa H, Miyajima
A, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Insititute of Life Science, Kurume University, Japan.

We searched for immediate early cytokine responsive genes and isolated a novel
gene, CIS (Cytokine Inducible SH2 containing protein) that is induced in
hematopoietic cells by a subset of cytokines including interleukin-2 (IL-2),
IL-3, and erythropoietin (EPO). The mutant IL-2 receptor that fails to activate
STAT5 could not induce CIS, suggesting that STAT5 is involved in the
cytokine-inducible expression of CIS. We cloned the 5'-flanking region of the CIS
gene and found that about 200 bases upstream of the transcription-initiation site
contain four potential STAT5 binding sites (MGF boxes). Luciferase reporter
assays showed that these MGF boxes were essential for EPO-dependent promoter
activity. Expression of STAT5 and the EPO receptor in HEK293 cells conferred
EPO-dependent activation of the CIS promoter. These data indicate that CIS is a
target of the JAK-STAT5 pathway of cytokine receptors. CIS contains an SH2 domain
and binds to tyrosine-phosphorylated EPO and IL-3 receptors. In HEK293 cells
expressing STAT5 and the EPO receptor, EPO-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of 
STAT5, as well as EPO-dependent CIS-promoter activation, was suppressed when CIS 
was coexpressed. Moreover, the induction of oncostatin M, another STAT5 target,
as well as the tyrosine-phosphorylation of STAT5, were partially suppressed by
CIS expression in Ba/F3 cells. Thus, CIS is a feedback modulator of STAT5; its
expression is induced by STAT5 and it negatively modulates STAT5 activation.

PMID: 9129017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11128-32.

Mapping of a cytoplasmic domain of the human growth hormone receptor that
regulates rates of inactivation of Jak2 and Stat proteins.

Hackett RH(1), Wang YD, Sweitzer S, Feldman G, Wood WI, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

It has been previously demonstrated that growth hormone (GH)-stimulated tyrosine 
phosphorylation of Jak2 and Stat5a and Stat5b occurs in FDP-C1 cells expressing
either the entire GH receptor or truncations of the cytoplasmic domain expressing
only the membrane-proximal 80 amino acids. However, other receptor domains that
might modulate rates of GH activation and inactivation of this cascade have not
been examined. Here we have defined a region in the human GH receptor between
amino acids 520 and 540 in the cytoplasmic domain that is required for
attenuation of GH-activated Jak/Stat signaling. Immunoprecipitations with
antibodies to Jak2 indicate that the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 is
associated with this kinase in cells exposed to GH. To address the possibility
that SHP-1 could function as a negative regulator of GH signaling, liver extracts
from motheaten mice deficient in SHP-1 or unaffected littermates were analyzed
for activation of Stats and Jak2. Extracts from motheaten mice displayed
prolonged activation of the Stat proteins as measured by their ability to
interact with DNA and prolonged tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2. These results
delineate a novel domain in the GH receptor that regulates the inactivation of
the Jak/Stat pathway and appears to be modulated by SHP-1.

PMID: 9111009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):3425-30.

Mammary-derived signals activate programmed cell death during the first stage of 
mammary gland involution.

Li M(1), Liu X, Robinson G, Bar-Peled U, Wagner KU, Young WS, Hennighausen L,
Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland Medical School, Baltimore
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 21201, USA.

Programmed cell death (PCD) of mammary alveolar cells during involution commences
within hours of the end of suckling. Locally, milk accumulates within alveolar
lumens; systemically, levels of lactogenic hormones fall. Four experimental
models were used to define the role of local factors as compared with systemic
hormones during the first and second stages of involution. In three models, milk 
release was disrupted in the presence of systemic lactogenic hormones: (i)
sealing of the teats, (ii) mammary gland transplants that cannot release milk due
to the absence of a teat connection, and (iii) inactivation of the oxytocin gene.
The ability of systemic hormones to preserve lobular-alveolar structure without
blocking PCD was illustrated using a fourth transgenic model of lactation
failure. During the first stage of involution, local signals were sufficient to
induce alveolar PCD even in the presence of systemic lactogenic hormones. PCD
coincided with bax induction, decreased expression of milk proteins, block of
prolactin signal transduction through Stat5a and 5b, and activation of Stat3. The
two stages of mammary gland involution are regulated by progressive gain of death
signals and loss of survival factors. This study demonstrates that genetic events
that occur during the first reversible stage are controlled by local factors.
These mammary-derived death signals are dominant over protective effects related 
to systemic hormone stimulation.

PMCID: PMC20386
PMID: 9096410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Genes Dev. 1997 Jan 15;11(2):179-86.

Stat5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and lactogenesis.

Liu X(1), Robinson GW, Wagner KU, Garrett L, Wynshaw-Boris A, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1812, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) induces mammary gland development (defined as mammopoiesis) and
lactogenesis. Binding of PRL to its receptor leads to the phosphorylation and
activation of STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins,
which in turn promote the expression of specific genes. The activity pattern of
two STAT proteins, Stat5a and Stat5b, in mammary tissue during pregnancy suggests
an active role for these transcription factors in epithelial cell differentiation
and milk protein gene expression. To investigate the function of Stat5a in
mammopoiesis and lactogenesis we disrupted this gene in mice by gene targeting.
Stat5a-deficient mice developed normally and were indistinguishable from
hemizygous and wild-type littermates in size, weight, and fertility. However,
mammary lobuloalveolar outgrowth during pregnancy was curtailed, and females
failed to lactate after parturition because of a failure of terminal
differentiation. Although Stat5b has a 96% similarity with Stat5a and a
superimposable expression pattern during mammary gland development it failed to
counterbalance for the absence of Stat5a. These results document that Stat5a is
the principal and an obligate mediator of mammopoietic and lactogenic signaling.

PMID: 9009201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Blood. 1997 Jan 15;89(2):483-92.

Thrombopoietin signal transduction in purified murine megakaryocytes.

Drachman JG(1), Sabath DF, Fox NE, Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington Medical Center, Division of Hematology, Seattle
98195, USA.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is a recently cloned cytokine that binds to its receptor,
Mpl, and promotes hematopoietic expansion and maturation, primarily of the
megakaryocyte lineage. The signaling pathways responsible for these events are
thought to involve the Janus family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (JAKs) and
the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs), which are
activated by tyrosine phosphorylation. Previous investigators have studied these 
molecules in engineered and naturally occurring cell lines. To investigate the
molecular basis for TPO signal transduction in a more physiologic target, we
determined the pattern of JAK and STAT activation in purified, normal urine
megakaryocytes. These results are compared with those of established cell lines
that only proliferate (Ba/F3- mMPL and DA-1-TPO) or only differentiate (L8057) in
response to TPO. From these findings, a model is proposed to explain the
physiologic roles of JAK2, TYK2, STAT3, and STAT5 in TPO signaling. Furthermore, 
previous studies of the physical interaction between Mpl and the JAKs are
extended, showing a difference in the association of JAK2 and TYK2 with the TPO
receptor. Finally, we show that, in the cell line Ba/F3-mMPL, the closely related
proteins STAT5A and STAT5B are both activated by TPO stimulation and are capable 
of heterodimerization. Together, these results further our understanding of the
early stages of megakaryocyte and platelet development.

PMID: 9002950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Stem Cells. 1997;15 Suppl 1:105-11; discussion 112.

Jaks and Stats in cytokine signaling.

Ihle JN(1), Nosaka T, Thierfelder W, Quelle FW, Shimoda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.

Hematopoiesis is regulated through the binding of cytokines to receptors of the
cytokine receptor superfamily. Although lacking catalytic domains, members of the
cytokine receptor superfamily mediate ligand-dependent activation of protein
tyrosine phosphorylation through their association and activation of members of
the Janus kinase (Jak) family of protein tyrosine kinases. The activated Jaks
phosphorylate the receptors which creates docking sites for SH2-containing
signaling proteins which are tyrosine phosphorylated following their association 
with the complex. Among the substrates of tyrosine phosphorylation are members of
the signal transducers and activators of the transcription family of proteins
(Stats). Various cytokines induce the tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of 
one or more of the seven family members. The pattern of Stat activation provides 
a level of cytokine individuality that is not observed in the activation of other
signaling pathways. The role of various Stats in the biological responses to
cytokines has been assessed through the analysis of receptor mutations which
disrupt Stat activation and more recently by disruption of the genes in mice. Our
results have demonstrated that the activation of Stat5a and Stat5b by
erythropoietin is critical for the activation of a number of immediate early
genes but is not required for a mitogenic response. Mice in which the genes for
Stat4 and Stat6 are disrupted are viable but lack functions that are mediated by 
interleukin 12 (IL-12) or IL-4, respectively, suggesting that these Stats perform
very specific functions in immune responses.

PMID: 9368330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Blood. 1996 Dec 15;88(12):4415-25.

Physical and functional interactions between Stat5 and the
tyrosine-phosphorylated receptors for erythropoietin and interleukin-3.

Chin H(1), Nakamura N, Kamiyama R, Miyasaka N, Ihle JN, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine and School of Allied Health Sciences,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) and interleukin-3 (IL-3) stimulate activation of the Jak2
tyrosine kinase and induce tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of Stat5. In
the present study, we have shown that Epo or IL-3 stimulation induces binding of 
Stat5 to the tyrosine-phosphorylated Epo receptor (EpoR) or IL-3 receptor beta
subunit (betaIL3), respectively, in IL-3-dependent 32D cells expressing the EpoR.
The binding of Stat5 to these cytokine receptors was shown to be rapid and
transient, occurring within 1 minute of stimulation of cells and significantly
decreasing after 5 minutes of cell treatment. In vivo binding experiments in COS 
cells showed that binding of Stat5 to the EpoR was mediated through the Stat5 Src
homology 2 (SH2) domain. In vitro binding studies further showed that Stat5, but 
not other Stats examined, bound specifically to tyrosine-phosphorylated
recombinant EpoR fusion proteins. In these in vivo and in vitro binding studies, 
Stat5 bound, albeit to a lesser degree, to truncated EpoR mutants in which all
the intracellular tyrosines except Y-343 were removed. Furthermore, EpoR-derived 
synthetic phosphotyrosine peptides corresponding to Y-343, Y-401, Y-431, and
Y-479 inhibited the in vitro binding of Stat5. When expressed in 32D cells, a
mutant EpoR in which all the intracellular tyrosines were removed by
carboxy-terminal truncation showed a significantly impaired ability to induce
tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5, particularly at low concentrations of Epo, but
exhibited an increased sensitivity to Epo for growth signaling as compared with
the wild-type EpoR. These results indicate that Stat5 specifically and
transiently binds to the EpoR through the interaction between the Stat5 SH2
domain and specific phosphorylated tyrosines, including Y-343, in the EpoR
cytoplasmic domain. It was implied that betaIL3 may also have similar Stat5
docking sites. The Stat5 docking sites in the EpoR were shown to facilitate
specific activation of Stat5, which, however, may not be required for the
EpoR-mediated growth signaling.

PMID: 8977232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31863-8.

Lactogenic hormone activation of Stat5 and transcription of the beta-casein gene 
in mammary epithelial cells is independent of p42 ERK2 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase activity.

Wartmann M(1), Cella N, Hofer P, Groner B, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Hynes NE.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, P.O. Box 2543, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
hynes@fmi.ch

HC11 mammary epithelial cells have been used to characterize molecular events
involved in the regulation of milk protein gene expression. Treatment of HC11
cells with the lactogenic hormones prolactin, insulin, and glucocorticoids
results in transcription of the beta-casein gene. Prolactin induces a signaling
event which involves tyrosine phosphorylation of the mammary gland factor, Stat5,
a member of the family of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stat). Here we show that HC11 cells express two Stat5 proteins, Stat5a and
Stat5b. Phosphopeptide and phosphoamino acid analysis of Stat5a and Stat5b
immunoprecipitated from phosphate-labeled HC11 cells revealed that both proteins 
were constitutively phosphorylated on serine. Lactogenic hormone treatment
resulted in the appearance of a tyrosine-phosphorylated peptide in both Stat5
proteins. Consistent with this observation, a Western blot analysis of Stat5a and
Stat5b showed that lactogenic hormones induced a rapid, transient increase in
phosphotyrosine which paralleled the binding of Stat5 to its cognate recognition 
sequence in the beta-casein gene promoter. Lactogenic hormone treatment of the
HC11 cells also led to a rapid activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase pathway. We examined the role of this pathway in beta-casein transcription
using a specific MAP kinase kinase inhibitor, PD98059. Concentrations of PD98059 
which completely abrogated lactogen-induced MAP kinase activation did not affect 
the phosphorylation state of Stat5, its DNA binding activity, or transcriptional 
activation of a beta-casein reporter construct. This indicates that the MAP
kinase pathway does not contribute to lactogenic hormone induction of the
beta-casein gene.

PMID: 8943229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Dec;10(12):1496-506.

Activation of Stat5a and Stat5b by tyrosine phosphorylation is tightly linked to 
mammary gland differentiation.

Liu X(1), Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive, and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5 was originally
identified as a mammary gland factor (MGF) that binds to promoter sequences of
milk protein genes and activates their transcription. We have generated
isoform-specific antibodies against Stat5a or Stat5b and show that both isoforms 
are present in similar amounts at the protein level in mammary tissues of virgin,
pregnant, lactating, and involuting mice. In contrast, Stat5 phosphorylation is
very low in immature virgins, rises sharply during late pregnancy, and declines
rapidly during involution. Upon phosphorylation, Stat5a and Stat5b form homo- and
heterodimers. The induction of Stat5 phosphorylation during late pregnancy
correlates with the transcriptional activation of milk protein genes. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift analysis, we demonstrated
that the DNA-binding activity detected during lactation is composed of both
Stat5a and Stat5b, but not of other STATs. The hypothesis that Stat5 is directly 
involved in mammary cell differentiation was tested in estrous cycle and in
transgenic mice with impaired mammary development. Transient differentiation of
mammary alveolar cells and milk protein gene expression during estrus in virgin
female mice coincide with transient Stat5 phosphorylation. Impaired mammary
development and very low levels of milk protein gene expression in mice carrying 
the truncated form of the cell fate protein Int3 correlated with reduced
phosphorylation and heterodimer formation.

PMID: 8961260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6937-44.

Activation of different Stat5 isoforms contributes to cell-type-restricted
signaling in response to interferons.

Meinke A(1), Barahmand-Pour F, Wöhrl S, Stoiber D, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Austria.

Tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factor Stat5 occur
in response to stimuli like granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor,
interleukin-3, or erythropoietin that stimulate both proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells. It is unclear whether Stat5 is part of a 
proliferative response or part of the events leading to cellular differentiation.
Here we report that agents promoting differentiation but not proliferation of
hematopoietic cells, like phorbol ester or both types of interferons (IFNs),
activate Stat5 in promonocytic U937 cells. Both IFN types caused tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding of predominantly one Stat5 isoform (Stat5a)
despite expression of both Stat5a and Stat5b proteins. Monocytic differentiation 
of U937 cells led to a strong decrease in IFN-gamma-mediated activation of Stat5 
but not of Stat1. Transactivation of Stat5-target genes occurred in response to
IFN-gamma, which activates both Stat5 and Stat1, but not in response to
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, which activates only Stat5.
Tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5 is not generally part of the IFN response.
IFN-gamma did not cause Stat5 activation in HeLa cells, despite the expression of
both Stat5 isoforms at similar levels. By contrast, IFN-alpha caused tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding of exclusively the b isoform of Stat5, and
activated Stat5b formed a DNA binding activity previously found in HeLa cells and
designated IFN-alpha activation factor 2. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that ligand binding of IFN receptors leads to an isoform-specific activation of
Stat5 in a restricted number of cell lineages. Moreover, they suggest that Stat5 
might be part of the differentiation response of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC231697
PMID: 8943349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6829-40.

Elf-1 and Stat5 bind to a critical element in a new enhancer of the human
interleukin-2 receptor alpha gene.

Lécine P(1), Algarté M, Rameil P, Beadling C, Bucher P, Nabholz M, Imbert J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U119, Marseille, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):2351.

The interleukin 2 receptor alpha-chain (IL-2R alpha) gene is a key regulator of
lymphocyte proliferation. IL-2R alpha is rapidly and potently induced in T cells 
in response to mitogenic stimuli. Interleukin 2 (IL-2) stimulates IL-2R alpha.
transcription, thereby amplifying expression of its own high-affinity receptor.
IL-2R alpha transcription is at least in part controlled by two positive
regulatory regions, PRRI and PRRII. PRRI is an inducible proximal enhancer,
located between nucleotides -276 and -244, which contains NF-kappaB and SRE/CArG 
motifs. PRRII is a T-cell-specific enhancer, located between nucleotides -137 and
-64, which binds the T-cell-specific Ets protein Elf-1 and HMG-I(Y) proteins.
However, none of these proximal regions account for the induction of IL-2R alpha 
transcription by IL-2. To find new regulatory regions of the IL-2R alpha gene,
8.5 kb of the 5' end noncoding sequence of the IL-2R alpha gene have been
sequenced. We identified an 86-nucleotide fragment that is 90% identical to the
recently characterized murine IL-2-responsive element (mIL-2rE). This putative
human IL-2rE, designated PRRIII, confers IL-2 responsiveness on a heterologous
promoter. PRRIII contains a Stat protein binding site that overlaps with an EBS
motif (GASd/EBSd). These are essential for IL-2 inducibility of PRRIII/CAT
reporter constructs. IL-2 induced the binding of Stat5a and b proteins to the
human GASd element. To confirm the physiological relevance of these findings, we 
carried out in vivo footprinting experiments which showed that stimulation of
IL-2R alpha expression correlated with occupancy of the GASd element. Our data
demonstrate a major role of the GASd/EBSd element in IL-2R alpha regulation and
suggest that the T-cell-specific Elf-1 factor can serve as a transcriptional
repressor.

PMCID: PMC231686
PMID: 8943338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6141-8.

Naturally occurring dominant negative variants of Stat5.

Wang D(1), Stravopodis D, Teglund S, Kitazawa J, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Stat5 was initially identified as a prolactin-induced member of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) family in sheep. However, Stat5 
is also activated in the response to a variety of cytokines. In mice, and
possibly in other species, there exist two Stat5 genes (Stat5a and Stat5b) that
encode proteins of 92 and 94 kDa that are 95% identical. In the studies described
here, we demonstrate that naturally occurring carboxyl-truncated, variant Stat5
proteins of 77 and 80 kDa exist and that these proteins are inducibly tyrosine
phosphorylated in the response to several cytokines and form heterodimers with
the full-length, wild-type proteins. Using expression constructs encoding
truncated forms, we demonstrate that the truncated forms can be tyrosine
phosphorylated and bind DNA. Surprisingly, the tyrosine phosphorylation of the
carboxyl-truncated forms is considerably more stable than that of the wild-type
proteins. Overexpression of a carboxyl-truncated Stat5a in cells resulted in the 
specific inhibition of the transcriptional activation by interleukin-3 of the
genes for oncostatin M (Osm) and the cytokine-inducible, SH2 domain-containing
gene (Cis), both of which have been shown to be normally regulated by Stat5.
Although Stat5 dominantly suppressed the induction of these genes, no effects on 
cell proliferation were observed. Together, the results demonstrate the natural
existence of potentially dominantly suppressive variants of Stat5 and implicate
the carboxyl domain of Stats in transcriptional regulation and functions related 
to dephosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC231617
PMID: 8887644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. FEBS Lett. 1996 Oct 28;396(1):77-80.

Differential activation of STATs 3 and 5 during mammary gland development.

Philp JA(1), Burdon TG, Watson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Roslin Institute (Edinburgh), Midlothian, UK.

We have investigated the activity of STAT family members throughout a mammary
developmental cycle. Transcripts for Stat 5 were upregulated during pregnancy
whilst STAT1 and STAT3 mRNAs were expressed at constant levels. DNA binding
complexes containing both STAT5a and 5b showed differing affinities for two
naturally occurring STAT5 binding sites. In the involuting mammary gland STAT5
activity decreased whereas STAT3 was specifically activated. These observations
reveal a complex pattern of activation of STAT factors during mammary growth,
differentiation and remodelling and provide the first evidence for the
involvement of STAT3 in development of the mammary gland.

PMID: 8906870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Nature. 1996 Oct 24;383(6602):726-8.

Functional interactions between Stat5 and the glucocorticoid receptor.

Stöcklin E(1), Wissler M, Gouilleux F, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg,
Germany.

Signal transduction pathways enable extracellular signals to activate latent
transcription factors in the cytoplasm of cells. Dimerization, nuclear
localization and binding to specific DNA sequences result in the induction of
gene transcription by these proteins. These events are necessary for the
functioning of the JAK/STAT pathway and of the glucocorticoid-receptor pathway.
In the former, the protein Stat5, which is a member of a family of signal
transducers and activators of transcription, is activated by cytokines, hormones 
and growth factors. These polypeptide ligands bind at the outside of the cell to 
specific transmembrane receptors and activate intracellular Janus protein
tyrosine kinases (JAKs) to tyrosine-phosphorylate STAT proteins; interaction with
the SH2 domain of the dimerization partner then confers the ability to bind to
DNA at the STAT-response element and induce transcription. In the
glucocorticoid-receptor pathway, the receptor interacts with its steroid hormone 
ligand in the cytoplasm, undergoes an allosteric change that enables the hormone 
receptor complex to bind to specific DNA-response elements (glucocorticoid
response elements, or GRE) and modulate transcription. Although these pathways
appear to be unrelated, we show here that the glucocorticoid receptor can act as 
a transcriptional co-activator for Stat5 and enhance Stat5-dependent
transcription. Stat5 forms a complex with the glucocorticoid receptor which binds
to DNA independently of the GRE. This complex formation between Stat5 and the
glucocorticoid receptor diminishes the glucocorticoid response of a
GRE-containing promoter.

PMID: 8878484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5691-700.

Deletion of the carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain of MGF-Stat5 results in 
sustained DNA binding and a dominant negative phenotype.

Moriggl R(1), Gouilleux-Gruart V, Jähne R, Berchtold S, Gartmann C, Liu X,
Hennighausen L, Sotiropoulos A, Groner B, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Biology Center, Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Freiburg,
Germany.

The Stat (signal transducer and activator of transcription) factors transmit
cytokine, growth factor, and hormone responses. Seven members of the Stat gene
family are known. MGF-Stat5a has been discovered as a mediator of the prolactin
response in mammary epithelial cells. Two closely related variants of Stat5,
Stat5a and Stat5b, are encoded by distinct genes. We examined the functional
properties of the carboxyl termini of these molecules. Wild-type Stat5a (794
amino acids) and the carboxyl-terminal deletion mutant Stat5a delta 772 supported
prolactin-induced transcription of a beta-casein promoter-reporter construct in
COS7 cells; Stat5a delta 750 did not. Upon prolactin activation, tyrosine
phosphorylation and the specificity of DNA binding were indistinguishable among
the three Stat5a variants. Tyrosine dephosphorylation and the downregulation of
the DNA-binding activity were delayed in the Stat5a delta 750 mutant. The
carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain of Stat5a, amino acids 722 to 794, can
be conferred to the DNA-binding domain of the yeast transcription factor GAL4.
Coexpression of Stat5a or Stat5b and of the carboxyl-terminal deletion mutants
resulted in the suppression of transcriptional induction in COS or Ba/F3 cells.
We propose that Stat5a delta 750 and Stat5b delta 754 are lacking functional
transactivation domains and exert their dominant negative effects by blocking the
DNA-binding site in Stat5-responsive gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC231569
PMID: 8816482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):22175-82.

Stat6 and Jak1 are common elements in platelet-derived growth factor and
interleukin-4 signal transduction pathways in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts.

Patel BK(1), Wang LM, Lee CC, Taylor WG, Pierce JH, LaRochelle WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Both platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) play major
roles in cell proliferation, differentiation, chemotaxis, and other functional
responses. Here, we demonstrate that Stat6, previously shown to be activated by
only IL-4 and IL-3, becomes activated after PDGF stimulation of NIH 3T3
fibroblasts. PDGF BB, and to a lesser extent PDGF AA, rapidly induced DNA binding
activity from NIH 3T3 cell lysates utilizing the immunoglobulin heavy chain germ 
line epsilon promoter (Iepsilon) that specifically binds to Stat6 in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. DNA binding activity could be detected
within 5 min and reached maximum levels at approximately 20 min in parental NIH
3T3 cells. An identical mobility shift and time course of PDGF-mediated Iepsilon 
binding activity was more pronounced in lysates of NIH 3T3 transfectants
overexpressing human Stat6 (NIH 3T3-Stat6). The observed radiolabeled Iepsilon
mobility shift was competed by unlabeled Iepsilon as well as by the beta-casein
gene promoter but not by the interferon-alpha-stimulated response element or the 
interferon-gamma response region of the guanylate-binding protein gene. A
Stat6-specific polyclonal antisera also supershifted the PDGF-induced Iepsilon
mobility shift. After PDGF BB treatment, a 100-kDa tyrosine phosphorylated
species was detected in anti-Stat6 immunoprecipitates. Cycloheximide had little
effect on Stat6 tyrosine phosphorylation. In addition to Stat6, Stat5a, and
Stat5b, PDGF BB also induced Jak1 tyrosine phosphorylation suggesting a potential
pathway for Stat activation. Strikingly, the concurrent addition of IL-4 enhanced
PDGF BB-induced Iepsilon binding activity, Jak1 tyrosine phosphorylation, and
[3H]thymidine incorporation. These results provide evidence that Stat6 and Jak1
are common elements in PDGF and IL-4 signaling pathways and suggest that IL-4
could play a role in potentiating certain known PDGF-induced biological
responses.

PMID: 8703030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 16;271(33):19768-73.

Growth hormone promotes the association of transcription factor STAT5 with the
growth hormone receptor.

Xu BC(1), Wang X, Darus CJ, Kopchick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Edison Biotechnology Institute, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, USA.

Members of the cytokine/growth hormone (GH)/prolactin receptor superfamily
transduce signals by association and activation of JAK tyrosine kinases. For GH
receptor (GHR), both JAK2 and the GHR undergo tyrosine phosphorylation upon GH
stimulation. Also, GH has recently been shown to activate the transcription
factor STAT5 by tyrosine phosphorylation. In the present study, we demonstrate
that GH induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of different isoforms of STAT5 in 
mouse L cells stably transfected with a cDNA encoding porcine GHR (pGHR). In this
cell system, STAT5 directly interacts with the GHR in a GH-dependent manner.
Additionally, GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 and the interaction of
STAT5 with GHR can be observed in mouse 3T3-F442A cells which express endogenous 
mouse GHR. Interestingly, when cDNAs encoding the two mouse STAT5 homologs
(STAT5A and STAT5B) were individually transfected into mouse L cells expressing
pGHR, only STAT5A demonstrated the ability to interact with the pGHR and
subsequently underwent GH-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation. STAT5B did not.
Therefore, the GH-dependent interaction of a particular STAT5 with
tyrosine-phosphorylated GHR may play an important role in GH-mediated signal
transduction.

PMID: 8702683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Blood. 1996 Aug 15;88(4):1206-14.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor preferentially activates the
94-kD STAT5A and an 80-kD STAT5A isoform in human peripheral blood monocytes.

Rosen RL(1), Winestock KD, Chen G, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Finbloom DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD
20892-4555, USA.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) induces immediate
effects in monocytes by activation of the Janus kinase (JAK2) and STAT
transcription factor (STAT5) pathway. Recent studies have identified homologues
of STAT5, STAT5A, and STAT5B, as well as lower molecular weight variants of
STAT5. To define the activation of the STAT5 homologues and lower molecular
weight variant in human monocytes and monocytes differentiated into macrophages
by culture in macrophage-CSF (M-CSF), we measured the GM-CSF induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5A, STAT5B, and any lower molecular weight STAT5 isoforms.
Freshly isolated monocytes expressed 94-kD STAT5A, 92-kD STAT5B, and an 80-kD
STAT5A molecule. Whereas 94-kD STAT5A was clearly tyrosine phosphorylated and
bound to the enhancer element, the gamma response region (GRR), of the Fc gamma
RI gene, substantially less tyrosine phosphorylated STAT5B bound to the
immobilized GRR element. Macrophages lost their ability to express the 80-kD
STAT5A protein, but retained their ability to activate STAT5A. STAT5A-STAT5A
homodimers and STAT5A-STAT5B heterodimers formed in response to GM-CSF.
Therefore, activation of STAT5A predominates compared to STAT5B when assayed by
direct immunoprecipitation and by evaluation of bound STATs to immobilized GRR.
Selective activation of STAT5 homologues in addition to generation of lower
molecular isoforms may provide specificity and control to genes expressed in
response to cytokines such as GM-CSF.

PMID: 8695838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 2;271(31):18350-4.

Formation of STAT5-containing DNA binding complexes in response to
colony-stimulating factor-1 and platelet-derived growth factor.

Novak U(1), Mui A, Miyajima A, Paradiso L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville 3050, Australia.

Colony-stimulating factor (CSF-1) activates several members belonging to the STAT
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) family of transcription
factors. We investigated the DNA binding complexes activated by CSF-1 in several 
cell lines and compared them with complexes activated by platelet-derived growth 
factor and interleukin 3. Our results indicate that the SIF-A complex activated
by CSF-1 and platelet-derived growth factor may contain STAT3/STAT5 heterodimers 
binding to the high affinity SIF binding site, m67. In addition, both growth
factors activate one or several STAT5-containing protein complexes binding to the
prolactin-inducible element, PIE. The formation of these complexes was cell type 
and growth factor specific. Interleukin 3 activated only PIE binding complexes
containing STAT5A and STAT5B and did not activate m67 binding complexes. It
appears, therefore, that STAT5 cannot bind to m67 as a homodimer, but it can bind
if it is dimerized with STAT3, whereas it can bind to the PIE element without
being either complexed with STAT3 or any other known STAT protein, possibly as a 
homodimer or as STAT5A/STAT5B heterodimer. However, in addition, STAT5 may
heterodimerize with other proteins and form novel PIE binding complexes.

PMID: 8702476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1996 Jul 23;121(1):19-28.

Multiple stat complexes interact at the interferon regulatory factor-1
interferon-gamma activation sequence in prolactin-stimulated Nb2 T cells.

Wang YF(1), Yu-Lee LY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) is a major immediate early gene induced by
prolactin (PRL) in a biphasic, cell cycle-dependent manner in Nb2 T cells. This
biphasic expression (30 min and 10 h) is mediated in part by an interferon-gamma 
activation sequence (GAS) in the IRF-1 promoter which binds factors belonging to 
the Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (Stat) family. By
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), Stat1 alpha was found to be the
major and Stat5a a minor component of the 30 min complex. At 10 h, Stat-like
factors were again found at the IRF-1 GAS. Western blot analyses show that Stat5a
was rapidly induced by PRL to enter the nucleus, but unexpectedly, Stat1 alpha
and the alternatively-spliced Stat1 beta were already present in the uninduced
nucleus. Further, Stat1 alpha but not Stat1 beta is preferentially tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to PRL stimulation. Our studies suggest that multiple 
Stat complexes may contribute to the biphasic transcription of the IRF-1 gene in 
PRL-stimulated T cells.

PMID: 8865162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 3;271(18):10738-44.

Cloning of human Stat5B. Reconstitution of interleukin-2-induced Stat5A and
Stat5B DNA binding activity in COS-7 cells.

Lin JX(1), Mietz J, Modi WS, John S, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

We have isolated a second human Stat5 cDNA, Stat5B, and demonstrated that the
genes encoding both Stat5A and Stat5B are located at chromosome 17q11.2. Both
genes were constitutively transcribed in peripheral blood lymphocytes. By using
specific antisera, we demonstrated that both Stat5A and Stat5B are activated by
interleukin-2 (IL-2) in peripheral blood lymphocytes, natural killer-like YT
leukemia cells, and human T cell lymphotropic virus type I-transformed MT-2 T
cells. In COS-7 cells, which constitutively express the Janus family tyrosine
kinase Jak1, reconstitution of IL-2-induced Stat5A and Stat5B DNA binding
activities was dependent on the coexpression of Jak3 along with the IL-2 receptor
beta chain and the common cytokine receptor gamma-chain. This IL-2-induced Stat5 
activation was dependent on the presence of either of two tyrosines (Tyr-392 or
Tyr-510) in the IL-2 receptor beta chain, indicating that either of these two
tyrosines can serve as a docking site. Moreover, we demonstrated that human Stat5
activation is also dependent on Tyr-694 in Stat5A and Tyr-699 in Stat5B,
indicating that these tyrosines are required for dimerization. The COS-7
reconstitution system described herein provides a valuable assay for further
elucidation of the IL-2-activated JAK-STAT pathway.

PMID: 8631883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 May;10(5):508-18.

Characterization and cloning of STAT5 from IM-9 cells and its activation by
growth hormone.

Silva CM(1), Lu H, Day RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville 22908, USA.

The interaction of GH with its receptor has been shown to lead to the
phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
family of transcription factors. We demonstrate here that GH activates the
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 in the human IM-9 lymphocyte cell line. Western
blotting indicates that GH also activates STAT5 in human embryonic kidney cells
(293), which stably express the rabbit GH receptor. Although it has been shown
previously that GH activates both STATs 1 and 3 in the 3T3-F442A mouse
preadipocyte cell line, we demonstrate that GH also activates STAT5 in these
cells. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we examined the interaction of
proteins with DNA elements containing consensus STAT-binding sequences. Proteins 
prepared from GH-treated 3T3-F442A cells bound to the c-sis inducible element of 
the human c-fos gene (m67 SIE), whereas proteins from GH-treated IM-9 cells did
not. However, proteins from GH-treated IM-9 cells did interact with
oligonucleotides containing either an interferon response element or the
lactogenic hormone-responsive region. Treatment of IM-9 cells with
interferon-gamma also induced protein interactions with these elements although
the complexes were distinctly different than those seen with GH treatment. Using 
STAT-specific antibodies, we demonstrate that the GH-induced DNA-protein complex 
formed with the lactogenic hormone-responsive region contained STAT5, while the
interferon-gamma-induced complex contained STAT1. These results implicate STAT5
as a downstream mediator of GH action in IM-9 cells. We report here the cloning
of two forms of STAT5, STAT5A and STAT5B, from an IM-9 cDNA library. Northern
blot analysis demonstrated multiple-forms of STAT5 mRNA in IM-9 cells.

PMID: 8732682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1622-31.

Erythropoietin induces activation of Stat5 through association with specific
tyrosines on the receptor that are not required for a mitogenic response.

Quelle FW(1), Wang D, Nosaka T, Thierfelder WE, Stravopodis D, Weinstein Y, Ihle 
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

The cytoplasmic domain of the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) contains a
membrane-distal region that is dispensable for mitogenesis but is required for
the recruitment and tyrosine phosphorylation of a variety of signaling proteins. 
The membrane-proximal region of 96 amino acids is necessary and sufficient for
mitogenesis as well as Jak2 activation, induction of c-fos, c-myc, cis, the
T-cell receptor gamma locus (TCR-gamma), and c-pim-1. The studies presented here 
demonstrate that this region is also necessary and sufficient for the activation 
of Stat5A and Stat5B. The membrane-proximal domain contains a single tyrosine,
Y-343, which when mutated eliminates the ability of the receptor to couple Epo
binding to the activation of Stat5. Furthermore, peptide competitions demonstrate
that this site, when phosphorylated, can disrupt Stat5 DNA binding activity,
consistent with a role of Y-343 as a site of recruitment to the receptor. Cells
expressing the truncated, Y343F mutant (a mutant with a Y-to-F alteration at
position 343) proliferate in response to Epo in a manner comparable to that of
the controls. However, in these cells, Epo stimulation does not induce the
appearance of transcripts for cis, TCR-gamma, or c-fos, suggesting a role for
Stat5 in their regulation.

PMCID: PMC231148
PMID: 8657137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;74(4):277-80.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of the rat Stat5 and Yy1 genes.

Chen KS(1), Paladugu A, Aldaz CM, Gould MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53792, USA.

Rat beta-casein gene expression is controlled in part by the positively acting
factor Stat5 and the negatively acting factor Yy1. Partial cDNAs encoding the SH2
domain of rat Stat5a and Stat5b and the zinc finger domain of rat Yy1 have been
cloned by an RT-PCR based approach. The nucleotide sequences encoding the SH2
domain of rat Stat5a and Stat5b are 75% homologous. The rat Yy1 cDNA is 95%
homologous to its human and mouse counterparts in the zinc finger domain-encoding
region. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we have localized Stat5a to rat
chromosome band 10q32.1 and Yy1 to rat chromosome band 6q32.

PMID: 8976384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Growth Factors. 1996;13(3-4):251-60.

Aberrant activation of JAK/STAT pathway components in response to G-CSF,
interferon-alpha/beta and interferon-gamma in NFS-60 cells.

Novak U(1), Ward AC, Hertzog PJ, Hamilton JA, Paradiso L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Dept. of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Australia.

There is evidence that the cellular responses to cytokines, such as granulocyte
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) and interferons, depend on prior activation of 
components of the JAK/STAT signalling pathway. We report here that the myeloid
cell line NFS-60 shows aberrant JAK/STAT signalling yet elicits expected
biological responses to G-CSF and interferons-alpha/beta and gamma. Instead of
increased phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2 in response to G-CSF and
interferon-gamma, and JAK1 and Tyk2 in response to interferon-alpha/beta, we
observed only an increase of phosphorylation of Tyk2 in response to all of these 
cytokines in NFS-60 cells. The subset of STAT proteins being activated in
response to these cytokines was unusual as well. G-CSF activated STAT3 and
STAT5A, whereas interferons activated, in addition to STAT1 and STAT5 other, as
yet unidentified, DNA binding proteins. However, NFS-60 cells show normal
biological responses to these cytokines, such as proliferation in response to
G-CSF, and reduction of proliferation, induction of an anti-viral response and
induction of specific genes in response to interferons.

PMID: 8919032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 15;270(50):29998-30006.

Transcription factors Stat3 and Stat5b are present in rat liver nuclei late in an
acute phase response and bind interleukin-6 response elements.

Ripperger JA(1), Fritz S, Richter K, Hocke GM, Lottspeich F, Fey GH.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

Proteins binding at the interleukin-6 response element of the rat alpha 2
macroglobulin gene were purified by a combination of chromatographic procedures
including binding site-specific DNA-affinity chromatography as the principal
step. Three polypeptides of 92, 91, and 86 kDa were enriched approximately
6,300-fold from nuclei of rat livers excised 12 h after the induction of an
experimental acute phase response. Amino acid sequence analysis identified the
86- and 91-kDa species as two forms of the transcription factor Stat3 and the
92-kDa species as the factor Stat5b. This identification was confirmed by gel
mobility shift-supershift experiments using specific antisera for Stat3 and
Stat5. Unexpectedly, activated Stat5 was also detected in the nuclei of untreated
control rats. cDNA clones representing Stat3 and two isoforms of Stat5b were
isolated from a cDNA library prepared with mRNA from rat livers excised at the
peak of an experimental acute phase response. Full-length Stat5b, predicted from 
cDNA, consisted of 786 amino acids, while the variant Stat5b delta 40C lacked 41 
amino acids at the COOH terminus. The amino acid sequence of rat Stat5b showed
26.7% overall identity with rat Stat3, 87.3% with sheep Stat5a, 92.5% with murine
Stat5a, and 98.7% with murine Stat5b.

PMID: 8530402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Endocrinology. 1995 Dec;136(12):5700-8.

Prolactin and interleukin-2 receptors in T lymphocytes signal through a
MGF-STAT5-like transcription factor.

Gouilleux F(1), Moritz D, Humar M, Moriggl R, Berchtold S, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg,
Germany.

The cell surface receptors for PRL and interleukin-2 (IL-2) are structurally
distinct, but share regulatory tasks in T lymphocytes. They can stimulate
proliferation and activate transcription of over-lapping sets of genes of T
cells. PRL and IL-2 receptor activation are both linked to the Jak/Stat (signal
transducer and activator of transcription) pathway. We investigated the ability
of PRL and IL-2 to activate Stat proteins in different T cell lines. The DNA
binding specificities, the reactivities toward Stat-specific antisera, and the
mol wt of IL-2- and PRL-induced DNA-binding proteins in Nb2 and C196 T cell lines
were investigated. A comparison with the Stat proteins induced by
interferon-gamma, PRL, and IL-6 in T47D mammary tumor cells was made. We found
that these parameters were indistinguishable for one of the PRL- and IL-2-induced
factors. A transcription factor closely related to mammary gland factor-Stat5 is 
rapidly activated upon interaction of IL-2 and PRL with their respective
receptors. Activation of a second protein related to Stat1 was also observed. Our
results emphasize the role of PRL as a regulator of the immune response and
indicate that the Stat factors mammary gland factor-Stat5 and Stat1 play a role
in the regulation of gene expression during T cell development.

PMID: 7588326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Nov 7;92(23):10772-6.

Interleukin 2 activates STAT5 transcription factor (mammary gland factor) and
specific gene expression in T lymphocytes.

Gilmour KC(1), Pine R, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York, Stony Brook 11794, USA.

Although prolactin and interleukin 2 (IL-2) can elicit distinct physiological
responses, we have found that their signal pathways share a common signal
transducer and activator of transcription, STAT5. STAT5 was originally identified
as a mammary gland factor induced by prolactin in lactating breast cells. Here we
demonstrate that STAT5 is activated after IL-2 stimulation of two responsive
lymphocyte cell lines, Nb2 and YT. Activation of STAT5 is measured both by
IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and by IL-2-induced DNA binding. The STAT5 
DNA recognition site is the same as the interferon gamma-activated site (GAS) in 
the interferon regulatory factor 1 gene. We demonstrate that the GAS element is
necessary and sufficient for transcriptional induction by both IL-2 and prolactin
in T lymphocytes. These results indicate that the role of STAT5 in the regulation
of gene expression is not restricted to mammary cells or to prolactin, but is an 
integral part of the signal pathway of a critical immunomodulatory cytokine,
IL-2.

PMCID: PMC40694
PMID: 7479881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Nov;9(11):1598-609.

Regulation of mammary gland factor/Stat5a during mammary gland development.

Kazansky AV(1), Raught B, Lindsey SM, Wang YF, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030-3498, USA.

The rat homolog of sheep mammary gland factor (MGF)/Stat5 has been isolated and
used to study the regulation of Stat5 during mammary gland development and PRL
regulation in COS cells transfected with Stat5a and the PRL receptor. Two
alternatively spliced isoforms, designated Stat5a1 and Stat5a2, were identified, 
the latter encoding a carboxy-terminal truncated protein. A polyclonal antibody
to a carboxy-terminal peptide of Stat5a1 was generated and used to measure the
level of this isoform during mammary gland development and after PRL induction in
COS cells transiently transfected with Stat5a and the long form of the PRL
receptor. Surprisingly, Stat5a mRNA and protein were readily detected both in
virgin rats and after mammary gland involution. The levels of Stat5a increased
during pregnancy, were highest in late pregnancy, and then, unexpectedly,
decreased during lactation, the time at which the highest levels of milk protein 
gene expression are observed. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using the
specific anti-Stat5a1 antisera demonstrated that Stat5a1 comprises part of the
heterogeneous, PRL-inducible, protein-DNA complex associated with the beta-casein
GAS site. Immunocytochemical analysis detected considerable cytoplasmic and some 
nuclear staining for Stat5a1 during late pregnancy and predominantly nuclear
staining during early lactation. The lack of correspondence of Stat5a gene
expression and beta-casein gene expression suggests that Stat5 activation may
facilitate the interaction of other factors binding within composite response
elements identified recently in the milk protein gene promoters that are then
responsible for the stable expression of milk protein genes in terminally
differentiated mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 8584036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1995 Oct;5(5):587-94.

Prolactin-mediated gene activation in mammary epithelial cells.

Groner B(1), Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg, Germany.

Mammary epithelial cells grow and develop with the onset of sexual maturity. In
addition, lobular alveolar structures are formed during pregnancy, and quiescent 
differentiated cells secrete high levels of milk proteins after parturition.
These events are governed by multiple hormones and growth factors and involve the
sequential and synergistic action of functionally distinct signal transduction
pathways. Milk protein genes have been analyzed and composite response elements
have been identified in the promoter sequences. Transcription factors, which
relay the hormonal signals, bind to these sequences. The factor that confers
prolactin simulation to milk protein gene transcription has recently been
identified. MGF/Stat5 is a latent transcription factor that becomes activated by 
a tyrosine-specific protein kinase, Jak2, associated with the prolactin receptor.
Tyrosine phosphorylation converts the latent factor into one with DNA-binding and
transcriptional activation potential. The regulation of MGF/Stat5 in vitro and in
vivo indicates that it is a central component of the lactogenic hormone signaling
pathway. Involvement of MGF/Stat5 in the signaling by other cytokines indicates
that the same factor might be involved in regulation of growth-promoting genes,
primarily in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 8664546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 12;92(19):8831-5.

Cloning and expression of Stat5 and an additional homologue (Stat5b) involved in 
prolactin signal transduction in mouse mammary tissue.

Liu X(1), Robinson GW, Gouilleux F, Groner B, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive, and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) induces transcriptional activation of milk protein genes, such as
the whey acidic protein (WAP), beta-casein, and beta-lactoglobulin genes, through
a signaling cascade encompassing the Janus kinase Jak2 and the mammary gland
factor (MGF; also called Stat5), which belongs to the family of proteins of
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT). We isolated and
sequenced from mouse mammary tissue Stat5 mRNA and a previously unreported
member, which we named Stat5b (Stat5 is renamed to Stat5a). On the protein level 
Stat5a and Stat5b show a 96% sequence similarity. The 5' and 3' untranslated
regions of the two mRNAs are not conserved. Stat5a comprises 793 amino acids and 
is encoded by a mRNA of 4.2 kb. The Stat5b mRNA has a size of 5.6 kb and encodes 
a protein of 786 amino acids. Both Stat5a and Stat5b recognized the GAS site
(gamma-interferon-activating sequence; TTCNNNGAA) in vitro and mediated
PRL-induced transcription in COS cells transfected with a PRL receptor. Stat5b
also induced basal transcription in the absence of PRL. Similar levels of Stat5a 
and Stat5b mRNAs were found in most tissues of virgin and lactating mice, but a
differential accumulation of the Stat5 mRNAs was found in muscle and mammary
tissue. The two RNAs are present in mammary tissue of immature virgin mice, and
their levels increase up to day 16 of pregnancy, followed by a decline during
lactation. The increase of Stat5 expression during pregnancy coincides with the
activation of the WAP gene.

PMCID: PMC41061
PMID: 7568026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 1;14(11):2527-35.

Interleukin 2 and erythropoietin activate STAT5/MGF via distinct pathways.

Wakao H(1), Harada N, Kitamura T, Mui AL, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins play an
important role in cytokine signal transduction in conjunction with Janus kinases 
(JAKs). MGF/STAT5 is known as prolactin regulated STAT. Here we demonstrate that 
interleukin 2 (IL-2) as well as erythropoietin (EPO) stimulate STAT5 and induce
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5. These IL-2- and EPO-induced STATs have an
identical DNA binding specificity and immunoreactivity. We also show that IL-4
induces a DNA binding factor which possesses similar, but distinct, DNA binding
specificity from that of STAT5 and is immunologically different from STAT5.
Analysis of two EPO receptor (EPOR) transfected CTLL-2 cell lines discloses that 
IL-2 activates JAK1 and JAK3 as well as STAT5, while EPO stimulates STAT5 and
JAK2 in EPO-responsive CTLL-2 cells (ERT/E2). On the contrary, EPO activates
neither JAK2 nor STAT5 in other cell lines that failed to respond to EPO (ERT
cells). EPOR and JAK2 associate with each other regardless of EPO presence in
ERT/E2 cells, however, such an interaction is not present in ERT cells. Thus,
EPOR and JAK2 association seems to be important for EPO responsiveness in CTLL-2 
cells.

PMCID: PMC398366
PMID: 7781605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. EMBO J. 1995 May 1;14(9):2005-13.

Prolactin, growth hormone, erythropoietin and granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor induce MGF-Stat5 DNA binding activity.

Gouilleux F(1), Pallard C, Dusanter-Fourt I, Wakao H, Haldosen LA, Norstedt G,
Levy D, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg,
Germany.

The molecular components which mediate cytokine signaling from the cell membrane 
to the nucleus were studied. Upon the interaction of cytokines with their
receptors, members of the janus kinase (Jak) family of cytoplasmic protein
tyrosine kinases and of the signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stat) family of transcription factors are activated through tyrosine
phosphorylation. It has been suggested that the Stat proteins are substrates of
the Jak protein tyrosine kinases. MGF-Stat5 is a member of the Stat family which 
has been found to confer the prolactin response. MGF-Stat5 can be phosphorylated 
and activated in its DNA binding activity by Jak2. The activation of MGF-Stat5 is
not restricted to prolactin. Erythropoietin (EPO) and growth hormone (GH)
stimulate the DNA binding activity of MGF-Stat5 in COS cells transfected with
vectors encoding EPO receptor and MGF-Stat5 or vectors encoding GH receptor and
MGF-Stat5. The activation of DNA binding by prolactin, EPO and GH requires the
phosphorylation of tyrosine residue 694 of MGF-Stat5. The transcriptional
induction of a beta-casein promoter luciferase construct in transiently
transfected COS cells is specific for the prolactin activation of MGF-Stat5; it
is not observed in EPO- and GH-treated cells. In the UT7 human hematopoietic cell
line, EPO and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor activate the DNA
binding activity of a factor closely related to MGF-Stat5 with respect to its
immunological reactivity, DNA binding specificity and molecular weight. These
results suggest that MGF-Stat5 regulates physiological processes in mammary
epithelial cells, as well as in hematopoietic cells.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMCID: PMC398300
PMID: 7744007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Leukoc Biol. 1995 May;57(5):799-803.

Interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and
interleukin-5 transduce signals through two forms of STAT5.

Mui AL(1), Wakao H, Harada N, O'Farrell AM, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, Palo Alto, California.

Recently, JAK2 kinase was found to be one of the tyrosine kinases activated by
interleukin-3 (IL-3) in target cells. JAK2 belongs to a family of kinases that
act upstream of transcription factors called STATs. STATs exist in the cytoplasm 
as latent, transcriptionally inactive forms until, in response to extracellular
signals, they become phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, translocate to the
nucleus, and bind to specific DNA elements. Because IL-3 activates JAK2, we
searched for the STAT(s) that might transduce IL-3 signals. Several lines of
evidence suggest that IL-3 uses the murine homologue of STAT5, a factor
originally purified from sheep. Unexpectedly, during isolation of the murine
homologue, we found two highly related molecules that we have designated STAT5A
and STAT5B.

PMID: 7539031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. EMBO J. 1995 Apr 3;14(7):1402-11.

Interleukin-3 signals through multiple isoforms of Stat5.

Azam M(1), Erdjument-Bromage H, Kreider BL, Xia M, Quelle F, Basu R, Saris C,
Tempst P, Ihle JN, Schindler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The interleukin (IL)-3 family of cytokines mediates its numerous effects on
myeloid growth and maturation by binding a family of related receptors. It has
been shown recently that IL-3 induces the activation of two distinct cytoplasmic 
signal transducing factors (STFs) that are likely to mediate the induction of
immediate early genes. In immature myeloid cells, IL-3 activates STF-IL-3a, which
comprises two tyrosine-phosphorylated DNA binding proteins of 77 and 80 kDa. In
mature myeloid cells, IL-3 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
activate STF-IL-3b, which consists of a 94 and 96 kDa tyrosine-phosphorylated DNA
binding protein. Peptide sequence data obtained from the purified 77 and 80 kDa
proteins (p77 and p80) indicate that they are closely related but are encoded by 
distinct genes. Both peptide and nucleotide sequence data demonstrate that these 
two proteins are the murine homologs of ovine mammary gland factor (MGF)/Stat5.
The peptide data also indicate that p77 and p80 are phosphorylated on tyrosine
699, a position analogous to the tyrosine that is phosphorylated in Stat1 and
Stat2 in response to interferon. Additionally, antiserum raised against
bacterially expressed p77/p80 recognizes the 94 and 96 kDa protein components of 
STF-IL-3b, suggesting that these may be additional isoforms of Stat5. These
studies indicate that the IL-3 family of ligands is able to activate multiple
isoforms of the signal transducing protein Stat5.

PMCID: PMC398225
PMID: 7537213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;15(4):2063-70.

Nuclear factor I and mammary gland factor (STAT5) play a critical role in
regulating rat whey acidic protein gene expression in transgenic mice.

Li S(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

The rat whey acidic protein (WAP) gene contains a mammary gland-specific and
hormonally regulated DNase I-hypersensitive site 830 to 720 bp 5' to the site of 
transcription initiation. We have reported previously that nuclear factor I (NFI)
binding at a palindromic site and binding at a half-site are the major
DNA-protein interactions detected within this tissue-specific
nuclease-hypersensitive region. We now show that point mutations introduced into 
these NFI-binding sites dramatically affect WAP gene expression in transgenic
mice. Transgene expression was totally abrogated when the palindromic NFI site or
both binding sites were mutated, suggesting that NFI is a key regulator of WAP
gene expression. In addition, a recognition site for mammary gland factor
(STAT5), which mediates prolactin induction of milk protein gene expression, was 
also identified immediately proximal to the NFI-binding sites. Mutation of this
site reduced transgene expression by approximately 90% per gene copy, but did not
alter tissue specificity. These results suggest that regulation of WAP gene
expression is determined by the cooperative interactions among several enhancers 
that constitute a composite response element.

PMCID: PMC230433
PMID: 7891701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Immunity. 1995 Apr;2(4):321-9.

Identification and purification of human Stat proteins activated in response to
interleukin-2.

Hou J(1), Schindler U, Henzel WJ, Wong SC, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, Incorporated, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA.

A key cytokine induced during the immune response is IL-2. Following T cell
activation, the genes encoding IL-2 and the various chains of its receptor are
transcriptionally induced. In turn, secreted IL-2 serves to stimulate the
proliferation and differentiation of T lymphocytes. Several recent studies have
implicated Jak kinases in the signaling pathway induced by IL-2. Following this
lead, we set out to identify transcription factors induced in response to IL-2.
Human peripheral blood lymphocytes were observed to contain several
IL-2-inducible DNA binding activities. Similar activities were also observed in a
transformed human lymphocyte line, termed YT. We have purified these activities
and found that the principal IL-2-inducible component bears significant
relatedness to a prolactin-induced transcription factor first identified in sheep
mammary gland tissue. We hypothesize that activation of this protein, designated 
hStat5, helps govern the biological effects of IL-2 during the immune response.

PMID: 7719937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 15;14(6):1166-75.

Interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor and interleukin-5
transduce signals through two STAT5 homologs.

Mui AL(1), Wakao H, O'Farrell AM, Harada N, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304-1104, USA.

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) is an important regulator of hemopoiesis and considerable
effort has been directed towards the study of its mechanism of signal
transduction. In this paper, we describe the first molecular identification of a 
STAT transcription factor that is activated by IL-3. STATs exist in a
cytoplasmic, transcriptionally inactive form which, in response to extracellular 
signals, become tyrosine phosphorylated and translocate to the nucleus where they
bind to specific DNA elements. Several of these DNA elements were found which
bind proteins in an IL-3-responsive manner. Analysis of these bandshift complexes
with available antibodies to the known STATs suggests that IL-3 activates the
DNA-binding ability of STAT5, a protein which was originally characterized as a
prolactin-responsive transcription factor in sheep. IL-5 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), which share a common
signaling receptor subunit with IL-3, also activate STAT5. Unexpectedly, two
murine STAT5 homologs, 96% identical to each other at the amino acid level, were 
isolated and IL-3-dependent GAS binding could be reconstituted in COS cells
transfected with IL-3 receptor and either STAT5 cDNA. In IL-3-dependent
hemopoietic cells, both forms of STAT5 are expressed and activated in response to
IL-3.

PMCID: PMC398194
PMID: 7720707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. FEBS Lett. 1995 Feb 20;360(1):29-33.

Colony-stimulating factors and interferon-gamma activate a protein related to
MGF-Stat 5 to cause formation of the differentiation-induced factor in myeloid
cells.

Barahmand-pour F(1), Meinke A, Eilers A, Gouilleux F, Groner B, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Austria.

The Jak-Stat pathway of intracellular signals is used by growth factor- and
cytokine receptors to induce gene transcription. We have recently reported that
differentiation of myeloid cells, induced by phorbol ester, interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) or colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) is accompanied by the
activation of the differentiation-induced factor (DIF). Activated DIF
specifically associates with a subclass of gamma-interferon activation site
(GAS)-like DNA elements. We now report that GM-CSF, which like CSF-1 promotes the
generation of mature macrophages, activates DIF. No activation was observed after
treatment with the granulocyte growth and differentiation factor G-CSF.
Antibodies raised against a Stat family protein, designated mammary gland
factor-Stat 5 (MGF-Stat 5), reacted with DIF induced by either CSF-1, GM-CSF or
IFN-gamma. Antisera to other known Stats were without effect on the DIF complex
in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). A 112 kDa protein could be
isolated from either GM-CSF- or IFN-gamma-treated cells by GAS oligonucleotide
precipitation. This protein reacted with antibodies to both MGF-Stat 5 and
phosphotyrosine. MGF-Stat 5 and closely related proteins thus define a subfamily 
of Stat transcription factors that are present in a variety of cell types and are
required for the onset of immediate gene expression in response to
differentiating stimuli.

PMID: 7875295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Aug;8(8):1091-102.

Prolactin-dependent activation of a tyrosine phosphorylated DNA binding factor in
mouse mammary epithelial cells.

Welte T(1), Garimorth K, Philipp S, Doppler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, Innsbruck, Austria.

The mammary gland factor MGF has been described as a developmentally and
environmentally regulated nuclear factor required for transcription of the milk
protein gene beta-casein. In the current study the individual role of lactogenic 
hormones in the activation of MGF DNA binding and the functional relation of MGF 
to known transcription factors was investigated by electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. DNA binding of MGF was rapidly induced by PRL in mammary epithelial
cells. The activation was not inhibited by the protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide. The effect of PRL on MGF did not require costimulation of cells
with the other lactogenic hormones, insulin, and glucocorticoids. Thus, MGF is
the first example of a nuclear factor directly regulated by PRL. The MGF
complexes formed upon initiation of lactation in the mammary gland and upon
stimulation of mammary epithelial cells with PRL migrated at the same position in
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, whereas the MGF complex found in mammary
gland extracts of pregnant mice exhibited a faster mobility. In cell cultures,
PRL-induced activation of MGF as well as up-regulation of beta-casein gene
transcription was confined to confluent cultures of mammary epithelial cells and 
inhibited by long term incubation of cells with epidermal growth factor. MGF was 
found to be related to the nuclear factors that are activated by tyrosine
phosphorylation when cells are stimulated with interferons or cytokines. This
notion is supported by experimental evidence for phosphorylation of MGF on
tyrosine and by the similar DNA recognition motifs of MGF and cytokine-activated 
factors.

PMID: 7527899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. EMBO J. 1994 May 1;13(9):2182-91.

Mammary gland factor (MGF) is a novel member of the cytokine regulated
transcription factor gene family and confers the prolactin response.

Wakao H(1), Gouilleux F, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 1995 Feb 15;14(4):854-5.

Milk protein gene expression in mammary epithelial cells is regulated by the
action of the lactogenic hormones insulin, glucocorticoids and prolactin. The
mammary gland factor, MGF, has been shown to be a central mediator in the
lactogenic hormone response. The DNA binding activity of MGF is hormonally
regulated and essential for beta-casein promoter activity. We have used Red A
Sepharose- and sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography to purify MGF from
mammary gland tissue of lactating sheep. Proteins of 84 and 92 kDa were obtained,
proteolytically digested and the resulting peptides separated by reverse phase
high pressure liquid chromatography. The 84 and 92 kDa proteins yielded very
similar peptide patterns. The amino acid sequence of two peptides was determined.
The sequence information was used to derive oligonucleotide probes. A cDNA
library from the mRNA of mammary gland tissue of lactating sheep was screened and
a molecular clone encoding MGF was isolated. MGF consists of 734 amino acids and 
has sequence homology with the 113 (Stat113) and 91 kDa (Stat91) components of
ISGF3, transcription factors which are signal transducers of IFN-alpha/beta and
IFN-gamma. Two species of MGF mRNA of 6.5 and 4.5 kb were detected in mammary
gland tissue of lactating sheep. Lower mRNA expression was found in ovary,
thymus, spleen, kidney, lung, muscle and the adrenal gland. MGF cDNA was
incorporated into a eukaryotic expression vector and cotransfected with a vector 
encoding the long form of the prolactin receptor into COS cells. A strong
MGF-specific bandshift was obtained with nuclear extracts of COS cells induced
with prolactin. Treatment of activated MGF with a tyrosine-specific protein
phosphatase resulted in the loss of DNA binding activity. Prolactin-dependent
transactivation of a beta-casein promoter-luciferase reporter gene construct was 
observed in transfected cells.

PMCID: PMC395072
PMID: 7514531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;100(1-2):109-14.

Hormonal regulation of transcription factor activity in mammary epithelial cells.

Groner B(1), Altiok S, Meier V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg,
Germany.

The multihormonal control of milk protein gene transcription in mammary
epithelial cells has been investigated. Although the hormones regulating milk
protein gene expression are known, the interaction of the signal transduction
pathways of steroid (glucocorticoids) and peptide (insulin and prolactin)
hormones remains undefined in molecular terms. These signals converge on the
level of nuclear factors binding to regulatory elements in the beta-casein gene
promoter. The promoter has a modular architecture and is composed of positive and
negative response elements. Nuclear transcription factors which bind to these
elements have been identified. The mammary gland factor, MGF, is an essential
mediator of lactogenic hormone action and is itself positively regulated in its
DNA binding activity. It binds to the promoter region between positions -80 to
-100. MGF counteracts a repressor element, constituted by two components, which
is located adjacent to the MGF binding site at positions -100 to -150. The
transcription factor YY1 binds to the proximal half of the repressor element
which overlaps with the MGF binding site. Specific single-stranded DNA binding
proteins contribute to the negative regulation of the promoter by interacting
with sequence elements between -160 and -190. DNA binding of these proteins is
negatively regulated by the lactogenic hormones.

PMID: 8056143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;8(4):469-77.

Mammary gland factor activated by prolactin on mammary epithelial cells and
acute-phase response factor activated by interleukin-6 in liver cells share DNA
binding and transactivation potential.

Standke GJ(1), Meier VS, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

We have studied transcription factors that are coupled to the activation of
cytokine receptors in liver and in mammary epithelial cells. Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
causes the rapid activation of the acute-phase response factor (APRF) in the
liver of animals during acute inflammation and in cultured human hepatoma cells
(HepG2) and induces the transcription of the acute-phase protein genes, e.g.
alpha 2-macroglobulin (alpha 2-M). In the mammary gland and in cultured HC11
mammary epithelial cells, milk protein genes, e.g. beta-casein, are induced by
the lactogenic hormones, insulin, glucocorticoids, and PRL. The induction of the 
beta-casein gene promoter is preceded by the activation of the mammary gland
factor (MGF). We have compared the DNA binding sequences of APRF and MGF,
5'-CTTCTT/GGGAATT-3', and have found that they coincide in 11 of 12 positions.
Bandshift experiments and oligonucleotide competition experiments showed that
both factors, MGF and APRF, are able to bind to the IL-6 response element of the 
alpha 2-M gene promoter and to the lactogenic hormone response element of the
beta-casein gene promoter with very similar specificities. Partial proteolytic
digestion of APRF and MGF DNA complexes yielded similar clipping patterns. The UV
cross-linked DNA complexes of both transcription factors were of the same
apparent molecular mass. IL-6 activation of APRF in HepG2 cells can be observed
within minutes. MGF induction by PRL in HC11 cells occurs with similar kinetics. 
The synergistic action of glucocorticoids and PRL is necessary for the induction 
of the beta-casein gene, but PRL is sufficient for MGF activation.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7519723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):128-37.

The nuclear factor YY1 participates in repression of the beta-casein gene
promoter in mammary epithelial cells and is counteracted by mammary gland factor 
during lactogenic hormone induction.

Meier VS(1), Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

Expression of the beta-casein milk protein gene in the mammary epithelial cell
line HC11 is primarily regulated at the transcriptional level. A 338-bp segment
of promoter sequence 5' of the transcription start site is sufficient to confer
inducibility by the lactogenic hormones insulin, glucocorticoid hormone, and
prolactin. Positively and negatively acting promoter elements and specific DNA
binding proteins have been identified. The binding of the mammary gland factor
MGF to a site between -80 and -100 is indispensable for hormonal induction of
transcription. Binding of MGF activity to DNA is greatly enhanced by the action
of the lactogenic hormones. Repression of transcription in the uninduced state is
mediated by a promoter element located adjacent to the MGF binding site at
positions -110 to -150. This repressor element consists of two interacting
protein binding sites. A nuclear factor that binds specifically to the proximal
site between positions -110 and -120 has been characterized and found to be
identical with the nuclear factor YY1 (delta, NF-E1). YY1 does not bind to the
distal site. The simultaneous mutation in the proximal and the distal sites
results in high, hormone-independent transcription. This finding suggests that
YY1 plays a functional role in the repression and acts in conjunction with a
second DNA binding protein. Comparison of YY1 DNA binding activity in uninduced
and hormone-induced cells showed that relief of repression is not mediated by
changes in the concentration or binding affinity of YY1. Infection of HC11 cells 
with a YY1-expressing recombinant retrovirus resulted in overexpression of YY1
but did not suppress hormonal induction. The addition of purified MGF decreased
YY1 binding to its DNA recognition site in vitro. This finding indicates that MGF
regulates the DNA binding activity of YY1 and thereby may cause the relief of
transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC358363
PMID: 8264581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Dec;6(12):1988-97.

Mammary gland-specific nuclear factor activity is positively regulated by
lactogenic hormones and negatively by milk stasis.

Schmitt-Ney M(1), Happ B, Hofer P, Hynes NE, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

The mammary gland-specific nuclear factor (MGF) is a crucial contributor to the
regulation of transcription from the beta-casein gene promoter. The beta-casein
gene encodes a major milk protein, which is expressed in mammary epithelial cells
during lactation and can be induced by lactogenic hormones in the clonal mammary 
epithelial cell line HC11. We have investigated the specific DNA-binding activity
of MGF in mammary epithelial cells in vivo and in vitro. Comparison of MGF in
HC11 cells and mammary gland cells from lactating mice revealed molecules with
identical DNA-binding properties. Bandshift and UV cross-linking experiments
indicated that MGF in HC11 cells has a higher mol wt than MGF found in mice.
Little MGF activity was detected in nuclear extracts from HC11 cells cultured in 
the absence of lactogenic hormones. Lactogenic hormone treatment of HC11 cells
led to a strong induction of MGF activity. The induction of MGF activity as well 
as utilization of the beta-casein promoter were suppressed when epidermal growth 
factor was present in the tissue culture medium simultaneously with the
lactogenic hormones. In lactating animals, MGF activity is regulated by suckling,
milk stasis, and systemic hormone signals. The mammary glands from maximally
lactating animals, 16 days postpartum, contain drastically reduced MGF activity
after removal of the pups for only 8 h. The down-regulation of MGF by pup
withdrawal was slower in early lactation, 6 days postpartum. We also investigated
the relative contributions of local signals, generated by milk stasis, and
systemic hormone signals to the regulation of MGF activity. The access to one row
of mammary glands of lactating mothers was denied to the pups for 24 h. High
levels of MGF were found in the accessible mammary glands, and intermediate
levels of MGF were found in the inaccessible glands of the same mouse. Very low
MGF levels were detected when the pups were removed from the dams for 24 h. We
conclude that systemic as well as local signals cooperate in the in vitro
regulation of MGF activity.

PMID: 1491685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


