
1. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.1002/eji.201546050. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT4-mediated transcriptional repression of the IL5 gene in human memory Th2
cells.

Gonzales-van Horn SR(1), Estrada LD(1), van Oers NS(1), Farrar JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Type I Interferon (IFN-a/ß) plays a critical role in suppressing viral
replication by driving the transcription of hundreds of interferon sensitive
genes (ISGs). While many ISGs are transcriptionally activated by the ISGF3
complex, the significance of other signaling intermediates in IFN-a/ß-mediated
gene regulation remains elusive, particularly in rare cases of gene silencing. In
human Th2 cells, IFN-a/ß signaling suppressed IL5 and IL13 mRNA expression during
recall responses to T cell receptor (TCR) activation. This suppression occurred
through a rapid reduction in the rate of nascent transcription, independent of de
novo expression of ISGs. Further, IFN-a/ß-mediated STAT4 activation was required 
for repressing the human IL5 gene, and disrupting STAT4 dimerization reversed
this effect. This is the first demonstration of STAT4 acting as a transcriptional
repressor in response to IFN-a/ß signaling and highlights the unique activity of 
this cytokine to acutely block the expression of an inflammatory cytokine in
human T cells. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26990433  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Invest Dermatol. 2016 Feb 27. pii: S0022-202X(16)00573-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2016.01.038. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of immunophenotypic and molecular biomarkers for Sézary syndrome using
standard operating procedures: multicenter study of 59 cases.

Boonk SE(1), Zoutman WH(2), Marie-Cardine A(3), van der Fits L(2), Out-Luiting
JJ(2), Mitchell TJ(4), Tosi I(4), Morris SL(5), Moriarty B(4), Booken N(6),
Felcht M(6), Quaglino P(7), Ponti R(7), Barberio E(7), Ram-Wolff C(8), Jäntti
K(9), Ranki A(9), Bernengo MG(7), Klemke CD(6), Bensussan A(3), Michel L(3),
Whittaker S(4), Bagot M(8), Tensen CP(2), Willemze R(2), Vermeer MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: s.e.boonk@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Dermatology,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)INSERM U976,
Hospital Saint-Louis, Paris, France; Paris Diderot University, Hospital
Saint-Louis, Paris, France. (4)St. John's Institute of Dermatology, Division of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King's
College London, London, United Kingdom. (5)Clinical Oncology, Guy's and St.
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. (6)Department of
Dermatology, Venereology and Allergy, University Medical Center Mannheim,
Ruprecht-Karls-University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. (7)Department of
Medical Sciences, Dermatologic Clinic, Turin University, Turin, Italy. (8)INSERM 
U976, Hospital Saint-Louis, Paris, France; Paris Diderot University, Hospital
Saint-Louis, Paris, France; Department of Dermatology, Hospital Saint-Louis,
Paris, France. (9)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of
Helsinki and Skin and Allergy Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland.

Differentiation between Sézary syndrome (SS) and erythrodermic inflammatory
dermatoses (EID) can be challenging and a number of studies have attempted to
identify characteristic immunophenotypic changes and molecular biomarkers in
Sézary cells that could be useful as additional diagnostic criterion. In this
European multicenter study the sensitivity and specificity of these
immunophenotypic and recently proposed but unconfirmed molecular biomarkers in SS
was investigated. Peripheral blood CD4+ T-cells from 59 SS and 19 EID patients
were analyzed for cell surface proteins by flow cytometry, and for copy number
alterations and differential gene expression using custom made qPCR plates.
Experiments were performed in duplicate in two independent centers using standard
operating procedures with almost identical results. Sézary cells showed MYC gain 
(40%) and MNT loss (66%), upregulation of DNM3 (75%), TWIST1 (69%), EPHA4 (66%)
and PLS3 (66%) and downregulation of STAT4 (91%). Loss of CD26 (= 80% CD4+
T-cells) and/ or CD7 (= 40% CD4+ T-cells) and combination of altered expression
of STAT4, TWIST1 and DNM3 or PLS3, could distinguish respectively 83% and 98% of 
SS patients from EID cases with 100% specificity. These additional diagnostic
panels will be useful adjuncts in the differential diagnosis of SS versus EID.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26930587  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 17. pii: jbc.M116.715870. [Epub ahead of print]

IL23R variants protective against inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) display loss 
of function due to impaired protein stability and intracellular trafficking.

Sivanesan D(1), Beauchamp C(1), Quinou C(2), Lee J(3), Lesage S(4), Chemtob S(2),
Rioux JD(1), Michnick S(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Canada; (2)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Centre, Canada;
(3)University of Ottawa, Canada; (4)Centre de recherche Hospital
Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Canada. (5)University of Montreal, Canada;
stephen.michnick@umontreal.ca.

Genome-wide association studies as well as murine models have shown that the
IL23R pathway plays a pivotal role in chronic inflammatory diseases such as
Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), psoriasis and type-1 diabetes.
GWAS and targeted re-sequencing studies have revealed the presence of multiple
potentially causal variants of the IL23R. Specifically the G149R, V362I and R381Q
IL23R a variants are linked to protection against the development of CD and UC in
humans. Moreover, the exact mechanism of action of these receptor variants has
not been elucidated. We show that all three of these IL23Ra variants cause a
reduction in IL23 receptor activation-mediated phosphorylation of the signal
transducing activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and phosphorylation of signal
transducing activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). The reduction in signaling is
due to lower levels of cell surface receptor expression. For G149R, the receptor 
retention in the ER is due to an impairment of receptor maturation whereas the
R381Q and V362I variant have reduced protein stability. Finally, we demonstrate
that the endogenous expression of IL23Ra protein from V362I and R381Q variants in
human lymphoblastoid cell lines exhibited lower expression levels relative to
susceptibility alleles. Our results suggest a convergent cause of IL23Ra variant 
protection against chronic inflammatory disease.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26887945  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Gut. 2016 Feb 17. pii: gutjnl-2015-309395. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309395. [Epub
ahead of print]

STAT4-associated natural killer cell tolerance following liver transplantation.

Jamil KM(1), Hydes TJ(2), Cheent KS(1), Cassidy SA(1), Traherne JA(3), Jayaraman 
J(3), Trowsdale J(3), Alexander GJ(4), Little AM(5), McFarlane H(5), Heneghan
MA(6), Purbhoo MA(1), Khakoo SI(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Imperial College, London, UK. (2)Department of
Hepatology, Southampton University, Southampton, UK. (3)Department of Pathology, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (4)Department of Hepatology, Addenbrookes
Hospital, Cambridge, UK. (5)Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Service,
Gartnavel General Hospital, Glasgow, UK. (6)Institute of Liver Studies, Kings
College Hospital London, London, UK. (7)Department of Hepatology, Imperial
College, London, UK Department of Hepatology, Southampton University,
Southampton, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Natural killer (NK) cells are important mediators of liver
inflammation in chronic liver disease. The aim of this study was to investigate
why liver transplants (LTs) are not rejected by NK cells in the absence of human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) matching, and to identify a tolerogenic NK cell
phenotype.
DESIGN: Phenotypic and functional analyses on NK cells from 54 LT recipients were
performed, and comparisons made with healthy controls. Further investigation was 
performed using gene expression analysis and donor:recipient HLA typing.
RESULTS: NK cells from non-HCV LT recipients were hypofunctional, with reduced
expression of NKp46 (p<0.05) and NKp30 (p<0.001), reduced cytotoxicity (p<0.001) 
and interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> secretion (p<0.025). There was no segregation of this
effect with HLA-C, and these functional changes were not observed in individuals 
with HCV. Microarray and RT-qPCR analysis demonstrated downregulation of STAT4 in
NK cells from LT recipients (p<0.0001). Changes in the expression levels of the
transcription factors Helios (p=0.06) and Hobit (p=0.07), which control NKp46 and
IFN<U+03B3> expression, respectively, were also detected. Hypofunctionality of NK cells 
was associated with impaired STAT4 phosphorylation and downregulation of the
STAT4 target microRNA-155. Conversely in HCV-LT NK cell tolerance was reversed,
consistent with the more aggressive outcome of LT for HCV.
CONCLUSIONS: LT is associated with transcriptional and functional changes in NK
cells, resulting in reduced activation. NK cell tolerance occurs upstream of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I mediated education, and is
associated with deficient STAT4 phosphorylation. STAT4 therefore represents a
potential therapeutic target to induce NK cell tolerance in liver disease.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26887815  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Exp Med. 2016 Mar 7;213(3):433-49. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150806. Epub 2016 Feb 15.

Functional screen identifies regulators of murine hematopoietic stem cell
repopulation.

Holmfeldt P(1), Ganuza M(1), Marathe H(1), He B(2), Hall T(1), Kang G(3), Moen
J(3), Pardieck J(1), Saulsberry AC(1), Cico A(1), Gaut L(1), McGoldrick D(4),
Finkelstein D(4), Tan K(5), McKinney-Freeman S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105. (2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242. (3)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105. (4)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105. (5)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242. (6)Department of Hematology,
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105
shannon.mckinney-freeman@stjude.org.

Understanding the molecular regulation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell 
(HSPC) engraftment is paramount to improving transplant outcomes. To discover
novel regulators of HSPC repopulation, we transplanted >1,300 mice with
shRNA-transduced HSPCs within 24 h of isolation and transduction to focus on
detecting genes regulating repopulation. We identified 17 regulators of HSPC
repopulation: Arhgef5, Armcx1, Cadps2, Crispld1, Emcn, Foxa3, Fstl1, Glis2,
Gprasp2, Gpr56, Myct1, Nbea, P2ry14, Smarca2, Sox4, Stat4, and Zfp251. Knockdown 
of each of these genes yielded a loss of function, except in the cases of Armcx1 
and Gprasp2, whose loss enhanced hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) repopulation. The 
discovery of multiple genes regulating vesicular trafficking, cell surface
receptor turnover, and secretion of extracellular matrix components suggests
active cross talk between HSCs and the niche and that HSCs may actively condition
the niche to promote engraftment. We validated that Foxa3 is required for HSC
repopulating activity, as Foxa3(-/-) HSC fails to repopulate ablated hosts
efficiently, implicating for the first time Foxa genes as regulators of HSPCs. We
further show that Foxa3 likely regulates the HSC response to hematologic stress. 
Each gene discovered here offers a window into the novel processes that regulate 
stable HSPC engraftment into an ablated host.

© 2016 Holmfeldt et al.

PMID: 26880577  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cent Eur J Immunol. 2016;40(4):437-41. doi: 10.5114/ceji.2015.57146. Epub 2016
Jan 15.

Contribution of the STAT4 rs7574865 gene polymorphism to the susceptibility to
autoimmune thyroiditis in healthy Turk population and psoriatic subgroups.

Hiz MM(1), Kiliç S(2), Isik S(2), Ogretmen Z(2), Silan F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Canakkale Onsekiz
Mart University, Çanakkale, Turkey. (2)Department of Dermatology, Medicine
Faculty, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Çanakkale, Turkey. (3)Department of
Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University,
Çanakkale, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: STAT4 is an important transcription factor that activates gene
transcription as a response to cytokines. Recently, the influence of STAT4 gene
on autoimmune disease has been widely studied in many different immune-related
diseases. Autoimmune, metabolic and cardiovascular disorders are more common in
psoriatic patients. STAT4 may be a unique gene that switches on in
autoimmune-related thyroid disease in psoriatic patients.
THE AIM OF THE STUDY: To explore the association of a STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism to autoimmune thyroid diseases in the general Turkish population and
psoriatic subgroups.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 132 psoriatic patients and 118 non-psoriatic
volunteers were genotyped for STAT4 rs7574865 using real time PCR. Twenty-four of
the psoriatic patients and 15 of the non-psoriatic volunteers have
autoimmune-related thyroid diseases.
RESULTS: The prevalence of the T allele [OR = 4.37; 95% CI: 1.05-19; p = 0.03] of
the STAT4 rs7574865 was higher in individuals with autoimmune-related thyroid
diseases among the all non-psoriatic volunteers. The volunteers with
autoimmune-related thyroid diseases has an increased allele positivity and
carriers having at least one of the risk allele was significantly higher than in 
counterparts with a GG wild genotype [ORGT/TT vs. GG: 1.73; 95% CI: 0.09-32; p = 
0.03]. Yet, there was no evidence of an association between rs7574865 and
autoimmune-related thyroid disease in psoriatic patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism increases autoimmune-related
thyroid disease susceptibility among the general population but not in psoriatic 
patients.

PMCID: PMC4737749
PMID: 26862307  [PubMed]


7. Exerc Immunol Rev. 2016;22:64-81.

Effects of acute aerobic exercise on leukocyte inflammatory gene expression in
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Perandini LA(1), Sales-de-Oliveira D(1), Almeida DC(2), Azevedo H(3),
Moreira-Filho CA(3), Cenedeze MA(2), Benatti FB(1,)(4), Lima FR(1), Borba E(1),
Bonfa E(1), Sa-Pinto AL(1), Roschel H(1,)(5), Camara NO(5), Gualano B(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, School of Medicine, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Immunology, Department of
Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. (3)Laboratory of Pediatric Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (4)School of Physical
Education and Sport, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (5)Laboratory of
Transplantation Immunobiology, Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with a persistent
systemic inflammation. Exercise induced inflammatory response in SLE remains to
be fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of
acuteexercise on leukocyte gene expression in active (SLEACTIVE) and inactive SLE
(SLEINACTIVE) patients and healthy controls(HC).METHODS: All subjects (n = 4 per 
group) performed a 30-min single bout of acute aerobic exercise (~70% of VO2peak)
on a treadmill, and blood samples were collected for RNA extraction from
circulating leukocyte at baseline, at the end of exercise, and after three hours 
of recovery. The expression of a panel of immune-related genes was evaluated by a
quantitative PCR array assay. Moreover, network-based analyses were performed to 
interpret transcriptional changes occurring after the exercise challenge.
RESULTS: In all groups, a single bout of acute exercise led to the
down-regulation of the gene expression of innate and adaptive immunity at the end
of exercise (e.g., TLR3, IFNG, GATA3, FOXP3, STAT4) with a subsequent
up-regulation occurring upon recovery. Exercise regulated the expression of
inflammatory genes in the blood leukocytes of the SLE patients and HC, although
the SLE groups exhibited fewer modulated genes and less densely connected
networks (number of nodes: 29, 40 and 58; number of edges: 29, 60 and 195;
network density: 0.07, 0.08 and 0.12, for SLEACTIVE, SLEINACTIVE and HC,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: The leukocytes from the SLE patients, irrespective of disease
activity, showed a down-regulated inflammatory geneexpression immediately after
acute aerobic exercise, followed by an up-regulation at recovery. Furthermore,
less organized gene networks were observed in the SLE patients, suggesting that
they may be deficient in triggering a normal exercised-induced immune
transcriptional response.

Copyright © 2015 International Society of Exercise and Immunology. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26859426  [PubMed - in process]


8. Autoimmun Rev. 2016 May;15(5):433-9. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.01.005. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Genetic aspects of the antiphospholipid syndrome: An update.

Sebastiani GD(1), Iuliano A(2), Cantarini L(3), Galeazzi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Reumatologia, Ospedale San Camillo-Forlanini, Roma, Italy. Electronic
address: giandoreum@libero.it. (2)U.O.C. Reumatologia, Ospedale San
Camillo-Forlanini, Roma, Italy. Electronic address: annamariaiuliano@hotmail.it. 
(3)Dip. Di Medicina Clinica e Scienze Immunologiche sez. di Reumatologia,
Policlinico Le Scotte, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy. Electronic address:
cantariniluca@hotmail.com. (4)Dip. Di Medicina Clinica e Scienze Immunologiche
sez. di Reumatologia, Policlinico Le Scotte, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy.
Electronic address: galeazzi@unisi.it.

Studies on the immunogenetic predisposition to antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)
and on other non-genetic and epigenetic factors are summarised and discussed.
Family studies suggest a genetic predisposition to APS. It appears that this
genetic predisposition is in part accounted for by the HLA system, the most
consistent associations being those with DR4 and DRw53. Furthermore, it appears
that lupus anticoagulant (LA) and anticardiolipin (aCL) antibodies are both
associated with the same HLA antigens. Population studies suggest that HLA genes 
have a role in conferring susceptibility to develop primary APS, with some
differences in different ethnic groups. Other genes, outside the MHC, give their 
contribution to the development of this autoimmune syndrome, such as IRF5, STAT4 
and those related to inherited thrombophilia - factor V Leiden and G20210A
prothrombin polymorphisms. Finally, post-transcriptional modifications of
anti-beta2GPI antibodies could be implicated too.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804759  [PubMed - in process]


9. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016 Jan 12;5:105. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2015.00105.
eCollection 2015.

Systemic Activation of TLR3-Dependent TRIF Signaling Confers Host Defense against
Gram-Negative Bacteria in the Intestine.

Ruiz J(1), Kanagavelu S(2), Flores C(3), Romero L(1), Riveron R(1), Shih DQ(4),
Fukata M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine Miami, FL, USA. (2)Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of MedicineMiami, FL,
USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, F. Widjaja Foundation, Inflammatory Bowel and Immunology Research
InstituteLos Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, F. Widjaja Foundation, Inflammatory Bowel 
and Immunology Research Institute Los Angeles, CA, USA. (4)Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, F. Widjaja
Foundation, Inflammatory Bowel and Immunology Research InstituteLos Angeles, CA, 
USA; Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
CaliforniaLos Angeles, CA, USA. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of MedicineMiami, FL, USA; Division
of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, F.
Widjaja Foundation, Inflammatory Bowel and Immunology Research InstituteLos
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of CaliforniaLos Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Cell Biology,
University of Miami Miller School of MedicineMiami, FL, USA; Department of
Biomedical Science, Cedars-Sinai Medical CenterLos Angeles, CA, USA.

Recognition of Gram-negative bacteria by toll-like receptor (TLR)4 induces MyD88 
and TRIF mediated responses. We have shown that TRIF-dependent responses play an 
important role in intestinal defense against Gram-negative enteropathogens. In
the current study, we examined underlying mechanisms of how systemic TRIF
activation enhances intestinal immune defense against Gram-negative bacteria.
First we confirmed that the protective effect of poly I:C against enteric
infection of mice with Yersinia enterocolitica was dependent on TLR3-mediated
TRIF signaling by using TLR3-deficient mice. This protection was unique in
TRIF-dependent TLR signaling because systemic stimulation of mice with agonists
for TLR2 (Pam3CSK4) or TLR5 (flagellin) did not reduce mortality on Y.
enterocolitica infection. Systemic administration of poly I:C mobilized CD11c+,
F4/80+, and Gr-1(hi) cells from lamina propria and activated NK cells in the
mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) within 24 h. This innate immune cell rearrangement
was type I IFN dependent and mediated through upregulation of TLR4 followed by
CCR7 expression in these innate immune cells found in the intestinal mucosa. Poly
I:C induced IFN-<U+03B3> expression by NK cells in the MLN, which was mediated through
type I IFNs and IL-12p40 from antigen presenting cells and consequent activation 
of STAT1 and STAT4 in NK cells. This formation of innate immunity significantly
contributed to the elimination of bacteria in the MLN. Our results demonstrated
an innate immune network in the intestine that can be established by systemic
stimulation of TRIF, which provides a strong host defense against Gram-negative
pathogens. The mechanism underlying TRIF-mediated protective immunity may be
useful to develop novel therapies for enteric bacterial infection.

PMCID: PMC4710052
PMID: 26793623  [PubMed - in process]


10. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 22;14(4):17730-8. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.21.46.

Meta-analysis of STAT4 and IFIH1 polymorphisms in type 1 diabetes mellitus
patients with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type III.

de Azevêdo Silva J(1), Tavares NA(1), Santos MM(1,)(2), Moura R(1,)(2), Guimarães
RL(1,)(2), Araújo J(3), Crovella S(1,)(2), Brandão LA(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunopatologia Keizo Asami, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco,
Recife, PE, Brasil. (2)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal de
Pernambuco, Recife, PE, Brasil. (3)Hospital das Clínicas, Unidade de
Endocrinologica Pediátrica, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, PE,
Brasil. (4)Departamento de Patologia, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife,
PE, Brasil.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is an organ-specific autoimmune disease
characterized by T-cell mediated self-destruction of insulin-producing ß cells in
the pancreas. T1D patients are prone to develop other glandular autoimmune
disorders, such as autoimmune thyroid disease that occurs simultaneously with
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type III (APSIII). Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) is a well-known regulator of proinflammatory
cytokines, and interferon-induced with helicase C domain 1 (IFIH1) is activated
in the interferon type I response. Both genes have been examined separately in
autoimmune diseases and, in this study, we assessed their joint role in T1D and
APSIII. We conducted a case-control study, enrolling 173 T1D patients and 191
healthy controls from northeastern Brazil, to assess the distribution of the
rs7574865 and rs3024839 SNPs in STAT4 and the rs3747517 and rs1990760 SNPs in
IFIH1 in T1D and APSIII patients. Additionally, we conducted a meta-analysis with
the rs7574865 SNP in STAT4 (1392 T1D patients and 1629 controls) and the
rs1990760 SNP in IFIH1 (25092 T1D patients and 28544 controls) to examine their
association with T1D. Distribution of STAT4 and IFIH1 allelic frequencies did not
show statistically significant differences between T1D patients and controls in
our study population; however, the meta-analysis indicated that SNPs in STAT4 and
IFIH1 are associated with T1D worldwide. Our findings indicate that although
STAT4 and IFIH1 SNPs are not associated with T1D in a Brazilian population, they 
might play a role in susceptibility to T1D on a larger worldwide scale.

PMID: 26782418  [PubMed - in process]


11. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 18;6:19341. doi: 10.1038/srep19341.

Enhancement of human sodium iodide symporter gene therapy for breast cancer by
HDAC inhibitor mediated transcriptional modulation.

Kelkar MG(1), Senthilkumar K(2), Jadhav S(1), Gupta S(3), Ahn BC(2), De A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Functional Imaging Lab, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre, Kharghar, Navi
Mumbai, India. (2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Kyungpook National University, 
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital,
Parel, Mumbai, India.

The aberrant expression of human sodium iodide symporter (NIS) in breast cancer
(BC) has raised the possibility of using targeted radioiodide therapy. Here we
investigate modulation of endogenous, functional NIS expression by histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) in vitro and in vivo. Luciferase reporter based
initial screening of six different HDACi shows 2-10 fold enhancement of NIS
promoter activity in majority of the cell types tested. As a result of drug
treatment, endogenous NIS transcript and protein shows profound induction in BC
cells. To get an insight on the mechanism of such transcriptional activation,
role of Stat4, CREB and other transcription factors are revealed by transcription
factor profiling array. Further, NIS-mediated intracellular iodide uptake also
enhances substantially (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) signifying functional relevance of the
transcriptional modulation strategy. Gamma camera imaging confirms 30% higher
uptake in VPA or NaB treated BC tumor xenograft. Corroborating with such
functional impact of NIS, significant reduction in cell survival (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005) is
observed in VPA, NaB or CI994 drug and (131)I combination treatment in vivo
indicating effective radioablation. Thus, for the first time this study reveals
the mechanistic basis and demonstrates functional relevance of HDACi
pre-treatment strategy in elevating NIS gene therapy approach for BC management
in clinic.

PMCID: PMC4726020
PMID: 26777440  [PubMed - in process]


12. Clin Exp Allergy. 2016 Jan 14. doi: 10.1111/cea.12710. [Epub ahead of print]

Therapeutic implication of genetic variants of IL13 and STAT4 in airway
remodelling with bronchial asthma.

Nakamura Y(1), Suzuki R(1), Mizuno T(1), Abe K(1), Chiba S(1), Horii Y(1), Tsuboi
J(2), Ito S(3), Obara W(4), Tanita T(5), Kanno H(6), Yamauchi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Allergy, and Rheumatology Department of
Internal Medicine, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine. (2)Department of 
Cardiovascular Surgery, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Urology, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine.
(6)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine.

BACKGROUND: Several gene variants identified in bronchial asthmatic patients are 
associated with a decrease in pulmonary function. The effects of this
intervention on pulmonary function have not been fully researched.
OBJECTIVE: We determined the effects of high-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) 
on decreased pulmonary function in asthmatic Japanese patients with variants of
IL13 and STAT4 during long-term treatments with low to mild doses of ICS.
METHODS: In this study, 411 patients with bronchial asthma who were receiving
ICSs and living in Japan were recruited, were genotyped, and underwent pulmonary 
function tests and fibreoptic examinations. The effects of two years of high-dose
ICSs administered to asthmatic patients who were homozygous for IL13 AA of
rs20541 or STAT4 TT of rs925847 and who progressed to airway remodelling were
investigated.
RESULTS: High-dose ICS treatment increased the pulmonary function of patients
homozygous for IL13 AA of rs20541 but not of patients homozygous for STAT4 TT of 
rs925847. The increased concentrations of the mediators IL23, IL11, GMCSF,
hyaluronic acid, IL24, and CCL8 in bronchial lavage fluid (BLF) were diminished
after high-dose ICS treatment in patients homozygous for IL13 AA of rs20541.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: IL13 AA of rs20541 and STAT4 TT of rs925847
are potential genomic biomarkers for predicting lower pulmonary function. The
administration of high-dose ICSs to asthmatic patients with genetic variants of
IL13 AA may inhibit the advancement of airway remodelling. The genetic variants
of STAT4 TT did not respond to high-dose ICSs. Therefore, using medications other
than ICSs must be considered even during the initial treatment of bronchial
asthma. These genetic variants may aid in the realization of personalized and
phenotype-specific therapies for bronchial asthma. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26765219  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(18):8405-10.

Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in STAT3 and STAT4 and Risk of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma in Thai Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B.

Chanthra N(1), Payungporn S, Chuaypen N, Piratanantatavorn K, Pinjaroen N,
Poovorawan Y, Tangkijvanich P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Hepatitis and Liver Cancer, Department of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand E-mail :
pisittkvn@yahoo.com.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the leading cause of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) development. Recent studies demonstrated that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2293152 in signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) and rs7574865 in signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) are associated with chronic hepatitis B (CHB)-related HCC
in the Chinese population. We hypothesized that these polymorphisms might be
related to HCC susceptibility in Thai population as well. Study subjects were
divided into 3 groups consisting of CHB-related HCC (n=192), CHB without HCC
(n=200) and healthy controls (n=190). The studied SNPs were genotyped using
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
The results showed that the distribution of different genotypes for both
polymorphisms were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P>0.05). Our data demonstrated 
positive association of rs7574865 with HCC risk when compared to healthy controls
under an additive model (GG versus TT: odds ratio (OR) =2.07, 95% confidence
interval (CI)=1.06-4.03, P=0.033). This correlation remained significant under
allelic and recessive models (OR=1.46, 95% CI=1.09-1.96, P=0.012 and OR=1.71, 95%
CI=1.13-2.59, P=0.011, respectively). However, no significant association between
rs2293152 and HCC development was observed. These data suggest that SNP rs7574865
in STAT4 might contribute to progression to HCC in the Thai population.

PMID: 26745093  [PubMed - in process]


14. Int J Dermatol. 2016 Apr;55(4):408-16. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12839. Epub 2015 Dec 29.

Polymorphisms in STAT4 and IRF5 increase the risk of systemic sclerosis: a
meta-analysis.

Xu Y(1), Wang W(1), Tian Y(1), Liu J(1), Yang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, General Hospital of Beijing Military Command,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is the most severe connective tissue
disorder. Recent studies have demonstrated that genetic factors may play a role
in the development of SSc. The aim of this study was to investigate the
association of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4)
rs7574865 and interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) rs2004640 polymorphisms with 
risk of SSc.
METHODS: Case-control studies were obtained from the electronic database of
PubMed, Medline, Embase, and CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure) up to
December 2013. The association between STAT4 and IRF5 polymorphisms and SSc
susceptibility was assessed by pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI).
RESULTS: Six related studies, including 4746 SSc cases and 7399 healthy controls,
were pooled in this meta-analysis. For STAT4 polymorphism, we observed a
statistically significant positive association between risk factor T allele
carriers and SSc susceptibility (OR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.27-1.48, P < 0.00001) in
the overall population. The presence of limited cutaneous (lcSSc) and diffuse
cutaneous (dcSSc) scleroderma also showed a significant association with each of 
the genetic models (P < 0.00001). For IRF5 polymorphism, the T allele was shown
to be strongly associated with increased SSc risk (OR = 1.27, 95% CI = 1.17-1.39,
P < 0.00001). No significant heterogeneity between studies was found.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrated that STAT4 rs7574865 and IRF5 rs2004640G/T 
substitution are associated with a susceptibility to SSc, and they may serve as
the SSc genetic susceptibility factor. These data confirmed that genetic
polymorphisms may play a role in the development of SSc and have provided new
insight into the pathogenesis of SSc.

© 2015 The International Society of Dermatology.

PMID: 26712637  [PubMed - in process]


15. Hepatology. 2016 Apr;63(4):1102-11. doi: 10.1002/hep.28423. Epub 2016 Feb 19.

Genetic variation in STAT4 predicts response to interferon-a therapy for
hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B.

Jiang DK(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Wu X(8), Qian J(1,)(2), Ma XP(1), Yang
J(1,)(2), Li Z(9), Wang R(10), Sun L(10), Liu F(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(11), Zhang
P(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Zhu X(8), Wu J(8), Chen K(8), Conran C(6), Zheng SL(5,)(6), Lu 
D(1,)(2), Yu L(1,)(12), Liu Y(8), Xu J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(6,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center
for Genetics and Development, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (2)Ministry
of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Fudan University,
Shanghai, P.R. China. (3)Center for Genetic Epidemiology, School of Life
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (4)Center for Genomic
Translational Medicine and Prevention, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.
(5)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC. (6)Program for Personalized Cancer Care, NorthShore University
HealthSystem, Evanston, IL. (7)Pritzker School of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL. (8)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School 
of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P.R. China.
(9)Department of Infectious Disease, Affiliated Youan Hospital, Capital
University of Medical Science, Beijing, P.R. China. (10)Xiamen Amoytop Biotech
Co., Ltd., Xiamen, Fujian Province, P.R. China. (11)Fudan Institute of Urology,
Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (12)Institute of
Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Interferon (IFN)-a is a first-line therapy for chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients
but only initiates a response in a minority of patients. A genetic variant,
rs7574865 in STAT4, was recently reported to be associated with risk of
developing CHB and hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma. We aimed
to determine whether this variant is associated with the response to IFNa
treatment for hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-positive CHB patients. We studied 466
HBeAg-positive CHB patients who received either IFNa-2b (n = 224) or pegylated
IFNa-2a (n = 242) therapy for 48 weeks and were followed for an additional 24
weeks. The rate of sustained virologic response (SVR), defined as HBeAg
seroconversion along with hepatitis B virus DNA level <2000 copies/mL at week 72,
was compared among patients with different genotypes of rs7574865. After 48 weeks
of treatment and 24 weeks off treatment, the SVR rates in the IFNa-2b and
pegylated IFNa-2a therapy groups were 30.4% and 28.9%, respectively. Compared to 
the rs7574865 GT/TT genotype, the GG genotype (a risk factor of CHB and hepatitis
B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma) was significantly associated with a
reduced SVR rate in both patients who received IFNa-2b therapy (21.1% versus
37.2%, P = 0.01) and those who received pegylated IFNa-2a therapy (18.0% versus
41.2%, P = 9.74 × 10(-5) ). In joint analysis of the 466 patients, the GG
genotype was associated with an approximately half SVR rate compared to the GT/TT
genotype (19.3% versus 39.1%, P = 4.15 × 10(-6) ). A multivariate logistic
regression model including rs7574865 and clinical variables showed that rs7574865
was the most significant factor for the prediction of SVR.CONCLUSION: STAT4
rs7574865 is a reliable predictor of response to IFNa therapy for HBeAg-positive 
CHB patients and may be used for optimizing the treatment of CHB. (Hepatology
2016;63:1102-1111).

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 26704347  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 1;196(3):1209-17. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501224. Epub 2015
Dec 22.

Cytoplasmic STAT4 Promotes Antiviral Type I IFN Production by Blocking
CHIP-Mediated Degradation of RIG-I.

Zhao K(1), Zhang Q(2), Li X(1), Zhao D(1), Liu Y(3), Shen Q(4), Yang M(5), Wang
C(1), Li N(4), Cao X(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China; (2)National Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Immunology, Institute of
Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100005, China; National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology,
Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433,
China; and. (3)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou 310058, China. (4)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology,
Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433,
China; and. (5)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department
of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China; Institute of
Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(6)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China; National Key
Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Institute of Immunology, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China; and Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China caoxt@immunol.org.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) signaling is critical to host innate
immune response against RNA virus infection. Numerous factors use different
mechanisms to regulate RIG-I signaling. In this study, we report that STAT family
member STAT4 promotes RIG-I-triggered type I IFN production in antiviral innate
immunity. Silencing of STAT4 impaired IFN-ß production in macrophages upon RNA
virus infection, whereas overexpression of STAT4 enhanced RIG-I-induced IFN-ß
promoter activation and IFN-stimulated response element activity. Silencing of
STAT4 increased degradation of RIG-I. Interestingly, during RNA virus infection
STAT4 was found to be constantly present in cytoplasm of macrophages without
Tyr(693) phosphorylation, which is required for its classical activation and
nuclear translocation. Mechanistically, cytoplasmic STAT4 could interact with E3 
ligase CHIP and block RIG-I and CHIP association, preventing CHIP-mediated
proteasomal degradation of RIG-I via K48-linked ubiquitination. Our study
provides a new manner for posttranslational regulation of RIG-I signaling and
identifies a previously unknown function of cytoplasm-localized STAT4 in
antiviral innate immunity.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26695369  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Diagn Ther. 2016 Feb;20(1):83-95. doi: 10.1007/s40291-015-0181-0.

Application of Various Statistical Models to Explore Gene-Gene Interactions in
Folate, Xenobiotic, Toll-Like Receptor and STAT4 Pathways that Modulate
Susceptibility to Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Rupasree Y(1), Naushad SM(2), Varshaa R(2), Mahalakshmi GS(2), Kumaraswami K(3), 
Rajasekhar L(3), Kutala VK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Nizam's Institute of
Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 500082, India. (2)School of Chemical and
Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Tirumalaisamudram, Thanjavur, 613401, India.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Panjagutta,
Hyderabad, 500082, India. (4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 500082, India.
vijaykutala@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: In view of our previous studies showing an independent association 
of genetic polymorphisms in folate, xenobiotic, and toll-like receptor (TLR)
pathways with the risk for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), we have developed 
three statistical models to delineate complex gene-gene interactions between
folate, xenobiotic, TLR, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) signaling pathways in association with the molecular pathophysiology of
SLE.
METHODS: We developed additive, multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR), and
artificial neural network (ANN) models.
RESULTS: The additive model, although the simplest, suggested a moderate
predictability of 30 polymorphisms of these four pathways (area under the curve
[AUC] 0.66). MDR analysis revealed significant gene-gene interactions among
glutathione-S-transferase (GST)T1 and STAT4 (rs3821236 and rs7574865)
polymorphisms, which account for moderate predictability of SLE. The MDR model
for specific auto-antibodies revealed the importance of gene-gene interactions
among cytochrome P450, family1, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (CYP1A1) m1,
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) H108L, solute carrier family 19 (folate
transporter), member 1 (SLC19A1) G80A, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), TLR5,
5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase reductase (MTRR),
thymidylate synthase (TYMS). and STAT4 polymorphisms. The ANN model for disease
prediction showed reasonably good predictability of SLE risk with 30
polymorphisms (AUC 0.76). These polymorphisms contribute towards the production
of SSB and anti-dsDNA antibodies to the extent of 48 and 40 %, respectively,
while their contribution for the production of antiRNP, SSA, and anti-cardiolipin
antibodies varies between 20 and 30 %.
CONCLUSION: The current study highlighted the importance of genetic polymorphisms
in folate, xenobiotic, TLR, and STAT4 signaling pathways as moderate predictors
of SLE risk and delineates the molecular pathophysiology associated with these
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by demonstrating their association with
specific auto-antibody production.

PMID: 26689915  [PubMed - in process]


18. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 21;5:18855. doi: 10.1038/srep18855.

Network-assisted analysis of primary Sjögren's syndrome GWAS data in Han Chinese.

Fang K(1), Zhang K(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) is a complex autoimmune disorder. So far,
genetic research in pSS has lagged far behind and the underlying biological
mechanism is unclear. Further exploring existing genome-wide association study
(GWAS) data is urgently expected to uncover disease-related gene combination
patterns. Herein, we conducted a network-based analysis by integrating pSS GWAS
in Han Chinese with a protein-protein interactions network to identify pSS
candidate genes. After module detection and evaluation, 8 dense modules covering 
40 genes were obtained for further functional annotation. Additional 31 MHC genes
with significant gene-level P-values (sigMHC-gene) were also remained. The
combined module genes and sigMHC-genes, a total of 71 genes, were denoted as pSS 
candidate genes. Of these pSS candidates, 14 genes had been reported to be
associated with any of pSS, RA, and SLE, including STAT4, GTF2I, HLA-DPB1,
HLA-DRB1, PTTG1, HLA-DQB1, MBL2, TAP2, CFLAR, NFKBIE, HLA-DRA, APOM, HLA-DQA2 and
NOTCH4. This is the first report of the network-assisted analysis for pSS GWAS
data to explore combined gene patterns associated with pSS. Our study suggests
that network-assisted analysis is a useful approach to gaining further insights
into the biology of associated genes and providing important clues for future
research into pSS etiology.

PMCID: PMC4685393
PMID: 26686423  [PubMed - in process]


19. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Dec 2;69:1291-8.

Activity of JAK/STAT and NF-kB in patients with axial spondyloarthritis.

Swierkot J(1), Sokolik R(1), Czarny A(2), Zaczynska E(2), Nowak B(3), Chlebicki
A(4), Korman L(1), Madej M(1), Wojtala P(4), Lubinski L(4), Wiland P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University. 
(2)L. Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy 
of Sciences. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw. 
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Medicine, Wroclaw University Hospital.

BACKGROUND: The etiology of axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) is not fully
elucidated. Research continues in determining the mechanisms responsible for
initiation of the disease process, its maintenance and development.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of transcription
factors STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) and NF-<U+03BA>B
(nuclear factor kappa B) as well as Janus kinase3 (JAK3) in the peripheral blood 
leukocytes. We also analyzed the connection between the degree of activation of
transcription factors and the disease activity.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The study involved 46 patients with axSpA and 19 healthy
individuals who comprised the control group. The expression of NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT1,
STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, STAT6, and JAK3 in peripheral blood leukocytes was assessed.
To determine the degree of activation of transcription factors STAT-s and NF-<U+03BA>B
and JAK3 kinase, the immunocytochemistry method was used. For location of the
factors, the primary monoclonal anti-NF-<U+03BA>B, anti-JAK3 and polyclonal anti-STAT-s 
antibodies were used (Chemicon International, USA, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), and the
set of antibodies Novocastain Super ABC Kit (Novocastra, UK).
RESULTS: Expression of STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, STAT6, NF-<U+03BA>B and JAK3 was
statistically higher in the group of patients with axSpA than in the control
group. There was a positive correlation with ESR values and expression of STAT4. 
There was no correlation between STAT, NF-<U+03BA>B, and JAK3 expression and ASDAS,
BASDAI, and BASFI. Nine patients were treated with TNF-a inhibitors. The
expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT6 was higher in the group treated with TNF-a
inhibitors, even though disease activity in these patients was shown to be lower 
than in those not receiving such treatment (ASDAS = 1.34±0.51 vs. 3.52±0.90,
BASDAI = 2.34±1.92 vs. 5.51±2.41).
CONCLUSIONS: In the group of patients with axSpA compared with the control group,
higher expression of the transcription factors STAT and NF-<U+03BA>B as well as JAK3 was
observed. Due to its crucial roles in inflammation and autoimmunity, STAT4 may
have promise as an effective therapeutic target for axSpA.

PMID: 26671920  [PubMed - in process]


20. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Dec 14. doi: 10.1002/art.39548. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of a systemic lupus erythematosus risk locus spanning ATG16L2,
FCHSD2, and P2RY2 in Koreans.

Lessard CJ(1), Sajuthi S(2), Zhao J(3), Kim K(4), Ice JA(1), Li H(1,)(5),
Ainsworth H(2), Rasmussen A(1), Kelly JA(1), Marion M(2), Bang SY(4), Bin Joo
Y(4), Choi J(4), Lee HS(4), Kang YM(6), Suh CH(7), Chung WT(8), Lee SK(9), Choe
JY(10), Shim SC(11), Oh JH(12), Kim YJ(12), Han BG(12), Shen N(13,)(14), Howe
HS(15), Wakeland EK(16), Li QZ(16), Song YW(17), Gaffney PM(1), Alarcón-Riquelme 
ME(1,)(18), Criswell LA(19), Jacob CO(20), Kimberly RP(21), Vyse TJ(22), Harley
JB(23,)(24), Sivils KL(1,)(5), Bae SC(4), Langefeld CD(2), Tsao BP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. (2)Center for Public Health Genomics
and Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-106, USA. (3)Division of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
90095, USA. (4)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for
Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, 133-792, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
73014, USA. (6)Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, 700-721, Republic
of Korea. (7)Ajou University Hospital, Suwon, 443-380, Republic of Korea.
(8)Dong-A University Hospital, Busan, 602-715, Republic of Korea. (9)Department
of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 120-749,
Republic of Korea. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University of
Daegu School of Medicine, Daegu, 705-718, Republic of Korea. (11)Daejeon
Rheumatoid & Degenerative Arthritis Center, Chungnam National University
Hospital, Daejeon, 305-764, Republic of Korea. (12)Korea National Institute of
Health, Osong, 361-709, Republic of Korea. (13)Shanghai Institute of
Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China, 200001. (14)Shanghai JiaoTong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China, 200025. (15)Department of
Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, 308433. 
(16)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101,
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Republic of Korea. (18)Centro de Genomica e
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucia,
Granada, 18100, Spain. (19)Rosalind Russell/Ephraim P. Engleman Rheumatology
Research Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
94117, USA. (20)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, 90095. (21)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology
and Rheumatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294,
USA. (22)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine and Immunology, Infection
and Inflammatory Disease, King's College London, London, UK, WC2R 2LS.
(23)Division of Rheumatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. (24)US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45220, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disorder
whose etiology is incompletely understood, but likely involves environmental
triggers in genetically susceptible individuals. We sought to identify the
genetic loci associated with SLE in a Korean population by performing an unbiased
genome-wide association scan.
METHODS: A total of 1,174 Korean SLE cases and 4,248 population controls were
genotyped with strict quality control measures and analyzed for association. For 
select variants, replication was tested in an independent set of 1,412 SLE cases 
and 1,163 population controls of Korean and Chinese ancestries.
RESULTS: Eleven regions outside the HLA exceeded genome-wide significance
(P<5x10(-8) ). A novel SNP-SLE association was identified between FCHSD2 and
P2RY2 peaking at rs11235667 (P = 1.0x10(-8) , odds ratio (OR) = 0.59) on a 33kb
haplotype upstream to ATG16L2. Replication for rs11235667 resulted in Pmeta-rep
=0.001 and Pmeta-overall =6.67x10(-11) (OR=0.63). Within the HLA region,
association peaked in the Class II region at rs116727542 with multiple
independent effects. Classical HLA allele imputation identified HLA-DRB1*1501 and
HLA-DQB1*0602, both highly correlated, as most strongly associated with SLE. We
replicated ten previously established SLE risk loci: STAT1-STAT4, TNFSF4,
TNFAIP3, IKZF1, HIP1, IRF5, BLK, WDFY4, ETS1 and IRAK1-MECP2. Of these loci, we
identified previously unreported independent second effects in TNFAIP3 and TNFSF4
as well as differences in the association for a putative causal variant in the
WDFY4 region.
CONCLUSIONS: Further studies are needed to identify true SLE risk effects in
other suggestive loci and to identify the causal variant(s) in the regions of
ATG16L2, FCHSD2, and P2RY2. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26663301  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Environ Int. 2016 Feb;87:94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2015.10.002. Epub 2015 Dec
2.

Air pollution and childhood bronchitis: Interaction with xenobiotic, immune
regulatory and DNA repair genes.

Ghosh R(1), Rossner P(2), Honkova K(2), Dostal M(2), Sram RJ(2), Hertz-Picciotto 
I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States. Electronic address: 
rakesh.ghosh@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, 14220 Prague, Czech Republic. (3)Department of
Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, United States.

BACKGROUND: Gene-environment interactions have been investigated for diseases
such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cancer etc. but acute
disease like bronchitis has rarely been studied. We investigated interactions
between air pollution (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and particulate
matter <2.5µm (PM2.5)) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in EPHX1, IL10, 
STAT4 and XPC genes in relation to bronchitis in children aged 0-2years.
METHODS: A stratified random sample of 1133 Czech children, born between 1994 and
1998 in two districts, were followed since birth, of which 626 were genotyped.
Pediatrician-diagnosed bronchitis episodes were obtained from the medical
records. Central-site monitors measured air pollution exposure. We used
multivariable logistic regression and estimated coefficients using generalized
estimating equations. Interaction was assessed between pollutants and genes and
associations in genotype-specific strata were presented. False discovery rate was
used to adjust for multiple comparisons.
RESULTS: There were 803 episodes of bronchitis with an incidence rate of 56 per
1000 child-months. We found significant gene-environment interaction between PAH 
and four SNPs (EPHX1, (rs2854461), STAT4 (rs16833215), XPC (rs2228001 and
rs2733532)), which became non-significant after adjusting for multiple
comparisons. PM2.5 interactions with two XPC SNPs (rs2228001 and rs2733532)
remained significant after accounting for multiple comparisons and those with CC 
alleles had a more than doubling of odds, OR=2.65 (95% CI: 1.91, 3.69) and 2.72
(95% CI: 1.95, 3.78), respectively, per 25µg/m(3) increase in exposure.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that the DNA repair gene XPC may play an
important role in the air pollution-induced pathogenesis of the inflammatory
disease bronchitis.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26655675  [PubMed - in process]


22. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar;223:16-22. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2015.11.016.
Epub 2015 Nov 28.

STAT4 knockout protects LPS-induced lung injury by increasing of MDSC and
promoting of macrophage differentiation.

Fu C(1), Jiang L(2), Xu X(1), Zhu F(1), Zhang S(1), Wu X(1), Liu Z(1), Yang X(3),
Li S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shanghai Chest
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030, China. (3)Shanghai
Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address: yang.xiangdong@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address: li.shanqun@zs-hospital.sh.cn.

The disruption of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4)
signal can inhibit the inflammation and protect organs from injury during severe 
bacterial infection. However, the mechanism of STAT4 signal in lung injury
remains poor understood. Here we report that STAT4 deficiency decreased the
lethality and protein leakage in STAT4(-/-) mice and protected lipopolysaccharid 
(LPS)-induced lung injury with ameliorated edema, inflammatory infiltration and
hemorrhage. The expression of CD11b(+)Gr-1(+) myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) markedly increased in the circulation of STAT4(-/-) mice after LPS
stimuli, accompanying with increased macrophages infiltration in inflamed lung
tissue. In addition, the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-a, interleukin (IL)-1ß and IL-6 decreased while
anti-inflammatory cytokine (IL-10) increased in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid 
of STAT4(-/-) mice. Thus, these results indicate that the accumulation of MDSCs
and macrophages play a critical role in LPS-induced lung injury. Targeting MDSCs 
and macrophages polarization through a STAT4 dependent signaling pathway might
help to reduce the inflammation and damage of lung tissue.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26644077  [PubMed - in process]


23. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2016 Apr;68(4):932-43. doi: 10.1002/art.39504.

Genome-Wide Association Study in an Amerindian Ancestry Population Reveals Novel 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Risk Loci and the Role of European Admixture.

Alarcón-Riquelme ME(1), Ziegler JT(2), Molineros J(1), Howard TD(2),
Moreno-Estrada A(3), Sánchez-Rodríguez E(4), Ainsworth HC(2), Ortiz-Tello P(3),
Comeau ME(2), Rasmussen A(1), Kelly JA(1), Adler A(1), Acevedo-Vázquez EM(5),
Mariano Cucho-Venegas J(5), García-De la Torre I(6), Cardiel MH(7), Miranda P(8),
Catoggio LJ(9), Maradiaga-Ceceña M(10), Gaffney PM(1), Vyse TJ(11), Criswell
LA(12), Tsao BP(13), Sivils KL(1), Bae SC(14), James JA(15), Kimberly RP(16),
Kaufman KM(17), Harley JB(17), Esquivel-Valerio JA(18), Moctezuma JF(19), García 
MA(20), Berbotto GA(21), Babini AM(22), Scherbarth H(23), Toloza S(24), Baca
V(25), Nath SK(1), Aguilar Salinas C(26), Orozco L(27), Tusié-Luna T(28),
Zidovetzki R(29), Pons-Estel BA(30), Langefeld CD(2), Jacob CO(31).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City. (2)Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. (3)Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, and Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la
Biodiversidad, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, Irapuato, Mexico. (4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York. (5)Hospital Nacional Guillermo Almenara Irigoyen,
Lima, Peru. (6)Hospital General de Occidente, Zapopan, Mexico. (7)Centro de
Investigación Clínica de Morelia, Morelia, Mexico. (8)Centro de Estudios
Reumatológicos, Santiago, Chile. (9)Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. (10)Hospital General de Culiacán, Culiacán, Mexico. (11)King's 
College London, London, UK. (12)University of California, San Francisco.
(13)University of California, Los Angeles. (14)Hanyang University Hospital for
Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (15)Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation and University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City.
(16)University of Alabama at Birmingham. (17)Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. (18)Hospital Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio
González Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico. (19)Hospital
General de México, Mexico City, Mexico. (20)Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos
General San Martin, La Plata, Argentina. (21)Hospital Escuela Eva Perón,
Granadero Baigorria, Argentina. (22)Hospital Italiano de Córdoba, Córdoba,
Argentina. (23)Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos Oscar E. Alende, Mar del
Plata, Argentina. (24)Hospital Interzonal San Juan Bautista, San Fernando del
Valle de Catamarca, Argentina. (25)Hospital de Peditaria, Centro Médico Nacional 
Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico City, Mexico.
(26)Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico
City, Mexico. (27)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico.
(28)Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán and
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico City, Mexico. (29)University of California, Riverside.
(30)Sanatorio Parque, Rosario, Argentina. (31)University of Southern California
School of Medicine, Los Angeles.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease
with a strong genetic component. We undertook the present work to perform the
first genome-wide association study on individuals from the Americas who are
enriched for Native American heritage.
METHODS: We analyzed 3,710 individuals from the US and 4 countries of Latin
America who were diagnosed as having SLE, and healthy controls. Samples were
genotyped with HumanOmni1 BeadChip. Data on out-of-study controls genotyped with 
HumanOmni2.5 were also included. Statistical analyses were performed using
SNPtest and SNPGWA. Data were adjusted for genomic control and false discovery
rate. Imputation was performed using Impute2 and, for classic HLA alleles, HiBag.
Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were calculated.
RESULTS: The IRF5-TNPO3 region showed the strongest association and largest OR
for SLE (rs10488631: genomic control-adjusted P [Pgcadj ] = 2.61 × 10(-29) , OR
2.12 [95% CI 1.88-2.39]), followed by HLA class II on the DQA2-DQB1 loci
(rs9275572: Pgcadj <U+2009>=<U+2009>1.11 × 10(-16) , OR 1.62 [95% CI 1.46-1.80] and rs9271366: 
Pgcadj <U+2009>=<U+2009>6.46 × 10(-12) , OR 2.06 [95% CI 1.71-2.50]). Other known SLE loci
found to be associated in this population were ITGAM, STAT4, TNIP1, NCF2, and
IRAK1. We identified a novel locus on 10q24.33 (rs4917385: Pgcadj <U+2009>=<U+2009>1.39 ×
10(-8) ) with an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) effect (Peqtl <U+2009>=<U+2009>8.0 
× 10(-37) at USMG5/miR1307), and several new suggestive loci. SLE risk loci
previously identified in Europeans and Asians were corroborated. Local ancestry
estimation showed that the HLA allele risk contribution is of European ancestral 
origin. Imputation of HLA alleles suggested that autochthonous Native American
haplotypes provide protection against development of SLE.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that studying admixed populations provides
new insights in the delineation of the genetic architecture that underlies
autoimmune and complex diseases.

© 2016, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26606652  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142683.
eCollection 2015.

The Minor Allele of rs7574865 in the STAT4 Gene Is Associated with Increased mRNA
and Protein Expression.

Lamana A(1), López-Santalla M(2), Castillo-González R(1), Ortiz AM(1), Martín
J(3), García-Vicuña R(1), González-Álvaro I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Reumatología, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria Hospital Universitario La Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Inmunología y Oncología, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
CSIC, Madrid, Spain. (3)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra,
CSIC, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The T allele of rs7574865 in STAT4 confers risk of developing
autoimmune disorders. However, its functional significance remains unclear. Here 
we analyze how rs7574865 affects the transcription of STAT4 and its protein
expression.
METHODS: We studied 201 patients (80% female; median age, 54 years; median
disease duration, 5.4 months) from PEARL study. Demographic, clinical, laboratory
and therapeutic data were collected at each visit. IL-6 serum levels were
measured by enzyme immune assay. The rs7574865 was genotyped using TaqMan probes.
The expression levels of STAT4 mRNA were determined at 182 visits from 69
patients using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. STAT4 protein
was assessed by western blot in 62 samples from 34 patients. To determine the
effect of different variables on the expression of STAT4 mRNA and protein, we
performed multivariate longitudinal analyses using generalized linear models.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, disease activity and glucocorticoid dose as
confounders, the presence of at least one copy of the T allele of rs7574865 was
significantly associated with higher levels of STAT4 mRNA. Similarly, TT patients
showed significantly higher levels of STAT4 protein than GG patients. IL-6
induced STAT4 and STAT5 phosphorylation in peripheral blood lymphocytes. Patients
carrying at least one T allele of rs7574865 displayed lower levels of serum IL-6 
compared to GG homozygous; by contrast the production of C-reactive protein was
similar in both populations.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the presence of the rs7574865 T allele enhances
STAT4 mRNA transcription and protein expression. It may enhance the signaling of 
molecules depending on the STAT4 pathway.

PMCID: PMC4646635
PMID: 26569609  [PubMed - in process]


25. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142735.
eCollection 2015.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12)/STAT4 Axis Is an Important Element for ß-Cell Dysfunction 
Induced by Inflammatory Cytokines.

Weaver JR(1), Nadler JL(2,)(3), Taylor-Fishwick DA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia
Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Department of
Internal Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, United
States of America. (3)Strelitz Diabetes Center, Eastern Virginia Medical School, 
Norfolk, Virginia, United States of America.

Pathology driving ß-cell loss in diabetes is poorly defined. Chronic subclinical 
inflammation is associated with ß-cell dysfunction. Acute in vitro exposure of
islets and ß-cells to an inflammatory cytokine cocktail (IL-1ß/TNF-a/IFN-<U+03B3>)
results in loss of cell function and viability. The contribution of each cytokine
alone or in combination has been evaluated in homogeneous mouse ß-cell lines and 
primary mouse islets. Cytokine cooperation is required for ß-cell apoptosis with 
the most potent combinations including IL-1ß. Single cytokine exposure did not
induce ß-cell apoptosis. Expression of endogenous interleukin-12 in ß-cells
correlated with inflammatory cytokine combinations that induced ß-cell apoptosis.
Uncoupling of the IL-12 axis by a block of IL-12 production, inhibition of IL-12 
receptor/ligand interaction or disruption of IL-12 receptor signaling conferred
protection to ß-cells from apoptosis induced by inflammatory cytokine
stimulation. Signaling through STAT4 is indicated since disruption of IL-12
concomitantly reduced inflammatory cytokine stimulation of endogenous IFN-<U+03B3>
expression. Primary mouse islets isolated from mice deficient in STAT4 show
resistance to inflammatory-cytokine-induced cell death when compared to islets
isolated from wild type mice. Collectively, the data identify IL-12 as an
important mediator of inflammation induced ß-cell apoptosis. Modulation of
IL-12/STAT4 signaling may be a valuable therapeutic strategy to preserve
islet/ß-cell viability in established diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4640700
PMID: 26555476  [PubMed - in process]


26. Immunobiology. 2016 Feb;221(2):291-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2015.10.006. Epub 2015
Oct 29.

IL12RB2 Polymorphisms correlate with risk of lung adenocarcinoma.

Prigione I(1), Covone AE(2), Giacopelli F(2), Bocca P(3), Risso M(4), Tripodi
G(4), Pistorio A(5), Sozzi G(6), Airoldi I(3), Ravazzolo R(7), Pistoia V(3).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Laboratorio di Oncologia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
Electronic address: ignaziaprigione@gaslini.org. (2)U.O.C. Genetica Medica,
Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. (3)U.O.C. Laboratorio di Oncologia,
Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. (4)U.O.C. Immunoematologia e Medicina
Trasfusionale, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. (5)U.O.S.D.
Epidemiologia, Biostatistica e Comitati, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova,
Italy. (6)S.C. Genomica Tumorale, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori 
Milano, Italy. (7)U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova,
Italy; Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy.

In a previous study, lack of IL-12 signaling in il12rb2 knock-out mice was found 
to predispose to lung adenocarcinoma (LAC). We asked whether specific
polymorphisms of the human IL12RB2 gene may confer susceptibility to LAC. We
studied IL12RB2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning from the promoter
to the first untranslated exon of the gene. Genotypes of 49 individuals with LAC 
were compared with those of 93 healthy subjects. Two allele variants were found
to be associated with increased susceptibility to LAC. One haplotype (hap),
hap18, was more frequent in patients (18%) versus controls (6%) and significantly
associated with increased probability of disease occurrence. Furthermore, IL-12
driven STAT4 phosphorylation in T cell blasts from healthy individuals was found 
to correlate with both single allele variants and haplotypes. In conclusion,
genetically determined low signaling activity of IL-12R predisposes to the
development of LAC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26547104  [PubMed - in process]


27. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 5;5:16278. doi: 10.1038/srep16278.

Genetic variations in STAT4,C2,HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQ associated with risk of
hepatitis B virus-related liver cirrhosis.

Jiang DK(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Ma XP(1), Wu X(7), Peng L(8), Yin J(9), Dan
Y(10), Huang HX(1), Ding DL(1), Zhang LY(1), Shi Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Zhang
P(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Yu H(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Sun J(5), Lilly Zheng S(5,)(6), Deng
G(10), Xu J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(6,)(11), Liu Y(7), Guo J(8), Cao G(9), Yu
L(1,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center
for Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Center for Genetic Epidemiology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. (4)Center for Genetic Translational Medicine and Prevention,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (5)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. (6)Program for Personalized Cancer
Care, NorthShore University HealthSystem, the University of Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (8)Division of Digestive Diseases,
Zhongshan Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (9)Department of Epidemiology, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (10)Department of Infectious Diseases,
Southwest Hospital, Institute of Immunology, Third Military Medical University,
and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, Chongqing, China. (11)Fudan 
Institute of Urology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(12)Institute of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Recent genome-wide associated studies (GWASs) have revealed several common loci
associated with the risk of hepatitis B virus (HBV)- or hepatitis C virus
(HCV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We selected 15 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) identified through GWASs on HBV- or HCV-related HCC, and
genotyped them in two independent Chinese cohorts of chronic HBV carriers,
including 712 LC cases and 2601 controls. The association of each SNP with the
risk of HBV-related LC was assessed by meta-analysis of the two cohorts. Of the
12 SNPs reported in HBV-related HCC GWASs, five SNPs (rs7574865 in STAT4,
rs9267673 near C2, rs2647073 and rs3997872 near HLA-DRB1 and rs9275319 near
HLA-DQ), were found to be significantly associated with the risk of HBV-related
LC (rs7574865: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.79<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-2), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.17, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.03-1.34; rs9267673:
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.91<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.37, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.15-1.63; rs2647073: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.53<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5),
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.63, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.29-2.06; rs3997872: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.22<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.86, 95%
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.32-2.62; rs9275319: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.30<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-2), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.32, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.06-1.64).
However, among the three SNPs associated with the risk of HCV-related HCC in
previous GWASs, none of them showed significant association with the risk of
HBV-related LC. Our results suggested that genetic variants associated with
HBV-related hepatocarcinogenesis may already play an important role in the
progression from CHB to LC.

PMCID: PMC4633722
PMID: 26538132  [PubMed - in process]


28. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Dec;29(2):383-92. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.10.025.
Epub 2015 Oct 24.

IL-35 inhibits acute graft-versus-host disease in a mouse model.

Zhang XH(1), Zhou Y(2), Zhang JM(2), Zhou SY(3), Wang M(2), Feng R(4), Feng
FE(2), Wang QM(2), Zhu XL(2), Zhao XS(2), Lv M(2), Kong Y(2), Chang YJ(2), Huang 
XJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of
Hematology, Beijing, China; Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Peking
University, China. Electronic address: zhangxh100@sina.com. (2)Peking University 
People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of Hematology, Beijing, China.
(3)Peking University People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of
Hematology, Beijing, China; Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Peking
University, China. (4)Department of Hematology, Beijing Hospital, Ministry of
Health, Beijing, China.

Acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD) is a serious complication of allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). Our previous study found
that the novel anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-35 could suppress aGVHD in patients 
after allo-HSCT. In this study, we used C57BL/6 (B6, H-2b) mice as donors and
(B6×DBA/2) F1 (BDF1, H-2b×d) mice as recipients to create a model of aGVHD and
explore the relationship between IL-35 and aGVHD. The mice receiving IL-35
survived longer than did the control mice. We observed that treatment with IL-35 
and RAPA could reduce the incidence of aGVHD. Additionally, this treatment
inhibited intestinal and thymic epithelial cell apoptosis and liver infiltration 
by the donor T-cells, thereby ameliorating the enteropathy and liver injury
caused by aGVHD. We found that IL-35 and RAPA also markedly suppressed TNF-a and 
IL-17A expression and enhanced IFN-<U+03B3> expression in the intestine and liver. We
measured Tregs in spleen and found that IL-35 and RAPA treatment expanded the
number of Tregs in spleen. We found that the phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT4
were inhibited in mice with aGVHD. In contrast, STAT1 and STAT4 were
phosphorylated when the mice were treated with IL-35. IL-35 may have therapeutic 
potential in the treatment of aGVHD after allo-HSCT.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26507167  [PubMed - in process]


29. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Oct 6. pii: annrheumdis-2015-207601. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-207601. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic variants in ANCA-associated vasculitis: a meta-analysis.

Rahmattulla C(1), Mooyaart AL(1), van Hooven D(1), Schoones JW(2), Bruijn JA(1), 
Dekkers OM(3); European Vasculitis Genetics Consortium, Bajema IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)Walaeus Library, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands Department of Medicine, Division Endocrinology,
Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands Department of Clinical 
Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors may influence the pathogenic pathways leading to
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV). We
performed a meta-analysis to determine the genetic variants most likely
associated with AAV and investigated whether diagnostic and serological subtypes 
within AAV have distinct genetic backgrounds.
METHODS: Studies investigating the association between genetic variants and AAV
in humans were searched in PubMed, EMBASE and Web of Science. All variants
investigated in at least two studies were selected. Subsequently, all studies
assessing these variants were included in this meta-analysis. Additionally, data 
on these variants from the largest genome-wide association studies in AAV were
included to increase the validity of this meta-analysis.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded 5180 articles. 62 articles investigating
140 genetic variants were included, 33 of which were associated with AAV in a
meta-analysis. These genetic variants were in or near the following genes: CD226,
CTLA-4, FCGR2A, HLA-B, HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, HLA-DR, HSD17B8, IRF5, PTPN22, RING1/RXRB,
RXRB, STAT4, SERPINA1 and TLR9. Moreover, we identified genetic distinctions
between granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis and between
proteinase 3 ANCA vasculitis and myeloperoxidase ANCA vasculitis. In 76% of the
genetic variants, subdivision based on ANCA serotype resulted in higher ORs than 
subdivision based on clinical diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis identified 33 genetic variants associated with
AAV, supporting a role for alpha-1-antitrypsin, the major histocompatibility
complex system, and several distinct inflammatory processes in AAV pathogenesis. 
Our results indicate that subdivision of AAV based on ANCA serotype has a
stronger genetic basis than subdivision based on clinical diagnosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26443607  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;32(5):728-33. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2015.05.026.

[Progress of molecular genetics research on rheumatoid arthritis].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen R(1), Luo J, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, North Sichuan Medical College,
Nanchong, Sichuan 637000, P.R. China. Email: zdd25@sina.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, inflammatory, autoimmune disorder that
principally attacks flexible joints and synovia. The precise pathogenesis of RA
remains unclear, and genetic factors probably play an important role in its
etiology. In addition to genes from human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region, such as
HLA-DRB, genes from non-HLA region, such as TIM-3, PTPN22, TRAF1/C5, STAT4, CCR5,
PADI4 and FCGR2A may also contribute to its susceptibility. The advance in
molecular genetics research on RA is reviewed here.

PMID: 26419001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 24;5:13887. doi: 10.1038/srep13887.

Associations between interleukin and interleukin receptor gene polymorphisms and 
risk of gout.

Liu S(1,)(2), Zhou Z(3), Wang C(2), Guo M(1), Chu N(4), Li C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, 266003, China. (2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Metabolic
Disease, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(3)Institute of Clinical Research, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, 266003, China. (4)Qingdao HaiCi hospital, Qingdao, 266003, China.

Gout is a self-limiting, auto-inflammatory arthritis induced by the deposition of
monosodium urate crystals in the synovial fluid and periarticular tissues. The
aim of this study was to investigate the associations between genetic variants in
the interleukin (IL) and interleukin receptor (ILR) genes IL-33, IL-1RL1, IL-23R,
and signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and susceptibility
to gout in Chinese Han male individuals. The genetic distributions of rs3939286
in IL-33, rs13015714 in IL-1RL1, rs10889677 in IL-23R, and rs7574865 in STAT4
were detected in 1100 men with gout and 1227 ethnically matched controls, using
Taqman allelic discrimination real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Differences in these polymorphisms between the groups were investigated using
<U+03C7>(2) tests. The genotype-phenotype relationship among gout patients was tested by
analysis of variance. There was a significant difference in genotypic frequencies
of IL-23R rs10889677 between gout patients and controls (<U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>= 81.386, P <
0.001). However, there were no significant differences in distributions of the
other polymorphisms between the groups. Our results revealed that the rs10889677 
variant in IL-23R may be involved in the development of gout in Chinese Han male 
individuals. However, further studies in other ethnic groups are needed to
confirm these results.

PMCID: PMC4585862
PMID: 26399911  [PubMed - in process]


32. Clin Exp Allergy. 2016 Jan;46(1):112-24. doi: 10.1111/cea.12642.

Genetic associations with viral respiratory illnesses and asthma control
in children.

Loisel DA(1,)(2), Du G(1), Ahluwalia TS(3,)(4), Tisler CJ(5), Evans MD(6), Myers 
RA(1), Gangnon RE(6,)(7), Kreiner-Møller E(3), Bønnelykke K(3), Bisgaard H(3),
Jackson DJ(5), Lemanske RF Jr(5,)(8), Nicolae DL(1,)(9,)(10), Gern JE(5), Ober
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Saint Michael's College, Colchester, VT, USA.
(3)COPSAC, Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood, Herlev and
Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Ledreborg Allé 34, DK-2820,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark. (5)Department
of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI, USA. (6)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(7)Department of Population Health Sciences, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA. (8)Department of Medicine,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(10)Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Viral respiratory infections can cause acute wheezing illnesses in
children and exacerbations of asthma.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify variation in genes with known antiviral and
pro-inflammatory functions to identify specific associations with more severe
viral respiratory illnesses and the risk of virus-induced exacerbations during
the peak fall season.
METHODS: The associations between genetic variation at 326 SNPs in 63 candidate
genes and 10 phenotypes related to viral respiratory infection and asthma control
were examined in 226 children enrolled in the RhinoGen study. Replication of
asthma control phenotypes was performed in 2128 children in the Copenhagen
Prospective Study on Asthma in Childhood (COPSAC). Significant associations in
RhinoGen were further validated using virus-induced wheezing illness and asthma
phenotypes in an independent sample of 122 children enrolled in the Childhood
Origins of Asthma (COAST) birth cohort study.
RESULTS: A significant excess of P values smaller than 0.05 was observed in the
analysis of the 10 RhinoGen phenotypes. Polymorphisms in 12 genes were
significantly associated with variation in the four phenotypes showing a
significant enrichment of small P values. Six of those genes (STAT4, JAK2, MX1,
VDR, DDX58, and EIF2AK2) also showed significant associations with asthma
exacerbations in the COPSAC study or with asthma or virus-induced wheezing
phenotypes in the COAST study.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified genetic factors contributing to individual differences
in childhood viral respiratory illnesses and virus-induced exacerbations of
asthma. Defining mechanisms of these associations may provide insight into the
pathogenesis of viral respiratory infections and virus-induced exacerbations of
asthma.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4715666 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26399222  [PubMed - in process]


33. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Nov;243(1):169-78. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.08.045. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

STAT4 deficiency reduces the development of atherosclerosis in mice.

Taghavie-Moghadam PL(1), Gjurich BN(1), Jabeen R(2), Krishnamurthy P(2), Kaplan
MH(2), Dobrian AD(3), Nadler JL(4), Galkina EV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia Medical
School, Norfolk, VA, USA. (2)Dept. of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (3)Dept. of Physiological Sciences, Eastern
Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA. (4)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Eastern
Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA. (5)Dept. of Microbiology and Molecular
Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA. Electronic
address: galkinev@evms.edu.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory process that leads to plaque formation 
in large and medium sized vessels. T helper 1 (Th1) cells constitute the majority
of plaque infiltrating pro-atherogenic T cells and are induced via IFN<U+03B3>-dependent
activation of T-box (Tbet) and/or IL-12-dependent activation of signal transducer
and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). We thus aimed to define a role for
STAT4 in atherosclerosis. STAT4-deficiency resulted in a ~71% reduction (p <
0.001) in plaque burden in Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) vs Apoe(-/-) mice fed chow diet
and significantly attenuated atherosclerosis (~31%, p < 0.01) in western diet fed
Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) mice. Surprisingly, reduced atherogenesis in
Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) mice was not due to attenuated IFN<U+03B3> production in vivo by Th1
cells, suggesting an at least partially IFN<U+03B3>-independent pro-atherogenic role of 
STAT4. STAT4 is expressed in T cells, but also detected in macrophages (MFs).
Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-)in vitro differentiated M1 or M2 MFs had reduced cytokine
production compare to Apoe(-/-) M1 and M2 MFs that was accompanied by reduced
induction of CD69, I-A(b), and CD86 in response to LPS stimulation.
Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) MFs expressed attenuated levels of CCR2 and demonstrated
reduced migration toward CCL2 in a transwell assay. Importantly, the percentage
of aortic CD11b(+)F4/80(+)Ly6C(hi) MFs was reduced in Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) vs
Apoe(-/-) mice. Thus, this study identifies for the first time a pro-atherogenic 
role of STAT4 that is at least partially independent of Th1 cell-derived IFN<U+03B3>,
and primarily involving the modulation of MF responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4636132 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26386214  [PubMed - in process]


34. Dig Dis. 2015 Sep 14;33 Suppl 1:113-119. [Epub ahead of print]

The IL-12/23/STAT Axis as a Therapeutic Target in Inflammatory Bowel Disease:
Mechanisms and Evidence in Man.

Marafini I, Angelucci E, Pallone F, Monteleone G.

BACKGROUND: In inflamed tissues of patients with inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD), many immune and non-immune cells produce a vast array of cytokines, which 
contribute to expand and maintain the pathologic process. Key Message:
Interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23, 2 heterodimeric cytokines sharing the common p40
subunit, are over-produced in IBD and supposed to play a major role in promoting 
and/or sustaining the pro-inflammatory cytokine response in these disorders.
IL-12 targets mostly T cells and innate lymphoid cells and through activation of 
Stat4 promotes T helper (Th)1 cell polarization, interferon-x03B3; and IL-21
production, while IL-23 activates Stat3 thus amplifying Th17 cell programs. These
observations together with the demonstration that IL-12 and IL-23 drive
pathogenic responses in animal models of colitis have paved the way for the
development of IL-12p40 blockers. Two monoclonal antibodies (ustekinumab and
briakinumab) targeting p40 have been tested in Crohn's disease (CD) patients.
Blockade of IL-12p40 is beneficial in CD patients resistant to tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) antagonists and promotes resolution of psoriatic lesions that
develop in IBD patients following anti-TNF therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The available human data support the pathogenic role of IL-12/IL-23 
in IBD and suggest that IL-12p40 blockers could help manage some subsets of IBD
patients.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26366705  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Sep 11. pii: annrheumdis-2015-208119. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-208119. [Epub ahead of print]

Dense genotyping of immune-related loci in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies
confirms HLA alleles as the strongest genetic risk factor and suggests different 
genetic background for major clinical subgroups.

Rothwell S(1), Cooper RG(2), Lundberg IE(3), Miller FW(4), Gregersen PK(5), Bowes
J(1), Vencovsky J(6), Danko K(7), Limaye V(8), Selva-O'Callaghan A(9), Hanna
MG(10), Machado PM(10), Pachman LM(11), Reed AM(12), Rider LG(4), Cobb J(13),
Platt H(14), Molberg Ø(15), Benveniste O(16), Mathiesen P(17), Radstake T(18),
Doria A(19), De Bleecker J(20), De Paepe B(20), Maurer B(21), Ollier WE(14),
Padyukov L(3), O'Hanlon TP(4), Lee A(5), Amos CI(22), Gieger C(23), Meitinger
T(24), Winkelmann J(25), Wedderburn LR(26), Chinoy H(27), Lamb JA(14); Myositis
Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Denton C, Mann H, Hilton-Jones D, Kiely P, Plotz PH, Gourley M,
Rouster-Stevens K, Huber AM, Marder G, Dimachkie M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, Arthritis Research UK, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. (2)Department of Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute
of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Environmental Autoimmunity Group,
Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Science,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (5)The Robert S Boas
Center for Genomics and Human Genetics, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research,
Manhasset, New York, USA. (6)Institute of Rheumatology and Department of
Rheumatology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic. (7)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. (8)Royal Adelaide Hospital and
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (9)Department of
Internal Medicine, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. (10)MRC Centre for
Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. (11)Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine and Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's
Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (12)Department of Pediatrics, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (13)Arthritis Research UK, NIHR
Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Central Manchester NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. (14)Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (15)Department of Rheumatology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (16)Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, UPMC, APHP,
Paris, France. (17)Paediatric Department, Naestved Hospital, Næstved, Denmark.
(18)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (19)Department of Medicine, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy. (20)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Reference
Centre, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. (21)Department of Rheumatology
and Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (22)Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New
Hampshire, USA. (23)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für
Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany. (24)Institute of Human
Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany Institute of Human
Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Neuherberg, Germany. (25)Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum
rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany Institute of
Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany. (26)Arthritis Research UK Centre for
Adolescent Rheumatology, and Institute of Child Health, University College
London, London, UK. (27)National Institute of Health Research Manchester
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Centre for Musculoskeletal Research,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs) are a heterogeneous
group of rare autoimmune diseases characterised by muscle weakness and
extramuscular manifestations such as skin rashes and interstitial lung disease.
We genotyped 2566 IIM cases of Caucasian descent using the Immunochip; a custom
array covering 186 established autoimmune susceptibility loci. The cohort was
predominantly comprised of patients with dermatomyositis (DM, n=879), juvenile DM
(JDM, n=481), polymyositis (PM, n=931) and inclusion body myositis (n=252)
collected from 14 countries through the Myositis Genetics Consortium.
RESULTS: The human leucocyte antigen (HLA) and PTPN22 regions reached genome-wide
significance (p<5×10(-8)). Nine regions were associated at a significance level
of p<2.25×10(-5), including UBE2L3, CD28 and TRAF6, with evidence of independent 
effects within STAT4. Analysis of clinical subgroups revealed distinct
differences between PM, and DM and JDM. PTPN22 was associated at genome-wide
significance with PM, but not DM and JDM, suggesting this effect is driven by PM.
Additional suggestive associations including IL18R1 and RGS1 in PM and GSDMB in
DM were identified. HLA imputation confirmed that alleles HLA-DRB1*03:01 and
HLA-B*08:01 of the 8.1 ancestral haplotype (8.1AH) are most strongly associated
with IIM, and provides evidence that amino acids within the HLA, such as HLA-DQB1
position 57 in DM, may explain part of the risk in this locus. Associations with 
alleles outside the 8.1AH reveal differences between PM, DM and JDM.
CONCLUSIONS: This work represents the largest IIM genetic study to date, reveals 
new insights into the genetic architecture of these rare diseases and suggests
different predominating pathophysiology in different clinical subgroups.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26362759  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. J Autoimmun. 2015 Nov;64:137-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.08.013. Epub 2015 Sep
5.

The immunogenetics of Behçet's disease: A comprehensive review.

Takeuchi M(1), Kastner DL(2), Remmers EF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Disease Section, Metabolic, Cardiovascular, and Inflammatory
Disease Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 
Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan. (2)Inflammatory Disease Section, Metabolic,
Cardiovascular, and Inflammatory Disease Genomics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Inflammatory Disease Section, Metabolic, Cardiovascular, and Inflammatory
Disease Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
elaine.remmers@nih.gov.

Behçet's disease is a chronic multisystem inflammatory disorder characterized
mainly by recurrent oral ulcers, ocular involvement, genital ulcers, and skin
lesions, presenting with remissions and exacerbations. It is thought that both
environmental and genetic factors contribute to its onset and development.
Although the etiology of Behçet's disease remains unclear, recent immunogenetic
findings are providing clues to its pathogenesis. In addition to the positive
association of HLA-B*51, which was identified more than four decades ago, and
which has since been confirmed in multiple populations, recent studies report
additional independent associations in the major histocompatibility complex class
I region. HLA-B*15, -B*27, -B*57, and -A*26 are independent risk factors for
Behçet's disease, while HLA-B*49 and -A*03 are independent class I alleles that
are protective for Behçet's disease. Genome-wide association studies have
identified associations with genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10(-8)) in the
IL23R-IL12RB2, IL10, STAT4, CCR1-CCR3, KLRC4, ERAP1, TNFAIP3, and FUT2 loci. In
addition, targeted next-generation sequencing has revealed the involvement of
rare nonsynonymous variants of IL23R, TLR4, NOD2, and MEFV in Behçet's disease
pathogenesis. Significant differences in gene function or mRNA expression
associated with the risk alleles of the disease susceptibility loci suggest which
genes in a disease-associated locus influence disease pathogenesis. These genes
encompass both innate and adaptive immunity and confirm the importance of the
predominant polarization towards helper T cell (Th) 1 versus Th2 cells, and the
involvement of Th17 cells. In addition, epistasis observed between HLA-B*51 and
the risk coding haplotype of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated protease,
ERAP1, provides a clue that an HLA class I-peptide presentation-based mechanism
contributes to this complex disease.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4628864 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26347074  [PubMed - in process]


37. J Autoimmun. 2016 Jan;66:25-39. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.08.016. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Using GWAS to identify genetic predisposition in hepatic autoimmunity.

Webb GJ(1), Hirschfield GM(2).

Author information: 
(1)NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK. (2)NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. Electronic address: g.hirschfield@bham.ac.uk.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) represent the three major hepatic autoimmune
conditions. Patient morbidity and mortality remain high across these three
diseases, and an unmet need for rational therapy exists. Disease understanding
has focused on combining clinical and laboratory based science to provide better 
insights into the joint host and environmental factors necessary for the
initiation, and perpetuation, of hepato-biliary inflammation. Twin studies,
family studies, population studies and an inter-relationship with other
autoimmune phenomena suggest a genetic component to risk for each disease. Until 
recently, understanding of this genetic risk has been limited to HLA haplotypes. 
Associations with risk-conferring and protective HLA haplotypes are present in
all three diseases. Over the last few years, genome-wide association studies
(GWAS), and related genetic association studies, have greatly increased
understanding of the genetic risk signature of these three diseases and
autoimmunity in general. Here we consider the rationale for GWAS in general and
with specific reference to hepatic autoimmunity. We consider the process of GWAS,
and highlight major findings to date. Potential functional implications of key
findings are discussed including the IL-12/STAT4 pathway in PBC and the CD28/IL-2
pathway in PSC. We describe the marked pleiotropy demonstrated by PBC and PSC,
which is consistent with other autoimmune diseases. Further, we focus on specific
gene associations including SH2B3, which is common to all three diseases, and
FUT2 in PSC, which represents a link between environment and genetics. We review 
attempts to translate GWAS findings into basic laboratory models including
in vivo systems and highlight where clinical observations relate to genetics.
Finally we describe deficiencies in GWAS to date and consider future study of
genetics in hepatic autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26347073  [PubMed - in process]


38. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015 Sep-Oct;33(5):632-8. Epub 2015 Aug 31.

Association of GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus
in a Chinese Han population.

Li Y(1), Li P(2), Chen S(2), Wu Z(2), Li J(2), Zhang S(2), Cao C(2), Wang L(2),
Liu B(3), Zhang F(2), Li YZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology & Clin.Immunology, Chinese Academy Med. Sciences & Peking Union
Med.College, Key Lab.of Rheumatology & Clin.Immunology, Ministry of Education,
Beijing; and Dept. Rheumatology, Affiliated Hosp. of Qingdao Univ. Med.College,
Shangdong, China. (2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Ministry of Education, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Rheumatology, The
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University Medical College, Shangdong, China.

OBJECTIVES: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the most common systemic
autoimmune disease which likely involves complex interactions between genes and
the environment. Two large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
implicated many loci as genetic risk factors associated with primary Sjögren's
syndrome (pSS). Among them there are a number of pSS associated gene
polymorphisms including the MHC-II, STAT4, IRF5, BLK, and TNIP1 genes that are
shared with SLE. However, the association of other genes such as GTF2I, GTF2IRD1,
and IL12A with SLE remain unknown. This study aimed to determine whether single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in GTF2I, GTF2IRD1 or IL12A genetically
predispose a Chinese Han population to SLE.
METHODS: Four SNPs in the GTF2I region (rs117026326), the GTF2IRD1 region
(rs4717901), and the IL12A region (rs485497, rs583911) were genotyped in a cohort
of 948 SLE patients and 938 healthy controls, using the polymerase chain
reaction-ligation detection reaction (PCR-LDR) method.
RESULTS: he frequency of risk allele of rs117026326 was notably higher in SLE
patients than in controls (37.2% vs. 14.9%, OR: 3.39, 95%CI: 2.89-3.97, pc
=3.31×10-54). Similarly, rs4717901 was also associated with SLE (35.3% vs. 20.2%,
OR: 2.16, 95%CI: 1.86-2.50, pc =1.50×10-24). The frequencies of alleles and
genotypes of IL12A SNPs were not significantly different between the SLE patients
and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates a significant association between SLE and
the GTF2I rs117026326 T allele, GTF2IRD1 rs4717901 C allele. The association of
GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 as common genetic susceptibility factor in SLE will require
further validation in other ethnic lines.

PMID: 26320362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2016 Jan;68(1):174-83. doi: 10.1002/art.39403.

Identification of a New Susceptibility Locus for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus on 
Chromosome 12 in Individuals of European Ancestry.

Demirci FY(1), Wang X(1), Kelly JA(2), Morris DL(3), Barmada MM(1), Feingold
E(1), Kao AH(4), Sivils KL(2), Bernatsky S(5), Pineau C(5), Clarke AE(6),
Ramsey-Goldman R(7), Vyse TJ(3), Gaffney PM(2), Manzi S(4), Kamboh MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (2)Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City. (3)King's College London and Guy's Hospital, 
London, UK. (4)Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (5)McGill
University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (6)University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (7)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in individuals of European
ancestry identified a number of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility
loci using earlier versions of high-density genotyping platforms. Followup
studies on suggestive GWAS regions using larger samples and more markers
identified additional SLE loci in subjects of European descent. This multistage
study was undertaken to identify novel SLE loci.
METHODS: In stage 1, we conducted a new GWAS of SLE in a North American
case-control sample of subjects of European ancestry (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,166) genotyped on
Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0. In stage 2, we further investigated
top new suggestive GWAS hits by in silico evaluation and meta-analysis using an
additional data set of subjects of European descent (>2,500 individuals),
followed by replication of top meta-analysis findings in another data set of
subjects of European descent (>10,000 individuals) in stage 3.
RESULTS: As expected, our GWAS revealed the most significant associations at the 
major histocompatibility complex locus (6p21), which easily surpassed the
genome-wide significance threshold (P < 5 × 10(-8) ). Several other SLE
signals/loci previously implicated in Caucasians and/or Asians were also
confirmed in the stage 1 discovery sample, and the strongest signals were
observed at 2q32/STAT4 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.6 × 10(-7) ) and at 8p23/BLK (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.1 × 10(-6) ).
Stage 2 meta-analyses identified a new genome-wide significant SLE locus at 12q12
(meta P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.1 × 10(-8) ), which was replicated in stage 3.
CONCLUSION: Our multistage study identified and replicated a new SLE locus that
warrants further followup in additional studies. Publicly available databases
suggest that this newly identified SLE signal falls within a functionally
relevant genomic region and near biologically important genes.

© 2016, American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4747422 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26316170  [PubMed - in process]


40. Lancet. 2015 Feb 26;385 Suppl 1:S25. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60340-3.

Role of retinoic acid in the stability of the T-helper-type 1 lineage and
implications for autoimmunity.

Brown C(1), Esterhazy D(2), Sarde A(3), Pullabhatla V(4), London M(2), Arno M(5),
de Rinaldis E(4), Mucida D(2), Lord G(3), Noelle R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's College
London, London, UK. Electronic address: chrysothemis.brown@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY,
USA. (3)Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's
College London, London, UK. (4)National Institute for Health Research Biomedical 
Research Centre at Guy's & St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and King's College
London, London, UK. (5)Genomics Centre, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: CD4 T cells with features of both T-helper-type 1 (Th1) and 17 (Th17)
cells have been implicated in several autoimmune diseases suggesting that
plasticity among CD4 T-cell lineages is potentially pathogenic. However, the
factors that regulate T-cell lineage stability are largely unknown. Retinoic acid
(RA) is synthesised at sites of inflammation. We hypothesised that retinoic acid,
a profound epigenetic modifier, could regulate T-cell lineage stability.
METHODS: We used a mouse model in which retinoic acid signalling is specifically 
ablated within the T-cell compartment through overexpression of a dominant
negative retinoic acid receptor a (RARa) (dnRARa mice) to investigate its role in
the regulation of Th1 lineage stability. Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis was done
to identify RARa targets. In parallel, we performed global mapping of regulatory 
regions, termed enhancers, to gain mechanistic insight into retinoic acid
regulation of T-cell fate. The in-vivo relevance of our findings was determined
in a model of oral antigen-induced intestinal inflammation.
FINDINGS: We found that retinoic acid is crucial for maintenance of the Th1
lineage. Abrogation of retinoic acid signalling in Th1 cells resulted in loss of 
T-bet expression and STAT4 activity. Th1 cells from dnRARa mice showed enhanced
plasticity with the emergence of hybrid Th1-Th17 and Th17 effector cells. Global 
analysis of RARa binding and enhancer mapping revealed that RA-RARa directly
regulated enhancer activity at Th1 lineage defining genes while repressing genes 
that regulate Th17 cell fate. Retinoic acid inhibition of Th1 plasticity was
essential for maintaining appropriate Th cell responses in vivo and preventing
autoimmune intestinal inflammation.
INTERPRETATION: Our study has identified RA-RARa as a key component of the
regulatory network governing maintenance and plasticity of Th1 cells and defines 
a new pathway for the development of pathogenic Th17 cells. Retinoids might be
novel therapeutic agents for Th17-associated autoimmune diseases.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26312847  [PubMed]


41. Lancet. 2015 Feb 26;385 Suppl 1:S13. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60328-2.

Genetic variants associated with non-typhoidal Salmonella bacteraemia in African 
children.

Gilchrist JJ(1), Mills TC(2), Naranbhai V(2), Chapman SJ(2), Fairfax BP(2),
Knight JC(2), Williams TN(3), Scott JA(3), MacLennan CA(4), Rautanen A(2), Hill
AV(2); Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Electronic address: james.gilchrist@well.ox.ac.uk. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (3)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust
Research Programme, Kilifi, Kenya. (4)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, School of
Immunity and Infection, College of Medicine and Dental Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) causes invasive and frequently fatal
disease in African children. Existing strategies to prevent, diagnose, and treat 
NTS disease are inadequate. An improved understanding of the biology of invasive 
Salmonella infection will facilitate the development of novel NTS control
measures. Despite evidence in mice and man showing a clear role for host genetics
in NTS susceptibility, there are no published studies investigating host genetic 
susceptibility to NTS in African populations.
METHODS: We conducted a genome-wide association study (SNP Array 6.0, Affymetrix,
CA, USA) of NTS bacteraemia in Kenyan children, with replication in Malawian
children. We assessed the function of NTS-associated variants in an expression
quantitative trait locus (eQTL) dataset of interferon <U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) and
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated monocytes from 432 healthy European adults. Serum
IFN<U+03B3> (Bio-Plex immunoassay, Bio-Rad Laboratories, CA, USA) in Malawian NTS cases 
(n=106) during acute disease was correlated with genotype by linear regression.
FINDINGS: After whole-genome imputation and quality control, 180 Kenyan cases and
2677 controls were included in an association analysis at 7<U+2008>951<U+2008>614 (additive
model) and 4<U+2008>669<U+2008>537 (genotypic model) loci. After quality control, 143 Malawian 
cases and 336 controls were included in the replication analysis. An intronic
variant in STAT4 was associated (recessive model) with NTS in both Kenyan and
Malawian children (Kenya p=5·6<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(-9), Malawi p=0·02, combined p=1·4<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(-9); 
odds ratio 7·2, 95% CI 3·8-13·5). The NTS-associated variant was an eQTL for
STAT4 expression in IFN<U+03B3>-stimulated monocytes (p=9·59<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(-6)), the NTS risk
allele being associated with lower STAT4 expression. In Malawian children with
NTS bacteraemia, the same NTS risk allele was associated with lower serum
concentrations of IFN<U+03B3> (p=0·02) at presentation.
INTERPRETATION: STAT4 is highly plausible as a susceptibility locus for invasive 
NTS disease. STAT4 mediates IFN<U+03B3> release in T cells and natural killer cells in
response to interleukin 12 (IL12). Individuals with rare mutations elsewhere in
the IL12-IFN<U+03B3> axis are at risk of disseminated NTS infection. We provide the
first evidence, to our knowledge, of a host genetic determinant of NTS disease in
African children, and of a STAT4 variant conferring susceptibility to an
infectious disease in man.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26312835  [PubMed]


42. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2015;134:283-98. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2015.04.009.

Molecular Genetic Advances in Uveitis.

Hou S(1), Kijlstra A(2), Yang P(3).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Lab of Ophthalmology, Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, PR China. (2)University
Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. (3)The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key Lab of Ophthalmology,
Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, PR China. Electronic address:
peizengycmu@126.com.

Uveitis is usually considered as an intraocular inflammation characterized by
variety of clinical features. Behcet's disease (BD), Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
syndrome, acute anterior uveitis (AAU), and birdshot chorioretinopathy (BCR) are 
examples of noninfectious forms of uveitis. Although the precise pathogenesis
remains unclear, accumulating evidence shows that complex genetic backgrounds
coupled with an aberrant immune response may be implicated in the development of 
uveitis. The complement and pattern recognition systems are both important
factors of the innate immune system and are involved in the pathogenesis of
uveitis. Copy number variants (CNVs) of complement component 4 have been found to
be associated with BD and VKH syndrome, but not with AAU. Several CNVs and gene
polymorphisms of toll-like receptors were found to be associated with BD.
Leukocytes are an important part of the adaptive immune system and various
molecules on these cells play an important role in the development of uveitis.
Genes encoding for human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) have been shown to be
associated with certain uveitis entities, including BD (HLA-B51), VKH syndrome
(HLA-DR4, DRB1/DQA1), AAU (HLA-B27), and BCR (HLA-A29). Genome wide association
studies showed that the IL-23R locus was a shared risk factor for multiple
uveitis entities including BD, AAU, and VKH syndrome. In addition, various other 
non-HLA genes are also associated with BD or VKH syndrome, such as IL-10, STAT4, 
STAT3, and UBAC2. These studies support the hypothesis that genetic factors play 
a key role in the pathogenesis of uveitis.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26310161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Autoimmun. 2015 Nov;64:113-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 Aug
21.

Immunogenetics of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: A comprehensive review.

Hersh AO(1), Prahalad S(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)Departments
of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA; Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address: 
sprahal@emory.edu.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common chronic inflammatory
arthropathy of childhood. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis is believed to be a
complex genetic trait influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. Twin 
and family studies suggest a substantial role for genetic factors in the
predisposition to JIA. Describing the genetics is complicated by the
heterogeneity of JIA; the International League of Associations for Rheumatology
(ILAR) has defined seven categories of JIA based on distinct clinical and
laboratory features. Utilizing a variety of techniques including candidate gene
studies, the use of genotyping arrays such as Immunochip, and genome wide
association studies (GWAS), both human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and non-HLA
susceptibility loci associated with JIA have been described. Several of these
polymorphisms (e.g. HLA class II, PTPN22, STAT4) are shared with other common
autoimmune conditions; other novel polymorphisms that have been identified may be
unique to JIA. Associations with oligoarticular and RF-negative polyarticular JIA
are the best characterized. A strong association between HLA DRB1:11:03/04 and
DRB1:08:01, and a protective effect of DRB1:15:01 have been described. HLA
DPB1:02:01 has also been associated with oligoarticular and RF-negative
polyarticular JIA. Besides PTPN22, STAT4 and PTPN2 variants, IL2, IL2RA, IL2RB,
as well as IL6 and IL6R loci also harbor variants associated with oligoarticular 
and RF-negative polyarticular JIA. RF-positive polyarticular JIA is associated
with many of the shared epitope encoding HLA DRB1 alleles, as well as PTPN22,
STAT4 and TNFAIP3 variants. ERA is associated with HLA B27. Most other
associations between JIA categories and HLA or non-HLA variants need
confirmation. The formation of International Consortia to ascertain and analyze
large cohorts of JIA categories, validation of reported findings in independent
cohorts, and functional studies will enhance our understanding of the genetic
underpinnings of JIA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26305060  [PubMed - in process]


44. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Nov;45(11):3150-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545713. Epub 2015 Sep 
21.

Transcription factor co-occupied regions in the murine genome constitute
T-helper-cell subtype-specific enhancers.

Fang Z(1), Hecklau K(1), Gross F(2), Bachmann I(3), Venzke M(1), Karl M(1),
Schuchhardt J(3), Radbruch A(1,)(4), Herzel H(2), Baumgrass R(1).

Author information: 
(1)German Rheumatism Research Center (DRFZ), A Leibniz Institute, Berlin,
Germany. (2)Institute for Theoretical Biology, Charité and Humboldt University
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (3)MicroDiscovery GmbH, Berlin, Germany. (4)Charité,
Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2015 Nov;45(11):2998-3001.

Transcription factors (TFs) regulate cell-type-specific gene expression programs 
by combinatorial binding to cis-genomic elements, particularly enhancers,
subsequently leading to the recruitment of cofactors, and the general
transcriptional machinery to target genes. Using data integration of genome-wide 
TF binding profiles, we defined regions with combinatorial binding of
lineage-specific master TFs (T-BET, GATA3, and ROR-<U+03B3>t) and STATs (STAT1 and
STAT4, STAT6, and STAT3) in murine T helper (Th) 1, Th2, and Th17 cells,
respectively. Stringently excluding promoter regions, we revealed precise genomic
elements which were preferentially associated with the enhancer marks p300 and
H3K4me1. Furthermore, closely adjacent TF co-occupied regions constituted larger 
enhancer domains in the respective Th-cell subset (177 in Th1, 141 in Th2, and
266 in Th17 cells) with characteristics of so-called super-enhancers.
Importantly, 89% of these super-enhancer regions were Th-cell subtype-specific.
Genes associated with super-enhancers, including relevant Th-cell genes (such as 
Ifng in Th1, Il13 in Th2, and Il17a in Th17 cells), showed strong transcriptional
activity. Altogether, the discovered catalog of enhancers provides information
about crucial Th-cell subtype-specific regulatory hubs, which will be useful for 
revealing cell-type-specific gene regulation processes.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26300430  [PubMed - in process]


45. J Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;227(1):13-24. doi: 10.1530/JOE-15-0098. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

STAT4 contributes to adipose tissue inflammation and atherosclerosis.

Dobrian AD(1), Hatcher MA(2), Brotman JJ(2), Galkina EV(2), Taghavie-Moghadam
P(2), Pei H(2), Haynes BA(2), Nadler JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiological SciencesMicrobiology and Molecular Cell
BiologyInternal MedicineEastern Virginia Medical School, 700W Olney Road,
Norfolk, Virginia 23505, USADivision of Inflammation BiologyLa Jolla Institute
for Allergy and Immunology, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
dobriaad@evms.edu. (2)Departments of Physiological SciencesMicrobiology and
Molecular Cell BiologyInternal MedicineEastern Virginia Medical School, 700W
Olney Road, Norfolk, Virginia 23505, USADivision of Inflammation BiologyLa Jolla 
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

Adipose tissue (AT) inflammation is an emerging factor contributing to
cardiovascular disease. STAT4 is a transcription factor expressed in adipocytes
and in immune cells and contributes to AT inflammation and insulin resistance in 
obesity. The objective of this study was to determine the effect of STAT4
deficiency on visceral and peri-aortic AT inflammation in a model of
atherosclerosis without obesity. Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) mice and Apoe(-/-) controls 
were kept either on chow or Western diet for 12 weeks. Visceral and peri-aortic
AT were collected and analyzed for immune composition by flow cytometry and for
cytokine/chemokine expression by real-time PCR. Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) and Apoe(-/-)
mice had similar body weight, plasma glucose, and lipids. Western diet
significantly increased macrophage, CD4+, CD8+, and NK cells in peri-aortic and
visceral fat in Apoe(-/-) mice. In contrast, in Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) mice, a
Western diet failed to increase the percentage of immune cells infiltrating the
AT. Also, IL12p40, TNFa, CCL5, CXCL10, and CX3CL1 were significantly reduced in
the peri-aortic fat in Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-) mice. Importantly, Stat4(-/-)Apoe(-/-)
mice on a Western diet had significantly reduced plaque burden vs Apoe(-/-)
controls. In conclusion, STAT4 deletion reduces inflammation in peri-vascular and
visceral AT and this may contribute via direct or indirect effects to reduced
atheroma formation.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4811759 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26285907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Diabetes. 2015 Dec;64(12):4171-83. doi: 10.2337/db15-0546. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Loss of NOX-Derived Superoxide Exacerbates Diabetogenic CD4 T-Cell Effector
Responses in Type 1 Diabetes.

Padgett LE(1), Anderson B(1), Liu C(2), Ganini D(3), Mason RP(3), Piganelli
JD(4), Mathews CE(2), Tse HM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Comprehensive Diabetes Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL. (2)Department of
Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL. (3)Free Radical Metabolites, Immunity, Inflammation
and Disease Laboratory, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC. (4)Department of
Surgery, Immunology, and Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA. (5)Department of Microbiology, Comprehensive Diabetes Center,
University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL
htse@uab.edu.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play prominent roles in numerous biological
systems. While classically expressed by neutrophils and macrophages, CD4 T cells 
also express NADPH oxidase (NOX), the superoxide-generating multisubunit enzyme. 
Our laboratory recently demonstrated that superoxide-deficient nonobese diabetic 
(NOD.Ncf1(m1J)) mice exhibited a delay in type 1 diabetes (T1D) partially due to 
blunted IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis by CD4 T cells. For further investigation of the roles of
superoxide on CD4 T-cell diabetogenicity, the NOD.BDC-2.5.Ncf1(m1J)
(BDC-2.5.Ncf1(m1J)) mouse strain was generated, possessing autoreactive CD4 T
cells deficient in NOX-derived superoxide. Unlike NOD.Ncf1(m1J), stimulated
BDC-2.5.Ncf1(m1J) CD4 T cells and splenocytes displayed elevated synthesis of Th1
cytokines and chemokines. Superoxide-deficient BDC-2.5 mice developed spontaneous
T1D, and CD4 T cells were more diabetogenic upon adoptive transfer into NOD.Rag
recipients due to a skewing toward impaired Treg suppression. Exogenous
superoxide blunted exacerbated Th1 cytokines and proinflammatory chemokines to
approximately wild-type levels, concomitant with reduced IL-12Rß2 signaling and
P-STAT4 (Y693) activation. These results highlight the importance of NOX-derived 
superoxide in curbing autoreactivity due, in part, to control of Treg function
and as a redox-dependent checkpoint of effector T-cell responses. Ultimately, our
studies reveal the complexities of free radicals in CD4 T-cell responses.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4657579 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26269022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Med Virol. 2016 Mar;88(3):371-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24350. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Host genetic variants influencing the clinical course of Hepatitis B virus
infection.

Matsuura K(1,)(2,)(3), Isogawa M(1), Tanaka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Liver Unit, Nagoya City University Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and
Metabolism, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya,
Japan. (3)Infectious Disease and Immunogenetics Section, Department of
Transfusion Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.

The clinical course of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection greatly differs in
individuals. Various viral, host, and environmental factors influence the natural
history of HBV infection. Recent genome-wide association studies identified
several host genetic factors influencing the clinical course of HBV infection.
Genetic variations in HLA class II loci were significantly associated with
susceptibility to persistent HBV infection. Other polymorphisms in or near the
genes EHMT2, TCF19, and HLA-C, located near HLA class II loci, and UBE2L3 were
also associated with persistent HBV infection. Meanwhile, polymorphisms in KIF1B,
GRIK1, and STAT4 were associated with HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Interestingly, HLA class II genetic variations were strongly associated with not 
only persistent HBV infection, but also disease progression and HBV-related HCC
in chronic hepatitis B. Understanding the various genetic factors associated with
the clinical course of HBV infection is essential for personalized treatment and 
surveillance of disease progression and HCC. J. Med. Virol. 88:371-379, 2016. ©
2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26255971  [PubMed - in process]


48. J Autoimmun. 2015 Nov;64:42-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.07.004. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

The immunogenetics of primary biliary cirrhosis: A comprehensive review.

Webb GJ(1), Siminovitch KA(2), Hirschfield GM(3).

Author information: 
(1)NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK. (2)Mount Sinai Hospital, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, 
Toronto General Research Institute, and Departments of Immunology and Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)NIHR Birmingham
Liver Biomedical Research Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
Electronic address: g.hirschfield@bham.ac.uk.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), a classic autoimmune liver disease, is
characterised by a progressive T cell predominant lymphocytic cholangitis, and a 
serologic pattern of reactivity in the form of specific anti-mitochondrial
antibodies (AMA). CD4+ T cells are particularly implicated by PBC's cytokine
signature, the presence of CD4+ T cells specific to mitochondrial auto-antigens, 
the expression of MHC II on injured biliary epithelial cells, and PBC's
coincidence with other similar T cell mediated autoimmune conditions. CD4+ T
cells are also central to current animal models of PBC, and their transfer
typically also transfers disease. The importance of genetic risk to developing
PBC is evidenced by a much higher concordance rate in monozygotic than dizygotic 
twins, increased AMA rates in asymptomatic relatives, and disproportionate rates 
of disease in siblings of PBC patients, PBC family members and certain
genetically defined populations. Recently, high-throughput genetic studies have
greatly expanded our understanding of the gene variants underpinning risk for PBC
development, so linking genetics and immunology. Here we summarize genetic
association data that has emerged from large scale genome-wide association
studies and discuss the evidence for the potential functional significance of the
individual genes and pathways identified; we particularly highlight associations 
in the IL-12-STAT4-Th1 pathway. HLA associations and epigenetic effects are
specifically considered and individual variants are linked to clinical phenotypes
where data exist. We also consider why there is a gap between calculated genetic 
risk and clinical data: so-called missing heritability, and how immunogenetic
observations are being translated to novel therapies. Ultimately whilst genetic
risk factors will only account for a proportion of disease risk, ongoing efforts 
to refine associations and understand biologic links to disease pathways are
hoped to drive more rational therapy for patients.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26250073  [PubMed - in process]


49. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug 5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.172. [Epub ahead of print]

No significant impact of IFN-<U+03B3> pathway gene variants on tuberculosis
susceptibility in a West African population.

Meyer CG(1), Intemann CD(1), Förster B(1), Owusu-Dabo E(2), Franke A(3),
Horstmann RD(1), Thye T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. (2)1] Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research in
Tropical Medicine, Kumasi, Ghana [2] Department of Community Health, College of
Health Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi,
Ghana. (3)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts University
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

The concept of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) having a central role in cell-mediated immune
defence to Mycobacterium tuberculosis has long been proposed. Observations made
through early candidate gene studies of constituents of the IFN-<U+03B3> pathway have
identified moderately associated variants associated with resistance or
susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB). By analysing 20 major genes whose proteins
contribute to IFN-<U+03B3> signalling we have assessed a large fraction of the
variability in genes that might contribute to susceptibility to TB. Genetic
variants were identified by sequencing the promoter regions and all exons of
IFNG, IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IRF1, IL12A, IL12B, IL12RB1, IL12RB2, IL23A, IL23R, IL27,
EBI3, IL27RA, IL6ST, SOCS1, STAT1, STAT4, JAK2, TYK2 and TBX21 in 69 DNA samples 
from Ghana. In addition, we screened all exons of IFNGR1 in a Ghanaian study
group comprising 1999 TB cases and 2589 controls by high-resolution melting point
analysis. The fine-mapping approach allows for a detailed screening of all
variants, common and rare. Statistical comparisons of cases and controls,
however, did not yield significant results after correction for multiple testing 
with any of the 246 variants selected for genotyping in this investigation.
Gene-wise haplotype tests and analysis of rare variants did not reveal any
significant association with susceptibility to TB in our investigation as well.
Although this analysis was applied on a plausible set of IFN-<U+03B3> pathway genes in
the largest African TB cohort available so far, the lack of significant results
challenges the view that genetic marker of the IFN-<U+03B3> pathway have an important
impact on susceptibility to TB.European Journal of Human Genetics advance online 
publication, 5 August 2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.172.

PMID: 26242990  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. Immunol Invest. 2015;44(6):566-77.

IL-35 Is Involved in the Pathogenesis of Guillain-Barré Syndrome Through Its
Influence on the Function of CD4+ T Cells.

Liu H(1), Zhang W, Tian FF, Kun A, Zhou WB, Xiao B, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University ,
Changsha, Hunan , PR China .

CD4+ T cells and many cytokines play critical roles in the pathogenesis of
Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS), an immune-mediated inflammatory disease. However, 
the role of IL-35, a novel member of the IL-12 cytokine family, in this kind of
disease has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we investigated the
functional changes of CD4+ T cells from GBS patients with IL-35 treatment in
vitro. This study involved 21 GBS patients and an equal number of healthy
controls (HCs). The results indicated that the average concentration of IL-35 in 
the plasma of GBS patients was lower than that of healthy controls (HCs).
Increased levels of STAT1, STAT3 and STAT4 proteins and T-bet, ROR <U+03B3>t, IFN-<U+03B3> and 
IL-17A mRNA were observed in CD4+ T cells from GBS patients. In contrast, the
levels of STAT5 and STAT6 proteins and GATA3, Foxp3, IL-4 and TGF-ß1 mRNAs were
decreased in GBS patients in comparison with those of HCs. In addition, treatment
of CD4+ T cells from GBS patients with IL-35 upregulated IL-35, STAT5 and STAT6
protein and T-bet, GATA3, Foxp3, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-17A and TGF-ß1 mRNA while
inhibited levels of STAT3 and STAT4 protein and ROR<U+03B3>t and IL-17A mRNA. These
results indicate that IL-35 might play a potential role in GBS pathogenesis.
Further studies are required in order to evaluate its role in GBS.

PMID: 26225474  [PubMed - in process]


51. Cell Signal. 2015 Oct;27(10):2068-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.07.015. Epub
2015 Jul 21.

MEK1 dependent and independent ERK activation regulates IL-10 and IL-12
production in bone marrow derived macrophages.

Bouhamdan M(1), Bauerfeld C(2), Talreja J(1), Beuret L(3), Charron J(3), Samavati
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep
Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine and Detroit Medical Center,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care,
Wayne State University School of Medicine and Children's Hospital of Michigan,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (3)Centre de Recherche sur le Cancer de l'Université
Laval, CRCHU de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada. (4)Department of 
Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Wayne State
University School of Medicine and Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI 48201, USA;
Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. Electronic address: lsamavat@med.wayne.edu.

The mitogen activated protein kinases ERK1/2 play an important role in response
to toll like receptor (TLR) activation and cytokine production, including IL-10
and IL-12. Here, we examined the role of MEK1 in ERK1/2 activation in response to
TLR4 agonist by using bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) from wild type (WT)
and Mek1(d/d)Sox2(Cre) mice. Our data demonstrates that MEK1 is essential for
ERK1/2 activation in response to LPS. Furthermore, stimulation of the TLR4
receptor of BMDMs derived from Mek1(d/d)Sox2(Cre) mice showed enhanced STAT4
phosphorylation and increased IL-12 secretion, but exhibited a significantly
lower IL-10 production as compared to WT macrophages. Most interestingly, TLR
ligation in the presence of recombinant IL-10 (rIL-10) or retinoic acid (RA) led 
to ERK1/2 activation independent of MEK1 in BMDMs derived from Mek1(d/d)Sox2(Cre)
mice and led to inhibition of STAT4 and decreased IL-12 levels. Collectively,
these data suggest that MEK1 is required for TLR4 mediated ERK activation and in 
turn regulates the production of IL-10 and IL-12. It also indicates that ERK1/2
can be activated independent of MEK1 in the presence of IL-10 and RA and this
activation negatively regulates IL-12, but positively regulates IL-10 production.
These findings may have significant implications for the development of drugs
that modulate MEK1 activity in the treatment of inflammatory, autoimmune and
proliferative diseases such as cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4540637 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26208884  [PubMed - in process]


52. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 21;10(7):e0131248. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131248.
eCollection 2015.

Association between the Interaction of Key Genes Involved in Effector T-Cell
Pathways and Susceptibility to Developallergic Rhinitis: A Population-Based
Case-Control Association Study.

Zhang Y(1), Li J(2), Wang C(3), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing TongRen Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100730, PR China; Beijing Key Laboratory of
nasal diseases, Beijing Institute of Otolaryngology, Beijing 100005, PR China;
Department of Allergy, Beijing TongRen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100730, PR China. (2)Beijing Key Laboratory of nasal diseases, Beijing
Institute of Otolaryngology, Beijing 100005, PR China. (3)Department of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing TongRen Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100730, PR China; Beijing Key Laboratory of nasal diseases,
Beijing Institute of Otolaryngology, Beijing 100005, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that interaction between key genes mediating
signaling and transcriptional networks involving effector T-cell responses may
influence an individual's susceptibility to develop allergic rhinitis(AR).
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was todetermine whether specific interactions
between key genes involved in effector T-cell pathways are associated with an
individual's susceptibility to develop AR in Han Chinese subjects.
METHOD: A cohort of 489 patients with AR and 421 healthy controls was enrolled
from the Han Chinese population in Beijing, China. AR was established by
questionnaire and clinical examination, and peripheral blood was drawn from all
subjects for DNA extraction. A total of 96 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in 26 reprehensive candidate genes involved in T helper 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17, Th9
and T regulatory cell pathways were selected from the International Haplotype
Mappingdatabase for Han Chinese in Beijing (CHB) population, and
IlluminaGoldenGate assay was conducted for SNP genotyping. The PLINK software
package was used to perform statistical analyses.
RESULTS: Simple SNP-phenotype association analysis using logistic regression
showed SNP rs8193036 in IL17A gene, rs2569254 in IL-12 and rs1898413 in RORa
weresignificantlyassociatedwith AR.Simple SNP-phenotype association analysis with
genetic models demonstrated thatrs2569254 in IL-12, rs1031508 in STAT4, and
rs3741809 in IL-26 were likely to be recessive, rs8193036 in IL17A allelic,
rs897200in STAT4 genotypic, and rs1898413 in RORa dominant. Epistasis analyses
exhibited that 83 SNPs in 23 genes were significantly interactive; of which 59
interactions/SNP pairs demonstrated OR values higher than 2 or lower than 0.5,
and 12 interactions/SNP pairs OR values higher than 4 or lower than 0.25. STAT3, 
RORa and IL-26, involved in Th17 pathway,were the mostfrequentlyinteractive
genes.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that interactions between several SNPs in key
genes involved in effector T-cell pathways are likely to influence an
individual's susceptibility to develop AR.

PMCID: PMC4510440
PMID: 26196693  [PubMed - in process]


53. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015 Oct;26(5):559-68. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2015.07.003. Epub 2015 Jul 4.

Interleukin-12: Functional activities and implications for disease.

Zundler S(1), Neurath MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine 1, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Kussmaul Campus
for Medical Research & Translational Research Center, Medical Clinic 1, Ulmenweg 
18, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. (2)Department of Medicine 1, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Kussmaul Campus for Medical Research & Translational Research
Center, Medical Clinic 1, Ulmenweg 18, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic
address: markus.neurath@uk-erlangen.de.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) was the first member of the IL-12 family of cytokines to
be identified and has therefore become its eponym. It is a heterodimeric protein 
of two subunits (p35, p40) secreted by phagocytic cells in response to pathogens 
and mainly acts through STAT4 to induce IFN-<U+03B3> production in T and NK cells. IFN-<U+03B3>
in turn mediates proinflammatory functions and activates T-bet. As IL-12 engages 
in TH1 development, it is believed to represent an important link between innate 
and adaptive immunity. Following its identification and the finding of its
association to TH1 commitment, great hopes were placed in IL-12 to become a
target for therapeutic applications in multiple settings of autoimmunity and
cancer. Though, the discovery of the related members of the IL-12 family and
several rather disappointing attempts to translate experimental results into
clinical practice, have relativized these hopes. Nevertheless, IL-12 remains a
cytokine of outstanding importance with lots of unresolved questions. In this
review, we will first briefly depict the biochemistry of the cytokine, its
receptor and the related signal transduction, before summarizing the regulation
of IL-12 production and its biological functions. We will then describe the
current knowledge about the implication of IL-12 in different murine disease
models as well as in the corresponding human conditions and comment on possible
consequences for future clinical applications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26182974  [PubMed - in process]


54. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2015 Oct;21(10):2383-92. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000495.

Altered STAT4 Isoform Expression in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Jabeen R(1), Miller L, Yao W, Gupta S, Steiner S, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana; Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; and Division of Pediatric
Gastroenterology/Hepatology/Nutrition, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are the major forms 
of inflammatory bowel disease, and pathogenesis involves a complex interplay
among genetic, environmental, and immunological factors. We evaluated isoform
expression of the IL-12-activated transcription factor STAT4 in children with CD 
and UC.
METHODS: We collected biopsy samples from both patients newly diagnosed with CD
and with UC. We further collected blood samples from patients newly diagnosed
with CD and with UC as well as from patients who had a flare-up after being in
clinical remission, and we examined the ratios of STAT4ß/STAT4a mRNA. In addition
to STAT4 isoforms, we measured the expression of the cytokines TNFa, IFN<U+03B3>,
granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor, and IL-17 using polymerase
chain reaction of biopsy samples and multiplex analysis of patient serum samples.
RESULTS: Ratios of STAT4ß/STAT4a were increased in specific gastrointestinal
tract segments in both patients with CD and those with UC that correlate with the
location and severity of inflammation. In contrast, we did not observe changes in
STAT4ß/STAT4a ratios in biopsy specimens from patients with eosinophilic
esophagitis. We also observed increased STAT4ß/STAT4a ratios in the peripheral
blood mononuclear cells of patients with UC and those with CD, compared with
healthy controls. Ratios were normalized after patients were treated with
steroids.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data indicate that STAT4 isoforms could be an
important noninvasive biomarker in the diagnosis and treatment of inflammatory
bowel disease and that expression of these isoforms might provide further insight
into the pathogenesis of IBD.

PMCID: PMC4567388 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26177303  [PubMed - in process]


55. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Nov;98(5):827-36. doi: 10.1189/jlb.3A0315-114R. Epub 2015 Jul
8.

Immunomodulation in host-protective immune response against murine tuberculosis
through regulation of the T regulatory cell function.

Das S(1), Halder K(1), Goswami A(1), Chowdhury BP(1), Pal NK(1), Majumdar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India; Department of
Microbiology, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Kolkata,
India; and Department of Microbiology, Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College, Kolkata,
India. (2)*Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India;
Department of Microbiology, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Kolkata, India; and Department of Microbiology, Nil Ratan Sircar
Medical College, Kolkata, India subrata@jcbose.ac.in.

Tuberculosis, caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is characterized
by an infection in lung and spleen. In the present study, we have elucidated the 
mechanism by which Mycobacterium indicus pranii renders protection in in vivo
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. We observed that Mycobacterium indicus
pranii treated infected C57BL/6 mice showed a strong host-protective Th1 immune
response along with a marked decrease in immunosuppressive cytokines, TGF-ß, and 
IL-10-secreting CD4(+) T cells. This Mycobacterium indicus pranii mediated
decrease in immunosuppressive cytokines was correlated with the reduction in the 
elevated frequency of CD4(+)CD25(+) T regulatory cells, along with the reduced
TGF-ß production from these T regulatory cells in tuberculosis-infected mice.
This reduction in the T regulatory cell population was a result of effective
modulation of STAT4-STAT5 transcription factor counter-regulation by
Mycobacterium indicus pranii, which in turn, reduced the immunosuppressive
activity of T regulatory cells. Thus, these findings put forward a detailed
mechanistic insight into Mycobacterium indicus pranii mediated regulation of the 
T regulatory cell functioning during experimental murine tuberculosis, which
might be helpful in combating Mycobacterium-induced pathogenesis.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 26156009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Jun 30;12:128. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0351-3.

STAT4 controls GM-CSF production by both Th1 and Th17 cells during EAE.

McWilliams IL(1), Rajbhandari R(2), Nozell S(3), Benveniste E(4), Harrington
LE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 845 19th Street South, BBRB 471, Birmingham, AL, 35294,
USA. IanLMcW@uab.edu. (2)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative
Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 845 19th Street South, BBRB 471,
Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA. pokhara@uab.edu. (3)Department of Cell, Developmental
and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 845 19th Street
South, BBRB 471, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA. Snozell@uab.edu. (4)Department of
Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
845 19th Street South, BBRB 471, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA. Tika@uab.edu.
(5)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 845 19th Street South, BBRB 471, Birmingham, AL, 35294,
USA. lharring@uab.edu.

BACKGROUND: In experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a mouse model of 
multiple sclerosis, mice genetically deficient in the transcription factor signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) are resistant to disease. In 
contrast, deletion or inhibition of the Th1-associated cytokines IL-12 or IFN<U+03B3>
which act upstream and downstream of STAT4, respectively, does not ameliorate
disease. These discordant findings imply that STAT4 may act in a non-canonical
role during EAE. Recently, STAT4 has been shown to regulate GM-CSF production by 
CD4 T cells and this cytokine is necessary for the induction of EAE. However, it 
is not known if STAT4 controls GM-CSF production by both Th1 and Th17 effector
CD4 T cells.
METHODS: This study utilized the MOG(35-55) peptide immunization model of EAE.
Intracellular cytokine staining and novel mixed bone marrow chimeric mice were
used to study the CD4 T cell-intrinsic role of STAT4 during disease. STAT4
chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP-PCR) experiments were performed to show STAT4
directly interacts with the Csf2 gene loci.
RESULTS: Herein, we demonstrate that STAT4 controls CD4 T cell-intrinsic GM-CSF
production by both Th1 and Th17 CD4 T cells during EAE as well as in vitro.
Importantly, we show that STAT4 interacts with the Csf2 locus in
MOG(35-55)-activated effector CD4 T cells demonstrating direct modulation of
GM-CSF.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these studies illustrate a previously unrecognized role of 
STAT4 to regulate GM-CSF production by not only Th1 cells, but also Th17 effector
CD4 T cell subsets during EAE pathogenesis. Critically, these data highlight for 
the first time that STAT4 is able to modulate the effector profile of Th17 CD4 T 
cell subsets, which redefines our current understanding of STAT4 as a Th1-centric
factor.

PMCID: PMC4491892
PMID: 26123499  [PubMed - in process]


57. Haematologica. 2015 Sep;100(9):1189-98. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.114967. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Deregulation of Fas ligand expression as a novel cause of autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome-like disease.

Nabhani S(1), Ginzel S(2), Miskin H(3), Revel-Vilk S(4), Harlev D(3),
Fleckenstein B(5), Hönscheid A(1), Oommen PT(1), Kuhlen M(1), Thiele R(6), Laws
HJ(1), Borkhardt A(1), Stepensky P(4), Fischer U(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany. (2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical
Immunology, University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany Department of Computer Science,
Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(3)Pediatric Hematology Unit, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Hadassah Hebrew University
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. (5)Department of Clinical and Molecular
Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(6)Department of Computer Science, Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied
Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany. (7)Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Hematology and Clinical Immunology, University Children's Hospital, Medical
Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany
ute.fischer@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome is frequently caused by mutations in
genes involved in the Fas death receptor pathway, but for 20-30% of patients the 
genetic defect is unknown. We observed that treatment of healthy T cells with
interleukin-12 induces upregulation of Fas ligand and Fas ligand-dependent
apoptosis. Consistently, interleukin-12 could not induce apoptosis in Fas
ligand-deficient T cells from patients with autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome. We hypothesized that defects in the interleukin-12 signaling pathway
may cause a similar phenotype as that caused by mutations of the Fas ligand gene.
To test this, we analyzed 20 patients with autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome of unknown cause by whole-exome sequencing. We identified a homozygous
nonsense mutation (c.698G>A, p.R212*) in the interleukin-12/interleukin-23
receptor-component IL12RB1 in one of these patients. The mutation led to IL12RB1 
protein truncation and loss of cell surface expression. Interleukin-12 and -23
signaling was completely abrogated as demonstrated by deficient STAT4
phosphorylation and interferon <U+03B3> production. Interleukin-12-mediated expression
of membrane-bound and soluble Fas ligand was lacking and basal expression was
much lower than in healthy controls. The patient presented with the classical
symptoms of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: chronic non-malignant,
non-infectious lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, elevated numbers of
double-negative T cells, autoimmune cytopenias, and increased levels of vitamin
B12 and interleukin-10. Sanger sequencing and whole-exome sequencing excluded the
presence of germline or somatic mutations in genes known to be associated with
the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Our data suggest that deficient
regulation of Fas ligand expression by regulators such as the interleukin-12
signaling pathway may be an alternative cause of autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome-like disease.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4800681
PMID: 26113417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Infect Immun. 2015 Sep;83(9):3490-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00730-15. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Adipose Tissue-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Attenuate Staphylococcal
Enterotoxin A-Induced Toxic Shock.

Asano K(1), Yoshimura S(1), Nakane A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hirosaki University Graduate School
of Medicine, Hirosaki, Aomori, Japan. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Aomori,
Japan a27k03n0@hirosaki-u.ac.jp.

Adipose tissue-derived stem cells (ASCs), which are mesenchymal stromal cells
isolated from adipose tissues, exhibit immunomodulatory effects that are
promising for several applications, including the therapeutics of inflammatory
diseases. In the present study, the effect of ASCs on bacterial toxin-induced
inflammation was investigated. Intraperitoneal administration of ASCs rescued
mice from lethal shock induced by staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) potentiated 
with lipopolysaccharide. In the sera and/or spleens of mice administered ASCs,
the production of proinflammatory cytokines, including interferon gamma, tumor
necrosis factor alpha, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and IL-2 was reduced. By
quantitative real-time PCR, the expression of Foxp3 in the mice administered ASCs
was not altered. On the other hand, the expression of IL-12 receptor and STAT4
was decreased with ASC administration. These results imply that the effect of
ASCs is not involved in the lineage of regulatory T cells but that these cells
may modulate TH1 differentiation. This information provides evidence that ASCs
have properties that are effective to attenuate SEA-induced toxic shock and
should prompt further exploration on other inflammatory diseases caused by
bacterial toxins or bacterial infections.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4534666
PMID: 26099581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Oct;67(10):2742-8. doi: 10.1002/art.39240.

Brief report: association of CCR1, KLRC4, IL12A-AS1, STAT4, and ERAP1 With
Behçet's disease in Iranians.

Sousa I(1), Shahram F(2), Francisco D(1), Davatchi F(2), Abdollahi BS(2),
Ghaderibarmi F(2), Nadji A(2), Mojarad Shafiee N(2), Xavier JM(1), Oliveira
SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular and Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 
and Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. (2)Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: To independently replicate the top findings from 4 published
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of susceptibility genes in Behçet's
disease (BD).
METHODS: We tested 14 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 13 genomic loci
(excluding the major histocompatibility complex [MHC], IL10, and IL23R-IL12RB2,
which have already been associated with BD in Iranians) for allelic and genotypic
associations with BD in 973 patients and 828 controls from Iran and performed
meta-analyses of the significantly associated markers.
RESULTS: Six SNPs (in decreasing order of significance, rs7616215 located 38 kb
downstream of CCR1, rs2617170 [p.Asn104Ser] in KLRC4, rs17810546 in IL12A-AS1,
rs7574070 in STAT4, and rs10050860 [p.Asp575Asn] and rs13154629 in ERAP1) were
nominally associated with BD in both allelic association tests (5.05 × 10(-9) =
Pallele = 7.55 × 10(-3) ) and sex-adjusted genotypic association tests (6.01 ×
10(-9) = adjusted P value = 1.30 × 10(-2) ). For all 6 SNPs tested by
meta-analysis (Pmeta ), the association with BD was strengthened, because the
direction and magnitude of association were similar across populations (e.g., for
rs7574070, odds ratio [OR] for A allele 1.29 [95% confidence interval (95% CI)
1.21-1.37], Pmeta <U+2009>=<U+2009>2.34 × 10(-16) ; for rs7616215, OR for C allele 0.70 [95% CI
0.65-0.76], Pmeta <U+2009>=<U+2009>1.54 × 10(-19) ; for rs17810546, OR for A allele 0.60 [95%
CI 0.52-0.70], Pmeta <U+2009>=<U+2009>6.34 × 10(-11) ; for rs2617170, OR for T allele 0.76 [95%
CI 0.70-0.81], Pmeta <U+2009>=<U+2009>2.75 × 10(-14) ; for rs13154629, OR for TT genotype 2.76 
[95% CI 2.01-3.80], Pmeta <U+2009>=<U+2009>3.57 × 10(-10) ).
CONCLUSION: This study reinforces the notion that CCR1, KLRC4, IL12A-AS1, STAT4, 
and ERAP1 are bona fide susceptibility genes for BD, in addition to the MHC,
IL10, and IL23R-IL12RB2 loci. Future genetic and functional studies are now
warranted to uncover the roles of these genes in the pathogenesis of BD.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26097239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0130155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130155.
eCollection 2015.

Invasive Surgery Impairs the Regulatory Function of Human CD56 bright Natural
Killer Cells in Response to Staphylococcus aureus. Suppression of Interferon-<U+03B3>
Synthesis.

Reinhardt R(1), Pohlmann S(2), Kleinertz H(2), Hepner-Schefczyk M(2), Paul A(1), 
Flohé SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General-, Visceral- and Transplantation Surgery, University
Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Surgical Research, 
Department of Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Essen, University
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Major surgery increases the risk for infectious complications due to the
development of immunosuppression. CD56 bright NK cells play a key role in the
defense against bacterial infections through the release of Interferon (IFN) <U+03B3>
upon stimulation with monocyte-derived Interleukin (IL) 12. We investigated
whether invasive visceral surgery interferes with the IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis of human NK
cells in response to Staphylococcus aureus. In a prospective pilot study,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from 53 patients before
and 1 to 7 d after elective visceral surgery. The release of IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3> from
PBMC upon exposure to S. aureus in vitro was quantified. The expression of the
IL-12 receptor ß1 chain on the surface, the phosphorylation of signal transducer 
and activator of transcription (STAT) 4, and the synthesis of IFN-<U+03B3> on/in
individual CD56 bright NK cells were investigated using flow cytometry. The
modulatory effect of IL-12 on the S. aureus-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production in CD56
bright NK cells was analyzed. The IFN-<U+03B3> secretion from purified CD56 bright NK
cells was quantified after stimulation with IL-12 and IL-18. After surgery, CD56 
bright NK cells among total PBMC were impaired in the release of IFN-<U+03B3> for at
least 5 d. Likewise, the IL-12-induced release of IFN-<U+03B3> from purified CD56 bright
NK cells was abolished. Upon stimulation with S. aureus, PBMC secreted less IL-12
but supplementation with recombinant IL-12 did not restore the capacity of CD56
bright NK cells to produce IFN-<U+03B3>. CD56 bright NK cells displayed reduced levels
of the IL-12Rß1 chain whereas the phosphorylation of STAT4, the key transcription
factor for the Ifng gene was not diminished. In summary, after invasive visceral 
surgery, CD56 bright NK cells are impaired in S. aureus-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production 
and might contribute to the enhanced susceptibility to opportunistic infections.

PMCID: PMC4474941
PMID: 26090673  [PubMed - in process]


61. J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;60(9):525-31. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.59. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Disease susceptibility genes shared by primary biliary cirrhosis and Crohn's
disease in the Japanese population.

Aiba Y(1), Yamazaki K(2), Nishida N(3,)(4), Kawashima M(3,)(5), Hitomi Y(3),
Nakamura H(1), Komori A(1,)(6), Fuyuno Y(2,)(7), Takahashi A(8), Kawaguchi T(9), 
Takazoe M(9), Suzuki Y(10), Motoya S(11), Matsui T(2,)(12), Esaki M(7), Matsumoto
T(13), Kubo M(2), Tokunaga K(3), Nakamura M(1,)(6,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization, Nagasaki Medical
Center, Omura, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for
Integrative Medical Science, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN),
Yokohama, Japan. (3)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)The Research Center for Hepatitis and
Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
(5)Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of
Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki,
Japan. (7)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (8)Laboratory for Statistical
Analysis, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Yamate Medical
Center, Tokyo, Japan. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Toho University, Chiba, Japan. (11)Department of Gastroenterology, Sapporo Kosei 
Hospital, Sapporo, Japan. (12)Department of Gastroenterology, Fukuoka University 
Chikushi Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. (13)Division of Gastroenterology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Iwate, Japan. (14)Headquarters of
PBC Research in the National Hospital Organization Study Group for Liver Disease 
in Japan (NHOSLJ) and gp210 working in Research Program of Intractable
Hepatoboliary Disease Study Group supported by the Ministry of Health, Labour,
and Welfare of Japan, Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization
Nagasaki Medical Center, Nagasaki, Japan.

We previously identified TNFSF15 as the most significant susceptibility gene at
non-HLA loci for both primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and Crohn's diseases (CD)
in the Japanese population. The aim of this study is to identify further disease 
susceptibility genes shared by PBC and CD. We selected 15 and 33 genetic variants
that were significantly associated with PBC and CD, respectively, based on
previously reported genome-wide association studies of the Japanese population.
Next, an association study was independently performed for these genetic variants
in CD (1312 CD patients and 3331 healthy controls) and PBC (1279 PBC patients and
1015 healthy controls) cohorts. Two CD susceptibility genes, ICOSLG rs2838519 and
IL12B rs6556412, were also nominally associated with susceptibility to PBC
(P=3.85 × 10(-2) and P=8.40 × 10(-3), respectively). Three PBC susceptibility
genes, CXCR5 rs6421571, STAT4 rs7574865 and NFKB1 rs230534, were nominally
associated with susceptibility to CD (P=2.82 × 10(-2), P=3.88 × 10(-2) and P=2.04
× 10(-2), respectively). The effect of ICOSLG and CXCR5 variants were concordant 
but the effect of STAT4, NFKB1 and IL12B variants were discordant for PBC and CD.
TNFSF15 and ICOSLG-CXCR5 might constitute a shared pathogenic pathway in the
development of PBC and CD in the Japanese population, whereas IL12B-STAT4-NFKB1
might constitute an opposite pathogenic pathway, reflecting the different balance
between Th1 and Th17 in the two diseases.

PMID: 26084578  [PubMed - in process]


62. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Aug 15;96(4):323-36. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.06.008. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

Arctigenin exerts anti-colitis efficacy through inhibiting the differentiation of
Th1 and Th17 cells via an mTORC1-dependent pathway.

Wu X(1), Dou Y(1), Yang Y(2), Bian D(1), Luo J(1), Tong B(1), Xia Y(3), Dai Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Discovery for Metabolic Diseases, Department of
Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong 
Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China. (2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Discovery for
Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China
Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China; Department
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, 82 Qing 
Long Street, Chengdu 610031, China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Discovery
for Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica,
China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China.
Electronic address: yfxiacpu@126.com. (4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Discovery
for Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica,
China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China.
Electronic address: yuedaicpu@hotmail.com.

Arctigenin, the main effective constituent of Arctium lappa L. fruit, has
previously been proven to dramatically attenuate dextran sulfate sodium
(DSS)-induced colitis in mice, a frequently used animal model of inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD). As Th1 and Th17 cells play a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of IBD, the present study addressed whether and how arctigenin
exerted anti-colitis efficacy by interfering with the differentiation and
activation of Th1/Th17 cells. In vitro, arctigenin was shown to markedly inhibit 
the differentiation of Th17 cells from naïve T cells, and moderately inhibit the 
differentiation of Th1 cells, which was accompanied by lowered phosphorylation of
STAT3 and STAT4, respectively. In contrast, arctigenin was lack of marked effect 
on the differentiation of either Th2 or regulatory T cells. Furthermore,
arctigenin was shown to suppress the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1) pathway in T cells as demonstrated by down-regulated phosphorylation of 
the downstream target genes p70S6K and RPS6, and it functioned independent of two
well-known upstream kinases PI3K/AKT and ERK. Arctigenin was also able to inhibit
the activity of mTORC1 by dissociating raptor from mTOR. Interestingly, the
inhibitory effect of arctigenin on T cell differentiation disappeared under a
status of mTORC1 overactivation via knockdown of tuberous sclerosis complex 2
(TSC2, a negative regulator of mTORC1) or pretreatment of leucine (an agonist of 
mTOR). In DSS-induced mice, the inhibition of Th1/Th17 responses and anti-colitis
effect of arctigenin were abrogated by leucine treatment. In conclusion,
arctigenin ameliorates colitis through down-regulating the differentiation of Th1
and Th17 cells via mTORC1 pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26074264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2015 Oct;39(5):627-36. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2015.04.002. Epub 2015 Jun 9.

Association of STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism with susceptibility to inflammatory
bowel disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Liu QF(1), Li Y(1), Zhao QH(1), Wang ZY(1), Hu S(1), Yang CQ(1), Ye K(1), Li
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, No. 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui Province 230601, China.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, No. 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui Province 230601, China.
Electronic address: lili1964li@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Association of Signal transducers and activators of transcription-4
(STAT4) gene polymorphism with susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease have 
been investigated in a number of epidemiological studies, but the results are
inclusive. The aim of this meta-analysis was to more precisely estimate the
relationship.
METHODS: The databases of Pubmed and CBM updated to October, 2014 were retrieved.
Random- or fixed-effect model was used to estimate odd radio (OR) and
corresponding 95% confidence interval (95%CI) on the basis of heterogeneity.
RESULTS: Seven articles containing 2196 Crohn's disease (CD) cases, 1588
ulcerative colitis (UC) cases and 4126 controls were identified. We detected a
significant association between STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism and IBD
susceptibility in overall population (GG vs. GT+TT, OR=0.855, 95% CI=0.760-0.962,
P=0.009), but not in Caucasian and Asian population, respectively. No association
was detected between rs7574865 polymorphism and CD susceptibility in overall,
Asian and Caucasian population, respectively. Interestingly, a significant
association was detected between rs7574865 with UC susceptibility in overall
population (G vs. T, OR=0.881, 95% CI=0.798-0.972, P=0.012; GG vs. GT+TT,
OR=0.788, 95% CI=0.679-0.914, P=0.002; GG vs. TT, OR=0.683, 95% CI=0.498-0.937,
P=0.018) and Caucasians (GG vs. GT+TT, OR=0.833, 95% CI=0.701-0.990, P=0.038;
GG+GT vs. TT, OR=0.667, 95% CI=0.456-0.975, P=0.037; GG vs. TT, OR=0.636, 95%
CI=0.433-0.934, P=0.021), respectively, and a possible association was found in
Asian population (GG vs. GT+TT, OR=0.709, 95% CI=0.503-0.998, P=0.049).
CONCLUSIONS: STAT4 rs7574865 gene is IBD risk factor, and this gene polymorphism 
is associated with UC susceptibility, especially in Caucasians. To confirm these 
findings, further studies with more sample size are required for a definitive
conclusion.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26066297  [PubMed - in process]


64. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Mar 15;8(3):3566-72. eCollection 2015.

STAT4 polymorphisms and diabetes risk: a meta-analysis with 18931 patients and
23833 controls.

Yi J(1), Fang X(2), Wan Y(1), Wei J(1), Huang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Ninth Hospital of Wuhan City Wuhan 430060, P.
R. China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of
Science and Technolgy Wuhan 430022 , P. R. China.

Some studies were conducted to investigate the association between signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) polymorphisms and diabetes
risk. However, the results were inconsistent. We thus did a meta-analysis. We
searched the articles in the PubMed, Embase and CNKI databases (the last search
updated on November 2014). Pooled odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals 
(CI) were derived from random-effects models or fixed-effects models. Ten
case-control studies with 18931 cases and 23833 controls were included in this
study. STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism was significantly associated with diabetes
risk (OR = 1.28; 95% CI 1.16-1.42; P < 0.00001). This polymorphism also increased
type 1 diabetes risk significantly (OR = 1.27; 95% CI 1.15-1.41; P < 0.00001). In
the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, a significant association was found among
Asians (OR = 1.33; 95% CI 1.04-1.71; P = 0.02) and Caucasians (OR = 1.24; 95% CI 
1.12-1.38; P < 0.0001). In the subgroup analysis by age, both children (OR =
1.28; 95% CI 1.12-1.45; P = 0.0002) and adults (OR = 1.27; 95% CI 1.13-1.42; P < 
0.0001) with this polymorphism showed increased diabetes risk. Other STAT4
polymorphisms were not investigated in this meta-analysis due to insufficient
data. This meta-analysis indicated that STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism was
associated with diabetes risk.

PMCID: PMC4443084
PMID: 26064250  [PubMed]


65. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Oct;98(4):601-13. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1A0814-375RR. Epub 2015
Jun 9.

Epigenetic regulation of IL-12-dependent T cell proliferation.

Schaller M(1), Ito T(2), Allen RM(2), Kroetz D(2), Kittan N(2), Ptaschinski C(2),
Cavassani K(2), Carson WF 4th(2), Godessart N(2), Grembecka J(2), Cierpicki T(2),
Dou Y(2), Kunkel SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA; Department of Immunology, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan;
and Dermatology Research, Almirall, S.A., St Feliu de Llobregat, Spain
mschalle@umich.edu. (2)*Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA; Department of Immunology, Nara Medical
University, Nara, Japan; and Dermatology Research, Almirall, S.A., St Feliu de
Llobregat, Spain.

It is well established that the cytokine IL-12 and the transcription factor
STAT4, an essential part of the IL-12 signaling pathway, are critical components 
of the Th1 differentiation process in T cells. In response to pathogenic stimuli,
this process causes T cells to proliferate rapidly and secrete high amounts of
the cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>, leading to the Th1 proinflammatory phenotype. However, there 
are still unknown components of this differentiation pathway. We here
demonstrated that the expression of the histone methyltransferase Mll1 is driven 
by IL-12 signaling through STAT4 in humans and mice and is critical for the
proper differentiation of a naïve T cell to a Th1 cell. Once MLL1 is up-regulated
by IL-12, it regulates the proliferation of Th1 cells. As evidence of this, we
show that Th1 cells from Mll1(+/-) mice are unable to proliferate rapidly in a
Th1 environment in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, upon restimulation with
cognate antigen Mll1(+/-), T cells do not convert to a Th1 phenotype, as
characterized by IFN-<U+03B3> output. Furthermore, we observed a reduction in IFN-<U+03B3>
production and proliferation in human peripheral blood stimulated with tetanus
toxoid by use of a specific inhibitor of the MLL1/menin complex. Together, our
results demonstrate that the MLL1 gene plays a previously unrecognized but
essential role in Th1 cell biology and furthermore, describes a novel pathway
through which Mll1 expression is regulated.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4763868 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26059830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;35(4):419-24.

[Effect of baicalin on signal transduction and activating transcription factor
expression in ulcerative colitis patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu FY, Huang SG, Zhang HY, Chi HG, Zou Y, Lu RX, Zheng XB.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the intervention of baicalin on signal transduction and
activating transcription factor expression of ulcerative colitis (UC) patients.
METHODS: Recruited were UC patients at Outpatient Department of Digestive
Disease, Inpatient Department of Digestive Disease, Center for Digestive
Endoscopy of College City Branch, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, and Southern Hospital affiliated to Southern Medical University
from June 2010 to January 2011. They were assigned to the UC group (33 cases) and
the diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome (IBS-D) group (30 cases).
Another 30 healthy subjects were recruited as a healthy control group. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in vitro intervened by different concentrations
baicalin were taken from UC patients. IL23R gene expressions in vitro intervened 
by different concentrations baicalin were detected using Q-PCR. Expressions of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) , STAT6,
phosphorylated-STAT4 (p-STAT4), and p-STAT6 were detected using Western blot.
Serum levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-10 were measured by ELISA. Effects of
different concentrations baicalin on expressions of PBMCs, and levels of IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-4, IL-10 of UC patients were also detected.
RESULTS: Compared with the negative control group, 40 µmol baicalin obviously
decreased IL23R gene expression of UC patients (P <0. 01). Compared with the
healthy control group and the IBS-D group, p-STAT4/STAT4 ratios increased,
p-STAT6/STAT6 ratios decreased, levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-10 all increased in the
US group (all P <0. 05). Compared with the negative control, 5 and 10 µmol
baicalin groups, 20 and 40 moL baicalin obviously decreased p-STAT4/STAT4 ratios 
(all P <0. 05); 20 and 40 µmoL baicalin obviously increased p-STAT6/STAT6 ratios 
(all P <0. 05); 20 and 40 µmoL baicalin obviously lowered levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and
IL-4, and elevated IL-10 levels (all P <0. 05).
CONCLUSION: 40 µmoL baicalin could in vitro inhibit p-STAT4/STAT4 ratios, adjust 
p-STAT6/STAT6 ratios and related cytokines, thereby balancing the immunity and
relieving inflammatory reactions of UC.

PMID: 26043563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 2;112(22):7061-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1415675112. Epub 2015 May 18.

Th17 cells give rise to Th1 cells that are required for the pathogenesis of
colitis.

Harbour SN(1), Maynard CL(1), Zindl CL(1), Schoeb TR(2), Weaver CT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology. (2)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294. (3)Department of Pathology cweaver@uab.edu.

Th17 cells reactive to the enteric microbiota are central to the pathogenesis of 
certain types of inflammatory bowel disease. However, Th17 cells display
substantial developmental plasticity, such that some progeny of Th17 cell
precursors retain a predominantly IL-17A(+) phenotype, whereas others extinguish 
IL-17 expression and acquire expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, giving rise to "Th1-like"
cells. It remains unclear what role these subsets play in inflammatory bowel
disease. Using a Th17 transfer model of colitis, we found that IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient
Th17 cells retained an IL-17A(+) phenotype and were unable to induce colitis in
recipients. Development of disease required the transition of a subset of Th17
precursors to Th1-like cells and was contingent on the expression of both Stat4
and T-bet, but not the IL-12 or IFN-<U+03B3> receptors. Moreover, Th17 cells could
provide "help" for the development of pathogenic Th1 cells from naïve precursors.
These results indicate that Th17 cells are potent mediators of colitis
pathogenesis by dual mechanisms: by directly transitioning to Th1-like cells and 
by supporting the development of classic Th1 cells.

PMCID: PMC4460486
PMID: 26038559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Aug;98(2):283-94. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A1014-520R. Epub 2015 Jun
1.

Altered effector functions of NK cells in chronic hepatitis C are associated with
IFNL3 polymorphism.

Rogalska-Taranta M(1), Markova AA(1), Taranta A(1), Lunemann S(1), Schlaphoff
V(1), Flisiak R(1), Manns MP(1), Cornberg M(1), Kraft AR(1), Wedemeyer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany; Department of Infectious Diseases and
Hepatology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland; and German Center
for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Hannover-Braunschweig, Germany.

Interferon a-mediated effector functions of NK cells may contribute to the
control of HCV replication and the pathogenesis of liver disease. The
single-nucleotide polymorphism rs12979860 near IFNL3 (previously known as IL28B) 
is important in response to IFN-a treatment and in spontaneous resolution of
acute hepatitis C. The role of the IFNL3 polymorphism in NK cell function is
unclear. Thus, we investigated the role of IFNL3 polymorphism in type I
IFN-dependent regulation of NK cell functions in patients with cHC and healthy
control subjects. We demonstrated a marked polarization of NK cells toward
cytotoxicity in response to IFN-a stimulation in patients with hepatitis C. That 
TRAIL up-regulation was present, particularly in patients with the IFNL3-TT
allele, was supported by a shift in the pSTAT-1:pSTAT-4 ratios toward pSTAT-1. In
patients bearing the IFNL3-TT allele, NK cell effector function correlated with
liver disease activity. In contrast, higher cytokine production of NK cells was
observed in healthy individuals with the IFNL3-CC genotype, which may support
spontaneous HCV clearance in acute infection. Overall, these findings show that
the role of NK cells may differ in chronic infection vs. early antiviral defense 
and that the IFNL3 genotype differentially influences NK cell function.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 26034208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug;60(8):443-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.45. Epub 2015 May 21.

Genetic association of key Th1/Th2 pathway candidate genes, IRF2, IL6, IFNGR2,
STAT4 and IL4RA, with atopic asthma in the Indian population.

Kumar A(1), Das S(1), Agrawal A(2), Mukhopadhyay I(3), Ghosh B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Laboratory, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology, Delhi, India. (2)Centre of Excellence for Translational
Research in Asthma and Lung Disease, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, Delhi, India. (3)Human Genetics unit, Indian Statistical Institute,
Kolkata, India.

Asthma is a complex, multifactorial disease resulting due to dysregulated immune 
responses. Genetic factors contribute significantly to asthma pathogenesis, and
identification of these factors is one of the major goals in understanding the
disease. Th1/Th2 helper differentiation has a critical role in modulating the
phenotypes associated with atopic asthma. This study was aimed at identifying
genetic modifiers of asthma in selected genes involved in T helper
differentiation. A total of 354 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 33
candidate genes were genotyped in a case-control cohort (cases=147, controls=199)
and families (n=247) using Illumina's Golden Gate Assay. Five SNPs, rs3733475A/C 
(IRF2), rs2069832A/G (IL6), rs2012075G/A (IFNGR2) and rs1400656G/A (STAT4) and
rs1805011C/A (IL4RA) were found to be associated with asthma in family based as
well as in case-control analyses (P=0.002, P=0.001, P=0.004, P=0.003 and P=0.001,
respectively). Interestingly, the minor alleles at these loci showed a protective
effect. A five loci haplotype, TAACG, in IRF2 gene, was significantly associated 
with asthma in families (P=1.1 × 10(-6)) and in case-control cohort (P=0.01). In 
conclusion, our studies led to identification of some key candidate genes, namely
IRF2, IL6, IFNGR2, STAT4 and IL4RA that modulate genetic susceptibility to asthma
in the Indian population. Also, this is the first report of independent
association of IL6 gene polymorphism with atopic asthma.

PMID: 25994869  [PubMed - in process]


70. Sci Rep. 2015 May 21;5:10501. doi: 10.1038/srep10501.

TLR ligand induced IL-6 counter-regulates the anti-viral CD8(+) T cell response
during an acute retrovirus infection.

Wu W(1), Dietze KK(1), Gibbert K(1), Lang KS(2), Trilling M(1), Yan H(3), Wu
J(4), Yang D(4), Lu M(1), Roggendorf M(1), Dittmer U(1), Liu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology, University Hospital of Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Institute for Immunology, University Hospital 
of Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China. (4)Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, China. (5)1] Institute for Virology, University Hospital
of Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany [2] Department of
Infectious Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

We have previously shown that Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists contribute to the
control of viral infection by augmenting virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell responses. 
It is also well established that signaling by TLRs results in the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 6 (IL-6). However, how these
pro-inflammatory cytokines influence the virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell response
during the TLR agonist stimulation remained largely unknown. Here, we
investigated the role of TLR-induced IL-6 in shaping virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell
responses in the Friend retrovirus (FV) mouse model. We show that the TLR agonist
induced IL-6 counter-regulates effector CD8(+) T-cell responses. IL-6 potently
inhibited activation and cytokine production of CD8(+) T cells in vitro. This
effect was mediated by a direct stimulation of CD8(+) T cells by IL-6, which
induced upregulation of STAT3 phosphorylation and SOCS3 and downregulated STAT4
phosphorylation and T-bet. Moreover, combining TLR stimulation and IL-6 blockade 
during an acute FV infection resulted in enhanced virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell
immunity and better control of viral replication. These results have implications
for our understanding of the role of TLR induced pro-inflammatory cytokines in
regulating effector T cell responses and for the development of therapeutic
strategies to overcome T cell dysfunction in chronic viral infections.

PMCID: PMC4440206
PMID: 25994622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(9):3917-22.

Dendrosomal curcumin suppresses metastatic breast cancer in mice by changing
m1/m2 macrophage balance in the tumor microenvironment.

Shiri S(1), Alizadeh AM, Baradaran B, Farhanghi B, Shanehbandi D, Khodayari S,
Khodayari H, Tavassoli A.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran E-mail : aalizadeh@razi.tums.ac.ir, baradaranb@tbzmed.ac.ir.

Curcumin, a lipid-soluble compound extracted from the plant Curcuma Longa, has
been found to exert immunomodulatory effects via macrophages. However, most
studies focus on the low bioavailability issue of curcumin by nano and
microparticles, and thus the role of macrophages in the anticancer mechanism of
curcumin has received little attention so far. We have previously shown the
potential biocompatibility, biodegradability and anti-cancer effects of
dendrosomal curcumin (DNC). In this study, twenty-seven BALB/c mice were equally 
divided into control as well as 40 and 80 mg/kg groups of DNC to investigate the 
involvement of macrophages in the antitumor effects of curcumin in a typical
animal model of metastatic breast cancer. At the end of intervention, the tumor
volume and weight were significantly reduced in DNC groups compared to control
(P<0.05). Histopathological data showed the presence of macrophages in tumor and 
spleen tissues. Real-time PCR results showed that DNC increased the expression of
STAT4 and IL-12 genes in tumor and spleen tissues in comparison with control
(P<0.05), referring to the high levels of M1 macrophages. Furthermore treatment
with DNC decreased STAT3, IL-10 and arginase I gene expression (P<0.05),
indicating low levels of M2 macrophage. The results confirm the role of
macrophages in the protective effects of dendrosomal curcumin against metastatic 
breast cancer in mice.

PMID: 25987060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Rheumatol. 2015 Jul;42(7):1131-40. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.141211. Epub 2015 May
15.

Do Genetic Susceptibility Variants Associate with Disease Severity in Early
Active Rheumatoid Arthritis?

Scott IC(1), Rijsdijk F(1), Walker J(1), Quist J(1), Spain SL(1), Tan R(1), Steer
S(1), Okada Y(1), Raychaudhuri S(1), Cope AP(1), Lewis CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, and Academic Department
of Rheumatology, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology of Inflammation, and
Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, and Department of Rheumatology, King's College London, and Guy's
Hospital, London, UK; Department of Human Genetics and Disease Diversity,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo; Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan; Division of Genetics, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.I.C. Scott, 
PhD, Clinical Research Fellow, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, and 
Academic Department of Rheumatology, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Inflammation, King's College London, and Guy's Hospital; F. Rijsdijk, PhD,
Reader, SGDP Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London; J. Walker,
PhD, Statistical Geneticist; J. Quist, PhD, MSc, Student; S.L. Spain, PhD,
Research Associate, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College 
London, and Guy's Hospital; R. Tan, MRes, Core Medical Trainee, Academic
Department of Rheumatology, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Inflammation, King's College London; S. Steer, PhD, Consultant Rheumatologist,
Department of Rheumatology, King's College Hospital; Y. Okada, PhD, Tenure Track 
Junior Associate Professor, Department of Human Genetics and Disease Diversity,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, and Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences; S. Raychaudhuri, PhD, Professor, Division of Genetics, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School; A.P. Cope, PhD, Professor, Academic
Department of Rheumatology, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Inflammation, King's College London; C.M. Lewis, PhD, Prof

OBJECTIVE: Genetic variants affect both the development and severity of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Recent studies have expanded the number of RA
susceptibility variants. We tested the hypothesis that these associated with
disease severity in a clinical trial cohort of patients with early, active RA.
METHODS: We evaluated 524 patients with RA enrolled in the Combination
Anti-Rheumatic Drugs in Early RA (CARDERA) trials. We tested validated
susceptibility variants - 69 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), 15 HLA-DRB1
alleles, and amino acid polymorphisms in 6 HLA molecule positions - for their
associations with progression in Larsen scoring, 28-joint Disease Activity
Scores, and Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) scores over 2 years using
linear mixed-effects and latent growth curve models.
RESULTS: HLA variants were associated with joint destruction. The *04:01 SNP
(rs660895, p = 0.0003), *04:01 allele (p = 0.0002), and HLA-DRß1 amino acids
histidine at position 13 (p = 0.0005) and valine at position 11 (p = 0.0012)
significantly associated with radiological progression. This association was only
significant in anticitrullinated protein antibody (ACPA)-positive patients,
suggesting that while their effects were not mediated by ACPA, they only
predicted joint damage in ACPA-positive RA. Non-HLA variants did not associate
with radiograph damage (assessed individually and cumulatively as a weighted
genetic risk score). Two SNP - rs11889341 (STAT4, p = 0.0001) and rs653178
(SH2B3-PTPN11, p = 0.0004) - associated with HAQ scores over 6-24 months.
CONCLUSION: HLA susceptibility variants play an important role in determining
radiological progression in early, active ACPA-positive RA. Genome-wide and
HLA-wide analyses across large populations are required to better characterize
the genetic architecture of radiological progression in RA.

PMID: 25979711  [PubMed - in process]


73. Immunobiology. 2015 Aug;220(8):1012-24. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2015.04.003. Epub
2015 Apr 28.

Association of PTPN22 rs2476601 and STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphisms with rheumatoid
arthritis: A meta-analysis update.

Elshazli R(1), Settin A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta,
Egypt. Electronic address: Biolab100@gmail.com. (2)Genetics Unit, Children
Hospital, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease with a
complex genetic background. The genes encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase
non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) have been reported to be associated with RA in several
ethnic populations.
OBJECTIVES: This work aims to assess the association between PTPN22 rs2476601 and
STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphisms with RA susceptibility through an updated
meta-analysis of available case-control studies.
METHODS: A literature search of all relevant studies published from January 2007 
up to December 2014 was conducted using Pubmed and Science Direct databases. The 
observed studies that were related to an association between PTPN22 rs2476601 and
STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphisms with RA susceptibility were identified.
Meta-analysis of the pooled and stratified data was done and assessed using
varied genetic models.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven case-control studies with a total of 47 comparisons (29 for
PTPN22 rs2476601 polymorphism and 18 for STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism) met our
inclusion criteria. The meta-analysis showed an association between PTPN22 T
allele, CT+TT and TT genotypes with RA susceptibility. Furthermore, The
meta-analysis showed an association between STAT4 T allele, GT+TT and TT
genotypes with RA susceptibility. Stratification of RA patients according to
ethnic groups showed that PTPN22 T allele, CT+TT genotypes, STAT4 T allele and
STAT4 GT+TT were significantly associated with RA in European, Asian, African
subjects, while PTPN22 TT genotype was significantly associated with RA in
European but not in Asian and African subjects and STAT4 TT genotype was
significantly associated with RA in European and Asian but not in African
subject. A subgroup analysis according to the presence or absence of rheumatoid
factor (RF) and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies revealed 
that the association between PTPN22 rs2476601 and STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphisms
with RA susceptibility may not be dependent on RF and anti-CCP antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis demonstrated that PTPN22 rs2476601 and STAT4
rs7574865 polymorphisms confers susceptibility to RA in total subjects and in
major ethnic groups. The association may not be dependent on RF and anti-CCP
antibodies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25963842  [PubMed - in process]


74. PLoS One. 2015 May 6;10(5):e0125273. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125273.
eCollection 2015.

Association between Variants in Atopy-Related Immunologic Candidate Genes and
Pancreatic Cancer Risk.

Cotterchio M(1), Lowcock E(2), Bider-Canfield Z(2), Lemire M(3), Greenwood C(4), 
Gallinger S(5), Hudson T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Prevention and Cancer Control, Cancer Care Ontario, Toronto, ON M5G 2L7,
Canada; Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
M5T 3M7, Canada. (2)Prevention and Cancer Control, Cancer Care Ontario, Toronto, 
ON M5G 2L7, Canada. (3)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON M5G
0A3, Canada. (4)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada. (5)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada; Division of General
Surgery, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada. (6)Ontario
Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON M5G 0A3, Canada; Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Many epidemiology studies report that atopic conditions such as
allergies are associated with reduced pancreas cancer risk. The reason for this
relationship is not yet understood. This is the first study to comprehensively
evaluate the association between variants in atopy-related candidate genes and
pancreatic cancer risk.
METHODS: A population-based case-control study of pancreas cancer cases diagnosed
during 2011-2012 (via Ontario Cancer Registry), and controls recruited using
random digit dialing utilized DNA from 179 cases and 566 controls. Following an
exhaustive literature review, SNPs in 180 candidate genes were pre-screened using
dbGaP pancreas cancer GWAS data; 147 SNPs in 56 allergy-related immunologic genes
were retained and genotyped. Logistic regression was used to estimate
age-adjusted odd ratio (AOR) for each variant and false discovery rate was used
to adjust Wald p-values for multiple testing. Subsequently, a risk allele score
was derived based on statistically significant variants.
RESULTS: 18 SNPs in 14 candidate genes (CSF2, DENND1B, DPP10, FLG, IL13, IL13RA2,
LRP1B, NOD1, NPSR1, ORMDL3, RORA, STAT4, TLR6, TRA) were significantly associated
with pancreas cancer risk. After adjustment for multiple comparisons, two LRP1B
SNPs remained statistically significant; for example, LRP1B rs1449477 (AA vs. CC:
AOR=0.37, 95% CI: 0.22-0.62; p (adjusted)=0.04). Furthermore, the risk allele
score was associated with a significant reduction in pancreas cancer risk
(p=0.0007).
CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary findings suggest certain atopy-related variants may be
associated with pancreas cancer risk. Further studies are needed to replicate
this, and to elucidate the biology behind the growing body of epidemiologic
evidence suggesting allergies may reduce pancreatic cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC4422524
PMID: 25945796  [PubMed - in process]


75. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Feb 15;8(2):2471-5. eCollection 2015.

STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism contributes to the risk of type 1 diabetes: a meta
analysis.

Li C(1), Zhao L(2), Wang W(3), Li H(3), Meng X(3), Chen S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University Jinan 250000, Shandong, China ; Department of Endocrinology, 
Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital Affiliated to Qingdao University Yantai 264000,
China. (2)Hemodialysis Center, Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital Affiliated to Qingdao 
University Yantai 264000, China. (3)Department of Endocrinology, Yantai
Yuhuangding Hospital Affiliated to Qingdao University Yantai 264000, China.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) rs7574865
polymorphism has been indicated to be correlated with type 1 diabetes (T1D)
susceptibility, but study results are still debatable. Thus, a meta-analysis was 
conducted. The electronic databases PubMed, Embase, CNKI, and Web of Science
(ISI) were searched to find eligible studies. Data were extracted and pooled odds
ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated. A significant
association was found between STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism and T1D risk (OR=1.30;
95% CI, 1.13-1.48; P<0.01; I(2) =73%). Significant associations were also found
in Asians (OR=1.33; 95% CI, 1.04-1.71; P=0.02; I(2) =60%) and Caucasians
(OR=1.26; 95% CI, 1.08-1.47; P<0.01; I(2) =74%), respectively. This association
was also positive in the pediatric patients (OR=1.41; 95% CI, 1.19-1.68; P<0.01; 
I(2) =46%). Moreover, we found that STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism was associated
with early-onset T1D risk (OR=1.43; 95% CI, 1.16-1.77; P<0.01; I(2) =0%). This
meta-analysis suggested that the STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism may be associated
with T1D development.

PMCID: PMC4402838
PMID: 25932191  [PubMed]


76. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;28(2):209-17. doi:
10.1177/0394632015584733. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Immunohistochemical pattern of T lymphocytes population within
bilharzial-associated bladder neoplasm microenvironment.

El-Aal AA(1), Emran AM(2), Al-Antably AS(3), El Saftawy EA(1), Bayoumy IR(4),
Hassan NS(5), Badawi M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(2)Urosurgery Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(3)Parasitology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt
asalantably@kasralainy.edu.eg. (4)Parasitology Department, Theodor Bilharz
Research Institute, Egypt. (5)Pathology Department, National Research Center,
Giza, Egypt.

The present work aimed to investigate the cellular and immunochemical pattern of 
T cells population in biopsy material from chronic schistosomiasis haematobium
Egyptian patients complicated with bladder cancer. Digital real-time quantitative
photocytometry was applied to auto-analyze 29 stained tissue sections from cases 
and 17 controls using STAT4, GATA3, FOXP3, and CD8 markers specific for Th1, Th2,
T regulatory, and T cytotoxic cells, respectively. Area percentage showed
significant high level of GATA, followed by FOXP3 and low level of both STAT and 
CD8 was reported. Tissue samples from five healthy bladder tissues showed
significant lower optical density (OD) values. Tissue samples from 12
non-bilharzial bladder cancers showed variable OD values, reflecting wide
disparity in the control group.Our results hypothesized an exclusive pattern of T
population in long standing complicated schistosomiasis haematobium. Our cases
were poorly controlled by unbalanced Th1/Th2 in which Th2 was dominated. FOXP3
increased significantly, however, failed to downregulate Th2, instead, the
relation between Th1 and T cytotoxic was forcibly limited by the high level of
FOXP3, resulting in loss of their power in defending the host against both
parasite and carcinogenic changes. These results provide more clarification for
the immune evasion process played by the parasite and tumor cells under the
supervision of T regulatory cells. Additionally a critical role of FOXP3 is
suggested in manipulating STAT4 and CD8 in favor of malignant transformation in
this life-threatening parasite.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25926591  [PubMed - in process]


77. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Jul;33:72-6. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.04.013. Epub 2015
Apr 22.

Replication of genome wide association studies on hepatocellular carcinoma
susceptibility loci of STAT4 and HLA-DQ in a Korean population.

Kim LH(1), Cheong HS(2), Namgoong S(1), Kim JO(2), Kim JH(3), Park BL(2), Cho
SW(4), Park NH(5), Cheong JY(4), Koh I(6), Shin HD(7), Kim YJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Republic of Korea; Department
of Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., Republic of Korea. (2)Department of 
Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Life Science, Sogang University, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Ulsan University Hospital, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Han Yang University, Republic
of Korea. (7)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Republic of Korea;
Department of Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: hdshin@sogang.ac.kr. (8)Department of Internal Medicine and
Liver Research Institute, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: yoonjun@snu.ac.kr.

A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) for hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) identified two loci (rs7574865 in STAT4 and
rs9275319 in HLA-DQ) in a Chinese population. We attempted to replicate the
associations between the two SNP loci and the risk of HCC in a Korean population.
The rs7574865 in STAT4 and rs9275319 in HLA-DQ were genotyped in a total of 3838 
Korean subjects composed of 287 HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma patients,
671 chronic hepatitis B virus (CHB) patients, and 2880 population controls using 
TaqMan genotyping assay. Gene expression was measured by microarray. A logistic
regression analysis revealed that rs7574865 in STAT4 and rs9275319 in HLA-DQ were
associated with the risk of CHB (OR = 1.25, P = 0.0002 and OR = 1.57, P= 1.44 ×
10(-10), respectively). However, these loci were no association with the risk of 
HBV-related HCC among CHB patients. In the gene expression analyses, although no 
significant differences in mRNA expression of nearby genes according to genotypes
were detected, a significantly decreased mRNA expression in HCC subjects was
observed in STAT4, HLA-DQA1, and HLA-DQB1. Although the genetic effects of two
HCC susceptibility loci were not replicated, the two loci were found to exert
susceptibility effects on the risk of CHB in a Korean population. In addition,
the decreased mRNA expression of STAT4, HLA-DQA1, and HLA-DQB1 in HCC tissue
might provide a clue to understanding their role in the progression to HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25913043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Transl Med. 2015 Apr 14;13:120. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0479-z.

Favorable in vitro effects of combined IL-12 and IL-18 treatment on NK cell
cytotoxicity and CD25 receptor expression in metastatic melanoma patients.

Mirjacic Martinovic K(1), Babovic N(2), Dodic R(3,)(4), Juriic V(5), Matkovic
S(6), Konjevic G(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Institute of Oncology and Radiology of
Serbia, Pasterova 14, 11000, Belgrade, Serbia. kmirjacic@sezam.net. (2)Department
of Medical Oncology, Institute of Oncology and Radiology of Serbia, Pasterova 14,
11000, Belgrade, Serbia. babovic_nada@ncrc.ac.rs. (3)Surgical Oncology Clinic,
Institute of Oncology and Radiology of Serbia, Pasterova 14, 11000, Belgrade,
Serbia. radan@ncrc.ac.rs. (4)School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Dr
Subotica 8, 11000, Beograd, Serbia. radan@ncrc.ac.rs. (5)Faculty of Medical
Sciences, University of Kragujevac, P.BOX 124, 34000, Kragujevac, Serbia.
vdvd@lycos.com. (6)Department of Medical Oncology, Institute of Oncology and
Radiology of Serbia, Pasterova 14, 11000, Belgrade, Serbia. smatkovic@ncrc.ac.rs.
(7)Department of Experimental Oncology, Institute of Oncology and Radiology of
Serbia, Pasterova 14, 11000, Belgrade, Serbia. konjevicg@ncrc.ac.rs. (8)School of
Medicine, University of Belgrade, Dr Subotica 8, 11000, Beograd, Serbia.
konjevicg@ncrc.ac.rs.

BACKGROUND: As IL-12 and IL-18 have important immunostimulatory role the aim of
this study was to investigate their in vitro effects on functional and receptor
characteristics of NK cells and their subsets in healthy controls (HC) and
metastatic melanoma patients (MM).
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of HC and MM were stimulated
with culture medium alone, medium supplemented with IL-12 (10 ng/ml), IL-18 (100 
ng/ml) and their combination. NK cell activity was determined using radioactive
cytotoxicity assay, while perforin, CD107a and pSTAT-4 expression, IFN-<U+03B3>
production and the expression of NKG2D, DNAM-1, CD161, CD158a/b, CD25, IL-12R
beta 1/2 receptors on CD3(-)CD56(+) NK cells and their CD3(-)CD56(dim+) and
CD3(-)CD56(bright+) subsets were analyzed by flow cytometry. Cytokine induced
level of DAP10 in PBMC was analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: IL-12 alone or in combination with IL-18 significantly induced NK cell
activity and CD107a degranulation marker expression in MM and HC, while IL-18
alone did not have any effect in patients. The combination of IL-12 and IL-18
significantly increased mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of IFN-<U+03B3> in all NK cell
subsets in HC and only in the bright subset in MM. MM that belong to M1c group
with metastasis in liver and increased LDH serum values had significantly lower
increase in NK cell cytotoxicity after combined IL-12 and IL-18 treatment
compared to the patients in M1a and M1b categories. These results could be
explained by decreased IL-12R expression and lower increase in pSTAT-4 and
perforin expression in NK cells of M1c patients after IL-12 and combined IL-12
and IL-18 treatment. IL-18 alone significantly decreased NKG2D receptor
expression and level of DAP10 signaling molecule in MM, while combined IL-12 and 
IL-18 increased the expression of CD25 on all NK cell subsets in HC and MM.
Additionally, MM that belong to M1a<U+2009>+<U+2009>M1b group had significantly higher increase
in CD25 receptor expression compared to the patients in M1c group.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel data obtained in this study support the use of IL-12 and
IL-18 in combination for developing new therapeutic strategies for metastatic
melanoma especially for patients with better survival rate and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4421987
PMID: 25889680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 17;10(4):e0124802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124802.
eCollection 2015.

Interferon-ß suppresses murine Th1 cell function in the absence of
antigen-presenting cells.

Boivin N(1), Baillargeon J(1), Doss PM(2), Roy AP(2), Rangachari M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec-Université
Laval, Québec QC, Canada G1V 4G2. (2)Department of Neuroscience, Centre de
recherche du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Québec QC, Canada G1V 4G2; Graduate 
Programme in Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, 
Québec QC, Canada G1V 0A6. (3)Department of Neuroscience, Centre de recherche du 
CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Québec QC, Canada G1V 4G2; Department of
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Québec QC, Canada G1V 
0A6.

Interferon (IFN)-ß is a front-line therapy for the treatment of the
relapsing-remitting form of multiple sclerosis. However, its immunosuppressive
mechanism of function remains incompletely understood. While it has been proposed
that IFN-ß suppresses the function of inflammatory myelin antigen-reactive T
cells by promoting the release of immunomodulatory cytokines such as IL-27 from
antigen-presenting cells (APCs), its direct effects on inflammatory CD4+ Th1
cells are less clear. Here, we establish that IFN-ß inhibits mouse IFN-<U+03B3>+ Th1
cell function in the absence of APCs. CD4+ T cells express the type I interferon 
receptor, and IFN-ß can suppress Th1 cell proliferation under APC-free
stimulation conditions. IFN-ß-treated myelin antigen-specific Th1 cells are
impaired in their ability to induce severe experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE) upon transfer to lymphocyte-deficient Rag1-/- mice.
Polarized Th1 cells downregulate IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-2, and upregulate the negative
regulatory receptor Tim-3, when treated with IFN-ß in the absence of APCs.
Further, IFN-ß treatment of Th1 cells upregulates phosphorylation of Stat1, and
downregulates phosphorylation of Stat4. Our data indicate that IFN-<U+03B3>-producing
Th1 cells are directly responsive to IFN-ß and point to a novel mechanism of
IFN-ß-mediated T cell suppression that is independent of APC-derived signals.

PMCID: PMC4401451
PMID: 25885435  [PubMed - in process]


80. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2015 Jan-Mar;29(1):85-92.

Silencing of stat4 gene inhibits cell proliferation and invasion of colorectal
cancer cells.

Cheng JM(1), Yao MR(1), Zhu Q(1), Wu XY(1), Zhou J(1), Tan WL(1), Zhan SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Shu Guang Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) play critical roles in 
development, proliferation, and immune defense. However the consequences of STAT 
hyperactivity can predispose to diseases, including colorectal cancer. In the
present study, we aimed to evaluate the function of STAT4 in human colorectal
cancer (CRC). The expression of STAT4 was examined by immunohistochemical assay
using a tissue microarray procedure. A loss-of-function experiment was carried
out to investigate the effects of lentivirus-mediated STAT4 shRNA (Lv-shSTAT4) on
cell proliferation and invasive potential indicated by MTT and Transwell assays
in CRC cell lines (SW480 and Caco2). As a consequence, it was found that the
expression of STAT4 protein was significantly increased in CRC tissues compared
with that in adjacent non-cancerous tissues (ANCT) (71.1% vs 44.4%, P=0.015), and
was related with the Duke<U+0092>s staging and depth of invasion in CRC patients
(P=0.022; P=0.001). Silencing of STAT4 gene suppressed cell proliferation and
invasion of CRC cells. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that increased 
expression of STAT4 is positively correlated with the depth of invasion in CRC
patients, and inhibition of STAT4 expression represses the growth and invasion of
CRC cells, suggesting that STAT4 may be a promising therapeutic target for the
treatment of CRC.

PMID: 25864744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Immunity. 2015 Apr 21;42(4):613-26. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 
Apr 7.

The methylcytosine dioxygenase Tet2 promotes DNA demethylation and activation of 
cytokine gene expression in T cells.

Ichiyama K(1), Chen T(2), Wang X(3), Yan X(4), Kim BS(5), Tanaka S(6),
Ndiaye-Lobry D(7), Deng Y(2), Zou Y(2), Zheng P(1), Tian Q(4), Aifantis I(7), Wei
L(8), Dong C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, China. (3)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (4)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA. (5)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77054, USA. (6)Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (8)State Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
Electronic address: weil9@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (9)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: chendong@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):1214.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Apr 21;42(4):593-5.

Epigenetic regulation of lineage-specific genes is important for the
differentiation and function of T cells. Ten-eleven translocation (Tet) proteins 
catalyze 5-methylcytosine (5 mC) conversion to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC) to
mediate DNA demethylation. However, the roles of Tet proteins in the immune
response are unknown. Here, we characterized the genome-wide distribution of 5
hmC in CD4(+) T cells and found that 5 hmC marks putative regulatory elements in 
signature genes associated with effector cell differentiation. Moreover, Tet2
protein was recruited to 5 hmC-containing regions, dependent on lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Deletion of Tet2 in T cells decreased their cytokine
expression, associated with reduced p300 recruitment. In vivo, Tet2 plays a
critical role in the control of cytokine gene expression in autoimmune disease.
Collectively, our findings suggest that Tet2 promotes DNA demethylation and
activation of cytokine gene expression in T cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr 7;21(13):3983-93. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i13.3983.

Decreased STAT4 indicates poor prognosis and enhanced cell proliferation in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wang G(1), Chen JH(1), Qiang Y(1), Wang DZ(1), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gang Wang, Yong Qiang, Dong-Zhi Wang, Zhong Chen, Department of General
Surgery, Medical School of Nantong University, Nantong 226000, Jiangsu Province, 
China.

AIM: To investigate the role of signal transduction and activation of
transcription 4 (STAT4) in the development and progression of human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Recent genetic investigations have identified that a genetic variant of 
STAT4 is associated with hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC. The level of STAT4 
in 90 HCC patients was examined via Western blot and immunohistochemical
analyses. The correlation between STAT4 expression and the clinicopathological
characteristics of the patients was analyzed. The level of STAT4 expression in
the HCC liver tissues was significantly lower than that in the non-HCC liver
tissues and correlated with tumor size, histological grade of HCC and serum
hepatitis B surface antigen level in HCC patients. The data were statistically
analyzed using SPSS. Furthermore, siRNA oligos targeting STAT4 were employed to
investigate the influence of STAT4 RNA interference on HCC cell physiology. Based
on Cell Counting Kit-8 and flow cytometric assays, we found that depletion of
STAT4 expression significantly enhanced the proliferation of L02 cells.
RESULTS: STAT4 protein expression was significantly lower in HCC tissues than in 
normal liver tissues. Immunohistochemistry followed by statistical analysis
revealed that the expression of STAT4 negatively correlated with Ki67 expression 
(r = 0.851; P < 0.05) and positively correlated with maximal tumor size (P <
0.05), HBV (P = 0.012) and histological grade (P < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier analysis
revealed significant differences in the survival curves between HCC patients
expressing low and high levels of STAT4 and Ki67 (P < 0.05). Based on a
multivariate Cox proportional hazard model, STAT4 expression was an independent
prognostic indicator for HCC patients who underwent curative resection. In vitro,
following the release of L02 cell lines from serum starvation, the expression of 
STAT4 was downregulated, and transfection of L02 cells with siRNA targeting STAT4
inhibited cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that STAT4 may inhibit HCC development by
modulating HCC cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4385547
PMID: 25852285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4056-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418549112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

T-bet- and STAT4-dependent IL-33 receptor expression directly promotes antiviral 
Th1 cell responses.

Baumann C(1), Bonilla WV(2), Fröhlich A(1), Helmstetter C(1), Peine M(1), Hegazy 
AN(3), Pinschewer DD(4), Löhning M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism
Research Center Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (2)Division of Experimental
Virology, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland;
and. (3)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, Experimental Medicine Division, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. (4)Division of Experimental Virology,
Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; and
daniel.pinschewer@gmx.ch loehning@drfz.de. (5)Experimental Immunology, Department
of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
10117 Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, 10117 Berlin,
Germany; daniel.pinschewer@gmx.ch loehning@drfz.de.

During infection, the release of damage-associated molecular patterns, so-called 
"alarmins," orchestrates the immune response. The alarmin IL-33 plays a role in a
wide range of pathologies. Upon release, IL-33 signals through its receptor ST2, 
which reportedly is expressed only on CD4(+) T cells of the Th2 and regulatory
subsets. Here we show that Th1 effector cells also express ST2 upon
differentiation in vitro and in vivo during lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) infection. The expression of ST2 on Th1 cells was transient, in contrast
to constitutive ST2 expression on Th2 cells, and marked highly activated effector
cells. ST2 expression on virus-specific Th1 cells depended on the Th1-associated 
transcription factors T-bet and STAT4. ST2 deficiency resulted in a
T-cell-intrinsic impairment of LCMV-specific Th1 effector responses in both mixed
bone marrow-chimeric mice and adoptive cell transfer experiments. ST2-deficient
virus-specific CD4(+) T cells showed impaired expansion, Th1 effector
differentiation, and antiviral cytokine production. Consequently, these cells
mediated little virus-induced immunopathology. Thus, IL-33 acts as a critical and
direct cofactor to drive antiviral Th1 effector cell activation, with
implications for vaccination strategies and immunotherapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4386370
PMID: 25829541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Immunol Res. 2015 Jun;62(2):146-52. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8645-1.

STAT4 genetic polymorphisms association with spontaneous clearance of hepatitis B
virus infection.

Lu Y(1), Zhu Y, Peng J, Wang X, Wang F, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No. 1095 Jie Fang Avenue, Wuhan,
430030, China.

STAT4 signal pathway plays an important role in IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated antiviral
activity. Recent studies show an association of STAT4 polymorphisms with
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. We therefore investigated the influence of
STAT4 polymorphisms on the susceptibility of spontaneous clearance of HBV in a
Chinese Han population. Genomic DNA from 288 cases with chronic HBV infection and
288 controls who spontaneously recovered from HBV infection was analyzed for five
SNPs in the STAT4 gene (rs7574865, rs7572482, rs7582694 rs11889341, and
rs8179673).Our analysis revealed that all the minor alleles of the four SNPs
(rs7574865, rs7582694, rs11889341, and rs8179673) had an association with overall
decreased risk to HBV infection [p = 0.040, OR 0.762 (95 % CI 0.593-0.981); p =
0.011, OR 0.686 (95 % CI 0.535-0.878); p = 0.023, OR 0.751 (95 % CI 0.586-0.962);
p = 0.002, OR 0.670 (95 % CI 0.521-0.861), respectively]. The major alleles of
the four SNPs were found to be associated with increased risk of HBV-related
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Furthermore, the haplotype GGGCT
constructed from the five SNPs was found to have a highly significant association
with chronic HBV infection when compared to the controls who spontaneously
recovered from HBV infection [p = 0.031, OR 1.368 (95 % CI 1.028-1.818)]. These
findings indicate that STAT4 minor allele may be associated with the spontaneous 
clearance of HBV, whereas the major allele may be associated with the progress of
the HBV-related liver disease.

PMID: 25829184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 Feb 27;11(4):448-55. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.11164. eCollection
2015.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 in liver diseases.

Wang Y(1), Qu A(2), Wang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Infectious Diseases, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing 100034; (2)3. Institute of Hypoxic Disease, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069 ; 4. Department of
Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100069, China. (3)2. Department of Oncology, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032;

STAT4 is a member of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 
family of molecules that localizes to the cytoplasm. STAT4 regulates various
genes expression as a transcription factor after it is phosphorylated, dimerizes 
and translocates to the nucleus. STAT4 activation is detected virtually in the
liver of several mouse models of liver injury, as well as the human liver of
chronic liver diseases. STAT4 gene polymorphism has been shown to be associated
with the antiviral response in chronic hepatitis C and drug-induced liver injury 
(DILI), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), HCV-associated liver fibrosis and in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the roles of STAT4 in the pathogeneses
of liver diseases are still not understood entirely. This review summarizes the
recent advances on the functional roles of STAT4 and its related cytokines in
liver diseases, especially in regulating hepatic anti-viral responses,
inflammation, proliferation, apoptosis and tumorigenesis. Targeting STAT4
signaling pathway might be a promising strategy in developing therapeutic
approaches for treating hepatitis in order to prevent further injury like
cirrhosis and liver cancer.

PMCID: PMC4366643
PMID: 25798064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 17;10(3):e0117389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117389.
eCollection 2015.

STAT4 rs7574865 G/T and PTPN22 rs2488457 G/C polymorphisms influence the risk of 
developing juvenile idiopathic arthritis in Han Chinese patients.

Fan ZD(1), Wang FF(1), Huang H(1), Huang N(1), Ma HH(1), Guo YH(1), Zhang YY(1), 
Qian XQ(1), Yu HG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Nanjing Children's Hospital
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, No. 72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu
Province 210008, China.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is a common autoimmune disease characterized 
by environmental influences along with several predisposing genes in the
pathogenesis. The protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor 22 (PTPN22) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription factor 4 (STAT4) have been recognized
as susceptibility genes for numerous autoimmune diseases. Associations of STAT4
rs7574865 G/T and PTPN22 (rs2488457 G/C and rs2476601 C/T) polymorphisms with JIA
have repeatedly been replicated in several Caucasian populations. The aim of this
study was to investigate the influence of three polymorphisms mentioned above on 
the risk of developing JIA in Han Chinese patients. Genotyping was performed on a
total of 137 Chinese patients with JIA (JIA group) and 150 sex and age
frequency-matched healthy volunteers (Control group). The single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) were determined by using direct sequencing of PCR-amplified
products. There were significant differences of PTPN22 rs2488457 G/C and STAT4
rs7574865 G/T polymorphisms between both groups. However, no significant
difference was observed in distribution frequencies of PTPN22 rs2476601
polymorphism. The association with the PTPN22 rs2488457 G/C polymorphism remained
significant in the stratifications by age at onset, ANA status, splenomegaly,
lymphadenectasis and involvement joints. As with the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T
polymorphisms, the enthesitis-related arthritis and presence of hepatomegaly had 
strong effect on the association. Our data strengthen STAT4 rs7574865 G/T and
PTPN22 rs2488457 G/C polymorphisms as susceptibility factors for JIA.

PMCID: PMC4363145
PMID: 25781893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015 Dec;22 Suppl 3:1548-55. doi: 10.1245/s10434-015-4485-4. Epub
2015 Mar 13.

Expressional STAT3/STAT5 Ratio is an Independent Prognostic Marker in Colon
Carcinoma.

Klupp F(1), Diers J(1), Kahlert C(1), Neumann L(1), Halama N(2), Franz C(1),
Schmidt T(1), Lasitschka F(3,)(4), Warth A(3), Weitz J(5), Koch M(5), Schneider
M(6), Ulrich A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral, and Transplantation Surgery, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)National Center for Tumor Diseases, Medical
Oncology, and Internal Medicine VI, Tissue Imaging and Analysis Center, Bioquant,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Tissue Bank of the National
Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of Visceral, 
Thoracic, and Vascular Surgery, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Department of General, Visceral, and Transplantation Surgery, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. m.schneider@uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Signal transducer and activator of transcription proteins (STATs) are
crucial regulators of cell growth and differentiation; however, their specific
prognostic impact in human colon cancer has only been studied to limited extent. 
We aimed to assess the prognostic significance of specific STAT expression
patterns in colon carcinoma.
METHODS: Protein expression patterns of activated STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, and STAT5 
in human colon carcinoma tissue and corresponding healthy mucosa (n = 104) were
assessed using multiplex bead-based immunoassay technologies. Expression patterns
were correlated with clinical and survival data. Immunohistochemistry was
performed to assess spatial expression of STAT3 and STAT5.
RESULTS: STAT3 was underexpressed whereas STAT4 and STAT5 were overexpressed in
colon carcinoma tissue. Primary tumors from patients with distant metastases (M1)
displayed significantly increased expression of STAT1 and STAT3 but decreased
expression of STAT4 and STAT5. Increased tumor expression of STAT1 or STAT3 was
associated with impaired patient survival, whereas increased expression of STAT4 
or STAT5 correlated with improved survival. Multivariate analysis identified an
increased STAT3/STAT5 expressional ratio as an adverse prognostic marker in colon
cancer patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The tumor progression-associated transcription factors STAT3, STAT4,
and STAT5 are differently expressed in colon carcinoma tissue and colon mucosa.
Moreover, the STAT3/STAT5 expression ratio is an independent prognostic marker in
colon cancer patients.

PMID: 25773877  [PubMed - in process]


88. Hum Pathol. 2015 May;46(5):746-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.01.015. Epub 2015 
Feb 12.

Immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of cellular transcription NF<U+03BA>B
(p65), AP-1 (c-Fos and c-Jun), and JAK/STAT in leprosy.

Silva LM(1), Hirai KE(1), de Sousa JR(2), de Souza J(1), Fuzii HT(2), Dias LB
Jr(1), Carneiro FR(1), de Souza Aarão TL(1), Quaresma JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciencias Biologicas e da Saude, Universidade do Estado do Para,
Belem, Para, Brazil 66000-000. (2)Nucleo de Medicina Tropical, Universidade
Federal do Para, Belem, Para, Brazil 66000-000. (3)Centro de Ciencias Biologicas 
e da Saude, Universidade do Estado do Para, Belem, Para, Brazil 66000-000; Nucleo
de Medicina Tropical, Universidade Federal do Para, Belem, Para, Brazil
66000-000. Electronic address: juarez@pesquisador.cnpq.br.

Leprosy is a disease whose clinical spectrum depends on the cytokine patterns
produced during the early stages of the immune response. The main objective of
this study was to describe the activation pattern of cellular transcription
factors and to correlate these factors with the clinical forms of leprosy. Skin
samples were obtained from 16 patients with the tuberculoid (TT) form and 14 with
the lepromatous (LL) form. The histologic sections were immunostained with
anti-c-Fos and anti-c-Jun monoclonal antibodies for investigation of AP-1,
anti-NF<U+03BA>B p65 for the study of NF<U+03BA>B, and anti-JAK2, STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4 for
investigation of the JAK/STAT pathway. Cells expressing STAT1 were more frequent 
in the TT form than in LL lesions (P = .0096), in agreement with the protective
immunity provided by IFN-<U+03B3>. STAT4 was also more highly expressed in the TT form
than in the LL form (P = .0098). This transcription factor is essential for the
development of a Th1 response because it is associated with interleukin-12. NF<U+03BA>B 
(p65) and STAT4 expression in the TT form showed a strong and significant
correlation (r = 0.7556 and P = .0007). A moderate and significant correlation
was observed between JAK2 and STAT4 in the TT form (r = 0.6637 and P = .0051),
with these factors responding to interleukin-12 in Th1 profiles. The results
suggest that STAT1, JAK2, and NF<U+03BA>B, together with STAT4, contribute to the
development of cell-mediated immunity, which is able to contain the proliferation
of Mycobacterium leprae.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Jul;181(1):29-38. doi: 10.1111/cei.12614. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

STAT-5 is activated constitutively in T cells, B cells and monocytes from
patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Pertovaara M(1,)(2), Silvennoinen O(3,)(4), Isomäki P(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Centre for Rheumatic Diseases, Tampere
University Hospital. (2)Department of Internal Medicine. (3)School of Medicine,
University of Tampere, Tampere. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

The expression and phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription-1 (STAT-1) have been shown to be markedly increased in the salivary
gland epithelial cells of patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS). The
present aim was to investigate the activation status of different STAT proteins
in peripheral blood (PB) lymphocytes and monocytes, and their correlations with
clinical parameters in patients with pSS. To this end, PB samples were drawn from
16 patients with active pSS and 16 healthy blood donors, and the phosphorylation 
of STAT-1, -3, -4, -5 and -6 proteins was studied in T cells, B cells and
monocytes using multi-colour flow cytometry. In addition, mRNA expression of STAT
molecules in PB mononuclear cells (PBMC) was studied with quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Basal phosphorylation of STAT-5
was found to be significantly higher in PB T cells, B cells and monocytes in
patients with pSS than in healthy controls. The expression of STAT-5 mRNA was not
increased in PBMC. pSTAT-5 levels in B cells and monocytes showed a significant
correlation with serum immunoglobulin (Ig)G levels and anti-SSB antibody titres. 
Constitutive STAT-5 activation in monocytes and CD4(+) T cells was associated
with purpura. There were no major differences in the activation of other STATs
between pSS patients and healthy controls. In conclusion, STAT-5 is activated
constitutively in PB leucocytes in patients with pSS, and basal STAT-5
phosphorylation seems to associate with hypergammaglobulinaemia, anti-SSB
antibody production and purpura.

© 2015 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4469153 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25736842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2015 Jun;48(2-3):316-21. doi:
10.1007/s12016-015-8472-0.

Multiple genetic variants associated with primary biliary cirrhosis in a Han
Chinese population.

Dong M(1), Li J, Tang R, Zhu P, Qiu F, Wang C, Qiu J, Wang L, Dai Y, Xu P, Gao Y,
Han C, Wang Y, Wu J, Wu X, Zhang K, Dai N, Sun W, Zhou J, Hu Z, Liu L, Jiang Y,
Nie J, Zhao Y, Gong Y, Tian Y, Ji H, Jiao Z, Jiang P, Shi X, Jawed R, Zhang Y,
Huang Q, Li E, Wei Y, Xie W, Zhao W, Liu X, Zhu X, Qiu H, He G, Chen W, Seldin
MF, Gershwin ME, Liu X, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, Institute of Life
Sciences, Southeast University, 210096, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Multiple genome-wide association studies of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) in
both European and Japanese ancestries have shown significant associations of many
genetic loci contributing to the susceptibility to PBC. Major differences in
susceptibility loci between these two population groups were observed. In this
study, we examined whether the most significant loci observed in either European 
and/or Japanese cohorts are associated with PBC in a Han Chinese population. In
1070 PBC patients and 1198 controls, we observed highly significant associations 
at CD80 (rs2293370, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.67<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) and TNFSF15 (rs4979462, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.86<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8))
and significant associations at 17q12-21 (rs9303277), PDGFB (rs715505), NF-<U+03BA>B1
(rs7665090), IL12RB2 (rs11209050), and STAT4 (rs7574865; all corrected P values
<0.01). However, no association was observed for POU2AF1 (rs4938534), IL12A
(rs485499 and rs2366408), IL7R (rs6897932), CXCR5 (rs715412), SOCS1 (rs725613),
and TNFRSF1A (rs1800693). STAT4 (rs7574865) was strongly associated after
additional control samples were analyzed. Our study is the first large-scale
genetic analysis in a Han Chinese PBC cohort. These results do not only reflect
that Han Chinese PBC patients share common genetic susceptibility genes with both
their Japanese and European counterparts but also suggest a distinctly different 
genetic susceptibility profile.

PMID: 25690649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Gene. 2015 Apr 25;561(1):63-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.02.006. Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Replication the association of 2q32.2-q32.3 and 14q32.11 with hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Chen W(1), Wang M(2), Zhang Z(1), Tang H(3), Zuo X(3), Meng X(1), Xiong M(1),
Zhou F(3), Liang B(3), Dai F(1), Fang J(1), Gao J(3), Zhu J(3), Zhu Y(1), Wan
H(1), Wang M(1), Chan S(1), Sun L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China. (2)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. (3)The First Affiliated
Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. (4)The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. Electronic address:
ahmusld@163.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a malignant tumor. The morbidity and mortality 
of HCC tend to ascend and become a serious threat to the population health.
Genetic studies of HCC have identified several susceptibility loci of HCC. In
this study, we aim to replicate the association of these loci in our samples from
Chinese population and further investigate the genetic interaction. We selected
16 SNPs within 1p36.22, 2q32.2-q32.3, 3p21.33, 8p12, 14q32.11 and 21q21.3 and
genotyped in 507 HCC patients and 3014 controls by using Sequenom MassARRAY
system. Association analyses were performed by using PLINK 1.07. We observed that
the STAT4 (2q32.2-q32.3) at rs7574865 (P=1.17×10(-3), OR=0.79) and EFCAB11
(14q32.11) at rs8013403 (P=1.54×10(-3), OR=0.80) were significantly associated
with HCC in this study. In 3p21.33, genetic variant rs6795737 within GLB1 was
also observed with suggestive evidence (P=9.98×10(-3), OR=0.84). In the
interaction analysis, the pair of associated SNPs (rs7574865 within STAT4,
rs8013403 within EFCAB11) generated evidence for interaction (P=4.10×10(-3)). In 
summary, our work first reported the association of 14q32.11 (EFCAB11) with HCC
in Chinese Han population and revealed the genetic interaction between STAT4
(2q32.2-q32.3) and EFCAB11 (14q32.11) in HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25665738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):5877-81. eCollection 2014.

Genetic variants of STAT4 are associated with ankylosing spondylitis
susceptibility and severity in a Chinese Han population.

Liu Z(1), Zhang P(1), Dong J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The Hospital Affiliated of Weifang Medical
University Kuiwen Region 261031, Weifang City, Shandong Province, China.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic factors play an important role in ankylosing spondylitis (AS) 
etiology and signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene
polymorphisms may be involved. The aim of this study was to test whether STAT4
variants were associated with susceptibility to AS in a Chinese population.
METHODS: A total of 175 subjects who were diagnosed as AS and 249 healthy
age-matched controls were enrolled in the present study. The rs7574865 G/T SNP in
STAT4 gene was genotyped in all the subjects. The SPSS software was used to
investigate the association between the rs7574865 genotypes and AS susceptibility
or severity.
RESULTS: Rs7574865 G/T was found to be significantly associated with increased
risk and severity of AS.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T SNP was significantly
associated with increased AS susceptibility and severity in Chinese Han
Population.

PMCID: PMC4307571
PMID: 25664124  [PubMed]


93. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 4;5:8234. doi: 10.1038/srep08234.

Jagged-1 signaling suppresses the IL-6 and TGF-ß treatment-induced Th17 cell
differentiation via the reduction of ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17A/IL-17F/IL-23a/IL-12rb1.

Wang Y(1), Xing F(1), Ye S(2), Xiao J(2), Di J(2), Zeng S(2), Liu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Tissue Transplantation and Immunology, Department of
Immunobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China [2] Key Laboratory of
Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (2)Institute of Tissue Transplantation and
Immunology, Department of Immunobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
China. (3)Department of Stomatology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

Jagged-1 signaling has recently been reported to be involved in the Th17 cell
differentiation. However, little is known about its mechanisms. Soluble Jagged-1 
was used to activate the Jagged-1-Notch signaling to interfere with the IL-6 and 
TGF-ß-induced Th17 cell skewing. Genes relevant to the autoimmunity or
inflammation were screened for the first time in this system by qPCR array for
the differential expressions. The 18 genes out of 84, including Clec7a, Il12b,
Il12rb1, Il12rb2, Csf3, Il15, Il17a, Il17f, Il17rc, Il17rd, Il17re, Il23a, Myd88,
Socs1, Stat4, Stat5a, Sykb and Tbx21, were downregulated, but only Cxcl2, Cxcl12 
and Mmp3 were upregulated. The expressions of the genes, Ror<U+03B3>t, Il17a, Il17f,
Il12rb1 and Il23a, induced by simultaneous IL-6 and TGF-ß treatment were
significantly suppressed by Jagged-1, followed by the reduction of ROR<U+03B3>t, IL-17A,
and IL-17F. Consistent with the attenuation of ROR<U+03B3>t, and the reduced production 
and secretion of IL-17A and IL-17F in the cell supernatant and the in situ
stained cells, the number of CD4(+)IL-17(+) cells was also diminished. It is
concluded that the Jagged-1-Notch signaling can suppress the IL-6 and TGF-ß
treatment-induced Th17 cell skewing through the attenuation of ROR<U+03B3>t and, hence
by, the down-regulation of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-23a, and IL-12rb1.

PMCID: PMC4316398
PMID: 25648768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2014;165(4):229-43. doi: 10.1159/000370067. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Exacerbating factors induce different gene expression profiles in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from asthmatics, patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and healthy subjects.

Pniewska E(1), Sokolowska M, Kuprys-Lipinska I, Kacprzak D, Kuna P, Pawliczak R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, Department of
Immunopathology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and Postgraduate Training,
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Despite several common phenotypic features, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma differ with regard to their causative 
factors and pathophysiology. Both diseases may be exacerbated by environmental
factors, however, the molecular profiles of disease episodes have not been
comprehensively studied. We identified differences in gene and protein expression
profiles expressed by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of COPD patients,
patients with atopic asthma and healthy subjects when challenged with
exacerbating factors in vitro: lipopolysaccharide (LPS), house dust mite (HDM)
and cat allergen.
METHODS: PBMC isolated from patients with severe atopic asthma and COPD, as well 
as healthy subjects were stimulated with rDer p 1 DG, rFel d 1 DG and LPS. The
changes in the expression of 47 genes belonging to five groups (phospholipase A2,
eicosanoids, transcription factors, cytokines and airway remodeling) were studied
using TaqMan low density array cards. Immunoblotting was used to study relative
protein expression.
RESULTS: rDer p 1 significantly up-regulated the expression of PLA2G4A, PLA2G6,
PLA2G15, CYSLTR1, LB4R2, PTGS1, PTGS2, FOXP1, GATA3, HDAC2, IREB2, PPARG, STAT4, 
TSLP and CHI3L1 genes in asthmatics in comparison to healthy subjects. LPS
induced significant expression of ANXA1 and LTA4H in asthmatics when compared to 
COPD patients and healthy subjects. SOX6,STAT4 and IL1RL1 were induced in COPD
after LPS stimulation. Analysis of protein expression revealed a pattern similar 
to mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: LPS-induced exacerbation of asthma and COPD is characterized by
differential expression of selected genes in PBMC. HDM allergen changed the
expression profile of inflammatory genes between patients with asthma of atopic
origin and healthy controls.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25634111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 15;194(4):1408-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402001. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Cutting edge: stage-specific requirement of IL-18 for antiviral NK cell
expansion.

Madera S(1), Sun JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065. (2)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065 sunj@mskcc.org.

Although NK cells are considered part of the innate immune system, recent studies
have demonstrated the ability of Ag-experienced NK cells to become long-lived and
contribute to potent recall responses similar to T and B cells. The precise
signals that promote the generation of a long-lived NK cell response are largely 
undefined. In this article, we demonstrate that NK cells require IL-18 signaling 
to generate a robust primary response during mouse CMV (MCMV) infection but do
not require this signal for memory cell maintenance or recall responses. IL-12
signaling and STAT4 in activated NK cells increased the expression of the adaptor
protein MyD88, which mediates signaling downstream of the IL-18 and IL-1
receptors. During MCMV infection, NK cells required MyD88, but not IL-1R, for
optimal expansion. Thus, an IL-18-MyD88 signaling axis facilitates the prolific
expansion of NK cells in response to primary viral infection, but not recall
responses.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4323636
PMID: 25589075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Front Immunol. 2014 Dec 29;5:662. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00662. eCollection
2014.

Human Umbilical Cord-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Utilize Activin-A to Suppress
Interferon-<U+03B3> Production by Natural Killer Cells.

Chatterjee D(1), Marquardt N(1), Tufa DM(1), Hatlapatka T(2), Hass R(3), Kasper
C(4), von Kaisenberg C(5), Schmidt RE(1), Jacobs R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Hannover Medical School , 
Hannover , Germany. (2)Institute of Technical Chemistry, Leibniz University of
Hannover , Hannover , Germany. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Tumor Biology,
Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hannover Medical School , Hannover ,
Germany. (4)Institute of Technical Chemistry, Leibniz University of Hannover ,
Hannover , Germany ; Department of Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources
and Life Science , Vienna , Austria. (5)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Medicine, Hannover Medical School , Hannover , Germany.

Following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), interferon
(IFN)-<U+03B3> levels in the recipient's body can strongly influence the clinical
outcome. Human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (UC-MSCs) are
lucrative as biological tolerance-inducers in HSCT settings. Hence, we studied
the molecular mechanism of how UC-MSCs influence natural killer (NK)
cell-mediated IFN-<U+03B3> production. Allogeneic NK cells were cultured in direct
contact with UC-MSCs or cell-free supernatants from mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
cultures (MSC-conditioned media). We found that soluble factors secreted by
UC-MSCs strongly suppressed interleukin (IL)-12/IL-18-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production by
NK cells by reducing phosphorylation of STAT4, NF-<U+03BA>B, as well as T-bet activity. 
UC-MSCs secreted considerable amounts of activin-A, which could suppress IFN-<U+03B3>
production by NK cells. Neutralization of activin-A in MSC-conditioned media
significantly abrogated their suppressive abilities. Till date, multiple groups
have reported that prostaglandin (PG)-E2 produced by MSCs can suppress NK cell
functions. Indeed, we found that inhibition of PGE2 production by MSCs could also
significantly restore IFN-<U+03B3> production. However, the effects of activin-A and
PGE2 were not cumulative. To the best of our knowledge, we are first to report
the role of activin-A in MSC-mediated suppression of IFN-<U+03B3> production by NK
cells.

PMCID: PMC4278046
PMID: 25584044  [PubMed]


97. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Jan 8;11(1):e1004005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004005.
eCollection 2015.

Systems level analysis of systemic sclerosis shows a network of immune and
profibrotic pathways connected with genetic polymorphisms.

Mahoney JM(1), Taroni J(1), Martyanov V(1), Wood TA(1), Greene CS(1), Pioli
PA(2), Hinchcliff ME(3), Whitfield ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hannover, New 
Hampshire, United States of America. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hannover, New Hampshire, United States of
America. (3)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Mar;11(3):e1004133.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a rare systemic autoimmune disease characterized by
skin and organ fibrosis. The pathogenesis of SSc and its progression are poorly
understood. The SSc intrinsic gene expression subsets (inflammatory,
fibroproliferative, normal-like, and limited) are observed in multiple clinical
cohorts of patients with SSc. Analysis of longitudinal skin biopsies suggests
that a patient's subset assignment is stable over 6-12 months. Genetically, SSc
is multi-factorial with many genetic risk loci for SSc generally and for specific
clinical manifestations. Here we identify the genes consistently associated with 
the intrinsic subsets across three independent cohorts, show the relationship
between these genes using a gene-gene interaction network, and place the genetic 
risk loci in the context of the intrinsic subsets. To identify gene expression
modules common to three independent datasets from three different clinical
centers, we developed a consensus clustering procedure based on mutual
information of partitions, an information theory concept, and performed a
meta-analysis of these genome-wide gene expression datasets. We created a
gene-gene interaction network of the conserved molecular features across the
intrinsic subsets and analyzed their connections with SSc-associated genetic
polymorphisms. The network is composed of distinct, but interconnected,
components related to interferon activation, M2 macrophages, adaptive immunity,
extracellular matrix remodeling, and cell proliferation. The network shows
extensive connections between the inflammatory- and fibroproliferative-specific
genes. The network also shows connections between these subset-specific genes and
30 SSc-associated polymorphic genes including STAT4, BLK, IRF7, NOTCH4, PLAUR,
CSK, IRAK1, and several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes. Our analyses suggest
that the gene expression changes underlying the SSc subsets may be long-lived,
but mechanistically interconnected and related to a patients underlying genetic
risk.

PMCID: PMC4288710
PMID: 25569146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Infect. 2015 May;70(5):445-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2014.12.010. Epub 2014 Dec
31.

Transcriptomic correlates of organ failure extent in sepsis.

Almansa R(1), Heredia-Rodríguez M(2), Gomez-Sanchez E(3), Andaluz-Ojeda D(4),
Iglesias V(5), Rico L(6), Ortega A(7), Gomez-Pesquera E(8), Liu P(9), Aragón
M(10), Eiros JM(11), Jiménez-Sousa MÁ(12), Resino S(13), Gómez-Herreras I(14),
Bermejo-Martín JF(15), Tamayo E(16).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital
Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: ralmansa@saludcastillayleon.es. (2)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: maria_her_05@hotmail.com. (3)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en
Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de
Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida
Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address:
esthergzam@hotmail.com. (4)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos 
(BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida 
Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Medicina Intensiva,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: davidandaluz78@yahoo.es. (5)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: viglesiasl@saludcastillayleon.es. (6)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: lrico@saludcastillayleon.es. (7)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: aortegaa@saludcastillayleon.es. (8)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: egp29@hotmail.com. (9)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: liupili@hotmail.com. (10)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: mrt.aragon@gmail.com. (11)Dpto de Microbiología, Universidad de
Valladolid, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 7, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic
address: jmeirosbouza@gmail.com. (12)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad de Infección Viral e
Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología - Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Carretera Majadahonda- Pozuelo km. 2, Majadahonda, 28220 Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: jimenezsousa@yahoo.es. (13)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica
en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad de
Infección Viral e Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología - Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Carretera Majadahonda- Pozuelo km. 2, Majadahonda, 28220
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: salvador.resino@gmail.com. (14)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: jgomez012001@yahoo.es. (15)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados 
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la
Investigación, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address:
jfbermejo@saludcastillayleon.es. (16)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: tamayo@med.uva.es.

OBJECTIVES: Sepsis is characterised by the frequent presence of organ failure and
marked immunologic alterations. We studied the association between the extent of 
organ failure and the transcriptomic response of septic patients.
METHODS: Gene expression profiles in the blood of 74 surgical patients with
sepsis were compared with those of 30 surgical patients with no sepsis.
Differentially expressed genes were assessed for their correlation with the
sequential organ failure (SOFA) score.
RESULTS: The expression levels of a group of genes participating in the cell
cycle (HIST1H1C, CKS2, CCNA2, CDK1, CCNB2, CIT, CCNB1, AURKA, RAD51), neutrophil 
protease activity (ELANE, ADORA3, MPO, MMP8, CTSG), IL-1R and IL-18R response
correlated directly with SOFA and mortality. Genes involved in T cell (LCK, CD3G,
CD3D, ZAP70, ICOS, CD3E, CD28, IL2RB, CD8B, CD8A, CD40LG, IL23A, CCL5, SH2D1A,
ITK, CD247, TBX21, GATA3, CCR7, LEF1, STAT4) and NK cell immunity (CD244, KLRK1, 
KLRD1) were inversely associated with SOFA and mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: The extent of organ failure in sepsis correlates directly with the
existence of imbalanced innate and adaptive responses at the transcriptomic
level. Quantification of the expression levels of the genes identified here could
contribute to the simultaneous assessment of disease severity and immunological
alterations in sepsis.

Copyright © 2014 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Rheum Dis. 2015 Feb;18(2):233-41. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12438. Epub 2014
Dec 19.

Antiphospholipid syndrome: 30 years and our contribution.

Koike T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan; NTT Sapporo Medical Center, Sapporo, Japan.

In 1983, Graham Hughes first described the concept of antiphospholipid syndrome
(APS). In 1984, we described the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) system
which directly detected circulating aCL in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) who revealed biological false positive serological test for
syphilis. In 1990, three groups, including our group, independently reported the 
necessity of a cofactor for the binding of autoimmune anticardiolipin antibodies 
(aCL) to the solid phase phospholipids. ß2-glycoprotein I (ß2GPI) was identified 
as this cofactor. In 1994,the epitope for aCL was shown to develop when ß2GPI is 
adsorbed on polyoxygenated polystyrene plates. In 2000, we described
antiprothrombin antibodies bind to prothrombin exposed to immobilized
phosphatidylserine and established a phosphatidylserine dependent monoclonal
antiprothrombin antibody. In 2004, a novel role of nicked ß2GPI was identified in
the negative feedback pathway of extrinsic fibrinolysis. Nicked ß2GPI was found
to bind angiostatin 4.5 and to attenuate its antiangiogenic property. In 2004, we
demonstrated that the p38 MAPK pathway mediates induction of the TF gene in
stimulated with human monoclonal anti- ß2GPI antibodies. Very recently, ß2GPI was
identified as a complement regulator. The cross-link between complement
activation and prothrombotic status in patients with APS has been drawn much
attention. Genetic factors are hypothesized to play a role in the susceptibility 
to APS based on several family studies in patients with antiphospholipid
antibodies (aPL) and/or clinical manifestations of APS. The genetics of ß2GPI has
been extensively studied. 247 Val/Leu polymorphism can affect the conformational 
change of ß2-GPI and the exposure of the epitopes for aCL. We found that 247 Val 
was correlated with anti-ß2-GPI production in patients with primary APS, and 247 
Val may be important for ß2-GPI antigenicity. STAT4 SNP in Japanese patients with
SLE and/or APS. T allele frequencies in SLE and APS were significantly elevated
compared with that in healthy controls. When analyzed only in primary APS
patients, T allele frequency was further higher. BANK1, BLK and SNP in 1q25.1
region were associated with not only SLE but also APS in Japanese population.
These results suggest that APS and SLE, in part, share a common genetic
background.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25524556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biomedicine (Taipei). 2014;4:9. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Genetic susceptibility to idiopathic membranous nephropathy in high-prevalence
Area, Taiwan.

Chen SY(1), Chen CH(2), Huang YC(3), Chan CJ(4), Chen DC(5), Tsai FJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Center, Department of Medical Research, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of Chinese Medical Science, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan ; Department of Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Division of Nephrology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (3)Genetics Center, Department of Medical Research, China Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of Chinese Medical
Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Genetics Center,
Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (5)Taiwan LandSeed Hospital, Pingjen City, Taoyuan, Taiwan ; Department
of Chemical and Materials Engineering, National Central University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan. (6)Department of Pediatrics, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan ; Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University Hospital, No.
2, Yuh Der Road, 404, Taichung, Taiwan ; Department of Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Idiopathic membranous nephropathy (MN) is one common cause of idiopathic
nephrotic syndrome in adults; 25% of MN patients proceed to end-stage renal
disease. In adults, membranous nephropathy is a lead cause of nephrotic syndrome,
with about 75% of the cases idiopathic. Secondary causes include autoimmune
disease, infection, drugs and malignancy. Three hypotheses about pathogenesis
have surfaced: preformed immune complex, in situ immune complex formation, and
auto-antibody against podocyte membrane antigen. Pathogenesis does involve immune
complex formation with later deposition in sub-epithelial sites, but definite
mechanism is still unknown. Several genes were recently proven associated with
primary membranous nephropathy in Taiwan: IL-6, NPHS1, TLR-4, TLR-9, STAT4, and
MYH9 . These may provide a useful tool for diagnosis and prognosis. This article 
reviews epidemiology and lends new information on KIRREL2 (rs443186 and rs447707)
polymorphisms as underlying causes of MN; polymorphisms revealed by this study
warrant further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4265015
PMID: 25520922  [PubMed]


101. Int J Rheum Dis. 2014 Dec 15. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12393. [Epub ahead of print]

Th-17 related regulatory network in the pathogenesis of Arab patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis.

AlFadhli S(1), AlFailakawi A(1), Ghanem AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, 
Kuwait University, Kuwait City, Kuwait. (2)Mubarak Al-Kabeer Hospital, Ministry
of Health, Kuwait City, Kuwait.

AIM: The present study aimed to identify the genes involved in the pathogenesis
of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in Arabs by investigating a panel of 84
genes related to the t helper (Th)17-related regulatory network and to further
explore the expression levels of serum interleukin (IL)-17A and IL-17F in a
studied cohort. A comparative analysis of gene expression profile in SLE and
lupus nephritis (LN) patients against that of healthy controls (HC) was
performed.
METHOD: A quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Th17
autoimmunity and inflammation) array analysis was performed in peripheral white
blood cells of 66 SLE patients under specific medical treatment and 30
age/gender/ethnically matched healthy controls. Statistical analysis was carried 
out using the RT(2) Profiler TM PCR Data Analysis tool.
RESULTS: The analysis of Th17 pathway revealed 14 genes (IL-17A, IL-17C, IL-17D, 
IL-17F, IL-18, IL-12RB2, IL-23R, CCL2, CCL20, CXCL5, MMP3, RORC, STAT4 and TRAF6)
that are differentially expressed in SLE and HC (fold change [FC] < 2,
P < 0.0006). No significant difference in expression profiles was observed
between SLE and LN. A significant difference in serum concentration of IL-17A
(P = 0.002) and IL-17F (P = 0.002) was observed between SLE (13.91 ± 4.25) and LN
(18.26 ± 4.24).
CONCLUSION: Our study is the first to investigate a panel of 84 genes related to 
Th17 regulatory pathway in Arab SLE subjects and the first to explore the effect 
of current immunosuppression regimens on Th17 regulatory pathway. It paves the
way for understanding the etiology of SLE and autoimmune diseases in general.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25496163  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


102. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jun 1;211(11):1842-51. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu667. Epub 2014
Dec 9.

Whole-Genome Sequencing Identifies STAT4 as a Putative Susceptibility Gene in
Classic Kaposi Sarcoma.

Aavikko M(1), Kaasinen E(1), Nieminen JK(2), Byun M(3), Donner I(1), Mancuso
R(4), Ferrante P(5), Clerici M(6), Brambilla L(7), Tourlaki A(7), Sarid R(8),
Guttman-Yassky E(9), Taipale M(10), Morgunova E(11), Pekkonen P(12), Ojala
PM(13), Pukkala E(14), Casanova JL(15), Vaarala O(2), Vahteristo P(1), Aaltonen
LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Genome-Scale Biology Research Programs Unit.
(2)Immune Response Unit, Department of Vaccination and Immune Protection,
National Institute for Health and Welfare. (3)St. Giles Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller University Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. (4)Don C. Gnocchi Foundation, ONLUS. (5)Department of Biomedical,
Surgery, and Dental Sciences. (6)Don C. Gnocchi Foundation, ONLUS Department of
Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan. (7)Dermatology Unit,
IRCCS Ca' Granda Foundation-Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. (8)Mina 
and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel. (9)Department of Dermatology Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai Medical
Center at Icahn School of Medicine, New York, New York. (10)Genome-Scale Biology 
Research Programs Unit Science for Life Center Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Science for Life Center 
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. (12)Genome-Scale Biology Research Programs Unit Institute of
Biotechnology, University of Helsinki. (13)Genome-Scale Biology Research Programs
Unit Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki Finnish Cancer Institute.
(14)Finnish Cancer Registry, Institute for Statistical and Epidemiological Cancer
Research, Helsinki School of Health Sciences, University of Tampere, Finland.
(15)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
University Howard Hughes Medical Institute Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases, Necker Hospital School for Sick Children Imagine Institute, 
University Paris Descartes, France.

BACKGROUND: Classic Kaposi sarcoma (cKS) is an inflammatory tumor caused by human
herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) commonly observed in elderly men of Mediterranean origin.
We studied a Finnish family of 5 affected individuals in 2 generations. Except
for atypical mycobacterial infection of the index case, the affected individuals 
did not have notable histories of infection.
METHODS: We performed genome and exome sequencing and mapped shared chromosomal
regions to identify genetic predisposition in the family.
RESULTS: We identified 12 protein-coding candidate variants that segregated in
the 3 affected cousins from whom we had samples. The affected mother of the index
case was an obligatory carrier. Among the 12 candidates was a rare heterozygous
substitution rs141331848 (c.1337C>T, p.Thr446Ile) in the DNA-binding domain of
STAT4. The variant was not present in 242 Finnish control genomes or 180
additional regional controls. Activated T-helper cells from the HHV-8-negative
variant carriers showed reduced interferon <U+03B3> production, compared with age and
sex matched wild-type individuals. We screened STAT4 in additional 18 familial KS
cases and the variant site from 56 sporadic KS cases but detected no pathogenic
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that STAT4 is a potential cKS-predisposition gene, 
but further functional and genetic validation is needed.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25492914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Adv Healthc Mater. 2015 Apr 2;4(5):686-94. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201400657. Epub 2014
Dec 9.

Hydrogen-bonded multilayers of tannic acid as mediators of T-cell immunity.

Kozlovskaya V(1), Xue B, Lei W, Padgett LE, Tse HM, Kharlampieva E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
35294, USA.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune-mediated disease resulting in the destruction of
insulin-secreting pancreatic ß-cells. Transplantation of insulin-producing islets
is a viable treatment to restore euglycemia in Type 1 diabetics; however, the
clinical application remains limited due to the use of toxic immunosuppressive
therapies to prevent immune-mediated rejection. A nanothin polymer material with 
dual antioxidant and immunosuppressive properties capable of modulating both
innate and adaptive immune responses crucial for transplantation outcome is
presented. Through the use of hollow microparticles (capsules) composed of
hydrogen-bonded multilayers of natural polyphenol (tannic acid) with
poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) (TA/PVPON) and with poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) (TA/PVCL), 
proinflammatory reactive oxygen and nitrogen species are efficiently dissipated
and the production of interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a
proinflammatory cytokines is attenuated by cognate antigen-stimulated
autoreactive CD4+ T cells. These results provide evidence that TA-containing
capsules are efficacious in immunomodulation and may provide physical transplant 
protection and prevent diabetogenic autoreactive T-cell responses. Future studies
will determine if xeno- and allotransplantation with (TA/PVPON)- or
(TA/PVCL)-coated pancreatic islets will decrease the risk of graft rejection due 
to attenuation of oxidative stress and IFN-<U+03B3>, and restore euglycemia in Type 1
diabetics.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4390483
PMID: 25491369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2975-82. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.947759.

Analysis of STAT4 expression in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) patients and
patient-derived cell lines.

Litvinov IV(1), Cordeiro B, Fredholm S, Ødum N, Zargham H, Huang Y, Zhou Y, Pehr 
K, Kupper TS, Woetmann A, Sasseville D.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Dermatology ; McGill University Health Centre ; Montréal , QC
Canada.

Deregulation of STAT signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis for a
variety of cancers, including CTCL. Recent reports indicate that loss of STAT4
expression is an important prognostic marker for CTCL progression and is
associated with the acquisition of T helper 2 cell phenotype by malignant cells. 
However, little is known about the molecular mechanism behind the downregulation 
of STAT4 in this cancer. In the current work we test the expression of STAT4 and 
STAT6 via RT-PCR and/or Western Blot in CTCL lesional skin samples and in
immortalized patient-derived cell lines. In these malignant cell lines we
correlate the expression of STAT4 and STAT6 with the T helper (Th) phenotype
markers and test the effect of Histone Deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and
siRNA-mediated knock down of miR-155 on STAT4 expression. Our findings
demonstrate that STAT4 expression correlates with Th1 phenotype, while STAT6 is
associated with the Th2 phenotype. Our results further document that STAT4 and
STAT6 genes are inversely regulated in CTCL. Treatment with HDAC inhibitors
upregulates STAT4 expression, while at the same time decreases STAT6 expression
in MyLa cells. Also, siRNA-mediated knock down of miR-155 leads to upregulation
in STAT4 expression in MyLa cells. In summary, our results suggest that loss of
STAT4 expression and associated switch to Th2 phenotype during Mycosis Fungoides 
progression may be driven via aberrant histone acetylation and/or upregulation of
oncogenic miR-155 microRNA.

PMCID: PMC4614388
PMID: 25486484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(21):3331-5. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.965061.

Deregulation in STAT signaling is important for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) 
pathogenesis and cancer progression.

Netchiporouk E(1), Litvinov IV, Moreau L, Gilbert M, Sasseville D, Duvic M.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Dermatology ; McGill University Health Centre ; Montréal , QC
Canada.

Deregulation of STAT signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis for a
variety of cancers, including CTCL. Constitutive activation of STAT5 and STAT3
was observed in early and late stages of CTCL, respectively. In early stages,
IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15 signaling via JAK1 and JAK3 kinases is believed to be
responsible for activating STAT5, while in advanced stages development of IL-21
autocrine signaling is thought to be important for STAT3 activation. Recent
molecular evidence further suggests that upregulation of STAT5 in early disease
stages results in increased expression of oncogenic miR-155 microRNA that
subsequently targets STAT4 expression on mRNA level. STAT4 signaling is known to 
be critical for T helper (Th) 1 phenotype differentiation and its loss results in
a switch from Th1 to Th2 phenotype in malignant T cells. During this switch the
expression of STAT6 is often upregulated in CTCL. In advanced stages, activation 
of STAT3 and STAT5 may become completely cytokine-independent and be driven only 
via constitutively active JAK1 and JAK3 kinases. Further research into the
molecular pathogenesis of JAK/STAT signaling in this cancer may enable us to
develop effective therapies for our patients.

PMCID: PMC4612117
PMID: 25485578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015 Apr;26(2):113-20. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.11.003. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

NK cells and interferons.

Paolini R(1), Bernardini G(1), Molfetta R(1), Santoni A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Istituto Pasteur Fondazione Cenci
Bolognetti, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Istituto Pasteur Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, "Sapienza" University of 
Rome, Italy; IRCCS, Neuromed, Pozzilli, IS, Italy. Electronic address:
angela.santoni@uniroma1.it.

The role of Natural Killer cells in host defense against infections as well as in
tumour surveillance has been widely appreciated for a number of years. Upon
recognition of "altered" cells, NK cells release the content of cytolytic
granules, leading to the death of target cells. Moreover, NK cells are powerful
producers of chemokines and cytokines, particularly Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), of
which they are the earliest source upon a variety of infections. Despite being
armed to fight against pathogens, NK cells become fully functional upon an
initial phase of activation that requires the action of several cytokines,
including type I IFNs. Type I IFNs are now recognized as key players in antiviral
defense and immune regulation, and evidences from both mouse models of disease
and in vitro studies support the existence of an alliance between type I IFNs and
NK cells to ensure effective protection against viral infections. This review
will focus on the role of type I IFNs in regulating NK cell functions to elicit
antiviral response and on NK cell-produced IFN-<U+03B3> beneficial and pathological
effects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25443799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2014 Dec;94(6):579-88.

IL-27 and IL-27-producing CD4+ T cells in human tuberculous pleural effusion.

Xia H, Ye ZJ, Zhou Q, You WJ, Cui A, Wang XJ, Zhai K, Jin XG, Tong ZH, Shi HZ.

The objective of the present study was to figure out whether human
IL-27-producing CD4(+) T cells represent a distinct T cell subset in tuberculosis
pleural effusion (TPE). Distribution, phenotypic features of IL-27-producing
CD4(+) T cells in TPE were determined. The required transcription factors and
signal transductions for IL-27-producing CD4(+) T cell differentiation were
explored. The immune regulation of IL-27 on pleural mesothelial cells was
observed. We have determined the presence of a subset of human Th cells that
infiltrated into tuberculous pleural effusion, which was characterized by the
secretion of IL-27, and somehow IFN-<U+03B3>, but not of IL-4, IL-9, IL-17, or IL-22.
These IL-27-producing CD4(+) T cells were effector memory cells and exhibited a
transcription profile clearly separated from those of Th2, Th17, Th9, and Th22
cells. The in vitro experiments showed that IL-1ß, IL-2 and IL-12, or their
various combinations could promote IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cell differentiation from
naive CD4(+) T cells by means of phosphorylation of STAT3, STAT4, or/and STAT5.
Transcription factors c-Fos and T-bet were required for IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cell
differentiation. By activating STAT3 signaling, IL-27 not only restored a clear
epithelial phenotype of pleural mesothelial cells, but also further reversed
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition of pleural mesothelial cells.
These data suggested that human IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cells might represent a distinct
human T cell subset with unique expression profiles of transcription factors and 
proinflammatory cytokines, and these IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cells may play important
roles in tuberculosis immunity by affecting pleural mesothelial cells.

PMID: 25443503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;211(13):2669-80. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141172. Epub 2014 Nov 
24.

Cytomegalovirus generates long-lived antigen-specific NK cells with diminished
bystander activation to heterologous infection.

Min-Oo G(1), Lanier LL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Cancer Research Institute,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 Department of
Microbiology and Immunology and Cancer Research Institute, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143. (2)Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology and Cancer Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 Department of Microbiology and Immunology and 
Cancer Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143 Lewis.Lanier@ucsf.edu.

Natural killer (NK) cells play a key role in the host response to cytomegalovirus
(CMV) and can mediate an enhanced response to secondary challenge with CMV. We
assessed the ability of mouse CMV (MCMV)-induced memory Ly49H(+) NK cells to
respond to challenges with influenza, an acute viral infection localized to the
lung, and Listeria monocytogenes, a systemic bacterial infection. MCMV-memory NK 
cells did not display enhanced activation or proliferation after infection with
influenza or Listeria, as compared with naive Ly49H(+) or Ly49H(-) NK cells.
Memory NK cells also showed impaired activation compared with naive cells when
challenged with a mutant MCMV lacking m157, highlighting their antigen-specific
response. Ex vivo, MCMV-memory NK cells displayed reduced phosphorylation of
STAT4 and STAT1 in response to stimulation by IL-12 and type I interferon (IFN), 
respectively, and IFN-<U+03B3> production was reduced in response to IL-12 + IL-18
compared with naive NK cells. However, costimulation of MCMV-memory NK cells with
IL-12 and m157 antigen rescues their impaired response compared with cytokines
alone. These findings reveal that MCMV-primed memory NK cells are diminished in
their response to cytokine-driven bystander responses to heterologous infections 
as they become specialized and antigen-specific for the control of MCMV upon
rechallenge.

© 2014 Min-Oo and Lanier.

PMCID: PMC4267234
PMID: 25422494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2015 Jun;30(3):242-52. doi: 10.1111/omi.12089. Epub 2015 Jan 
11.

Porphyromonas gingivalis RagB is a proinflammatory signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 agonist.

Hutcherson JA(1), Bagaitkar J, Nagano K, Yoshimura F, Wang H, Scott DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA.

Periodontal diseases are semi-ubiquitous and caused by chronic, plaque-induced
inflammation. The 55-kDa immunodominant RagB outer membrane protein of
Porphyromonas gingivalis, a keystone periodontal pathogen, has been proposed to
facilitate nutrient transport. However, potential interactions between RagB and
the innate response have not been examined. We determined that RagB exposure led 
to the differential and dose-related expression of multiple genes encoding
proinflammatory mediators [interleukin-1a (IL-1a), IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-8 and CCL2;
all P < 0.05] in primary human monocytes and to the secretion of tumor necrosis
factor and IL-8, but not interferon-<U+03B3> or IL-12. RagB was shown to be a Toll-like 
receptor 2 (TLR2) and TLR4 agonist that activated signal transducer and activator
of transcription 4 and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signaling, as determined by a
combination of blocking antibodies, pharmaceutical inhibitors and gene silencing.
In keeping, a <U+0394>ragB mutant similarly exhibited reduced inflammatory capacity,
which was rescued by ragB complementation. These results suggest that RagB
elicits a major pro-inflammatory response in primary human monocytes and,
therefore, could play an important role in the etiology of periodontitis and
systemic sequelae.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4624316 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25418117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2015 Jan;27(1):10-7. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000124.

Genetics of vasculitis.

Carmona FD(1), Martín J, González-Gay MA.

Author information: 
(1)aInstituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina 'López-Neyra', CSIC, Granada
bDepartment of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
IDIVAL, Santander, Spain cUniversity of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We aim to give an overview of the recent progress in the
knowledge of the genetic component of vasculitides.
RECENT FINDINGS: Using a state-of-the-art imputation method to analyse the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region, Ombrello and colleagues narrowed down
the association between human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51 and Behçet's disease to
a model of five amino acids of the HLA-B molecule involved in the binding of the 
antigen, the interactions with receptors on CD8 T cells and natural killer cells,
and the signal peptide of HLA-B, suggesting a crucial role of the cellular
cytotoxicity on this disease. Other recent genetic studies have identified
several loci with strong effects on vasculitis predisposition, most of them
representing important players in the immune and inflammatory response. These
associations include ERAP1, CCR1-CCR3, STAT4, KLRC4, GIMAP4, and TNFAIP3 in
Behçet's disease; BLK and CD40 in Kawasaki disease; SERPINA1 and SEMA6A in
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody associated vasculitides; IL12B and FCGR2A/
FCGR2A in Takayasu arteritis; and CECR1 in a newly defined vascular inflammatory 
syndrome associated with adenosine deaminase (ADA2) deficiency. Although other
vasculitides, such as giant cell arteritis (GCA) or immunoglobulin A vasculitis, 
have not benefitted by the great advantage of the large-scale genetic analyses
yet, some interesting associations have been recently suggested, such as the
classical functional PTPN22 allele rs2476601 (R620W) with GCA.
SUMMARY: The analysis of high-throughput genotyping and exome-sequencing data has
produced a considerable advance in the identification of consistent genetic risk 
factors in vasculitides during the last 3 years. Further collaborative efforts,
which will increase the sample size, and the use of custom arrays like the
immunochip, will definitively help to better understand the genetic basis of
vasculitides and to identify the common and specific molecular pathways
underlying their pathophysiology.

PMID: 25405820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 14;9(11):e112831. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112831.
eCollection 2014.

Primary murine CD4+ T cells fail to acquire the ability to produce effector
cytokines when active Ras is present during Th1/Th2 differentiation.

Janardhan SV(1), Marks R(1), Gajewski TF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United 
States of America. (2)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America; Department of Medicine, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Constitutive Ras signaling has been shown to augment IL-2 production, reverse
anergy, and functionally replace many aspects of CD28 co-stimulation in CD4+ T
cells. These data raise the possibility that introduction of active Ras into
primary T cells might result in improved functionality in pathologic situations
of T cell dysfunction, such as cancer or chronic viral infection. To test the
biologic effects of active Ras in primary T cells, CD4+ T cells from
Coxsackie-Adenovirus Receptor Transgenic mice were transduced with an adenovirus 
encoding active Ras. As expected, active Ras augmented IL-2 production in naive
CD4+ T cells. However, when cells were cultured for 4 days under conditions to
promote effector cell differentiation, active Ras inhibited the ability of CD4+ T
cells to acquire a Th1 or Th2 effector cytokine profile. This differentiation
defect was not due to deficient STAT4 or STAT6 activation by IL-12 or IL-4,
respectively, nor was it associated with deficient induction of T-bet and GATA-3 
expression. Impaired effector cytokine production in active Ras-transduced cells 
was associated with deficient demethylation of the IL-4 gene locus. Our results
indicate that, despite augmenting acute activation of naïve T cells, constitutive
Ras signaling inhibits the ability of CD4+ T cells to properly differentiate into
Th1/Th2 effector cytokine-producing cells, in part by interfering with epigenetic
modification of effector gene loci. Alternative strategies to potentiate Ras
pathway signaling in T cells in a more regulated fashion should be considered as 
a therapeutic approach to improve immune responses in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4232516
PMID: 25397617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 Jul;53(1):60-73. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0160OC.

Alterations in gene expression and DNA methylation during murine and human lung
alveolar septation.

Cuna A(1), Halloran B(2), Faye-Petersen O(2), Kelly D(2), Crossman DK(2), Cui
X(2), Pandit K(3), Kaminski N(4), Bhattacharya S(5), Ahmad A(5), Mariani TJ(5),
Ambalavanan N(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri. (2)2 University
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (3)3 University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (4)4 Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut; and. (5)5 University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, 
New York.

DNA methylation, a major epigenetic mechanism, may regulate coordinated
expression of multiple genes at specific time points during alveolar septation in
lung development. The objective of this study was to identify genes regulated by 
methylation during normal septation in mice and during disordered septation in
bronchopulmonary dysplasia. In mice, newborn lungs (preseptation) and adult lungs
(postseptation) were evaluated by microarray analysis of gene expression and
immunoprecipitation of methylated DNA followed by sequencing (MeDIP-Seq). In
humans, microarray gene expression data were integrated with genome-wide DNA
methylation data from bronchopulmonary dysplasia versus preterm and term lung.
Genes with reciprocal changes in expression and methylation, suggesting
regulation by DNA methylation, were identified. In mice, 95 genes with inverse
correlation between expression and methylation during normal septation were
identified. In addition to genes known to be important in lung development (Wnt
signaling, Angpt2, Sox9, etc.) and its extracellular matrix (Tnc, Eln, etc.),
genes involved with immune and antioxidant defense (Stat4, Sod3, Prdx6, etc.)
were also observed. In humans, 23 genes were differentially methylated with
reciprocal changes in expression in bronchopulmonary dysplasia compared with
preterm or term lung. Genes of interest included those involved with detoxifying 
enzymes (Gstm3) and transforming growth factor-ß signaling (bone morphogenetic
protein 7 [Bmp7]). In terms of overlap, 20 genes and three pathways methylated
during mouse lung development also demonstrated changes in methylation between
preterm and term human lung. Changes in methylation correspond to altered
expression of a number of genes associated with lung development, suggesting that
DNA methylation of these genes may regulate normal and abnormal alveolar
septation.

PMCID: PMC4566107 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25387348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Nov 7;20(41):15299-309. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i41.15299.

Effects of baicalin in CD4 + CD29 + T cell subsets of ulcerative colitis
patients.

Yu FY(1), Huang SG(1), Zhang HY(1), Ye H(1), Chi HG(1), Zou Y(1), Lv RX(1), Zheng
XB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Feng-Yan Yu, Hong-Gang Chi, Ying Zou, Xue-Bao Zheng, Traditional Chinese
Medicine Institute Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 524023, Guangdong
Province, China.

AIM: To evaluate the role of baicalin in ulcerative colitis (UC) with regard to
the CD4(+)CD29(+) T helper cell, its surface markers and serum inflammatory
cytokines.
METHODS: Flow cytometry was used to detect the percentage of CD4(+)CD29(+) cells 
in patients with UC. Real time polymerase chain reaction was used to detect
expression of GATA-3, forkhead box P3, T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), and
retinoic acid-related orphan nuclear hormone receptor C (RORC). Western blotting 
was used to analyze expression of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65, phosphorylation 
of NF-<U+03BA>B (p-NF-<U+03BA>B) p65, STAT4, p-STAT4, STAT6 and p-STAT6. The concentrations of 
interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10 and TGF-ß in serum
were determined by ELISA assay.
RESULTS: The percentages of CD4(+)CD29(+) T cells were lower in treatment with 40
and 20 µmol/L baicalin than in the treatment of no baicalin. Treatment with 40 or
20 µmol/L baicalin significantly upregulated expression of IL-4, TGF-ß1 and
IL-10, increased p-STAT6/STAT6 ratio, but downregulated expression of IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-5, IL-6, RORC, Foxp3 and T-bet, and decreased ratios of T-bet/GATA-3,
p-STAT4/STAT4 and p-NF-<U+03BA>B/NF-<U+03BA>B compared to the treatment of no baicalin.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that baicalin regulates immune balance and
relieves the ulcerative colitis-induced inflammation reaction by promoting
proliferation of CD4(+)CD29(+) cells and modulating immunosuppressive pathways.

PMCID: PMC4223263
PMID: 25386078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jun 1;136(11):2556-65. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29305. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Metformin decreases IL-22 secretion to suppress tumor growth in an orthotopic
mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhao D(1), Long XD, Lu TF, Wang T, Zhang WW, Liu YX, Cui XL, Dai HJ, Xue F, Xia
Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Epidemiological, preclinical and cellular studies in the last 5 years have shown 
that metformin exerts anti-tumoral properties, but its mode of action in cancer
remains unclear. Here, we investigated the effects of metformin on a mouse
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) model and tumor-associated T cell immune
responses. Oral metformin administration led to a significant reduction of tumor 
growth, which was accompanied by decreased interleukin-22 (IL-22). Meanwhile,
IL-22-induced STAT3 phosphorylation and upregulation of downstream genes Bcl-2
and cyclin D1 were inhibited by metformin. At the cellular level, metformin
attenuated Th1- and Th17-derived IL-22 production. Furthermore, metformin
inhibited de novo generation of Th1 and Th17 cells from naive CD4(+) cells. These
observations were further supported by the fact that metformin treatment
inhibited CD3/CD28-induced IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17A expression along with the
transcription factors that drive their expression (T-bet [Th1] and ROR-<U+03B3>t [Th17],
respectively). The effects of metformin on T cell differentiation were mediated
by downregulated STAT3 and STAT4 phosphorylation via the AMP-activated
kinase-mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 pathway. Notably, metformin led to
a reduction in glucose transporter Glut1 expression, resulting in less glucose
uptake, which is critical to regulate CD4(+) T cell fate. Taken together, these
findings provide evidence for the growth-inhibitory and immune-modulatory effects
of metformin in HCC and thus, broaden our understanding about the action of
metformin in liver cancer treatment.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25370454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e111991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111991.
eCollection 2014.

A multilocus genetic study in a cohort of Italian SLE patients confirms the
association with STAT4 gene and describes a new association with HCP5 gene.

Ciccacci C(1), Perricone C(2), Ceccarelli F(2), Rufini S(1), Di Fusco D(1),
Alessandri C(2), Spinelli FR(2), Cipriano E(2), Novelli G(1), Valesini G(2),
Borgiani P(1), Conti F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Section of Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. (2)Lupus Clinic,
Reumatologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Sapienza
Università di Roma, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with
complex pathogenesis in which genes and environmental factors are involved. We
aimed at analyzing previously identified loci associated with SLE or with other
autoimmune and/or inflammatory disorders (STAT4, IL10, IL23R, IRAK1, PSORS1C1,
HCP5, MIR146a, PTPN2, ERAP1, ATG16L1, IRGM) in a sample of Italian SLE patients
in order to verify or confirm their possible involvement and relative
contribution in the disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two hundred thirty-nine consecutive SLE patients and 278
matched healthy controls were enrolled. Study protocol included complete physical
examination, and clinical and laboratory data collection. Nineteen polymorphisms 
were genotyped by allelic discrimination assays. A case-control association study
and a genotype-phenotype correlation were performed.
RESULTS: STAT4 was the most associated gene [P = 3 × 10(-7), OR = 2.13 (95% CI:
1.59-2.85)]. IL10 confirmed its association with SLE [rs3024505: P = 0.02, OR =
1.52 (95% CI: 1.07-2.16)]. We describe a novel significant association between
HCP5 locus and SLE susceptibility [rs3099844: P = 0.01, OR = 2.06 (95% CI:
1.18-3.6)]. The genotype/phenotype correlation analysis showed several
associations including a higher risk to develop pericarditis with STAT4, and an
association between HCP5 rs3099844 and anti-Ro/SSA antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT4 and IL10 confirm their association with SLE. We found that
some SNPs in PSORS1C1, ATG16L1, IL23R, PTPN2 and MIR146a genes can determine
particular disease phenotypes. HCP5 rs3099844 is associated with SLE and with
anti-Ro/SSA. This polymorphism has been previously found associated with cardiac 
manifestations of SLE, a condition related with anti-Ro/SSA antibodies. Thus, our
results may provide new insights into SLE pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4219822
PMID: 25369137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e111677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111677.
eCollection 2014.

Association of HLA-DP/DQ and STAT4 polymorphisms with HBV infection outcomes and 
a mini meta-analysis.

Liao Y(1), Cai B(1), Li Y(1), Chen J(1), Tao C(1), Huang H(1), Wang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Though HLA-DP/DQ is regarded to associate with HBV susceptibility and
HBV natural clearance, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development is 
obscure. And the role of STAT4 in HBV susceptibility and clearance as well as HCC
development is still contentious. Therefore, we conducted this study, aiming to
clarify these obscure relationships.
METHODS: We recruited 1312 Chinese Han subjects including healthy controls, HBV
carriers and HCC patients in the experiment stage. The meta-analysis included
3467 HCC patients and 5821 HBV carriers to appraise the association with HCC
development.
RESULTS: Consistent with previous studies, HLA-DP/DQ associated with HBV
susceptibility and HBV natural clearance (p<0.05). However, the experiment showed
that HLA-DP rs3077, rs9277535 and rs7453920 did not associate with HCC
development (dominant model, rs3077, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.86, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.62-1.18; rs9277535,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.94, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.68-1.30; rs7453920, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.75, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.44-1.27).
Meta-analysis again consolidated this conclusion (allele model, rs3077,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.94, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.87-1.02; rs9277535, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.04, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.97-1.11; rs7453920,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.89, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.76-1.02). As for STAT4 rs7574865, we did not find any
significant association with HBV susceptibility (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.91, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.66-1.26) or
HBV natural clearance (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.13, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.86-1.49). Moreover, current data
failed to acquire positive connection of rs7574865 with HCC development
(experiment, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.86, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.62-1.19; meta-analysis, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.87,
95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.74-1.03), which may be due to the small sample size.
CONCLUSIONS: HLA-DP/DQ polymorphisms (rs3077, rs9277535, rs7453920) did not
associate with HCC development, but did correlate with HBV susceptibility and HBV
natural clearance. STAT4 rs7574865 seemed not to correlate with HBV
susceptibility or natural clearance. And it seemed rather ambiguous in its role
on HCC development at present.

PMCID: PMC4218798
PMID: 25365208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5470-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401629. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

Proprotein convertase FURIN constrains Th2 differentiation and is critical for
host resistance against Toxoplasma gondii.

Oksanen A(1), Aittomäki S(1), Jankovic D(2), Ortutay Z(1), Pulkkinen K(1),
Hämäläinen S(1), Rokka A(3), Corthals GL(4), Watford WT(5), Junttila I(6), O'Shea
JJ(7), Pesu M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, BioMediTech, University of Tampere, 33014
Tampere, Finland; (2)Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; (3)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of
Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland; (4)Turku Centre for
Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku,
Finland; Van't Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Amsterdam,
1090 GD Amsterdam, the Netherlands; (5)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular
Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892; Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602; (6)Fimlab Laboratories, Pirkanmaa
Hospital District, 33101 Tampere, Finland; School of Medicine, University of
Tampere, 33014 Tampere, Finland; and. (7)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section,
Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892; (8)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, BioMediTech, University of Tampere,
33014 Tampere, Finland; Fimlab Laboratories, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, 33101
Tampere, Finland; Department of Dermatology, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, 33101
Tampere, Finland marko.pesu@uta.fi.

The proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin enzymes proteolytically convert
immature proproteins into bioactive molecules, and thereby they serve as key
regulators of cellular homeostasis. The archetype proprotein convertase
subtilisin/kexin, FURIN, is a direct target gene of the IL-12/STAT4 pathway and
it is upregulated in Th1 cells. We have previously demonstrated that FURIN
expression in T cells critically regulates the maintenance of peripheral immune
tolerance and the functional maturation of pro-TGF-ß1 in vivo, but FURIN's role
in cell-mediated immunity and Th polarization has remained elusive. In this
article, we show that T cell-expressed FURIN is essential for host resistance
against a prototypic Th1 pathogen, Toxoplasma gondii, and for the generation of
pathogen-specific Th1 lymphocytes, including Th1-IL-10 cells. FURIN-deficient Th 
cells instead show elevated expression of IL-4R subunit a on cell surface,
sensitized IL-4/STAT6 signaling, and a propensity to polarize toward the Th2
phenotype. By exploring FURIN-interacting proteins in Jurkat T cells with
Strep-Tag purification and mass spectrometry, we further identify an association 
with a cytoskeleton modifying Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate/dedicator 
of cytokinesis 2 protein complex and unravel that FURIN promotes F-actin
polymerization, which has previously been shown to downregulate IL-4R subunit a
cell surface expression and promote Th1 responses. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that in addition to peripheral immune tolerance, T cell-expressed
FURIN is also a central regulator of cell-mediated immunity and Th1/2 cell
balance.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4261955
PMID: 25355923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Acta Reumatol Port. 2015 Jan-Mar;40(1):56-62.

Association of PTPN22 (rs2476601) and STAT4 (rs7574865) polymorphisms with
Rheumatoid Arthritis in the Western Algerian population.

Fodil M, Benzaoui A, Zemani-Fodil F, Aberkane M, Boughrara W, Saidi-Mehtar N,
Petit-Teixeira E, Boudjema A.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to replicate the association of five risk
gene polymorphisms (PTPN22-rs2476601, STAT4-rs7574865, 6q23-rs6927172,
IRF5-rs2004640 and TRAF1/C5-rs10818488) with RA in a specific population of the
Western Algeria.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study group comprised 110 patients with RA and 197
ethnically matched healthy control subjects. All polymorphisms were genotyped
using predesigned TaqMan® assays. Allele and genotype frequencies in patients and
control subjects were compared by chi-square test and odds ratios with 95%
confidence intervals. Correction for multiple testing was carried out using the
Bonferroni adjustment.
RESULTS: Statistically significant associations with RA were detected. The
strongest signal was obtained for PTPN22-rs2476601 with an allelic Pvalue 3.32 x 
10(-11) (OR = 9.83, 95% CI [4.28 - 22.56]). A second significant association was 
obtained with STAT4-rs7574865 (allelic Pvalue = 4 x 10(-3); OR = 1.75, 95% CI
[1.16 - 2.63]). The third SNP, 6q23-rs6927172, showed a significant result of
association with RA, but missed our criteria for significance at allelic level
after Bonferroni's correction (allelic Pvalue = 0.027; OR = 0.64, 95% CI [0.42 - 
0.97]). Finally, IRF5-rs2004640 and TRAF1/C5-rs10818488 showed a significant
association only at genotypic level (Pvalues: 3 x 10(-4) and 2.9 x 10(-3)
respectively) but did not reach statistical significance when comparing allele
frequencies (Pvalues: 0.96 and 0.21 respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: From this initial study, we can conclude that PTPN22-rs2476601 and
STAT4-rs7574865 polymorphisms are clearly associated with the risk of RA in the
Western Algerian population.

PMID: 25351936  [PubMed - in process]


119. Immunol Innov. 2013 Nov 2;1(3). doi: 10.7243/2053-213X-1-3.

Decreased signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) protein
expression in lymphatic organs during EAE development in mice.

Wu WX(1), Zuo L(2), Dine KE(1), Shindler KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Scheie Eye Institute and F.M. Kirby Center for Molecular Ophthalmology,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of
Ophthalmology, Second Hospital of Jilin University, Jilin, China.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is mediated by myelin-specific
CD4+ T cells secreting Th1 and/or Th17 cytokines. Signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) family proteins have essential roles in transmitting Th1 
and/or Th17 cytokine-mediated signals. However, most studies demonstrating the
importance of the STAT signaling system in EAE have focused on distinct members
of this family, often looking at their role specifically in the central nervous
system, or in vitro. There is limited information available regarding the
temporal and spatial expression patterns of each STAT protein and interplay
between STAT proteins over the course of EAE development in critical lymphatic
organs in vivo. In the present study, we demonstrate dramatic and progressive
decrease of all six STAT family members (STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5,
STAT6) in the spleen and lymph nodes through the course of EAE development in
SJL/J mice, in contrast with almost steady expression of thymic STAT proteins.
Decreased splenic and lymphatic STAT expression was accompanied by significant
enlargement of the spleen and lymph nodes, and histological proliferation of T
cell areas with remodeling of the splenic microstructure in EAE mice. All STAT
family members except STAT2 were mainly confined in T cell areas in spleen,
whereas they were distributed in a protein specific manner in thymus. We present 
here a comprehensive analysis of all six members of the STAT family in spleen,
lymph nodes and thymus through the development phase of EAE. Results suggest that
EAE induced inflammatory T cells may develop distinct biological features
different from normal splenic T cells due to altered STAT signaling.

PMCID: PMC4206267
PMID: 25346854  [PubMed]


120. MBio. 2014 Oct 21;5(5):e01978-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01978-14.

CD8 T cells in innate immune responses: using STAT4-dependent but
antigen-independent pathways to gamma interferon during viral infection.

Suarez-Ramirez JE(1), Tarrio ML(1), Kim K(1), Demers DA(1), Biron CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Biology and
Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, Rhode
Island, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of 
Biology and Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island, USA Christine_Biron@brown.edu.

The cytokine gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>), with antimicrobial and immunoregulatory
functions, can be produced by T cells following stimulation through their T cell 
receptors (TCRs) for antigen. The innate cytokines type 1 IFNs and interleukin-12
(IL-12) can also stimulate IFN-<U+03B3> production by natural killer (NK) but not naive 
T cells. High basal expression of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4), used by type 1 IFN and IL-12 to induce IFN-<U+03B3> as well as 
CD25, contributes to the NK cell responses. During acute viral infections,
antigen-specific CD8 T cells are stimulated to express elevated STAT4 and respond
to the innate factors with IFN-<U+03B3> production. Little is known about the
requirements for cytokine compared to TCR stimulation. Primary infections of mice
with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) demonstrated that although the
elicited antigen-specific CD8 T cells acquired STAT4-dependent innate cytokine
responsiveness for IFN-<U+03B3> and CD25 induction ex vivo, TCR stimulation induced
these through STAT4-independent pathways. During secondary infections,
LCMV-immune CD8 T cells had STAT4-dependent IFN-<U+03B3> expression at times of innate
cytokine induction but subsequently expanded through STAT4-independent pathways. 
At times of innate cytokine responses during infection with the antigen-distinct 
murine cytomegalovirus virus (MCMV), NK and LCMV-immune CD8 T cells both had
activation of pSTAT4 and IFN-<U+03B3>. The T cell IFN-<U+03B3> response was STAT4 and IL-12
dependent, but antigen-dependent expansion was absent. By dissecting requirements
for STAT4 and antigen, this work provides novel insights into the endogenous
regulation of cytokine and proliferative responses and demonstrates conditioning 
of innate immunity by experience. Importance: Understanding the regulation and
function of adaptive immunity is key to the development of new and improved
vaccines. Its CD8 T cells are activated through antigen-specific receptors to
contribute to long-lasting immunity after natural infections or purposeful
immunization. The antigen-receptor pathway of stimulation can lead to production 
of gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>), a cytokine having both direct antimicrobial and
immunoregulatory functions. Natural killer cells can also produce IFN-<U+03B3> in
response to the innate cytokines type 1 IFNs and/or interleukin-12. This work
demonstrates that CD8 T cells acquire parallel responsiveness to innate cytokine 
signaling for IFN-<U+03B3> expression during their selection and development and
maintain this capability to participate in innate immune responses as long-lived 
memory cells. Thus, CD8 T cells are conditioned to play a role in innate
immunity, and their presence under immune conditions has the potential to
regulate resistance to either secondary challenges or primary infections with
unrelated agents.

Copyright © 2014 Suarez-Ramirez et al.

PMCID: PMC4212840
PMID: 25336459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Oct 21;16(5):438. doi: 10.1186/s13075-014-0438-8.

An Immunochip-based interrogation of scleroderma susceptibility variants
identifies a novel association at DNASE1L3.

Zochling J, Newell F, Charlesworth JC, Leo P, Stankovich J, Cortes A, Zhou Y,
Stevens W, Sahhar J, Roddy J, Nash P, Tymms K, Rischmueller M, Lester S, Proudman
S, Brown MA.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to interrogate the genetic architecture
and autoimmune pleiotropy of scleroderma susceptibility in the Australian
population.
METHODS: We genotyped individuals from a well-characterized cohort of Australian 
scleroderma patients with the Immunochip, a custom array enriched for single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at immune loci. Controls were taken from the 1958
British Birth Cohort. After data cleaning and adjusting for population
stratification the final dataset consisted of 486 cases, 4,458 controls and
146,525 SNPs. Association analyses were conducted using logistic regression in
PLINK. A replication study was performed using 833 cases and 1,938 controls.
RESULTS: A total of eight loci with suggestive association (P <10-4.5) were
identified, of which five showed significant association in the replication
cohort (HLA-DRB1, DNASE1L3, STAT4, TNP03-IRF5 and VCAM1). The most notable
findings were at the DNASE1L3 locus, previously associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus, and VCAM1, a locus not previously associated with human disease.
This study identified a likely functional variant influencing scleroderma
susceptibility at the DNASE1L3 locus; a missense polymorphism rs35677470 in
DNASE1L3, with an odds ratio of 2.35 (P = 2.3 × 10(-10)) in anti-centromere
antibody (ACA) positive cases.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study has confirmed previously reported scleroderma
associations, revealed further genetic overlap between scleroderma and systemic
lupus erythematosus, and identified a putative novel scleroderma susceptibility
locus.

PMCID: PMC4230517
PMID: 25332064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Open Rheumatol J. 2014 Sep 29;8:29-42. doi: 10.2174/1874312901408010029.
eCollection 2014.

Systemic Sclerosis is a Complex Disease Associated Mainly with Immune Regulatory 
and Inflammatory Genes.

Jin J(1), Chou C(2), Lima M(3), Zhou D(4), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA ; Duke University, USA.
(2)University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA. (3)University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA ; Rice University, USA. (4)University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA ; Washington University, USA.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a fibrotic and autoimmune disease characterized
clinically by skin and internal organ fibrosis and vascular damage, and
serologically by the presence of circulating autoantibodies. Although
etiopathogenesis is not yet well understood, the results of numerous genetic
association studies support genetic contributions as an important factor to SSc. 
In this paper, the major genes of SSc are reviewed. The most recent genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) are taken into account along with robust candidate
gene studies. The literature search was performed on genetic association studies 
of SSc in PubMed between January 2000 and March 2014 while eligible studies
generally had over 600 total participants with replication. A few genetic
association studies with related functional changes in SSc patients were also
included. A total of forty seven genes or specific genetic regions were reported 
to be associated with SSc, although some are controversial. These genes include
HLA genes, STAT4, CD247, TBX21, PTPN22, TNFSF4, IL23R, IL2RA, IL-21,
SCHIP1/IL12A, CD226, BANK1, C8orf13-BLK, PLD4, TLR-2, NLRP1, ATG5, IRF5, IRF8,
TNFAIP3, IRAK1, NFKB1, TNIP1, FAS, MIF, HGF, OPN, IL-6, CXCL8, CCR6, CTGF, ITGAM,
CAV1, MECP2, SOX5, JAZF1, DNASEIL3, XRCC1, XRCC4, PXK, CSK, GRB10, NOTCH4, RHOB, 
KIAA0319, PSD3 and PSOR1C1. These genes encode proteins mainly involved in immune
regulation and inflammation, and some of them function in transcription, kinase
activity, DNA cleavage and repair. The discovery of various SSc-associated genes 
is important in understanding the genetics of SSc and potential pathogenesis that
contribute to the development of this disease.

PMCID: PMC4200700
PMID: 25328554  [PubMed]


123. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jan;45(1):260-72. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444667. Epub 2014 Nov
27.

MicroRNA-146a controls Th1-cell differentiation of human CD4+ T lymphocytes by
targeting PRKCe.

Möhnle P(1), Schütz SV, van der Heide V, Hübner M, Luchting B, Sedlbauer J,
Limbeck E, Hinske LC, Briegel J, Kreth S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Molecular Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, University of
Munich (LMU), Munich, Germany.

T-cell functions must be tightly controlled to keep the balance between vital
proinflammatory activity and detrimental overactivation. MicroRNA-146a (miR-146a)
has been identified as a key negative regulator of T-cell responses in mice. Its 
role in human T cells and its relevance to human inflammatory disease, however,
remains poorly defined. In this study, we have characterized miR-146a-driven
pathways in primary human T cells. Our results identify miR-146a as a critical
gatekeeper of Th1-cell differentiation processes acting via molecular mechanisms 
not uncovered so far. MiR-146a targets protein kinase C epsilon (PRKCe), which is
part of a functional complex consisting of PRKCe and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). Within this complex, PRKCe phosphorylates
STAT4, which in turn is capable of promoting Th1-cell differentiation processes
in human CD4(+) T lymphocytes. In addition, we observed that T cells of sepsis
patients had reduced levels of miR-146a and an increased PRKCe expression in the 
initial hyperinflammatory phase of the disease. Collectively, our results
identify miR-146a as a potent inhibitor of Th1-cell differentiation in human T
cells and suggest that dysregulation of miR-146a contributes to the pathogenesis 
of sepsis.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25308712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Pharmacol Res. 2014 Dec;90:48-57. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Oct 
2.

Rutin has intestinal antiinflammatory effects in the CD4+ CD62L+ T cell transfer 
model of colitis.

Mascaraque C(1), Aranda C(2), Ocón B(3), Monte MJ(4), Suárez MD(5), Zarzuelo
A(6), Marín JJ(7), Martínez-Augustin O(8), de Medina FS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, CIBERehd, School of Pharmacy, University of
Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain. Electronic address:
cristimascaraque@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
II, CIBERehd, School of Pharmacy, University of Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n,
18071 Granada, Spain. Electronic address: cjarandaclemente@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, CIBERehd, School of Pharmacy, University of
Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain. Electronic address:
boryus13@hotmail.com. (4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, HEVEFARM,
IBSAL, CIBERehd, University of Salamanca, Spain. Electronic address:
mjmonte@usal.es. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II,
CIBERehd, School of Pharmacy, University of Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071
Granada, Spain. Electronic address: msuarez@ugr.es. (6)Department of
Pharmacology, CIBERehd, School of Pharmacy, University of Granada, Campus de
Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain. Electronic address: zarzuelo@ugr.es.
(7)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, HEVEFARM, IBSAL, CIBERehd,
University of Salamanca, Spain. Electronic address: jjgmarin@usal.es.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, CIBERehd, School of
Pharmacy, University of Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain.
Electronic address: omartine@ugr.es. (9)Department of Pharmacology, CIBERehd,
School of Pharmacy, University of Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, 
Spain. Electronic address: fsanchez@ugr.es.

Rutin, one of the most abundant flavonoids in nature, has been shown to exert
intestinal antiinflammatory effects in experimental models of colitis. Our aim
was to study the antiinflamatory effect of rutin in the CD4+ CD62L+ T cell
transfer model of colitis, one of the closest to the human disease. Colitis was
induced by transfer of CD4+ CD62L+ T cells to Rag1(-/-) mice. Rutin was
administered by gavage as a postreatment. Treatment with rutin improved colitis
at the dose of 57mg/kg/day, while no effect was noted with 28.5mg/kg/day.
Therapeutic benefit was evidenced by a reduced disease activity index, weight
loss and damage score, plus a 36% lower colonic myeloperoxidase and a 54% lower
alkaline phosphatase activity. In addition, a decreased secretion of
proinflammatory cytokines (IFN<U+03B3> and TNFa) by mesenteric lymph node cells was
observed ex vivo. The colonic expression of proinflammatory genes, including
IFN<U+03B3>, TNFa, CXCL1, S100A8 and IL-1ß, was significantly reduced by more than 80%
with rutin as assessed by RT-qPCR. Flavonoid treated mice exhibited decreased
activation of splenic CD4+ cells (STAT4 phosphorylation and IFN<U+03B3> expression) and 
reduced plasma cytokine levels. This effect was also apparent in mucosal
lymphocytes based on reduced STAT4 phosphorylation. The protective effect was
comparable to that of 3mg/kg/day budesonide. Rutin had no effect on splenocytes
or murine T cells in vitro, while its aglycone, quercetin, exhibited a
concentration dependent inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines, including IFN<U+03B3>. 
Rutin but not quercetin showed vectorial basolateral to apical transport in IEC18
cells, associated with reduced biotransformation. We conclude that rutin exerts
intestinal antiinflammatory activity in chronic, T lymphocyte dependent colitis
via quercetin release and actions involving mucosal and lymph node T cells. Our
results suggest that rutin may be useful in the management of inflammatory bowel 
disease in appropriate dosage conditions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25281414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:15-44. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9487-9_2.

TH1/TH2 cell differentiation and molecular signals.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y, Gu W, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.

Erratum in
    Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:E1-2.

The distinctive differentiated states of the CD4+ T helper cells are determined
by the set of transcription factors and the genes transcribed by the
transcription factors. In vitro induction models, the major determinants of the
cytokines present during the T-cell receptor (TCR)-mediated activation process.
IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3> make Naive CD4+ T cells highly express T-bet and STAT4 and
differentiate to TH1 cells, while IL-4 make Naive CD4+ T cells highly express
STAT6 and GATA3 and differentiated to TH2 cells. Even through T-bet and GATA3 are
master regulators for TH1/TH2 cells differentiation. There are many other
transcription factors, such as RUNX family proteins, IRF4, Dec2, Gfi1, Hlx, and
JunB that can impair TH1/TH2 cells differentiation. In recent years, noncoding
RNAs (microRNA and long noncoding RNA) join in the crowd. The leukocytes should
migrate to the right place to show their impact. There are some successful
strategies, which are revealed to targeting chemokines and their receptors, that 
have been developed to treat human immune-related diseases.

PMID: 25261203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Exp Med. 2014 Sep 22;211(10):2047-59. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131333. Epub 2014 Sep 
15.

Dysfunctional CD8+ T cells in hepatitis B and C are characterized by a lack of
antigen-specific T-bet induction.

Kurktschiev PD(1), Raziorrouh B(2), Schraut W(2), Backmund M(3), Wächtler M(4),
Wendtner CM(4), Bengsch B(5), Thimme R(5), Denk G(6), Zachoval R(6), Dick A(7),
Spannagl M(7), Haas J(8), Diepolder HM(6), Jung MC(9), Gruener NH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 80539 Munich, Germany
Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany
peter.kurktschiev@med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Institute for Immunology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 80539 Munich, Germany Department of Medicine II,
University Hospital Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Medicine II, 
University Hospital Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany PiT - Praxis im Tal, 80331
Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Medicine, Klinikum Schwabing, 81925 Munich,
Germany. (5)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Freiburg, 79106
Freiburg, Germany. (6)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Munich,
80539 Munich, Germany. (7)Laboratory of Immunogenetics and Molecular Diagnostics,
80539 Munich, Germany. (8)Division of Infection and Pathway Medicine, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, Scotland, UK. (9)Leberzentrum München, 80336
Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Nov;11(11):643.

The transcription factor T-bet regulates the production of interferon-<U+03B3> and
cytotoxic molecules in effector CD8 T cells, and its expression correlates with
improved control of chronic viral infections. However, the role of T-bet in
infections with differential outcome remains poorly defined. Here, we report that
high expression of T-bet in virus-specific CD8 T cells during acute hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection was associated with spontaneous
resolution, whereas T-bet deficiency was more characteristic of chronic evolving 
infection. T-bet strongly correlated with interferon-<U+03B3> production and
proliferation of virus-specific CD8 T cells, and its induction by antigen and
IL-2 stimulation partially restored functionality in previously dysfunctional
T-bet-deficient CD8 T cells. However, restoration of a strong interferon-<U+03B3>
response required additional stimulation with IL-12, which selectively induced
the phosphorylation of STAT4 in T-bet(+) CD8 T cells. The observation that T-bet 
expression rendered CD8 T cells responsive to IL-12 suggests a stepwise mechanism
of T cell activation in which T-bet facilitates the recruitment of additional
transcription factors in the presence of key cytokines. These findings support a 
critical role of T-bet for viral clearance and suggest T-bet deficiency as an
important mechanism behind chronic infection.

© 2014 Kurktschiev et al.

PMCID: PMC4172217
PMID: 25225458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Transplant. 2015;24(9):1717-31. doi: 10.3727/096368914X684592. Epub 2014 Sep
8.

Inducible Costimulator Gene-Transduced Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells
Attenuate the Severity of Acute Graft-Versus-Host Disease in Mouse Models.

Yang D(1), Wang LP, Zhou H, Cheng H, Bao XC, Xu S, Zhang WP, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Changhai Hospital, the Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

In murine allogeneic transplantation models, ICOS gene-transduced bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs(ICOS-EGFP)) were evaluated for their 
effects on GvHD severity and long-term survival. Lethally irradiated BALB/c or
first filial generation of BALB/c and C57BL/6 (CB6F1) mice were transplanted with
bone marrow cells and splenocytes from C57BL/6 mice to establish acute GvHD
models. Recipient mice were injected with MSCs(ICOS-EGFP), MSCs, MSCs(EGFP),
ICOS-Ig fusion protein, MSCs<U+2009>+<U+2009>ICOS-Ig, or PBS (control group). Long-term
survival, GvHD rates and severity, CD4(+) T-cell apoptosis and proliferation, and
Th1/Th2/Th17 effecter cell polarization were evaluated. In the C57BL/6<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>CB6F1
HSCT model, the long-term survival in the MSC(ICOS-EGFP) group was higher than
that in the GvHD group (74.29 ± 7.39% vs. 0, p < 0.01), and this survival rate
was also higher than that in the MSC, ICOS-Ig, or MSC<U+2009>+<U+2009>ICOS-Ig groups (42.86 ±
8.36%, p = 0.004; 48.57 ± 8.45%, p = 0.03; or 50.43 ± 8.45% p = 0.04,
respectively). The survival advantages of MSC(ICOS-EGFP)-treated group were
confirmed in the C57BL/6 <U+2192> BALB/c HSCT model. In both HSCT models, the low
mortality in the MSC(ICOS-EGFP) group was associated with lower incidence and
severity of acute GvHD. Treatment with MSCs(ICOS-EGFP) induced more CD4(+) T-cell
apoptosis compared with that in the GvHD group. The effect on CD4(+) T cells was 
shown as early as day 2 and maintained until day 14 (p < 0.05 on days 2, 3, 7,
and 14). Furthermore, we demonstrated that MSCs(ICOS-EGFP) were able to suppress 
Th1 and Th17 polarization and promote Th2 polarization on both protein expression
and gene transcription levels. Higher serum levels of IL-4, IL-10, and lower
levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-2, IL-12, and IL-17A were detected in the MSC(ICOS-EGFP)
group. The MSCs(ICOS-EGFP) could also induce GATA-3, STAT6 expression and inhibit
T-bet, STAT4, ROR-<U+03B3>t expression. Our results showed that injection of
MSCs(ICOS-EGFP) is a promising strategy for acute GvHD prevention and treatment. 
It provides synergistic benefits of MSC immune modulation and ICOS-B7h pathway
blockage.

PMID: 25203502  [PubMed - in process]


128. J Genet. 2014 Aug;93(2):597-605.

Association of susceptible genetic markers and autoantibodies in rheumatoid
arthritis.

Mohan VK(1), Ganesan N, Gopalakrishnan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai 600
116, India. nalinisrmc@gmail.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disorder of unknown aetiology
resulting in inflammation of the synovium, cartilage and bone. The disease has a 
heterogeneous character, consisting of clinical subsets of anti-citrullinated
protein antibody (ACPA)-positive and APCA-negative disease. Although, the
pathogenesis of RA is incompletely understood, genetic factors play a vital role 
in susceptibility to RA as the heritability of RA is between 50 and 60%, with the
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) locus accounting for at least 30% of overall
genetic risk. Non-HLA genes, i.e. tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) within the MHC
(major histocompatibility complex) have also been investigated for association
with RA. Although, some contradictory results have originated from several
studies on TNF-a gene, the data published so far indicate the possible existence 
of TNF-a gene promoter variants that act as markers for disease severity and
response to treatment in RA. The correlation of HLA and non-HLA genes within MHC 
region is apparently interpreted. A considerable number of confirmed associations
with RA and other autoimmune disease susceptibility loci including
peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 (PADI4), protein tyrosine phosphatase
non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22), signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT4), cluster of differentiation 244 (CD244) and cytotoxic T
lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4), located outside the MHC have been
reported recently. In this review, we aim to give an update on recent progress in
RA genetics, the importance of the combination of HLA-DRB1 alleles, non-HLA gene 
polymorphism, its detection and autoantibodies as susceptibility markers for
early RA disease.

PMID: 25189266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2014 Dec;58(12):2379-82. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400364. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

Active hexose correlated compound exerts therapeutic effects in lymphocyte driven
colitis.

Mascaraque C(1), Suárez MD, Zarzuelo A, Sánchez de Medina F, Martínez-Augustin O.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, CIBERehd, School of Pharmacy, Instituto de
Investigación Biosanitaria ibs. GRANADA, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.

Active hexose correlated compound (AHCC) is a commercial extract of
Basidiomycetes fungi enriched in oligosaccharides that is used as a human
nutritional supplement for various purposes in humans. Our aim was to study the
anti-inflammatory effect of AHCC in the CD4+ CD62L(+) T cell transfer model of
colitis, considered one of the closest to the human disease. Colitis was induced 
by transfer of CD4(+) CD62L(+) T cells to recombination activating gene 1(-/-)
mice. AHCC (75 mg/d) was administered by gavage as a post-treatment. Three groups
were established: noncolitic, colitic (CD4(+) CD62L(+) transferred mice treated
with vehicle), and AHCC (colitic treated with AHCC). AHCC improved colitis, as
evidenced by a 24% lower colonic myeloperoxidase and a 21% lower alkaline
phosphatase activity. In addition, a decreased secretion of proinflammatory genes
assessed by RT-qPCR was observed, particularly TNF-a and IL-1ß. Ex vivo
mesenteric lymph node cells obtained from AHCC treated mice exhibited a fully
normalized production of IL-6, IL-17, and IL-10 (p < 0.05). Also, AHCC treated
mice exhibited decreased STAT4 and I<U+03BA>B-a phosphorylation in splenic CD4(+) cells.
Our data provide validation of AHCC colonic anti-inflammatory activity in a
chronic, T cell driven model of inflammatory bowel disease.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25186628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2014 Oct;16(10):446. doi: 10.1007/s11926-014-0446-3.

Strategies for evaluating idiopathic inflammatory myopathy disease susceptibility
genes.

Rothwell S(1), Cooper RG, Lamb JA, Chinoy H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.

This review outlines the progress that has been made in understanding the
genetics of the idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in the previous 2 years, with 
a particular focus on dermatomyositis and polymyositis. A recent genome-wide
association study in dermatomyositis has confirmed the importance of the major
histocompatibility region in this disease, and has suggested a shared genetic
etiology with other autoimmune disorders. This has led to an ongoing study of
additional immune-related loci using the Immunochip array. Candidate gene studies
have identified novel risk associations in non-Europeans, such as STAT4 and
HLA-DRB1 in the Japanese population. Evidence for gene-environment interactions
has come from two recent studies implicating smoking status and statin use with
HLA alleles. This review also touches on future approaches to genetic research in
myositis, including bioinformatics tools to identify causal variants, HLA
imputation from existing genetic data and statistical methods to investigate
shared effects between subgroups of myositis.

PMCID: PMC4578230
PMID: 25182674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Scand J Rheumatol. 2014;43(6):477-80. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2014.918174. Epub
2014 Sep 2.

An updated meta-analysis of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 
4 (STAT4) rs7574865 G/T polymorphism and rheumatoid arthritis risk in an Asian
population.

Jiang X(1), Zhou Z, Zhang Y, Yang H, Ren K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of Southeast
University Medical School , Jiangyin , China.

OBJECTIVES: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) transmits 
signals induced by the cytokines interleukin (IL)-12, IL-23, and interferon
(IFN)-<U+03B3>, which play an important role in the development of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). Studies have shown conflicting results concerning the association between
the rs7574865 G/T polymorphism in the STAT4 gene and RA in an Asian population.
We have performed a meta-analysis to examine this relationship.
METHOD: We searched PubMed and WanFang databases for all papers published up to 5
October 2013. Eight case-control studies with 6029 cases and 4685 controls were
retrieved based on the search criteria for RA susceptibility related to the STAT4
rs7574865 G/T polymorphism. Risk ratios (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) 
were used to assess the strength of this association. Publication bias was
assessed using Begg's test.
RESULTS: A significant association was found between the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T
polymorphism and RA risk (e.g. GG+GT vs. TT: RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.95-0.97; GG+TT vs.
GT: RR 0.94, 95% CI 0.91-0.97). Subgroup analysis of rheumatoid factor (RF)
status revealed a protective relationship between the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T
polymorphism and RF(+)/RF(-) RA risk. A similar relationship was detected in the 
anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) status subgroup. No clear evidence of
publication bias was detected in the overall analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T polymorphism was
significantly associated with a decreased RA risk in an Asian population.

PMID: 25179669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015 Jan;71(1):353-7. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0205-0.

STAT4 gene polymorphism and risk of chronic hepatitis B-induced hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Zhao X(1), Jiang K, Liang B, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital & Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China, drxiangqianzhao@163.com.

STAT4 is a latent cytosolic factor that encodes a transcription factor
transmitting signals stimulated by cytokines. Previous studies with different
study designs in diverse ethnic populations have assessed the influence of STAT4 
rs7574865 polymorphism on HBV-induced HCC risk. The aim of the current study was 
to investigate the effects in a larger sample. The individual reports published
up to Dec. 30, 2013 were systematically identified by searching the PubMed and
Embase databases. To combine the OR and corresponding 95% CI, we used the fixed
effects model during meta-analysis. Based on eight independent populations with a
total of 5,719 cases and 6,525 controls, we found a slightly reduced risk of
HBV-induced HCC in individuals with the minor T allele compared with individuals 
with the common G allele (T versus G: OR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.82-0.91, P(Het) =
0.974). Similar reductions were also indicated in all subgroups. The combined
data indicate that STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism may be associated with
significantly reduced risk of HBV-induced HCC in Asian.

PMID: 25178516  [PubMed - in process]


133. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2015 Feb;213(2):432-41. doi: 10.1111/apha.12366. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide inhibits human immunodeficiency type 1
transmission by Langerhans cells via an autocrine/paracrine feedback mechanism.

Ganor Y(1), Drillet-Dangeard AS, Bomsel M.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Entry of HIV-1 and Mucosal Immunity, Department of Infection, Immunity
and Inflammation, Cochin Institute, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France; INSERM U1016,
Paris, France; Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.

AIM: Peripheral neurones innervating mucosal epithelia are in direct contact with
resident immune cells, including Langerhans cells (LCs). Such neurones secrete
the neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) that modulates LCs
function. We recently found that CGRP strongly inhibits human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) transmission, by interfering with multiple steps of mucosal 
LC-mediated HIV-1 transfer, including increased expression of the LC-specific
lectin langerin. Herein, we investigated the anti-HIV-1 mechanism of CGRP.
METHODS: In the presence of CGRP, HIV-1 transfer from LCs to CD4+ T cells was
tested with viral clones using either the HIV-1 co-receptor CCR5 (R5) or CXCR4
(X4). Surface expression of CCR5, CXCR4 and langerin was evaluated by flow
cytometry. CGRP secretion by LCs was measured with an enzyme immunoassay.
Expression of the multimeric CGRP receptor was examined by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR and immuno-fluorescent microscopy.
RESULTS: Calcitonin gene-related peptide decreased transfer of HIV-1 R5, but
increased that of X4. These opposing effects correlated with decreased CCR5 vs.
increased CXCR4 surface expression in LCs. Inhibition of HIV-1 R5 transfer by
CGRP involved signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4)
activation. Both aCGRP and ßCGRP were similarly efficient in decreasing HIV-1 R5 
transfer and increasing langerin expression. LCs secreted low basal levels of
endogenous CGRP, which increased markedly following CGRP treatment. CGRP also
increased expression of its cognate receptor in LCs.
CONCLUSION: CGRP engages a positive feedback mechanism that would further enhance
its anti-HIV-1 activity. This information might be relevant for the therapeutic
use of CGRP as a prophylactic agent against HIV-1.

© 2014 Scandinavian Physiological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25142255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Nov;23(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.08.006. Epub 
2014 Aug 15.

Ubiquitin-hepatitis B core antigen-cytoplasmic transduction peptide enhances
HBV-specific humoral and CTL immune responses in vivo.

Song L(1), Zhuo M(1), Tang Y(1), Chen X(1), Tang Z(2), Zang G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China. (2)Department of Infectious
Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital,
Shanghai 200233, China. Electronic address: tzhhao@163.com. (3)Department of
Infectious Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated Sixth People's
Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China. Electronic address: professorzangtg@126.com.

Therapeutic strategies based on an enhanced hepatitis B virus (HBV)-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity may eradicate HBV. We previously verified
that a fusion protein ubiquitin (Ub)-hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg)-cytoplasmic
transduction peptide (CTP) can enter the cytoplasm of dendritic cells and enhance
T cell response to generate HBV-specific CTLs efficiently in vitro. Ub, a marker 
of protein degradation, may promote the generation of peptides appropriate for
major histocompatibility complex class I presentation. In the present study, the 
specific immune responses of the fusion protein Ub-HBcAg-CTP in BALB/c mice were 
evaluated and the underlying mechanisms were investigated. Results showed that
Ub-HBcAg-CTP increased the anti-HBcAg titer and produced the cytokines IFN-<U+03B3> and 
IL-2. This fusion protein also induced higher percentages of IFN-<U+03B3>(+)CD8(+) cells
and specific CTL responses. Ub-HBcAg-CTP could also upregulate the expressions of
Jak2, Tyk2, STAT1, and STAT4 in T lymphocytes. In conclusion, Ub-HBcAg-CTP
enhanced cellular and humoral immune responses and induced robust HBV-specific
CTL activities in BALB/c mice.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25135878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Aug;147(1):145-58. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3071-y. 
Epub 2014 Aug 8.

Genetic variation in the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway influences breast
cancer-specific mortality through interaction with cigarette smoking and use of
aspirin/NSAIDs: the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Hines LM, Torres-Mejia G, Wolff RK, Stern MC, John
EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, 383 Colorow, Salt Lake City, UT,
84108, USA, marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu.

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway is involved in immune function and cell growth; genetic
variation in this pathway could influence breast cancer risk. We examined 12
genes in the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway with breast cancer risk and
mortality in an admixed population of Hispanic (2,111 cases, 2,597 controls) and 
non-Hispanic white (1,481 cases, 1,585 controls) women. Associations were
assessed by Indigenous American (IA) ancestry. After adjustment for multiple
comparisons, JAK1 (three of ten SNPs) and JAK2 (4 of 11 SNPs) interacted with
body mass index (BMI) among pre-menopausal women, while STAT3 (four of five SNPs)
interacted significantly with BMI among post-menopausal women to alter breast
cancer risk. STAT6 rs3024979 and TYK2 rs280519 altered breast cancer-specific
mortality among all women. Associations with breast cancer-specific mortality
differed by IA ancestry; SOCS1 rs193779, STAT3 rs1026916, and STAT4 rs11685878
associations were limited to women with low IA ancestry, and associations with
JAK1 rs2780890, rs2254002, and rs310245 and STAT1 rs11887698 were observed among 
women with high IA ancestry. JAK2 (5 of 11 SNPs), SOCS2 (one of three SNPs), and 
STAT4 (2 of 20 SNPs) interacted with cigarette smoking status to alter breast
cancer-specific mortality. SOCS2 (one of three SNPs) and all STAT3, STAT5A, and
STAT5B SNPs significantly interacted with use of aspirin/NSAIDs to alter breast
cancer-specific mortality. Genetic variation in the JAK/STAT/SOCS pathway was
associated with breast cancer-specific mortality. The proportion of SNPs within a
gene that significantly interacted with lifestyle factors lends support for the
observed associations.

PMCID: PMC4167366
PMID: 25104439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Arch Med Sci. 2014 Jun 29;10(3):419-24. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2014.43735. Epub 2014
Jun 27.

Association of STAT4 gene rs7574865G > T polymorphism with ulcerative colitis
risk: evidence from 1532 cases and 3786 controls.

Xu L(1), Dai WQ(1), Wang F(1), He L(1), Zhou YQ(1), Lu J(1), Xu XF(1), Guo CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University, 
Shanghai, China.

INTRODUCTION: Several studies have reported the relationship between the STAT4
rs7574865G > T polymorphism as a susceptibility factor to ulcerative colitis
(UC). However, the results have been controversial. Therefore, we conducted this 
meta-analysis to obtain the most reliable estimate of the association.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: PubMed, Embase and Web of Science databases were searched. 
Crude odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were extracted and
pooled to assess the strength of the association between the STAT4 rs7574865G > T
polymorphism and risk of UC. A total of five eligible studies including 1532
cases and 3786 controls based on the search criteria were involved in this
meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We observed that the STAT4 rs7574865G > T polymorphism was significantly
correlated with UC risk when all studies were pooled into the meta-analysis (the 
allele contrast model: OR = 1.13, 95% CI = 1.02-1.25; the heterozygote codominant
model: OR = 1.22, 95% CI = 1.04-1.43; the dominant model: OR = 1.25, 95% CI =
1.07-1.45). In the stratified analysis by ethnicity, significant associations
were observed in Spanish for the allele contrast model (OR = 1.20; 95% CI =
1.04-1.39), for the homozygote codominant model (OR = 1.57; 95% CI = 1.07-2.31), 
for the dominant model (OR = 1.20; 95% CI = 1.01-1.43), and for the recessive
model (OR = 1.50; 95% CI = 1.03-2.19).
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggests that the STAT4 rs7574865G > T
polymorphism is a low-penetrant risk factor for UC, especially in Spanish.

PMCID: PMC4107247
PMID: 25097569  [PubMed]


137. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 19;452(2):254-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.085. Epub 2014 Jul 29.

Genetic basis of rheumatoid arthritis: a current review.

Kochi Y(1), Suzuki A(2), Yamamoto K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,
RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address: ykochi@src.riken.jp. (2)Laboratory
for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN,
Yokohama, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan; Department of Allergy and Rheumatology,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is one of the most common autoimmune diseases. As with 
other complex traits, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have tremendously
enhanced our understanding of the complex etiology of RA. In this review, we
describe the genetic architecture of RA as determined through GWASs and
meta-analyses. In addition, we discuss the pathologic mechanism of the disease by
examining the combined findings of genetic and functional studies of individual
RA-associated genes, including HLA-DRB1, PADI4, PTPN22, TNFAIP3, STAT4, and CCR6.
Moreover, we briefly examine the potential use of genetic data in clinical
practice in RA treatment, which represents a challenge in medical genetics in the
post-GWAS era.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25078624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 30;9(7):e103523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103523.
eCollection 2014.

Gene expression analysis of children with acute hematogenous osteomyelitis caused
by Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: correlation with clinical
severity of illness.

Gaviria-Agudelo C(1), Carter K(2), Tareen N(3), Pascual V(4), Copley LA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics Infectious Disease, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America; Children's Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (2)University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Children's Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (4)Baylor 
Institute for Immunology Research, Dallas, Texas, United States of America; Texas
Scottish Rite Hospital, Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (5)Children's
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America; Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of 
America; Texas Scottish Rite Hospital, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Children with acute hematogenous osteomyelitis (AHO) demonstrate a broad spectrum
of clinical manifestations, ranging from mild to severe. Several advances have
been achieved in the study of host immune response to acute invasive
Staphylococcus aureus infections through gene expression analysis. However,
previous research has neither attempted to evaluate the response of children with
AHO specific to Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) nor to
correlate gene expression with clinical phenotype. Study objective was to
correlate gene expression of children with AHO due to MRSA with clinical severity
of illness. Whole blood samples were obtained in Tempus tubes from 12 children
with osteomyelitis once cultures obtained directly from the site of infection
confirmed to be positive for MRSA. Using an Illumina platform and a systems-wide 
modular analysis, microarray findings from ten of these children were compared to
that of nine healthy (age, ethnicity and gender) matched controls and correlated 
with clinical severity of illness. Children with AHO from MRSA demonstrated
over-expression of innate immunity with respect to neutrophil activity,
coagulation, inflammatory response, and erythrocyte development. Concurrently,
these children demonstrated under-expression of adaptive immunity with respect to
lymphocyte activation and activity of T-cell, cytotoxic or NK cell, and B-cell
lines. Three over-expressed genes, P2RX1, SORT1, and RETN, and two
under-expressed genes, LOC641788 and STAT 4, were significantly correlated with
severity of illness. STAT 4 showed the strongest correlation (R2<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.83). STAT4 
downregulation could potentially explain under-expression of genes related to
adaptive immunity in this cohort of patients with AHO. This study identified
specific genes which correspond to disease severity during the early
hospitalization of children with AHO from MRSA. Pattern recognition of this
combination of genes could help to identify in the future severe clinical
phenotypes before the disease is fully manifest and direct appropriate attention 
and resources to those children.

PMCID: PMC4116206
PMID: 25076205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Exp Med. 2014 Aug 25;211(9):1807-19. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131548. Epub 2014 Jul
29.

Role of Blimp-1 in programing Th effector cells into IL-10 producers.

Neumann C(1), Heinrich F(2), Neumann K(1), Junghans V(1), Mashreghi MF(2), Ahlers
J(1), Janke M(2), Rudolph C(1), Mockel-Tenbrinck N(3), Kühl AA(4), Heimesaat
MM(4), Esser C(5), Im SH(6), Radbruch A(2), Rutz S(7), Scheffold A(8).

Author information: 
(1)German Rheumatism Research Centre Berlin, an Institute of the
Leibniz-Association, 10117 Berlin, Germany Department of Rheumatology and
Clinical Immunology, Medical Clinic I, Gastroenterology, and Department of
Microbiology and Hygiene, Charité University Hospital, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(2)German Rheumatism Research Centre Berlin, an Institute of the
Leibniz-Association, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (3)Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, 51429
Bergisch Gladbach, Germany. (4)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunology, Medical Clinic I, Gastroenterology, and Department of Microbiology
and Hygiene, Charité University Hospital, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (5)Leibniz
Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Academy of Immunology and Microbiology (AIM), Institute for Basic Science
(IBS) Pohang, Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, Pohang
University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Republic of Korea. (7)German
Rheumatism Research Centre Berlin, an Institute of the Leibniz-Association, 10117
Berlin, Germany alexander.scheffold@charite.de saschar@gene.com. (8)German
Rheumatism Research Centre Berlin, an Institute of the Leibniz-Association, 10117
Berlin, Germany Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Medical
Clinic I, Gastroenterology, and Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Charité
University Hospital, 10117 Berlin, Germany alexander.scheffold@charite.de
saschar@gene.com.

Secretion of the immunosuppressive cytokine interleukin (IL) 10 by effector T
cells is an essential mechanism of self-limitation during infection. However, the
transcriptional regulation of IL-10 expression in proinflammatory T helper (Th) 1
cells is insufficiently understood. We report a crucial role for the
transcriptional regulator Blimp-1, induced by IL-12 in a STAT4-dependent manner, 
in controlling IL-10 expression in Th1 cells. Blimp-1 deficiency led to excessive
inflammation during Toxoplasma gondii infection with increased mortality. IL-10
production from Th1 cells was strictly dependent on Blimp-1 but was further
enhanced by the synergistic function of c-Maf, a transcriptional regulator of
IL-10 induced by multiple factors, such as the Notch pathway. We found Blimp-1
expression, which was also broadly induced by IL-27 in effector T cells, to be
antagonized by transforming growth factor (TGF) ß. While effectively blocking
IL-10 production from Th1 cells, TGF-ß shifted IL-10 regulation from a
Blimp-1-dependent to a Blimp-1-independent pathway in IL-27-induced Tr1 (T
regulatory 1) cells. Our findings further illustrate how IL-10 regulation in Th
cells relies on several transcriptional programs that integrate various signals
from the environment to fine-tune expression of this critical immunosuppressive
cytokine.

© 2014 Neumann et al.

PMCID: PMC4144744
PMID: 25073792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nat Immunol. 2014 Sep;15(9):856-65. doi: 10.1038/ni.2947. Epub 2014 Jul 27.

The cytokine TGF-ß co-opts signaling via STAT3-STAT4 to promote the
differentiation of human TFH cells.

Schmitt N(1), Liu Y(1), Bentebibel SE(1), Munagala I(1), Bourdery L(1),
Venuprasad K(1), Banchereau J(2), Ueno H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
Texas, USA. (2)1] Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research
Institute, Dallas, Texas, USA. [2].

Understanding the developmental mechanisms of follicular helper T cells (TFH
cells) in humans is relevant to the clinic. However, the factors that drive the
differentiation of human CD4+ helper T cells into TFH cells remain largely
undefined. Here we found that transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) provided
critical additional signals for the transcription factors STAT3 and STAT4 to
promote initial TFH differentiation in humans. This mechanism did not appear to
be shared by mouse helper T cells. Developing human TFH cells that expressed the 
transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 also expressed ROR<U+03B3>t, a transcription factor
typically expressed by the TH17 subset of helper T cells. Our study documents a
mechanism by which TFH cells and TH17 cells emerge together in inflammatory
environments in humans, as is often observed in many human autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC4183221
PMID: 25064073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2014 Oct;21(10):767-76. doi: 10.1002/jhbp.131. Epub
2014 Jul 16.

STATs profiling reveals predominantly-activated STAT3 in cholangiocarcinoma
genesis and progression.

Dokduang H(1), Techasen A, Namwat N, Khuntikeo N, Pairojkul C, Murakami Y,
Loilome W, Yongvanit P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, 40002, Thailand; Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Khon
Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the aberrant expression of the STAT family in humans 
and liver fluke (Opisthorchis viverrini, Ov)-induced hamster cholangiocarcinoma
(CCA) tissues.
METHODS: The expression and phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4,
STAT5a, STAT5b and STAT6 in human hamster CCA tissues were
immunohistochemistry-profiled. Localizations of STAT5 in macrophages and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophage-conditioned media mediated STAT3
activation in CCA cells were demonstrated.
RESULTS: The expressions of STAT 1-4 and 6 were detected in the cytoplasm of
hyperplastic bile ducts and tumor cells, whereas STAT5a and STAT5b were observed 
in macrophages and connective tissues surrounding tumor, respectively. The
expressions of STAT3 and STAT5b were significantly observed in tumors with a
poorer histological differentiation. STAT3 expression was significantly
associated with shorter survival of CCA patients and was predominately activated 
in CCA cell lines. In the CCA-hamsters, STATs expression was gradually increased 
along the carcinogenesis, especially at 30 days post-infection in which the
inflammatory response was markedly observed, showing the correlation between the 
inflammation and STATs activation. Moreover, LPS-induced macrophage-conditioned
media could mediate STAT3 activation in CCA cells.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT3 is the major STAT, which plays roles in the inflammation that 
contributes to CCA carcinogenesis and progression and may serve as a marker for a
poor prognosis of CCA.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery.

PMID: 25044480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Liver Int. 2015 Mar;35(3):886-96. doi: 10.1111/liv.12643. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Association of HLA-DP/DQ, STAT4 and IL-28B variants with HBV viral clearance in
Tibetans and Uygurs in China.

Liao Y(1), Cai B, Li Y, Chen J, Ying B, Tao C, Zhao M, Ba Z, Zhang Z, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Several genome-wide association studies have revealed that
HLA-DP/DQ, STAT4 and IL-28B associated with liver diseases. But because of
population heterogeneity, different races would have different causative
polymorphisms. Therefore, in this study, we included Chinese Tibetans and Uygurs 
to examine the roles of these genes on HBV natural clearance.
METHODS: A total of 1341 subjects including 908 Tibetans and 433 Uygurs were
recruited. Seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were genotyped.
RESULTS: HLA-DP/DQ polymorphisms associated with HBV natural clearance in both
ethnicities (Tibetans, rs3077, OR = 0.61, 95% CI = 0.46-0.82; rs9277535, OR =
0.56, 95% CI = 0.41-0.75; rs7453920, OR = 0.64, 95%CI = 0.47-0.85; Uygurs,
rs3077, OR = 0.48, 95% CI = 0.24-0.96; rs9277535, OR = 0.43, 95% CI = 0.20-0.91; 
rs7453920, OR = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.39-0.99), whereas no significant association was
observed between IL-28B with HBV natural clearance in neither ethnicities (P >
0.05). STAT4 rs7574865 seemed to be Tibetan specific in HBV natural clearance (OR
= 0.76, 95% CI = 0.58-0.99). Moreover, in Tibetan patients, HLA-DQ rs7453920 GG
had a higher frequency in HBeAg positive patients (P = 0.032) and STAT4 rs7574865
GG genotype appeared more frequently in Genotype C virus infected patients (P =
0.005). In addition, Uygurs have higher frequencies of HLA-DP/DQ protective
alleles (72.5% for rs3077, 76.6% for rs9277535 and 26.8% for rs7453920) than
Tibetans (51.7% for rs3077, 52.5% for rs9277535 and 18.5% for rs7453920)(all P < 
0.05), and a lower prevalence of HBV infection as previously reported.
CONCLUSIONS: HLA-DP/DQ but not IL-28B polymorphisms correlate with HBV natural
clearance, irrespective of race, and HLA-DP/DQ would be causative genes
attributing to varying prevalence in different regions. STAT4 rs7574865 seemed to
be population specific in Tibetans and it might synergistically interact with
virus contributing to disease progression.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25041342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jul 11;15(7):12280-93. doi: 10.3390/ijms150712280.

Association between STAT4 gene polymorphisms and autoimmune thyroid diseases in a
Chinese population.

Yan N(1), Meng S(2), Zhou J(3), Xu J(4), Muhali FS(5), Jiang W(6), Shi L(7), Shi 
X(8), Zhang J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. bapintanhua@163.com.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. momingfd@163.com.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. zhoujiaozhen@163.com.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. wendy20140710@163.com.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. muhalifatma@yahoo.co.uk.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. hidyfan@yeah.net.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China. slf8181@163.com.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508, China.
yinghuichen@fudan.edu.cn. (9)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of
Fudan University, No. 1508 Longhang Road, Jinshan District, Shanghai 201508,
China. zhangja@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

The STAT4 gene encodes a transcriptional factor that transmits signals induced by
several key cytokines which play important roles in the development of autoimmune
diseases. The aim of this study was to explore the association of STAT4
polymorphism with Graves' disease (GD) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT). A total 
of 1048 autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) patients (693 with GD and 355 with
HT) and 909 age- and gender-matched controls were examined. STAT4 polymorphisms
(rs7574865/rs10181656/ rs7572482) were genotyped by multiplex polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and ligase detection reaction (LDR). The results indicated that
the frequencies of rs7574865 genotypes in patients with GD differed significantly
from the controls (p=0.028), the T allele frequency of GD patients was also
significantly higher than the controls (p=0.020). The genotypes of rs10181656
differed significantly in GD patients from controls (p=0.012); G allele
frequencies were significantly higher in AITD patients than the controls (p=0.014
and 0.031, respectively). The frequencies of haplotype GC with GD and HT patients
were significantly lower than their controls (p=0.015 and 0.030, respectively).
In contrast, the frequencies of haplotype TG with GD and HT patients were
significantly higher than their controls (p=0.016 and 0.048, respectively). These
findings strongly suggest that STAT4 rs7574865/rs10181656 polymorphisms increase 
the risk of AITD in a Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC4139844
PMID: 25019342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hum Immunol. 2014 Aug;75(8):863-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2014.06.013. Epub 2014
Jun 28.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) G>T gene polymorphism 
in Egyptian cases with rheumatoid arthritis.

Settin A(1), Salama A(2), Elshazli R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Children Hospital, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta,
Egypt. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Tanta University,
Tanta, Egypt. Electronic address: Biolab100@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The gene encoding signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 
(STAT4) has been reported to be associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in
several populations. This work aimed at assessing the association of STAT4 G>T
gene polymorphism with the susceptibility, activity and functional disability of 
RA in Egyptian subjects.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: This study included 112 unrelated RA Egyptian patients who 
were compared to 122 healthy unrelated individuals taken from the same locality. 
For all subjects, DNA was genotyped for STAT4 G>T (rs7574865) polymorphism using 
the PCR-RFLP technique. Antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP)
were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Cases showed a significantly higher frequency of the STAT4 T allele
carriage (GT+TT genotypes) compared to controls (51.8% vs. 31.1%, OR = 2.37, 95% 
CI = 1.39-4.05, p = 0.001). Also the frequency of the STAT4 T allele was
significantly higher among cases compared to controls (30.4% vs. 16.8%, OR =
2.16, 95% CI = 1.39-3.35, p = 0.001). Cases positive to the STAT4 T allele (GT+TT
genotypes) showed no significant difference compared to those with the GG
genotype regarding their clinical and immune parameters. Nonetheless, they showed
a more functional disability presented in their significantly higher health
assessment questionnaire (HAQ) score (p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: This study gives an extra evidence to the association of the STAT4 T
allele with the susceptibility and functional disability of RA.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24979672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S721-8. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3861-9. Epub 
2014 Jun 26.

High STAT4 expression is a better prognostic indicator in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatectomy.

Wubetu GY(1), Utsunomiya T, Ishikawa D, Yamada S, Ikemoto T, Morine Y, Iwahashi
S, Saito Y, Arakawa Y, Imura S, Kanamoto M, Zhu C, Bando Y, Shimada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) mediates
the intracellular effects of interleukin-12, leading to the production of
interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) and natural killer cells cytotoxicity. However, the
clinical significance of STAT4 expression in patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) remains virtually unknown.
METHODS: A total of 66 HCC patients who underwent hepatectomy were enrolled in
this study. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed to
determine STAT4 and IFNG mRNA expression levels. Tissue microarray-based
immunohistochemistry was performed to examine CD8(+) T cells, STAT4, and INF-<U+03B3>
proteins.
RESULTS: STAT4 was differentially expressed in tumor and nontumor tissues (P =
0.001) and positively correlated with IFNG expression (R (2) = 0.506, P < 0.05)
and CD8(+) T cell infiltration (R (2) = 0.53, P < 0.001). Significant
correlations were observed between STAT4 expression and tumor TNM stage (P =
0.043), hepatic venous invasion (P = 0.003), des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin (P =
0.011), tumor size (P = 0.036), and tumor differentiation (P = 0.034). Patients
with high STAT4 expression had significantly better recurrence-free survival (P =
0.009). Low STAT4 expression (P = 0.030) and presence of portal venous invasion
or hepatic venous invasion (P = 0.006) were independent risk factors for HCC
recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Downregulation of STAT4 in HCC indicated aggressive tumor behavior
and predicted a worse clinical outcome. STAT4 might be a useful biomarker to
identify patients at high risk of recurrence after hepatectomy.

PMID: 24965572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 8;111(27):9887-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1402468111. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

Androgens alter T-cell immunity by inhibiting T-helper 1 differentiation.

Kissick HT(1), Sanda MG(2), Dunn LK(1), Pellegrini KL(3), On ST(1), Noel JK(1),
Arredouani MS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Urology Division, Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; (2)Department of Urology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; and. (3)Renal Division,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215. (4)Urology Division, Department of Surgery, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215;
marredou@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The hormonal milieu influences immune tolerance and the immune response against
viruses and cancer, but the direct effect of androgens on cellular immunity
remains largely uncharacterized. We therefore sought to evaluate the effect of
androgens on murine and human T cells in vivo and in vitro. We found that murine 
androgen deprivation in vivo elicited RNA expression patterns conducive to IFN
signaling and T-cell differentiation. Interrogation of mechanism showed that
testosterone regulates T-helper 1 (Th1) differentiation by inhibiting
IL-12-induced Stat4 phosphorylation: in murine models, we determined that
androgen receptor binds a conserved region within the phosphatase, Ptpn1, and
consequent up-regulation of Ptpn1 then inhibits IL-12 signaling in CD4 T cells.
The clinical relevance of this mechanism, whereby the androgen milieu modulates
CD4 T-cell differentiation, was ascertained as we found that androgen deprivation
reduced expression of Ptpn1 in CD4 cells from patients undergoing androgen
deprivation therapy for prostate cancer. Our findings, which demonstrate a
clinically relevant mechanism by which androgens inhibit Th1 differentiation of
CD4 T cells, provide rationale for targeting androgens to enhance CD4-mediated
immune responses in cancer or, conversely, for modulating androgens to mitigate
CD4 responses in disorders of autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC4103356
PMID: 24958858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. FASEB J. 2014 Oct;28(10):4235-46. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-249599. Epub 2014 Jun 16.

MAPKAP kinase 3 suppresses Ifng gene expression and attenuates NK cell
cytotoxicity and Th1 CD4 T-cell development upon influenza A virus infection.

Köther K(1), Nordhoff C(1), Masemann D(1), Varga G(2), Bream JH(3), Gaestel M(4),
Wixler V(5), Ludwig S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology (IMV), Centre for Molecular Biology of
Inflammation (ZMBE), and. (2)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology and Immunology,
Westfälische Wilhelms University, Münster, Germany; (3)Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA; (4)Institute of Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany; and. (5)Institute of Molecular Virology (IMV), Centre for
Molecular Biology of Inflammation (ZMBE), and Interdisciplinary Center of
Clinical Research (IZKF), University of Münster, Münster, Germany. (6)Institute
of Molecular Virology (IMV), Centre for Molecular Biology of Inflammation (ZMBE),
and Interdisciplinary Center of Clinical Research (IZKF), University of Münster, 
Münster, Germany ludwigs@uni-muenster.de.

MK2 and MK3 are downstream targets of p38 and ERK1/2. They control the mRNA
stability of several inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-a and IL-10. Whereas
MK2 is expressed ubiquitously, the expression of MK3 is restricted to muscle,
liver, and heart tissues and T and NK cells. Using Mk-deficient and wild-type
(WT) mice, we demonstrated an inhibitory effect of MK3, but not of MK2, on
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> expression in T and NK lymphocytes. The results provided
evidence that the inhibitory effect of MK3 is based on negative feedback
phosphorylation of p38 and ERK1/2, which causes decreased binding of Stat4 to the
IFN-<U+03B3> promoter and reduced expression of IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA and protein. Consequently,
all Mk3(-/-) mice challenged with the Th1-inducing influenza A virus (IAV)
survived the WT LD50 virus dose. The reduced disease severity in the Mk3(-/-)
mice was accompanied by a >10-fold reduction in viral lung titer and an increase 
in the number of activated NK cells and enhanced Th1 activation of CD4 T cells.
Thus, our data describe the protein kinase MK3 as a novel regulator of the innate
and adaptive immune responses.-Köther, K., Nordhoff, C., Masemann, D., Varga, G.,
Bream, J. H., Gaestel, M., Wixler, V., Ludwig, S. MAPKAP kinase 3 suppresses Ifng
gene expression and attenuates NK cell cytotoxicity and Th1 CD4 T-cell
development upon influenza A virus infection.

© FASEB.

PMID: 24935968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Sep;74:284-94. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.06.001. Epub
2014 Jun 14.

STAT4 deficiency protects against neointima formation following arterial injury
in mice.

Lv L(1), Meng Q(1), Ye M(1), Wang P(2), Xue G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, China. (2)Department of Vascular Surgery, Ren Ji Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Electronic address:
pudongnanlu@sohu.com.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) has been associated
with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases. Intriguingly, we previously reported 
that STAT4 might play a critical role in vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC)
proliferation. The present study therefore investigated the impact of STAT4 on
VSMC migration, apoptosis and neointimal hyperplasia postinjury, as well as the
underlying mechanisms. Guide-wire injury was associated with development of
intimal neointima, STAT4 and phosphorylated STAT4 (p-STAT4) expressions were
apparently up-regulated in the injured arteries. Neointima was greatly blocked in
STAT4 knockout (KO) mice compared with wild type (WT) mice. A marked loss of
inflammatory cells was identified in the vasculature postinjury in STAT4 KO mice.
VSMC apoptosis was enhanced in the vasculature postinjury in STAT4 KO mice
compared with WT mice. Cultured primary STAT4 KO VSMCs displayed reduced
migration in comparison with WT controls. Mechanically, the deletion of STAT4
potently decreased the level of MCP-1, and its downstream targets MMP1 and MMP2. 
The effect of STAT4 on VSMC apoptosis was mainly mediated by the activation of
the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, as manifested by increased cytochrome c
release and the activation of caspase-3. STAT4 therefore represents a promising
molecular target to limit restenosis after artery intervention.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24933129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Dec;51(6):830-9. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0369OC.

Fibroblast signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 drives cigarette
smoke-induced airway fibrosis.

Hackett TL(1), Shaheen F, Zhou S, Wright JL, Churg A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology and.

Cigarette smoke-induced emphysema and small airway remodeling are the anatomic
bases of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but the pathogenesis of
these changes is unclear, and current treatments for COPD are minimally
effective. To evaluate the role of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-4 in cigarette smoke-induced small airway remodeling, we
used C57BL/6J (wild type [WT]) and STAT4-/- mice exposed to air or cigarette
smoke for 6 months and isolated airway and parenchymal fibroblasts. We also
compared the results with those obtained with human fibroblasts. We found that
STAT4-/- mice were protected against smoke-induced small airway remodeling but
not emphysema. STAT4 is abundantly expressed in airway compared with
parenchymal-derived fibroblasts isolated from normal human and murine lung. WT
airway fibroblasts proliferate faster than STAT4-/- airway fibroblasts, whereas
there is no difference between strains for parenchymal fibroblasts. IL-12 is
up-regulated in the lung after smoke exposure, and IL-12 receptor B2 is expressed
on airway and parenchymal fibroblasts in mouse and human lung. Treatment with
IL-12 causes phosphorylation of STAT4 in WT airway fibroblasts. Exposure of WT
airway, but not parenchymal, fibroblasts to IL-12 causes increased expression of 
collagen 1a1 and transforming growth factor ß1, factors involved in small airway 
remodeling, whereas STAT4-/- fibroblasts are unresponsive to IL-12. These results
indicate that IL-12 can drive small airway remodeling via STAT4 signaling and
suggest that treatment with clinically available anti-IL-12p40 drugs might
provide a new approach to preventing small airway remodeling in cigarette
smokers.

PMID: 24922586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Virol. 2014 Sep 1;88(17):9655-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03299-13. Epub 2014 Jun 11.

STAT4 deficiency fails to induce lung Th2 or Th17 immunity following primary or
secondary respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) challenge but enhances the lung
RSV-specific CD8+ T cell immune response to secondary challenge.

Dulek DE(1), Newcomb DC(2), Toki S(2), Goliniewska K(2), Cephus J(2), Reiss S(2),
Bates JT(3), Crowe JE Jr(4), Boyd KL(5), Moore ML(6), Zhou W(2), Peebles RS
Jr(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (5)Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, and Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. (7)Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Department of
Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA stokes.peebles@vanderbilt.edu.

Immune-mediated lung injury is a hallmark of lower respiratory tract illness
caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). STAT4 plays a critical role in CD4+ 
Th1 lineage differentiation and gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) protein expression by
CD4+ T cells. As CD4+ Th1 differentiation is associated with negative regulation 
of CD4+ Th2 and Th17 differentiation, we hypothesized that RSV infection of
STAT4-/- mice would result in enhanced lung Th2 and Th17 inflammation and
impaired lung Th1 inflammation compared to wild-type (WT) mice. We performed
primary and secondary RSV challenges in WT and STAT4-/- mice and used STAT1-/-
mice as a positive control for the development of RSV-specific lung Th2 and Th17 
inflammation during primary challenge. Primary RSV challenge of STAT4-/- mice
resulted in decreased T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> expression levels in CD4+ T cells compared 
to those of WT mice. Lung Th2 and Th17 inflammation did not develop in primary
RSV-challenged STAT4-/- mice. Decreased IFN-<U+03B3> expression by NK cells, CD4+ T
cells, and CD8+ T cells was associated with attenuated weight loss and enhanced
viral clearance with primary challenge in STAT4-/- mice compared to WT mice.
Following secondary challenge, WT and STAT4-/- mice also did not develop lung Th2
or Th17 inflammation. In contrast to primary challenge, secondary RSV challenge
of STAT4-/- mice resulted in enhanced weight loss, an increased lung IFN-<U+03B3>
expression level, and an increased lung RSV-specific CD8+ T cell response
compared to those of WT mice. These data demonstrate that STAT4 regulates the
RSV-specific CD8+ T cell response to secondary infection but does not
independently regulate lung Th2 or Th17 immune responses to RSV
challenge.IMPORTANCE: STAT4 is a protein critical for both innate and adaptive
immune responses to viral infection. Our results show that STAT4 regulates the
immune response to primary and secondary challenge with RSV but does not restrain
RSV-induced lung Th2 or Th17 immune responses. These findings suggest that STAT4 
expression may influence lung immunity and severity of illness following primary 
and secondary RSV infections.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4136353
PMID: 24920804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Genes Immun. 2014 Sep;15(6):413-23. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.33. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

IL-12 is required for mTOR regulation of memory CTLs during viral infection.

Garcia K(1), Sun Z(1), Mattson E(1), Li L(1), Smyth K(1), Xiao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA.

The induction of functional memory cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) is a major goal
of vaccination against intracellular pathogens. Interleukin (IL)-12 is critical
for the generation of memory CTLs, and inhibition of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) by rapamycin can effectively enhance the memory CTL response.
Yet, the role of IL-12 in mTOR's regulation of memory CTL is unknown. Here we
hypothesized that the immunostimulatory effects of mTOR on memory CTLs requires
IL-12 signaling. Our results revealed that rapamycin increased the generation of 
memory CTLs in vaccinia virus infection, and this enhancement was dependent upon 
the IL-12 signal. Furthermore, IL-12 receptor deficiency diminished the secondary
expansion of rapamycin-regulated memory and resultant secondary memory CTLs were 
abolished. Rapamycin enhanced IL-12 signaling by upregulating IL-12 receptor ß2
expression and signal transducer and activator of transcription factor 4
phosphorylation in CTLs during early infection. In addition, rapamycin
continually suppressed T-bet expression in both wild-type and IL-12 receptor
knockout CTLs. These results indicate an essential role for IL-12 in the
regulation of memory CTLs by mTOR and highlight the importance of considering the
interplay between cytokines and adjuvants during vaccine design.

PMCID: PMC4156562
PMID: 24898389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 May 22;7:27. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-27.

Cellular dissection of psoriasis for transcriptome analyses and the post-GWAS
era.

Swindell WR(1), Stuart PE, Sarkar MK, Voorhees JJ, Elder JT, Johnston A,
Gudjonsson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA. wswindel@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Genome-scale studies of psoriasis have been used to identify genes of
potential relevance to disease mechanisms. For many identified genes, however,
the cell type mediating disease activity is uncertain, which has limited our
ability to design gene functional studies based on genomic findings.
METHODS: We identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with altered
expression in psoriasis lesions (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>216 patients), as well as candidate genes
near susceptibility loci from psoriasis GWAS studies. These gene sets were
characterized based upon their expression across 10 cell types present in
psoriasis lesions. Susceptibility-associated variation at intergenic (non-coding)
loci was evaluated to identify sites of allele-specific transcription factor
binding.
RESULTS: Half of DEGs showed highest expression in skin cells, although the
dominant cell type differed between psoriasis-increased DEGs (keratinocytes, 35%)
and psoriasis-decreased DEGs (fibroblasts, 33%). In contrast, psoriasis GWAS
candidates tended to have highest expression in immune cells (71%), with a
significant fraction showing maximal expression in neutrophils (24%, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). 
By identifying candidate cell types for genes near susceptibility loci, we could 
identify and prioritize SNPs at which susceptibility variants are predicted to
influence transcription factor binding. This led to the identification of
potentially causal (non-coding) SNPs for which susceptibility variants influence 
binding of AP-1, NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF1, STAT3 and STAT4.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings underscore the role of innate immunity in psoriasis
and highlight neutrophils as a cell type linked with pathogenetic mechanisms.
Assignment of candidate cell types to genes emerging from GWAS studies provides a
first step towards functional analysis, and we have proposed an approach for
generating hypotheses to explain GWAS hits at intergenic loci.

PMCID: PMC4060870
PMID: 24885462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:143463. doi: 10.1155/2014/143463. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Interaction with mesenchymal stem cells provokes natural killer cells for
enhanced IL-12/IL-18-induced interferon-gamma secretion.

Thomas H(1), Jäger M(2), Mauel K(1), Brandau S(3), Lask S(1), Flohé SB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Research, Department of Orthopedics, University Hospital Essen,
University Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstraße 171, 45147 Essen, Germany. (2)Orthopedic
Research, Department of Orthopedics, University Hospital Essen, University
Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstraße 171, 45147 Essen, Germany ; Surgical Research,
Department of Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Essen, University
Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstraße 171, 45147 Essen, Germany. (3)Department of
Otolaryngology, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Virchowstraße 171, 45147 Essen, Germany. (4)Surgical Research, Department of
Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Virchowstraße 171, 45147 Essen, Germany.

Tissue injury induces an inflammatory response accompanied by the recruitment of 
immune cells and of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) that contribute to tissue
regeneration. After stimulation with interleukin- (IL-) 12 and IL-18 natural
killer (NK) cells secrete the proinflammatory cytokine interferon- (IFN-) <U+03B3>. IFN-
<U+03B3> plays a crucial role in the defense against infections and modulates tissue
regeneration. In consideration of close proximity of NK cells and MSC at the site
of injury we investigated if MSC could influence the ability of NK-cells to
produce IFN-<U+03B3>. Coculture experiments were performed with bone marrow-derived
human MSC and human NK cells. MSC enhanced the ability of IL-12/IL-18-stimulated 
NK cells to secrete IFN- <U+03B3> in a dose-dependent manner. This activation of NK
cells was dependent on cell-cell contact as well as on soluble factors. The
increased IFN- <U+03B3> secretion from NK cells after contact with MSC correlated with
an increased level of intracellular IFN- <U+03B3>. Alterations in the IL-12 signaling
pathway including an increased expression of the IL-12ß1 receptor subunit and an 
increased phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) could be observed. In conclusion, MSC enhance the IFN- <U+03B3> release from NK 
cells which might improve the defense against infections at the site of injury
but additionally might affect tissue regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4021755
PMID: 24876666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Planta Med. 2014 Jun;80(8-9):614-21. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1368454. Epub 2014 May
22.

Evidence for the involvement of JAK/STAT/SOCS pathway in the mechanism of
Tangshen formula-treated diabetic nephropathy.

Hu J(1), Fan X(2), Meng X(1), Wang Y(2), Liang Q(2), Luo G(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Liaoning University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Dalian, P.<U+200A>R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry &
Chemical Biology (Ministry of Education), Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, P.<U+200A>R. China. (3)State Key Laboratory for Quality Research in
Chinese Medicines, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, P.<U+200A>R.
China.

Diabetic nephropathy is one of the most significant microvascular complications
associated with diabetes. Until now, there is no effective treatment and the gene
mechanism of diabetic nephropathy is still unclear. Tangshen formula is a
traditional Chinese medicine, and has been shown to have good clinical efficacy
in diabetic nephropathy treatment. The objective of this study was to investigate
the changes of gene expression profiling and explore the molecular mechanism
using a db/db mice model treated by Tangshen formula. After administration for 12
weeks, a microarray was applied to detect the gene expression of db/db mice
kidney tissues. Quantitative real-time PCR was used to confirm the differential
gene expression and carry out a JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway study. Treatment 
with Tangshen formula reduced the levels of serum glucose and urinary albumin in 
db/db mice, and the effects of Tangshen formula on db/db mice were significantly 
different from the positive control (Losartan potassium tablets) on microarray
data. It also showed that the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway played an important
role in the treatment process. The expressions of JAK1, JAK2, and STAT3 were
upregulated, and STAT4 was downregulated in Tangshen formula-treated db/db mice. 
SOCS1, 3, and 7 were all activated, while negative feedback regulated other
related genes in the JAK/STAT/SOCS pathway. Our study suggested that Tangshen
formula has beneficial effects on diabetic nephropathy treatment via regulating
the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway. This study will help to provide
evidence-based recommendations for Tangshen formula clinical treatment.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24853762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Aug;18(8):945-60. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.920325. Epub 2014 May 20.

Therapeutic potential of STAT4 in autoimmunity.

Liang Y(1), Pan HF, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Medical University, School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics , Anhui, PR China ydqahmu@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: STAT4, which acts as the major signaling transducing STATs in
response to IL-12, is a central mediator in generating inflammation during
protective immune responses and immune-mediated diseases.
AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes that STAT4 is essential for the
differentiation and function of a wide variety of immune cells, including natural
killer cells, mast cells, dendritic cells and T helper cells. In addition,
STAT4-mediated signaling promoted the production of autoimmune-associated
components, which are implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, such
as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis and
psoriasis.
EXPERT OPINION: Due to its crucial roles in inflammation and autoimmunity, STAT4 
may have promise as an effective therapeutic target for autoimmune diseases.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms driving STAT4, together with knowledge on 
the ability of current immunosuppressive treatment to target this process, may
open an avenue to novel therapeutic options.

PMID: 24844303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Exp Med. 2014 Jun 2;211(6):1079-91. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131131. Epub 2014 May
19.

Transcriptional regulation of Munc13-4 expression in cytotoxic lymphocytes is
disrupted by an intronic mutation associated with a primary immunodeficiency.

Cichocki F(1), Schlums H(2), Li H(3), Stache V(2), Holmes T(2), Lenvik TR(4),
Chiang SC(2), Miller JS(4), Meeths M(5), Anderson SK(3), Bryceson YT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical Genetics
Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 
Stockholm, Sweden Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation,
University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455. (2)Centre for
Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical Genetics Unit, Department
of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Laboratory of
Experimental Immunology, SAIC-Frederick Inc., Frederick National Laboratory,
Frederick, MD 21702. (4)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation,
University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455. (5)Centre for
Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical Genetics Unit, Department
of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden
Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Solna, 171 76 Stockholm,
Sweden. (6)Centre for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine; Clinical
Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, and Center for
Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden Broegelmann Research Laboratory, Clinical
Institute, University of Bergen, N-5021 Bergen, Norway yenan.bryceson@ki.se.

Autosomal recessive mutations in UNC13D, the gene that encodes Munc13-4, are
associated with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 3 (FHL3).
Munc13-4 expression is obligatory for exocytosis of lytic granules, facilitating 
cytotoxicity by T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. The mechanisms regulating 
Munc13-4 expression are unknown. Here, we report that Munc13-4 is highly
expressed in differentiated human NK cells and effector CD8(+) T lymphocytes. A
UNC13D c.118-308C>T mutation, causative of FHL3, disrupted binding of the ETS
family member ELF1 to a conserved intronic sequence. This mutation impairs UNC13D
intron 1 recruitment of STAT4 and the chromatin remodeling complex component
BRG1, diminishing active histone modifications at the locus. The intronic
sequence acted as an overall enhancer of Munc13-4 expression in cytotoxic
lymphocytes in addition to representing an alternative promoter encoding a novel 
Munc13-4 isoform. Mechanistically, T cell receptor engagement facilitated
STAT4-dependent Munc13-4 expression in naive CD8(+) T lymphocytes. Collectively, 
our data demonstrates how chromatin remodeling within an evolutionarily conserved
regulatory element in intron 1 of UNC13D regulates the induction of Munc13-4
expression in cytotoxic lymphocytes and suggests that an alternative Munc13-4
isoform is required for lymphocyte cytotoxicity. Thus, mutations associated with 
primary immunodeficiencies may cause disease by disrupting transcription factor
binding.

© 2014 Cichocki et al.

PMCID: PMC4042637
PMID: 24842371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. PLoS One. 2014 May 2;9(5):e96401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096401. eCollection 
2014.

Protein kinase C <U+03B8> regulates the phenotype of murine CD4+ Th17 cells.

Wachowicz K(1), Hermann-Kleiter N(1), Meisel M(1), Siegmund K(1), Thuille N(1),
Baier G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cell Genetics, Department of Pharmacology and Genetics, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Protein kinase C <U+03B8> (PKC<U+03B8>) is involved in signaling downstream of the T cell
antigen receptor (TCR) and is important for shaping effector T cell functions and
inflammatory disease development. Acquisition of Th1-like effector features by
Th17 cells has been linked to increased pathogenic potential. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying Th17/Th1 phenotypic instability remain largely
unknown. In the current study, we address the role of PKC<U+03B8> in differentiation and
function of Th17 cells by using genetic knock-out mice. Implementing in vitro
(polarizing T cell cultures) and in vivo (experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis model, EAE) techniques, we demonstrated that PKC<U+03B8>-deficient
CD4+ T cells show normal Th17 marker gene expression (interleukin 17A/F, ROR<U+03B3>t), 
accompanied by enhanced production of the Th1-typical markers such as interferon 
gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) and transcription factor T-bet. Mechanistically, this phenotype was
linked to aberrantly elevated Stat4 mRNA levels in PKC<U+03B8>-/- CD4+ T cells during
the priming phase of Th17 differentiation. In contrast, transcription of the
Stat4 gene was suppressed in Th17-primed wild-type cells. This change in cellular
effector phenotype was reflected in vivo by prolonged neurological impairment of 
PKC<U+03B8>-deficient mice during the course of EAE. Taken together, our data provide
genetic evidence that PKC<U+03B8> is critical for stabilizing Th17 cell phenotype by
selective suppression of the STAT4/IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet axis at the onset of
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4008503
PMID: 24788550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(6):2439-45.

Cryptotanshinone induces inhibition of breast tumor growth by cytotoxic CD4+ T
cells through the JAK2/STAT4/ perforin pathway.

Zhou J(1), Xu XZ, Hu YR, Hu AR, Zhu CL, Gao GS.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China E-mail : guosheng_gao@163.com.

Cryptotanshinone (CPT), is a quinoid diterpene isolated from the root of the
Asian medicinal plant, Salvia miotiorrhiza bunge. Numerous researchers have found
that it could work as a potent antitumor agent to inhibit tumor growth in vitro, 
buith there has been much less emphasis on its in vivo role against breast
tumors. Using a mouse tumor model of MCF7 cells, we showed that CPT strongly
inhibited MCF7 cell growth in vivo with polarization of immune reactions toward
Th1-type responses, stimulation of naive CD4+ T cell proliferation, and also
increased IFN-<U+03B3> and perforin production of CD4+ T cells in response to
tumor-activated splenocytes. Furthermore, data revealed that the cytotoxic
activity of CD4+ T cells induced by CPT was markedly abrogated by concanamycin
A(CMA), a perforin inhibitor, but not IFN-<U+03B3> Ab. On the other hand, after
depletion of CD4+ T cells or blocked perforin with CMA in a tumor-bearing model, 
CPT could not effectively suppress tumor growth, but this phenomenon could be
reversed by injecting naive CD4+ T cells. Thus, our results suggested that CPT
mainly inhibited breast tumor growth through inducing cytotoxic CD4+ T cells to
secrete perforin. We further found that CPT enhanced perforin production of CD4+ 
T cells by up-regulating JAK2 and STAT4 phosphorylation. These findings suggest a
novel potential therapeutic role for CPT in tumor therapy, and demonstrate that
CPT performs its antitumor functions through cytotoxic CD4+ T cells.

PMID: 24761844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 1;192(11):5012-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302943. Epub 2014
Apr 23.

Ezh2 regulates transcriptional and posttranslational expression of T-bet and
promotes Th1 cell responses mediating aplastic anemia in mice.

Tong Q(1), He S(2), Xie F(3), Mochizuki K(3), Liu Y(2), Mochizuki I(3), Meng
L(4), Sun H(5), Zhang Y(5), Guo Y(6), Hexner E(7), Zhang Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)International Joint Cancer Institute, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200433, China; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular
Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140; (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109;
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute for Cancer Research 
and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140; Institute of
Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200433, China; and. (5)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200433, 
China; and. (6)International Joint Cancer Institute, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China; (7)Department of Medicine and Abramson Cancer
Center, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 
19104. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute
for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
19140; yi.zhang@temple.edu.

Acquired aplastic anemia (AA) is a potentially fatal bone marrow (BM) failure
syndrome. IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th1 CD4(+) T cells mediate the immune destruction of
hematopoietic cells, and they are central to the pathogenesis. However, the
molecular events that control the development of BM-destructive Th1 cells remain 
largely unknown. Ezh2 is a chromatin-modifying enzyme that regulates multiple
cellular processes primarily by silencing gene expression. We recently reported
that Ezh2 is crucial for inflammatory T cell responses after allogeneic BM
transplantation. To elucidate whether Ezh2 mediates pathogenic Th1 responses in
AA and the mechanism of Ezh2 action in regulating Th1 cells, we studied the
effects of Ezh2 inhibition in CD4(+) T cells using a mouse model of human AA.
Conditionally deleting Ezh2 in mature T cells dramatically reduced the production
of BM-destructive Th1 cells in vivo, decreased BM-infiltrating Th1 cells, and
rescued mice from BM failure. Ezh2 inhibition resulted in significant decrease in
the expression of Tbx21 and Stat4, which encode transcription factors T-bet and
STAT4, respectively. Introduction of T-bet but not STAT4 into Ezh2-deficient T
cells fully rescued their differentiation into Th1 cells mediating AA. Ezh2 bound
to the Tbx21 promoter in Th1 cells and directly activated Tbx21 transcription.
Unexpectedly, Ezh2 was also required to prevent proteasome-mediated degradation
of T-bet protein in Th1 cells. Our results demonstrate that Ezh2 promotes the
generation of BM-destructive Th1 cells through a mechanism of transcriptional and
posttranscriptional regulation of T-bet. These results also highlight the
therapeutic potential of Ezh2 inhibition in reducing AA and other autoimmune
diseases.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4075972
PMID: 24760151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Int J Rheum Dis. 2015 Jan;18(1):3-16. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12363. Epub 2014 Apr
19.

Rs7574865 polymorphism in signal transducers and activators of transcription 4
gene and rheumatoid arthritis: an updated meta-analysis of 28 case-control
comparisons.

Gu E(1), Lu J, Xing D, Chen X, Xie H, Liang J, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, First Teaching Hospital of Tianjin University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of the present meta-analysis was to investigate whether
the combined evidence shows an association between the STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism and RA.
METHODS: A systematic search of all relevant studies published through April 2013
was conducted using MEDLINE, EMBASE, OVID, and ScienceDirect. The observational
studies that were related to an association between the STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism and RA were identified. The association between the STAT4 rs7574865 
polymorphism and RA susceptibility was assessed using genetic models.
RESULTS: Seventeen case-control studies with a total of 28 comparisons (25 300 RA
patients and 26 326 controls) met the inclusion criteria. A meta-analysis was
conducted for genotype TT versus GT+GG, GT+TT versus GG, TT versus GG and
T-allele. The meta-analysis showed an association between RA and the STAT4
rs7574865 TT genotype, GT+TT genotype and T-allele in all subjects.
Stratification of RA patients according to ethnic group showed that the TT
genotype, GT+TT genotype and T-allele were significantly associated with RA in
Europeans, Asians, Africans and Latin Americans. A subgroup analysis according to
the absence or presence of rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-cyclic citrullinated
peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies revealed that the association between the STAT4
rs7574865 polymorphism and RA may be independent of the presence of RF and
anti-CCP antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrated that the STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism confers susceptibility to RA in major ethnic groups. The association
may not be dependent on the presence of RF and anti-CCP antibodies.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24751105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:529167. doi: 10.1155/2014/529167. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Insight into gene polymorphisms involved in toll-like receptor/interferon
signalling pathways for systemic lupus erythematosus in South East Asia.

Chai HC(1), Chua KH(2), Lim SK(3), Phipps ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Sunway Campus, 46150 Selangor, Malaysia ; Department of Biomedical Science,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (4)Jeffrey Cheah School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University, Sunway Campus, 46150 Selangor,
Malaysia.

Polymorphisms in genes involved in toll-like receptor/interferon signalling
pathways have been reported previously to be associated with SLE in many
populations. This study aimed to investigate the role of seven single nucleotide 
polymorphisms within TNFAIP3, STAT4, and IRF5, which are involved in upstream and
downstream pathways of type I interferon production, in SLE in the South East
Asian populations. Genotyping of 360 Malaysian SLE patients and 430 normal
healthy individuals revealed that minor alleles of STAT4 rs7574865 and rs10168266
were associated with elevated risk of SLE in the Chinese and Malay patients,
respectively (P = 0.028, odds ratio (OR) = 1.42; P = 0.035, OR = 1.80,
respectively). Polymorphisms in TNFAIP3 and IRF5 did not show significant
associations with SLE in any of the ethnicities. Combined analysis of the Malays,
Chinese, and Indians for each SNP indicated that STAT4 rs10168266 was
significantly associated with the Malaysian SLE as a whole (P = 0.014; OR =
1.435). The meta-analysis of STAT4 rs10168266, which combined the data of other
studies and this study, further confirmed its importance as the risk factor for
SLE by having pooled OR of 1.559 and P value of <0.001.

PMCID: PMC3987947
PMID: 24741605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nephrology (Carlton). 2014 Apr 16. doi: 10.1111/nep.12264. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Retracted Association of STAT4 gene polymorphism with systemic lupus
erythematosus / lupus nephritis risk.

Zhou TB(1), Jiang ZP, Qin YH, Zhou JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, the Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou 510655, China.

Retraction in
    Nephrology (Carlton). 2014 Aug;19(8):517.

OBJECTIVE: The association of STAT4 gene polymorphism with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) / lupus nephritis (LN) results from the published studies is 
still conflicting. This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the relationship 
between STAT4 rs7574865, rs16833431, rs11889341, rs8179673, rs10168266,
rs7582694, rs3821236, rs7601754 gene polymorphism and SLE / LN, and to explore
whether STAT4 gene polymorphism could become a predictive marker for SLE / LN
risk.
METHODS: Association studies were identified from the databases of PubMed,
Embase, Cochrane Library and CBM-disc (China Biological Medicine Database) as of 
September 1, 2013, and eligible investigations were synthesized using
meta-analysis method.
RESULTS: 24 investigations were identified for the analysis of association
between STAT4 gene polymorphism and SLE, consisting of 31190 patients with SLE
and 43940 controls. In STAT4 rs7574865, there was a marked association between T 
allele or TT genotype and SLE susceptibility (T: OR=1.53, 95% CI: 1.30-1.79,
P<0.00001; TT: OR=1.60, 95% CI: 1.34-1.92, P<0.00001), and GG homozygous was
associated with SLE risk (OR=0.62, 95% CI: 0.51-0.75, P<0.00001). Furthermore,
rs8179673, rs7582694, or rs3821236 minor allele frequency was associated with the
risk of SLE, but this association was not found in rs16833431, rs11889341,
rs10168266, rs7601754, however, the number of included studies was small and the 
results were less robust. In addition, STAT4 rs7574865 gene polymorphism was not 
associated with the LN risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that T allele or TT homozygous is a significant
risk genetic molecular marker to predict the SLE susceptibility and GG genotype
is a valuable marker to against the SLE risk, but the association was not found
for LN. However, more investigations are required to further clarify the
association of the T allele or TT homozygous with SLE / LN susceptibility.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24738721  [PubMed]


163. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(4):1003-12. doi: 10.1159/000358671. Epub 2014 Apr
4.

Down-regulation of miR-141 induced by helicobacter pylori promotes the invasion
of gastric cancer by targeting STAT4.

Zhou X(1), Xia Y, Su J, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
China.

BACKGROUND: The association between Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric
cancer has been identified recently. However, the molecular mechanism remained
largely unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We found that miR-141 was decreased in Helicobacter pylori
positive specimens (n=75) compared with negative tissues (n=75). The knockdown of
miR-141 enhanced the invasion ability of gastric cancer cells; meanwhile,
over-expression of miR-141 could inhibit the abilities of gastric cancer cells in
vitro. A luciferase assay revealed that miR-141 was directly bound to the
3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTR) of STAT4. STAT4 was found up-regulated at mRNA
and protein levels, as shown by qRT-PCR and western blot. Over-expression of
STAT4 was used to mimic miR-141 action in the invasion of gastric cancer.
CONCLUSION: MiR-141 may play a pivotal role in controlling gastric cancer
invasion through regulating STAT4 and maybe a potential target to treat gastric
cancer.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24732377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Pathol. 2014 Jun;184(6):1785-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.02.023. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

STAT4 knockout mice are more susceptible to concanavalin A-induced T-cell
hepatitis.

Wang Y(1), Feng D(2), Wang H(2), Xu MJ(2), Park O(2), Li Y(2), Gao B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Department of
Infectious Diseases, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Laboratory of
Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address: bgao@mail.nih.gov.

STAT4, which is activated mainly by IL-12, promotes inflammatory responses by
inducing Th1 and Th2 cytokines. Recent genome-wide association studies indicate
that STAT4 gene variants are associated with risk of various types of liver
diseases, but how STAT4 contributes to liver disease pathogenesis remains
obscure. In this study, STAT4 activation was detected in liver immune cells from 
patients with viral hepatitis and autoimmune hepatitis, as well as in a mouse
model of concanavalin A (Con A)-induced hepatitis. Such STAT4 activation was
detected mainly in T cells, natural killer T cells, and macrophages and Kupffer
cells, and was diminished in Il12a(-/-) and Il12b(-/-) mice. As expected,
disruption of the Stat4 gene reduced production of Th1 and Th2 cytokines, but
surprisingly exacerbated Con A-induced liver injury. Similarly, disruption of
Il12a or Il12b also augmented Con A-induced hepatocellular damage. Further
studies showed that hepatic natural killer T (NKT) cells from Con A-treated
Stat4(-/-) mice had higher levels of FasL expression and increased cytotoxicity
against hepatocytes than those from Con A-treated WT mice. In vitro, blocking
FasL attenuated Stat4(-/-) NKT cytotoxicity against hepatocytes. In conclusion,
despite up-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines, STAT4 protects against acute 
T-cell hepatitis, which is mediated by direct or indirect down-regulation of FasL
expression on NKT cells.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4044716
PMID: 24731448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Gut. 2015 Mar;64(3):469-82. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-306767. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Effects of HDV infection and pegylated interferon a treatment on the natural
killer cell compartment in chronically infected individuals.

Lunemann S(1), Malone DF(2), Grabowski J(1), Port K(1), Béziat V(2), Bremer B(1),
Malmberg KJ(3), Manns MP(1), Sandberg JK(2), Cornberg M(1), Ljunggren HG(2),
Wedemeyer H(1), Björkström NK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany. (2)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of
Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Center for
Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway Institute for Cancer Research, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine 
Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Liver Immunology Laboratory,
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Although hepatitis delta is considered an immune-mediated disease,
adaptive immune responses to hepatitis delta virus (HDV) are hardly detectable.
Thus, the role of other immune responses, including those mediated by natural
killer (NK) cells, must be considered in HDV pathogenesis and in treatments with 
immune-stimulating agents such as interferon (IFN)a. However, the phenotype and
function of NK cells in chronic HDV infection, or in HDV-infected individuals
undergoing IFNa treatment, have not been extensively studied.
DESIGN: We performed an extensive analysis of NK cells in chronically
HDV-infected patients before and during treatment with IFNa, and compared the
results with those for patients with HBV mono-infection as well as healthy
controls.
RESULTS: In untreated HDV-infected patients, a higher than normal frequency of NK
cells was observed in peripheral blood with unaltered phenotypic NK cell
differentiation status. In contrast, long-term IFNa treatment of HDV-infected
patients caused a significant change in NK cell differentiation status, with
selective loss of terminally differentiated NK cells and, in parallel, a relative
enrichment in immature NK cell subsets. Treatment was associated with marked
functional impairment of the NK cells, which was independent of the changes in NK
cell differentiation status. Furthermore, treatment polarised NK cell IFN
signalling from STAT4 towards STAT1 dependency. Strikingly, a high frequency of
CD56(dim) NK cells at baseline was positively associated with IFNa treatment
outcome in the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe in detail how HDV infection, and IFNa treatment of this 
infection, affects the NK cell compartment and what consequences this has for the
functional capacity of NK cells.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24721903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Clin Invest. 2014 May;124(5):2009-22. doi: 10.1172/JCI71951. Epub 2014 Apr 8.

CXCL11-dependent induction of FOXP3-negative regulatory T cells suppresses
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Zohar Y, Wildbaum G, Novak R, Salzman AL, Thelen M, Alon R, Barsheshet Y, Karp
CL, Karin N.

A single G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) can activate multiple signaling
cascades based on the binding of different ligands. The biological relevance of
this feature in immune regulation has not been evaluated. The chemokine-binding
GPCR CXCR3 is preferentially expressed on CD4+ T cells, and canonically binds 3
structurally related chemokines: CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11. Here we have shown
that CXCL10/CXCR3 interactions drive effector Th1 polarization via STAT1, STAT4, 
and STAT5 phosphorylation, while CXCL11/CXCR3 binding induces an immunotolerizing
state that is characterized by IL-10(hi) (Tr1) and IL-4(hi) (Th2) cells, mediated
via p70 kinase/mTOR in STAT3- and STAT6-dependent pathways. CXCL11 binds CXCR3
with a higher affinity than CXCL10, suggesting that CXCL11 has the potential to
restrain inflammatory autoimmunity. We generated a CXCL11-Ig fusion molecule and 
evaluated its use in the EAE model of inflammatory autoimmune disease.
Administration of CXCL11-Ig during the first episode of relapsing EAE in SJL/J
mice not only led to rapid remission, but also prevented subsequent relapse.
Using GFP-expressing effector CD4+ T cells, we observed that successful therapy
was associated with reduced accumulation of these cells at the autoimmune site.
Finally, we showed that very low doses of CXCL11 rapidly suppress signs of EAE in
C57BL/6 mice lacking functional CXCL11.

PMCID: PMC4001543
PMID: 24713654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Immunol. 2014 May 15;192(10):4876-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302750. Epub 2014 
Apr 7.

STAT3, STAT4, NFATc1, and CTCF regulate PD-1 through multiple novel regulatory
regions in murine T cells.

Austin JW(1), Lu P, Majumder P, Ahmed R, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and.

Programmed death-1 (PD-1) is a crucial negative regulator of CD8 T cell
development and function, yet the mechanisms that control its expression are not 
fully understood. Through a nonbiased DNase I hypersensitivity assay, four novel 
regulatory regions within the Pdcd1 locus were identified. Two of these elements 
flanked the locus, bound the transcriptional insulator protein CCCTC-binding
factor, and interacted with each other, creating a potential regulatory
compartmentalization of the locus. In response to T cell activation signaling,
NFATc1 bound to two of the novel regions that function as independent regulatory 
elements. STAT binding sites were identified in these elements as well. In
splenic CD8 T cells, TCR-induced PD-1 expression was augmented by IL-6 and IL-12,
inducers of STAT3 and STAT4 activity, respectively. IL-6 or IL-12 on its own did 
not induce PD-1. Importantly, STAT3/4 and distinct chromatin modifications were
associated with the novel regulatory regions following cytokine stimulation. The 
NFATc1/STAT regulatory regions were found to interact with the promoter region of
the Pdcd1 gene, providing a mechanism for their action. Together these data add
multiple novel distal regulatory regions and pathways to the control of PD-1
expression and provide a molecular mechanism by which proinflammatory cytokines, 
such as IL-6 or IL-12, can augment PD-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC4011967
PMID: 24711622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Hepatology. 2014 Oct;60(4):1160-9. doi: 10.1002/hep.27092. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

Ribavirin improves the IFN-<U+03B3> response of natural killer cells to IFN-based
therapy of hepatitis C virus infection.

Werner JM(1), Serti E, Chepa-Lotrea X, Stoltzfus J, Ahlenstiel G, Noureddin M,
Feld JJ, Liang TJ, Rotman Y, Rehermann B.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, DHHS, Bethesda, MD; Liver Diseases
Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, DHHS, Bethesda, MD.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Oct;60(4):1126-9.

Ribavirin (RBV) is an important component of interferon (IFN)-based and direct
antiviral treatment regimens for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.
Immunomodulation, in particular improvement of the host IFN response, has been
proposed as RBV's mechanism of action. Natural killer (NK) cells are sensitive
biomarkers for IFN-a/ß receptor signaling, as NK cell cytotoxicity and IFN-<U+03B3>
production are regulated by signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)1- and STAT4-phosphorylation, respectively. Specifically, pSTAT1-dependent 
NK cell cytotoxicity increases and pSTAT4-dependent IFN-<U+03B3> production decreases in
response to endogenous, virus-induced IFN-a and during IFN-a-based therapy. To
assess whether RBV has a direct effect on NK cells and/or improves the IFN-<U+03B3>
response of NK cells in the presence of IFN-a, we prospectively studied 22 HCV
patients with and 32 patients without 4 weeks of RBV pretreatment, who all
received subsequent pegylated (Peg)IFN/ribavirin combination therapy. During RBV 
pretreatment, both the frequency of CD56(dim) NK cells with cytotoxic effector
functions and the frequency of CD56(bright) NK cells with the capacity to produce
IFN-<U+03B3> decreased (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.049 and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001, respectively). In vitro or in vivo
exposure of NK cells to RBV improved the pSTAT4 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) but not pSTAT1
response of NK cells to subsequent stimulation with IFN-a. This was associated
with an increase in IFN-<U+03B3> production but not cytotoxicity of NK cells during
subsequent IFN-a-based therapy. The frequency of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing NK cells was
greater in fast second-phase virological responders than in slow
responders.CONCLUSION: RBV enhances the pSTAT4 and IFN-<U+03B3> response of NK cells to 
IFN-a-stimulation.

Published 2014. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC4469648
PMID: 24700342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Tissue Antigens. 2014 Jun;83(6):401-8. doi: 10.1111/tan.12349. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Gene-gene interactions of IRF5, STAT4, IKZF1 and ETS1 in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Dang J(1), Shan S, Li J, Zhao H, Xin Q, Liu Y, Bian X, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education and
Department of Medical Genetics, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
China; Department of Medical Genetics and Cell Biology, Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, China.

Interferon (IFN) activation signaling and T helper 17 (Th17)-cell/B-cell
regulation play a critical role in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Several studies have provided convincing evidence that
polymorphisms in IRF5, STAT4, IKZF1 and ETS1 from these pathways may be involved 
in SLE by affecting gene expression or epistasis. We analyzed the genetic
interaction in known SLE susceptibility loci from the four genes in northern Han 
Chinese. A total of 946 northern Han Chinese participated in this study (370
unrelated SLE patients and 576 healthy controls). Subjects underwent genotyping
for the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2004640 in IRF5, rs7574865 in
STAT4, rs4917014 in IKZF1 and rs1128334 in ETS1 by use of a TaqMan SNP genotyping
assay and direct sequencing. Gene-gene interaction analysis involved direct
counting, multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and linear regression
analysis. SLE patients and controls differed in allele frequencies of rs7574865, 
rs1128334 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and rs4917014 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Direct counting revealed that the
frequency of risk homozygote combinations was higher for SLE patients than
controls (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Furthermore, 2-, 3- and 4-way gene-gene epistasis in SLE was
confirmed by parametric methods and MDR analysis. Gene expression analysis
partially supported the findings. Our study confirmed the association of the IFN 
pathway or Th17/B-cells and the pathogenesis of SLE, and gene-gene interaction in
this pathway may increase the risk of SLE.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24697319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Autoimmune Dis. 2014;2014:305436. doi: 10.1155/2014/305436. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Evaluation of SLE Susceptibility Genes in Malaysians.

Molineros JE(1), Chua KH(2), Sun C(1), Lian LH(3), Motghare P(1), Kim-Howard
X(1), Nath SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, 1025 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (2)Department of
Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a clinically heterogeneous autoimmune
disease with strong genetic and environmental components. Our objective was to
replicate 25 recently identified SLE susceptibility genes in two distinct
populations (Chinese (CH) and Malays (MA)) from Malaysia. We genotyped 347 SLE
cases and 356 controls (CH and MA) using the ImmunoChip array and performed an
admixture corrected case-control association analysis. Associated genes were
grouped into five immune-related pathways. While CH were largely homogenous, MA
had three ancestry components (average 82.3% Asian, 14.5% European, and 3.2%
African). Ancestry proportions were significantly different between cases and
controls in MA. We identified 22 genes with at least one associated SNP (P <
0.05). The strongest signal was at HLA-DRA (P Meta = 9.96 × 10(-9); P CH = 6.57 ×
10(-8), P MA = 6.73 × 10(-3)); the strongest non-HLA signal occurred at STAT4 (P 
Meta = 1.67 × 10(-7); P CH = 2.88 × 10(-6), P MA = 2.99 × 10(-3)). Most of these 
genes were associated with B- and T-cell function and signaling pathways. Our
exploratory study using high-density fine-mapping suggests that most of the
established SLE genes are also associated in the major ethnicities of Malaysia.
However, these novel SNPs showed stronger association in these Asian populations 
than with the SNPs reported in previous studies.

PMCID: PMC3948475
PMID: 24696779  [PubMed]


171. Cytokine. 2014 May;67(1):13-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.02.002. Epub 2014 Feb
26.

Antimalarial drugs inhibit IFNa-enhanced TNFa and STAT4 expression in monocytes: 
implication for systemic lupus erythematosus.

López P(1), Rodríguez-Carrio J(2), Suárez A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Biology, Immunology Area, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain. Electronic address: lopezpatricia@uniovi.es.
(2)Department of Functional Biology, Immunology Area, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain. Electronic address:
rodriguezcjavier@uniovi.es. (3)Department of Functional Biology, Immunology Area,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain. Electronic address:
anasua@uniovi.es.

OBJECTIVES: To analyse the influence of IFNa on TNFa production by human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), as well as the possible interference 
of this cytokine on the effect of antimalarial drugs, TNFa regulators widely used
in the treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: PBMCs, monocytes or T cells were treated with IFNa alone or
simultaneously to cellular stimuli as well as in the presence or absence of
chloroquine. Supernatants from such cultures were collected to quantify TNFa by
ELISA. TNFa and STAT4 expression in cultured cells were analysed by intracellular
flow cytometry. In addition, STAT4 gene expression and serum levels of TNFa and
IFNa were quantified in 53 SLE patients and 45 controls.
RESULTS: IFNa alone did not modify significantly TNFa production, but an increase
was observed in stimulated PBMC. Further analyses showed that monocytes were the 
cellular population responsible for this effect. In addition, IFNa treatment
increased STAT4 in stimulated monocytes, suggesting that TNFa upregulation could 
be mediated by STAT4. On the other hand, the analysis of the antimalarial effect 
showed that chloroquine was able to inhibit in vitro the expression of TNFa and
STAT4 enhanced by IFNa. In antimalarial-treated SLE patients, however, only those
with high IFNa serum levels presented lower expression of STAT4.
CONCLUSIONS: IFNa treatment enhances the induction of TNFa and STAT4 in
stimulated monocytes, an effect inhibited in vitro by chloroquine treatment.
However, the consequence of antimalarial treatment on SLE patients could be
different depending on their IFNa serum levels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24680477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Curr Genomics. 2014 Feb;15(1):52-65. doi: 10.2174/138920291501140306113715.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Old and New Susceptibility Genes versus Clinical
Manifestations.

J de AS(1), C A(2), P SG(2), S C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology Keizo Asami (LIKA), Federal University of
Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Immunopathology Keizo
Asami (LIKA), Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil ;
Department of Genetics, Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco,
Brazil.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is one of the most relevant world-wide
autoimmune disorders. The formation of autoantibodies and the deposition of
antibody-containing immune complexes in blood vessels throughout the body is the 
main pathogenic mechanism of SLE leading to heterogeneous clinical manifestations
and target tissue damage. The complexity of etiology and pathogenesis in SLE,
enclosing genetic and environmental factors, apparently is one of the greatest
challenges for both researchers and clinicians. Strong indications for a genetic 
background in SLE come from studies in families as well as in monozygotic and
dizygotic twins, discovering several SLE-associated loci and genes (e.g. IRF5,
PTPN22, CTLA4, STAT4 and BANK1). As SLE has a complex genetic background, none of
these genes is likely to be entirely responsible for triggering autoimmune
response in SLE even if they disclosure a potentially novel molecular mechanisms 
in the pathogenesis' disease. The clinical manifestations and disease severity
varies greatly among patients, thus several studies try to associate clinical
heterogeneity and prognosis with specific genetic polymorphisms in SLE associated
genes. The continue effort to describe new predisposing or modulating genes in
SLE is justified by the limited knowledge about the pathogenesis, assorted
clinical manifestation and the possible prevention strategies. In this review we 
describe newly discovered, as well as the most studied genes associated to SLE
susceptibility, and relate them to clinical manifestations of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3958959
PMID: 24653663  [PubMed]


173. Biomedica. 2013 Apr-Jun;33(2):259-67.

Variants in the IFN<U+03B3> transcription factor genes TBET, STAT1, STAT4, and HLX and
the risk of pulmonary tuberculosis in a Colombian population: a case-control
study.

Sánchez D(1), Lefebvre C(2), García LF(3), Barrera LF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Health Science Center, Louisiana State
University. (2)ECOGENE-21 Clinical Trial Center, Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, 
Centre de Médecine Génique Communautaire de l´Université de Montréal Centre
Hospitalier Affilié, Pavillon Notre-Dame. (3)Centro Colombiano de Investigación
en Tuberculosis (CCITB), Medellín, Colombia. (4)Grupo de Inmunología Celular e
Inmunogenética (GICIG), Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia.

INTRODUCTION: Interferon gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) is the most potent cytokine involved in the
control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the etiological agent of human
tuberculosis (TB). Patients with active TB present reduced levels of IFN<U+03B3>, which 
may explain the lack of effective immunity against Mtb in these patients. The
diminished expression of or functional alterations in trans-acting factors that
regulate IFN<U+03B3> gene expression may explain the reduced levels of IFN<U+03B3> in TB
patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationships of genetic variants in the
transcription factors TBET, STAT1, STAT4, and HLX to susceptibility/resistance to
pulmonary TB.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eight candidate single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were selected, and genotyped in 466 unrelated pulmonary TB patients and 300
healthy controls from Colombia, and the allelic and genetic associations with TB 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: The results indicate that no SNP in the transcription factors studied is
associated with TB. However, polymorphism rs11650354 in the TBET gene may be
associated with a decreased risk of TB; the TT genotype was significantly
associated with TB protection in a recessive genetic model (OR=0.089, 95% CI:
0.01-0.73, p=0.0069), although this association was not maintained after multiple
test correction (EMP2= 0.61).
CONCLUSION: In this study, the rs11650354 variant of TBET was suggested to
promote resistance to TB in a Colombian population. A future replication
case-control study using additional samples will be necessary to confirm this
suggestive association.

PMID: 24652136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biomed Rep. 2013 Mar;1(2):320-324. Epub 2013 Jan 21.

Polymorphisms of STAT4 and the risk of inflammatory bowel disease: A case-control
study in Chinese Han population.

Zhu H(1), Liu J(1), Zhang H(2), Wang Z(3), Liu J(4), Lu S(2), Xu W(1), Zhong
J(3), Wang Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, E-Institutes of Shanghai Universities,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China ;
(2)Research Center for Experimental Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Medical
Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai, P.R. China ; (3)Department 
of Gastroenterology, Shanghai, P.R. China ; (4)Shanghai Key Laboratory for
Prevention and Treatment of Bone and Joint Diseases with Integrated
Chinese-Western Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Orthopaedics and Traumatology,
Department of Orthopaedics, Rui-Jin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China. (5)Department of Medical
Genetics, E-Institutes of Shanghai Universities, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China ; ; Research Center for Experimental
Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of
Hematology, Shanghai, P.R. China ; ; Shanghai Research Center for Model
Organisms, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) is a transcription
factor involved in the signaling pathways of several cytokines, playing an
essential role in the development of inflammation in various immune-mediated
diseases. Genetic association studies have shown that the STAT4 gene was
significantly associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in Spanish and
Caucasian populations. However, these associations in other ethnic populations
remain unknown. In the present study, we evaluated the role of the STAT4
rs7574865 and rs7582694 polymorphisms on IBD in 562 unrelated Chinese Han
subjects by assessing distributions of genotypes and allele frequencies. Results 
showed that neither rs7574865 [Crohn's disease (CD): P=0.66, odds ratio (OR) =
0.95, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.74-1.21; ulcerative colitis (UC): P=0.43,
OR=0.85, 95% CI 0.56-1.28; IBD: P=0.52, OR=0.93, 95% CI 0.73-1.17] nor rs7582694 
(CD: P=0.40, OR=1.12, 95% CI 0.86-1.44; UC: P=0.50, OR=0.86, 95% CI 0.56-1.33;
IBD: P=0.62, OR=1.06, 95% CI 0.83-1.36) was significantly associated with IBD,
although the genotype frequency of rs7574865 varied in patients and the controls.
In conclusion, our data did not support that STAT4 variants contribute to IBD
susceptibility in the Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC3917037
PMID: 24648942  [PubMed]


175. Dis Markers. 2014;2014:727393. doi: 10.1155/2014/727393. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

STAT4 gene polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility and ANA status in
primary biliary cirrhosis.

Joshita S(1), Umemura T(1), Nakamura M(2), Katsuyama Y(3), Shibata S(1), Kimura
T(1), Morita S(1), Komatsu M(1), Matsumoto A(1), Yoshizawa K(1), Ishibashi H(2), 
Tanaka E(1), Ota M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Shinshu
University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.
(2)Clinical Research Center, NHO Nagasaki Medical Center and Department of
Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 2-1001-1 
Kubara, Omura 856-8562, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Shinshu University
Hospital, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan. (4)Department of Legal
Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621,
Japan.

Recent genome-wide association studies suggest that genetic factors contribute to
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) susceptibility. Although several reports have
demonstrated that the interleukin (IL) 12 signaling pathway is involved in PBC
pathogenesis, its precise genetic factors have not been fully clarified. Here, we
performed an association analysis between IL12A, IL12RB, and signal transducer
and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) genetic variations and susceptibility to
PBC. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 395 PBC patients
and 458 healthy subjects of Japanese ethnicity and evaluated for associations
with PBC susceptibility, anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) status, and
anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) status. We detected significant associations
with PBC susceptibility for several STAT4 SNPs (rs10168266; P = 9.4 × 10(-3),
rs11889341; P = 1.2 × 10(-3), rs7574865; P = 4.0 × 10(-4), rs8179673; P = 2.0 ×
10(-4), and rs10181656; P = 4.2 × 10(-5)). Three risk alleles (rs7574865; P =
0.040, rs8179673; P = 0.032, and rs10181656; P = 0.031) were associated with ANA 
status, but not with AMA positivity. Our findings confirm that STAT4 is involved 
in PBC susceptibility and may play a role in ANA status in the Japanese
population.

PMCID: PMC3932279
PMID: 24648611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 14;9(3):e90019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090019. eCollection
2014.

Association between a C8orf13-BLK polymorphism and polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in the Japanese population: an additive effect with STAT4 on disease
susceptibility.

Sugiura T(1), Kawaguchi Y(1), Goto K(2), Hayashi Y(2), Gono T(1), Furuya T(1),
Nishino I(2), Yamanaka H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, and 
Department of Clinical Development, Translational Medical Center, National Center
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence has shown that several non-HLA genes are
involved in the susceptibility to polymyositis/dermatomyositis. This study aimed 
to investigate the involvement of C8orf13-BLK, one of the strongest candidate
genes for autoimmune diseases, in susceptibility to polymyositis/dermatomyositis 
in the Japanese population. A possible gene-gene interaction between C8orf13-BLK 
and STAT4, which we recently showed to be associated with Japanese
polymyositis/dermatomyositis, was also analyzed.
METHODS: A single-nucleotide polymorphism in C8orf13-BLK (dbSNP ID: rs13277113)
was investigated in the Japanese population using a TaqMan assay in 283
polymyositis patients, 194 dermatomyositis patients, and 656 control subjects.
RESULTS: The C8orf13-BLK rs13277113A allele was associated with overall
polymyositis/dermatomyositis (P<0.001, odds ratio [OR] 1.44, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 1.19-1.73), as well as polymyositis (P = 0.011, OR 1.32, 95% CI
1.06-1.64) and dermatomyositis (P<0.001, OR 1.64, 95% CI 1.26-2.12). No
association was observed between the C8orf13-BLK rs13277113A allele and either
interstitial lung disease or anti-Jo-1 antibody positivity. The C8orf13-BLK
rs13277113 A and STAT4 rs7574865 T alleles had an additive effect on
polymyositis/dermatomyositis susceptibility. The strongest association was
observed in dermatomyositis, with an OR of 3.07 (95% CI; 1.57-6.02) for the
carriers of four risk alleles at the two SNP sites, namely, rs1327713 and
rs7574865.
CONCLUSIONS: This study established C8orf13-BLK as a new genetic susceptibility
factor for polymyositis/dermatomyositis. Both C8orf13-BLK and STAT4 exert
additive effects on disease susceptibility. These observations suggested that
C8orf13-BLK, in combination with STAT4, plays a pivotal role in creating genetic 
susceptibility to polymyositis/dermatomyositis in Japanese individuals.

PMCID: PMC3954551
PMID: 24632671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Apr 2;62(13):2861-71. doi: 10.1021/jf405507e. Epub 2014
Mar 21.

Molecular cloning of a Poria cocos protein that activates Th1 immune response and
allays Th2 cytokine and IgE production in a murine atopic dermatitis model.

Lu YT(1), Kuan YC, Chang HH, Sheu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture and Center for Biotechnology, National Taiwan
University , No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10673, Taiwan.

Edible fungus Poria cocos (Schw.) Wolf is a cooking material that has myriad
health benefits. However, its active constituents have not been well-defined. We 
previously purified an immunomodulatory protein, PCP, from P. cocos and described
its biochemical features and its ability to activate primary macrophage via TLR4.
In this study, we cloned the gene of PCP and demonstrated its ability to activate
Th1 response in cell cultures and in mice. The complete cDNA sequence of PCP
consisted of 807 bp, which included a 579 bp coding sequence that encoded 194
amino acids. With the addition of co-stimulatory CD3/CD28 signals, PCP
significantly increased the surface expression of CD44 and CD69 on effector T
cells. PCP could also up-regulate T-bet and STAT4 expressions and IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-2 
secretions. Oral administration of PCP suppressed the production of both total
and OVA-specific IgG1 in serum and enhanced the amounts of serum and OVA-specific
IgG2a and Th1-related cytokine production in BALB/c splenocytes. In addition,
oral administration of PCP significantly reduced IL-4 and IgE expressions in a
murine model of atopic dermatitis. In conclusion, these results provide evidence 
that PCP could regulate mammalian immune cells and reveal their pharmaceutical
potential in developing therapeutic strategies against Th2-mediated immune
disorders.

PMID: 24625278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Lab Invest. 2014 May;94(5):478-90. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2014.6. Epub 2014 Mar
10.

Tapasin modification on the intracellular epitope HBcAg18-27 enhances
HBV-specific CTL immune response and inhibits hepatitis B virus replication in
vivo.

Chen X(1), Tang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhuo M(1), Tang Z(1), Yu Y(1), Zang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

HBV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) activity has a very important role in
hepatitis B virus clearance. Present studies suggest that Tapasin, a endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) chaperone, stabilizes the peptide-receptive MHC I conformation,
allowing peptide exchange and increasing more peptides to be translocated into
the ER. We have previously testified that cytoplasmic transduction peptide
(CTP)-HBcAg(18-27)-Tapasin fusion protein could enter cytoplasm of dendritic
cells, and enhance T cells' response to generate specific CTLs efficiently in
vitro. In the present study, we evaluated specific immune responses of
CTP-HBcAg(18-27)-Tapasin fusion protein in HLA-A2 transgenic mice (H-2K(b)) and
anti-viral ability in HBV transgenic mice, and explored the mechanisms probably
involved in. The studies showed that CTP-HBcAg(18-27)-Tapasin not only increased 
production of cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> and interleukin-2 (IL-2), compared with
CTP-HBcAg(18-27), HBcAg(18-27)-Tapasin, and PBS, but also significantly induced
the higher percentages of IFN-<U+03B3>+CD8(+) T cells and specific CTL responses in
HLA-A2 transgenic mice. Moreover, enhancement of specific CTL activity induced by
the fusion protein reduced HBV DNA and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) levels
and decreased the expression of HBsAg and hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) in
liver tissue of HBV transgenic mice. In addition, CTP-HBcAg(18-27)-Tapasin could 
upregulate the expression of JAK2, Tyk2, STAT1, and STAT4 in T lymphocytes in
HLA-A2 transgenic mice splenocytes. However, there was no significant difference 
on the expressions of JAK1, JAK3, and STAT6 between each group. In conclusion,
CTP-HBcAg(18-27)-Tapasin fusion protein could enhance not only the percentages of
CTLs but also induce robust specific CTL activity and inhibits hepatitis B virus 
replication in vivo, which was associated with activation of the JAK/STAT
signaling pathway.

PMID: 24614195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e88991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088991. eCollection
2014.

Association of autoimmune Addison's disease with alleles of STAT4 and GATA3 in
European cohorts.

Mitchell AL(1), Macarthur KD(1), Gan EH(1), Baggott LE(1), Wolff AS(2),
Skinningsrud B(3), Platt H(4), Short A(4), Lobell A(5), Kämpe O(5), Bensing S(6),
Betterle C(7), Kasperlik-Zaluska A(8), Zurawek M(9), Fichna M(9), Kockum I(10),
Nordling Eriksson G(11), Ekwall O(12), Wahlberg J(13), Dahlqvist P(14), Hulting
AL(15), Penna-Martinez M(16), Meyer G(16), Kahles H(16), Badenhoop K(16), Hahner 
S(17), Quinkler M(18), Falorni A(19), Phipps-Green A(20), Merriman TR(20), Ollier
W(4), Cordell HJ(1), Undlien D(3), Czarnocka B(21), Husebye E(22), Pearce SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United
Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)CIGMR, Institute of Population Health,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (5)Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (6)Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Department of Medicine, University of Padua School of
Medicine, Padua, Italy. (8)Department of Endocrinology, Center for Postgraduate
Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland. (9)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy
of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (10)Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience and Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (12)The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (13)Department of Medical and Health Sciences,
Division of Endocrinology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. (14)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden. (15)Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Department Medicine (Division Endocrinology), University Hospital Frankfurt, 
Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany. (17)University Hospital Wuerzburg
(Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetology), Wuerzburg, Germany.
(18)Clinical Endocrinology, Charité Campus Mitte, Charité University Medicine
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (19)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (20)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago,
Otago, New Zealand. (21)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center 
for Postgraduate Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland. (22)Department of Clinical
Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Department of Medicine, Haukeland 
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e102428.

BACKGROUND: Gene variants known to contribute to Autoimmune Addison's disease
(AAD) susceptibility include those at the MHC, MICA, CIITA, CTLA4, PTPN22,
CYP27B1, NLRP-1 and CD274 loci. The majority of the genetic component to disease 
susceptibility has yet to be accounted for.
AIM: To investigate the role of 19 candidate genes in AAD susceptibility in six
European case-control cohorts.
METHODS: A sequential association study design was employed with genotyping using
Sequenom iPlex technology. In phase one, 85 SNPs in 19 genes were genotyped in UK
and Norwegian AAD cohorts (691 AAD, 715 controls). In phase two, 21 SNPs in 11
genes were genotyped in German, Swedish, Italian and Polish cohorts (1264 AAD,
1221 controls). In phase three, to explore association of GATA3 polymorphisms
with AAD and to determine if this association extended to other autoimmune
conditions, 15 SNPs in GATA3 were studied in UK and Norwegian AAD cohorts, 1195
type 1 diabetes patients from Norway, 650 rheumatoid arthritis patients from New 
Zealand and in 283 UK Graves' disease patients. Meta-analysis was used to compare
genotype frequencies between the participating centres, allowing for
heterogeneity.
RESULTS: We report significant association with alleles of two STAT4 markers in
AAD cohorts (rs4274624: P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00016; rs10931481: P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0007). In addition,
nominal association of AAD with alleles at GATA3 was found in 3 patient cohorts
and supported by meta-analysis. Association of AAD with CYP27B1 alleles was also 
confirmed, which replicates previous published data. Finally, nominal association
was found at SNPs in both the NF-<U+03BA>B1 and IL23A genes in the UK and Italian
cohorts respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the STAT4 gene, previously associated with other
autoimmune conditions, confer susceptibility to AAD. Additionally, we report
association of GATA3 variants with AAD: this adds to the recent report of
association of GATA3 variants with rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3948621
PMID: 24614117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Infect Dis. 2014 Aug 15;210(4):611-8. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu140. Epub 2014 Mar
8.

Association study of genes controlling IL-12-dependent IFN-<U+03B3> immunity: STAT4
alleles increase risk of pulmonary tuberculosis in Morocco.

Sabri A(1), Grant AV(2), Cosker K(2), El Azbaoui S(1), Abid A(3), Abderrahmani
Rhorfi I(3), Souhi H(3), Janah H(3), Alaoui-Tahiri K(3), Gharbaoui Y(3),
Benkirane M(4), Orlova M(5), Boland A(6), Deswarte C(2), Migaud M(2), Bustamante 
J(7), Schurr E(5), Boisson-Dupuis S(8), Casanova JL(9), Abel L(8), El Baghdadi
J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Military Hospital Mohamed V, Hay Riad, Rabat, Morocco Faculty
of Science-Kenitra, Ibn Tofail University, Kenitra, Morocco. (2)Laboratory of
Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1163, Paris, France Paris Descartes
University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. (3)Department 
of Pneumology, Military Hospital Mohamed V, Hay Riad, Rabat, Morocco. (4)Blood
Transfusion Center, Military Hospital Mohamed V, Hay Riad, Rabat, Morocco.
(5)McGill International TB Centre, The Research Institute of the McGill
University Health Centre, Montreal, Canada. (6)CEA, Institut de Génomique, Centre
National de Génotypage, Evry, France. (7)Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale U1163, Paris, France Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France Center for the Study of Primary
Immunodeficiencies, AP-HP, Necker hospital, Paris France. (8)Laboratory of Human 
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et 
de la Recherche Médicale U1163, Paris, France Paris Descartes University,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France St. Giles Laboratory of
Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller
University, New York, New York. (9)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale U1163, Paris, France Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Imagine Institute, Paris, France St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York,
New York Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris,
France. (10)Genetics Unit, Military Hospital Mohamed V, Hay Riad, Rabat, Morocco.

BACKGROUND: Only a minority of individuals infected with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis develop clinical tuberculosis. Genetic epidemiological evidence
suggests that pulmonary tuberculosis has a strong human genetic component.
Previous genetic findings in Mendelian predisposition to more severe
mycobacterial infections, including by M. tuberculosis, underlined the importance
of the interleukin 12 (IL-12)/interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) circuit in antimycobacterial
immunity.
METHODS: We conducted an association study in Morocco between pulmonary
tuberculosis and a panel of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering 14
core IL-12/IFN-<U+03B3> circuit genes. The analyses were performed in a discovery
family-based sample followed by replication in a case-control population.
RESULTS: Out of 228 SNPs tested in the family-based sample, 6 STAT4 SNPs were
associated with pulmonary tuberculosis (P = .0013-.01). We replicated the same
direction of association for 1 cluster of 3 SNPs encompassing the promoter region
of STAT4. In the combined sample, the association was stronger among younger
subjects (pulmonary tuberculosis onset <25 years) with an odds ratio of
developing pulmonary tuberculosis at rs897200 for GG vs AG/AA subjects of 1.47
(1.06-2.04). Previous functional experiments showed that the G allele of rs897200
was associated with lower STAT4 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present findings in a Moroccan population support an association
of pulmonary tuberculosis with STAT4 promoter-region polymorphisms that may
impact STAT4 expression.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4111910
PMID: 24610875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Clin Immunol. 2014 Apr;151(2):101-13. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.02.006. Epub 2014 
Feb 21.

T cell-specific BLIMP-1 deficiency exacerbates experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis in nonobese diabetic mice by increasing Th1 and Th17 cells.

Lin MH(1), Yeh LT(1), Chen SJ(2), Chiou HY(3), Chu CC(4), Yen LB(5), Lin KI(6),
Chang DM(7), Sytwu HK(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department and Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC. (3)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, Chi Mei Medical Center,
Tainan, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Recreation and Health-Care Management, Chia
Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: 
chinchen.chu@gmail.com. (5)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National
Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan, ROC. (6)Genomics Research Center,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (7)Department of Internal Medicine,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC. (8)Department and Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate Institute of Life 
Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic
address: sytwu@ndmctsgh.edu.tw.

Recently, we demonstrated that B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1
(BLIMP-1) has a role in regulating the differentiation and effector function of
Th1 and Th17 cells. As these cells play critical roles in the induction and
pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), we investigated 
the potential role of T cell BLIMP-1 in modulating MOG35-55-induced EAE. We
established T cell-specific BLIMP-1 conditional knockout (CKO) NOD mice to
dissect the role of BLIMP-1 in EAE using loss-of-function model. Our results
indicate that EAE severity is dramatically exacerbated in CKO mice. The numbers
of CNS-infiltrating Th1, Th17, IFN-<U+03B3>(+)IL-17A(+), and IL-21(+)IL-17A(+) CD4(+) T 
cells are remarkably increased in brain and spinal cord of CKO mice. Moreover,
the ratio of Tregs/effectors and IL-10 production of Tregs are significantly
downregulated in CNS of CKO mice. We conclude that BLIMP-1 suppresses autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis via downregulating Th1 and Th17 cells and impairing Treg cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24568746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014 Jun;53(6):1014-21.

Association of rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility gene with lipid profiles in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Davis LA, Whitfield E, Cannon GW, Wolff RK, Johnson DS, Reimold AM, Kerr GS,
Richards JS, Mikuls TR, Caplan L.

OBJECTIVE: RA patients have an increased risk of cardiovascular (CV) disease,
although the mechanisms are unclear. As RA and CV disease may be associated
through lipid profiles, we examined whether single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) associated with RA susceptibility were associated with low-density
lipoprotein (LDL), high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and triglyceride (TG) levels in
RA subjects.
METHODS: Patients (n = 763) enrolled in the Veterans Affairs RA registry who were
not on hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitor were genotyped for human
leukocyte antigen shared epitope (HLA-DRB1-SE) and SNPs in the following genes:
CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4), IL-10, PTPN22 (protein tyrosine
phosphatase, non-receptor type 22), REL (c-Rel), STAT4 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription protein), TNF- and TRAF1 (TNF receptor-associated
factor 1). Other covariates included patient characteristics (age, gender, race, 
smoking status, education, BMI, modified CharlsonDeyo comorbidity index), CV
characteristics (hypertension, diabetes, alcohol abuse), pharmacologic exposures 
(MTX, anti-TNF, glucocorticoids) and RA severity/activity markers (RA disease
duration, mean DAS, CRP, RF positivity, anti-CCP positivity). Multivariate linear
regression was performed to determine the factors associated with LDL, HDL and TG
levels.
RESULTS: The REL SNP rs9309331 homozygous minor allele was associated with higher
LDL levels. Caucasian race and increasing BMI were associated with lower HDL.
Factors associated with higher TG were diabetes, Caucasian race and higher BMI.
CONCLUSION: The REL SNP rs9309331 was associated with LDL levels in our study.
This association is a possible explanation of the increased risk of RA patients
for CV disease and requires further inquiry.

PMCID: PMC4023559
PMID: 24489016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e27080. doi: 10.4161/jkst.27080. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

STATs get their move on.

Reich NC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology; Stony Brook University;
Stony Brook, NY USA.

Understanding the mechanisms that regulate dynamic localization of a protein
within a cell can provide critical insight to its functional molecular
interactions. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) play
essential roles in development, proliferation, and immune defense. However the
consequences of STAT hyperactivity can predispose to diseases including
autoimmunity and cancer. To function as transcription factors STATs must gain
access to the nucleus, and knowledge of the mechanisms that regulate STAT nuclear
trafficking can provide a means to control STAT action. This review presents a
synopsis of some of the studies that address the nuclear dynamics of the STAT
proteins. Evidence suggests that not all STATs are the same. Nuclear import of
STAT1 and STAT4 appears linked to their tyrosine phosphorylation and the
formation of parallel dimers via reciprocal phosphotyrosine and Src homology 2
domain interactions. This dimer arrangement generates a conformational nuclear
localization signal. STAT2 is imported continually to the nucleus in an
unphosphorylated state due to its association with IRF9, but the dominant nuclear
export signal of STAT2 shuttles the complex back to the cytoplasm. Following
STAT2 tyrosine phosphorylation, it can form dimers with STAT1 to affect nuclear
import as the trimeric complex (ISGF3). Distinctly, STAT3, STAT5, and STAT6 are
continually imported to the nucleus independent of tyrosine phosphorylation.
Mutational studies indicate the nuclear localization signals in these STATs
require the conformational structure of their coiled-coil domains. Increases in
STAT nuclear accumulation following cytokine stimulation appear coordinate with
their ability to bind DNA.

PMCID: PMC3891633
PMID: 24470978  [PubMed]


184. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Apr;138(2):322-32. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu010. Epub 2014 Jan
21.

In vitro enhancement of mouse T helper 2 cell sensitization to ovalbumin allergen
by carbon black nanoparticles.

Lefebvre DE(1), Pearce B, Fine JH, Chomyshyn E, Ross N, Halappanavar S, Tayabali 
AF, Curran I, Bondy GS.

Author information: 
(1)Bureau of Chemical Safety, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K9, Canada.

Agglomerated carbon black nanoparticles (CBNPs) administered via respiratory or
subcutaneous routes have been shown to promote allergic sensitization to
coadministered ovalbumin (OVA) protein in rodents. In the present study, we aimed
to model and elucidate the mechanism of this adjuvanticity using an in vitro
assay based on T cell sensitization to ovalbumin323<U+208B>339 peptide (OVA(p)). CBNP
base particles of 22 and 39 nm were characterized and termed CBNP22 and CBNP39
powders. Splenic leukocytes derived from transgenic DO11.10 mice were exposed to 
suspensions of media alone, concanavalin A mitogen, CBNP agglomerates smaller
than 220 nm, OVA(p) alone, OVA(p) + anti-CD28 costimulant, OVA(p) + cyclosporin A
immunosuppressant, or OVA(p) + CBNPs. Samples were analyzed at 72 h
post-exposure. Proliferation rate, a marker of cellular mitosis, was assessed.
Polymerase chain reaction arrays were used to assess genes involved in allergic
response pathways. The mitogen control, costimulatory control, and
immunosuppressive control chemicals modified the T helper cell proliferation
rate. CBNP22 mildly reduced proliferation at 12 µg/ml, but CBNP39 did not. Gene
expression analysis of cells treated with OVA(p) showed that coincubation with 12
µg/ml CBNP22 enhanced gene expression of interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-10, and IL-13, 
all allergy-associated Th2 cytokines. Coincubation of OVA(p) with 12 µg/ml CBNP39
significantly enhanced IL-13 gene expression concurrent with downregulation of
the Th1-associated transcription factor Stat4. IL-4 and IL-13 protein secretion
reflected the mRNA trends. The changes were consistently higher in cells exposed 
to CBNP22 than CBNP39, suggesting that smaller particle size, higher surface
area, and higher purity were associated with the direct adjuvant effect on Th2
cells in this genetically susceptible model of OVA allergy.

PMID: 24449417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1425-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301742. Epub 2014
Jan 20.

Islet antigen-specific Th17 cells can induce TNF-a-dependent autoimmune diabetes.

Li CR(1), Mueller EE, Bradley LM.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious and Inflammatory Disease Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) results from autoimmune destruction of pancreatic ß-cells. 
Although Th1 cells are key orchestrators of T1D, the function(s) of the more
recently identified Th17 subset are unclear due to inherent plasticity. In this
study, we analyzed Th17 cells for stability and diabetogenicity in NOD mice. We
found that like Th1 cells, Th17 are a distinct population throughout the
prediabetic phase. At diabetes onset, there were marked increases in
IL-17-producing Th17 cells and IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th1 cells in the pancreas as well 
as in the serum levels of these cytokines, indicating that these proinflammatory 
mediators serve as biomarkers of advanced autoimmunity. Although naturally
occurring Th17 cells in diabetic mice did not contribute to diabetes development 
in transfer models, islet-specific Th17 cells were diabetogenic independently of 
IL-17 and displayed inflammation-induced Th17-to-Th1 reprogramming that could be 
elicited by Th1 cells. However, an inability to generate Th1 cells because of
Stat4, Ifngr, and Ifng deficiencies did not prevent diabetes. Instead, TNF-a
could mediate diabetes in response to either Th17 cells or Th1 cells. The results
identify a previously unknown mechanism by which Th17 cells can contribute to
T1D. Our studies also suggest that when developing interventions for T1D, it will
be potentially advantageous to focus on mechanisms common to effector T cells
rather than on the signature cytokines of various subsets.

PMCID: PMC3932136
PMID: 24446517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e25530. doi: 10.4161/jkst.25530. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

JAK-STAT and intestinal mucosal immunology.

Heneghan AF(1), Pierre JF(1), Kudsk KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and 
Public Health; Madison, WI USA. (2)Department of Surgery; University of
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health; Madison, WI USA ; Veteran
Administration Surgical Service; William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital;
Madison, WI USA.

The intestinal mucosal immune system is challenged with bacteria, viruses, and
parasites, in addition to food and environmental antigens, that require dynamic
immune responsiveness for homeostasis. One central signaling pathway is JAK-STAT,
which regulates the adaptive and innate immune arms of mucosal immunity as well
as epithelial repair and regeneration. Adaptive immunity includes lymphocyte
mediated secretion of specific antibodies, while innate immune respones include
secretion of non-antigen specific compounds. This review examines effects of
specialized nutrition support on JAK-STAT in innate immune function and in
lymphocyte modulation and epithelial antibody transport in gut-associated
lymphoid tissue.

PMCID: PMC3876429
PMID: 24416649  [PubMed]


187. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003969. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003969. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

Deletion of a conserved cis-element in the Ifng locus highlights the role of
acute histone acetylation in modulating inducible gene transcription.

Balasubramani A(1), Winstead CJ(2), Turner H(2), Janowski KM(2), Harbour SN(2),
Shibata Y(3), Crawford GE(3), Hatton RD(2), Weaver CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, United States of America ; Department of Microbiology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, United States of America. (3)Institute for Genome Sciences & Policy,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

Differentiation-dependent regulation of the Ifng cytokine gene locus in T helper 
(Th) cells has emerged as an excellent model for functional study of distal
elements that control lineage-specific gene expression. We previously identified 
a cis-regulatory element located 22 kb upstream of the Ifng gene (Conserved
Non-coding Sequence -22, or CNS-22) that is a site for recruitment of the
transcription factors T-bet, Runx3, NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT4, which act to regulate
transcription of the Ifng gene in Th1 cells. Here, we report the generation of
mice with a conditional deletion of CNS-22 that has enabled us to define the
epigenetic and functional consequences of its absence. Deletion of CNS-22 led to 
a defect in induction of Ifng by the cytokines IL-12 and IL-18, with a more
modest effect on induction via T-cell receptor activation. To better understand
how CNS-22 and other Ifng CNSs regulated Ifng transcription in response to these 
distinct stimuli, we examined activation-dependent changes in epigenetic
modifications across the extended Ifng locus in CNS-22-deficient T cells. We
demonstrate that in response to both cytokine and TCR driven activation signals, 
CNS-22 and other Ifng CNSs recruit increased activity of histone acetyl
transferases (HATs) that transiently enhance levels of histones H3 and H4
acetylation across the extended Ifng locus. We also demonstrate that
activation-responsive increases in histone acetylation levels are directly linked
to the ability of Ifng CNSs to acutely enhance Pol II recruitment to the Ifng
promoter. Finally, we show that impairment in IL-12+IL-18 dependent induction of 
Ifng stems from the importance of CNS-22 in coordinating locus-wide levels of
histone acetylation in response to these cytokines. These findings identify a
role for acute histone acetylation in the enhancer function of distal conserved
cis-elements that regulate of Ifng gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3886902
PMID: 24415943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2014 Mar;68(3):338-43. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2013.268. Epub 2014 Jan
8.

Effect of vitamin D supplementation on cathelicidin, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and Th1/Th2
transcription factors in young healthy females.

Das M(1), Tomar N(1), Sreenivas V(2), Gupta N(1), Goswami R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India. (2)Department of Biostatistics, All India Institute
of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

OBJECTIVES: We assessed the effect of cholecalciferol and calcium supplementation
on mRNA expression of cathelicidin (LL-37), Th1 and Th2 cytokines and their
transcription factors in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in
healthy females with vitamin D deficiency (VDD).
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Subjects included 131 females with biochemical VDD randomized
to receive (a) oral cholecalciferol (60,000 IU/week for 8 weeks followed by
60,000 IU/fortnight (b) calcium (elemental calcium 500 mg twice/day) (c), dual
supplementation and (d) placebo for 6 months. The mRNA expression of
cathelicidin, Th1 (IFN-<U+03B3>) and Th2 (IL-4 and its antagonist-IL-4d2) cytokines and 
their transcription factors (T-bet, STAT4, GATA-3, STAT6) were measured in the
PBMC by real-time PCR before and after intervention.
RESULTS: Cholecalciferol-supplemented groups showed significant rise of mean
serum 25(OH)D (30.6 ± 7.51 and 28.6 ± 8.41 ng/ml). The expression of LL-37,
IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-4d2 and transcription factors were comparable in the four groups 
at baseline. Despite significant increase in mean serum 25(OH)D in the
cholecalciferol-supplemented groups, their mean mRNA transcripts of LL-37, IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-4, transcription factors and their IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4 and T-bet/GATA-3 ratios were
similar to that of calcium and placebo groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Six months of cholecalciferol/calcium supplementation in young
females with VDD do not lead to significant alteration in mRNA expression of
LL-37, Th1/Th2 cytokines and their transcription factors.

PMID: 24398649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e84450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084450.
eCollection 2013.

Association of STAT4 polymorphism with severe renal insufficiency in lupus
nephritis.

Bolin K(1), Sandling JK(2), Zickert A(3), Jönsen A(4), Sjöwall C(5), Svenungsson 
E(3), Bengtsson AA(4), Eloranta ML(1), Rönnblom L(6), Syvänen AC(2), Gunnarsson
I(3), Nordmark G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences and
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Rheumatology
Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital and Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Section of Rheumatology, Department Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (5)Rheumatology/AIR, Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(6)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden ; Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Lupus nephritis is a cause of significant morbidity in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) and its genetic background has not been completely clarified.
The aim of this investigation was to analyze single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) for association with lupus nephritis, its severe form proliferative
nephritis and renal outcome, in two Swedish cohorts. Cohort I (n = 567 SLE cases,
n = 512 controls) was previously genotyped for 5676 SNPs and cohort II (n = 145
SLE cases, n = 619 controls) was genotyped for SNPs in STAT4, IRF5, TNIP1 and
BLK. Case-control and case-only association analyses for patients with lupus
nephritis, proliferative nephritis and severe renal insufficiency were performed.
In the case-control analysis of cohort I, four highly linked SNPs in STAT4 were
associated with lupus nephritis with genome wide significance with p = 3.7 ×
10(-9), OR 2.20 for the best SNP rs11889341. Strong signals of association
between IRF5 and an HLA-DR3 SNP marker were also detected in the lupus nephritis 
case versus healthy control analysis (p <0.0001). An additional six genes showed 
an association with lupus nephritis with p <0.001 (PMS2, TNIP1, CARD11, ITGAM,
BLK and IRAK1). In the case-only meta-analysis of the two cohorts, the STAT4 SNP 
rs7582694 was associated with severe renal insufficiency with p = 1.6 × 10(-3)
and OR 2.22. We conclude that genetic variations in STAT4 predispose to lupus
nephritis and a worse outcome with severe renal insufficiency.

PMCID: PMC3873995
PMID: 24386384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. JAKSTAT. 2014 Oct 30;3(3):e955393. doi: 10.4161/21623988.2014.955393. eCollection
2014.

STAT4 is required for IL-23 responsiveness in Th17 memory cells and NKT cells.

Glosson-Byers NL(1), Sehra S(2), Kaplan MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics; Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research ;
Indianapolis, IN USA ; Department of Microbiology and Immunology; Indiana
University School of Medicine ; Indianapolis, IN USA. (2)Department of
Pediatrics; Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research ; Indianapolis, IN USA.

STAT4 is a critical mediator of inflammatory immunity and is required for all
known IL-12 biological responses, including the induction of IFN-<U+03B3> and
development of Th1 cells. We demonstrate that IL-23, an IL-12-related cytokine,
also requires STAT4 for optimal IL-17 secretion from memory T helper cells and
NKT cells. Although IL-23 stimulation had modest effects on STAT4 activation,
STAT4-deficiency results in reduced Il23r expression. These data demonstrate a
restricted requirement for STAT4 in innate and adaptive IL-17-secreting T cell
responses that might contribute to inflammatory immunity.

PMCID: PMC4580079
PMID: 26413419  [PubMed]


191. Cent Eur J Immunol. 2014;39(1):40-5. doi: 10.5114/ceji.2014.42121. Epub 2014 Apr 
17.

Effects of microRNA-21 on the interleukin 12/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 signaling pathway in asthmatic mice.

Wu SQ(1), Wang GL(1), Li LY(2), Ji J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Lishui University, Lishui, PR China. (2)The People's
Hospital of Lishui City, PR China. (3)Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, RP China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of microRNA-21 (miRNA-21) on the regulation of the
interleukin 12 (IL-12)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4)
pathway in the lung tissue of asthmatic mice.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty five male C57BL/6 mice were randomly divided into
three groups of 15 mice each: normal control, asthmatic model, and dexamethasone.
Our mouse model of allergic asathma was established using OVA sensitization and
challenge. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed to observe the
pathological changes in lung tissue morphology. Both the total cell number and
the amount of eosinophils (EOS) in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were
manually counted. The expression of miRNA-21 was detected by real time
quantitative PCR. The expression levels of IL-12 and STAT4 in lung tissue were
assayed via western blot, and immunohistochemistry was used to observe the
distribution of their expression.
RESULTS: The expression levels of miRNA-21 as well as the total number of BALF
cells and EOS were significantly higher in the asthmatic model group than in the 
control or dexamethasone groups, with significantly higher amounts found in the
dexamethasone group than in the control group. The expression levels of IL-12 and
STAT4 proteins were lower in the asthmatic model group than in the control and
dexamethasone groups, with a significantly lower expression of IL-12 and STAT4 in
the dexamethasone group than in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression level of miRNA-21 was significantly increased and the
expression level of IL-12 and STAT4 proteins was significantly decreased in
allergic asthmatic mice compared with normal control mice. These findings suggest
a role for miRNA-21 and the IL-12/STAT4 pathway in the development of allergic
asthma.

PMCID: PMC4439986
PMID: 26155098  [PubMed]


192. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 2014;(9-10):83-94.

[Contribution of non-HLA genes to juvenile idiopathic arthritis susceptibility].

[Article in Russian]

Savost'anov KV, Alexeeva EI, Chistiakov DA.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JAL4) is the most common chronic rheumatologic
disease in children. JIA is a group of disorders that share the clinical
manifestation of chronic joint inflammation. The Human Leukocyte Antigen region
(HLA) seems to be a major susceptibility locus for JIA that is estimated to
account for 17% of familial segregation of the disease. Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), case-control studies and meta-analyses of the post-GWAS era
revealed over 20 non-HLA loci conferring susceptibility to JIA. At least a half
of those are shared between JIA and rheumatoid arthritis, an adult rheumatic
disease, thereby suggesting for similarity of pathogenic mechanisms of both
diseases. New findings also suggest for a likely role of epigenetic alterations
in the pathogenesis of JIA that should be investigated in the future.

PMID: 25816648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2014 Mar;63(3):283-95. doi: 10.1007/s00262-013-1513-8.
Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Soypeptide lunasin in cytokine immunotherapy for lymphoma.

Chang HC(1), Lewis D, Tung CY, Han L, Henriquez SM, Voiles L, Lupov IP, Pelloso
D, Sinn AL, Pollok KE, de Lumen BO, Li F, Blum JS, Srivastava S, Robertson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Science, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, 723 West Michigan Street, SL310, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA,
huchang@iupui.edu.

Immunostimulatory cytokines can enhance anti-tumor immunity and are part of the
therapeutic armamentarium for cancer treatment. We have previously reported that 
post-transplant lymphoma patients have an acquired deficiency of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4, which results in defective IFN<U+03B3>
production during clinical immunotherapy. With the goal of further improving
cytokine-based immunotherapy, we examined the effects of a soybean peptide called
lunasin that synergistically works with cytokines on natural killer (NK) cells.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of healthy donors and post-transplant lymphoma
patients were stimulated with or without lunasin in the presence of IL-12 or
IL-2. NK activation was evaluated, and its tumoricidal activity was assessed
using in vitro and in vivo tumor models. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was 
performed to evaluate the histone modification of gene loci that are regulated by
lunasin and cytokine. Adding lunasin to IL-12- or IL-2-stimulated NK cells
demonstrated synergistic effects in the induction of IFNG and GZMB involved in
cytotoxicity. The combination of lunasin and cytokines (IL-12 plus IL-2) was
capable of restoring IFN<U+03B3> production by NK cells from post-transplant lymphoma
patients. In addition, NK cells stimulated with lunasin plus cytokines displayed 
higher tumoricidal activity than those stimulated with cytokines alone using in
vitro and in vivo tumor models. The underlying mechanism responsible for the
effects of lunasin on NK cells is likely due to epigenetic modulation on target
gene loci. Lunasin represents a different class of immune modulating agent that
may augment the therapeutic responses mediated by cytokine-based immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3928510
PMID: 24363024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Dec;17(23):3178-85.

Transcriptome network analysis reveals potential candidate genes for ankylosing
spondylitis.

Zhu ZQ(1), Tang JS, Cao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, JiangSu Province, China. xiaojiancao@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a chronic, inflammatory arthritis and 
autoimmune disease.
BACKGROUND: The main symptom of AS is inflammatory spinal pain; with time, some
patients develop ankylosis and spinal immobility. We aim to find cure available
for ankylosing spondylitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used the GSE11886 series to identify potential genes
that related to AS to construct a regulation network.
RESULTS: In the network, some of TFs and target genes have been proved related
with AS in previous study, such as NFKB1, STAT1, STAT4, TNFSF10, IL2RA, and
IL2RB. We also found some new TFs (Franscription Factors) and target genes
response to AS, such as BXDC5, and EGFR. Further analysis indicated some
significant pathways are associated with AS, including antigen processing and
presentation and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, etc.; although not
significant, there was evident that they play an important role in AS
progression, such as apoptosis and systemic lupus erythematosus.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, it is demonstrated that transcriptome network analysis is
useful in identification of the candidate genes in AS.

PMID: 24338459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Sep;48(9):671-5.

[Association of polymorphisms in signal transducer and activator of transcription
4 gene and the susceptibility to unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortions].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YG(1), You ZS(2), Wu ZG, Li ZY, Li J, Zhang XM, Fang LY, Jiang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (2)Email: youzeshan888@21cn.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between the polymorphisms of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene and the susceptibility
to unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion(URSA).
METHODS: PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) was used to
detect genotype 3 loca (rs7574865 G/T, rs10181656 C/G and rs16833431 C/T)
polymorphism of STAT4 in 246 URSA cases (URSA group) and 183 normal controls
(control group) .
RESULTS: (1)The frequencies of rs7574865 were genotype G/G of 36.2% (89/246) in
URSA group and 46.4% (85/183) in control group, genotype G/T of 47.2% (116/246)
in URSA group and 45.4% (83/183) in control group, and genotype T/T of 16.7%
(41/246) in URSA group and 8.2% (15/183) in control group, which reached
statistical difference (P < 0.05). The frequencies of rs10181656 were genotype CC
of 36.6% (90/246) in URSA group and 46.4% (85/183) in control group, genotype C/G
of 48.0% (118/246) in URSA group and 44.8% (82/183) in control group, and
genotype G/G of 15.4% (38/246) in URSA group and 8.7% (16/183) in control group, 
which reached statistical difference (P < 0.05). The carriers of rs7574865 T
allele and rs10181656 G allele increased the risk of URSA (OR = 1.51, 1.44, all P
< 0.05).(2) There was no different distribution in 3 genotypes (C/C, C/T, T/T)
and 2 alleles (C and T) of rs16833431 C/T between URSA patients and normal
controls (P = 0.43,0.48). (3) Timated haplotype frequency distribution of
rs7574865 G/T and rs10181656 C/G showed haplotype G-T conferring the
susceptibility to URSA (OR = 1.49, P < 0.01), but haplotype C-G could provide
protection on URSA (OR = 0.68, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of STAT4 gene might confer the susceptibility to URSA
by altering STAT4 function and (or) its expression.

PMID: 24332134  [PubMed - in process]


196. Am J Otolaryngol. 2014 Mar-Apr;35(2):130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2013.10.005.
Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Jak-Stat signaling pathway may play a role in the pathogenesis of cholesteatoma.

Eskiizmir G(1), Seda Vatansever H(2), Ozgür E(3), Aslan A(3), Tanyeri G(3),
Gözüaçik D(3), Kemal Özbilgin M(2), Cingi C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Celal Bayar University,
Manisa, Turkey. Electronic address: gorkemeskiizmir@yahoo.com. (2)Department of
Histology & Embryology, Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey. (3)Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery Osmangazi University,
Eskisehir, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Jak-Stat signaling pathway is one of the major signal transduction
cascades which regulates most of the cellular events such as cell proliferation, 
differentiation, cell migration and apoptosis. This study aims to determine the
activity of Jak-Stat signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of cholesteatoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cholesteatoma and skin samples were obtained from 10
patients who underwent tympanomastoidectomy for chronic otitis media with
cholesteatoma. Immunohistochemical analysis of cholesteatoma and skin was
performed using anti-Jak1, anti-Jak2, anti-Jak3, anti-Stat1, anti-Stat2,
anti-Stat3, anti-Stat4 and anti-Stat5 antibodies. The immunoreactivities in
cholesteatoma and skin were quantified using H-score measurement and statistical 
comparison was performed.
RESULTS: Jak1, Jak2, Jak3, Stat1 and Stat3 immunoreactivities were not detected
in cholesteatoma; in contrast to the skin (129.8; 226.7; 33.0; 66.4;115.9). In
addition, when H-score measurements of Stat2, Stat4 and Stat5 immunoreactivities 
were compared between cholesteatoma (172.8; 166.7; 120.0) and skin (400.0; 284.9;
292.0), statistically significant differences were found (p<0.0001, p<0.0001,
p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: A remarkable deficiency in the family members of Jak-Stat signaling 
pathway was demonstrated in cholesteatoma. Therefore, perturbations in Jak-Stat
signaling pathway may play a role in the pathogenesis of cholesteatoma.

© 2013.

PMID: 24321752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;29(12):1233-6.

[Relationship of reduced lung function with Th1/Th2 polarization, STAT4/6
expression in rats of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang C(1), Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Division, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, Wuhan 430065, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the correlations between lung function and Th1/Th2
polarization, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins in
rats of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Sixty rats were randomly divided into normal control group, sham group
and model group. The COPD rat models were developed by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
The changes of pulmonary function were detected at 28 d after modeling. The lung 
tissues of rats were observed by HE staining, and serum IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-12, and
IL-13 were determined by ELISA. The mRNA expressions of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 were
examined by PCR, and STAT4, STAT6 proteins in lung tissues were detected by
Western blotting.
RESULTS: Inflammation of lung tissues was more serious, the levels of serum
IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 and Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA and STAT4 protein in lung tissues were
higher, and lung function, the levels of serum IL-4 and IL-13, IL-4 mRNA and
STAT6 protein in lung tissues were lower in model group than those in normal
control and sham groups (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01). Correlation analysis showed that 
there were negative correlations between pulmonary function parameters and IFN-<U+03B3>,
Th1/Th2, STAT4 protein, and positive correlations between pulmonary function
parameters and IL-4, IL-13, IL-4 mRNA, STAT6 protein (P < 0.01 or P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The reduced lung function was found related to airway inflammation,
cell Th1/Th2 imbalance in COPD. STAT4 and STAT6 involve in the regulation of
Th1/Th2 cells. All of the above factors lead to the occurrence of COPD in rats.

PMID: 24321062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 29;8(11):e72892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072892.
eCollection 2013.

No evidence of association between common autoimmunity STAT4 and IL23R risk
polymorphisms and non-anterior uveitis.

Cénit MC(1), Márquez A, Cordero-Coma M, Gorroño-Echebarría MB, Fonollosa A, Adán 
A, Martínez-Berriotxoa A, Díaz Valle D, Pato E, Blanco R, Cañal J, Díaz-Llopis M,
García Serrano JL, de Ramón E, Del Rio MJ, Martín-Villa JM, Molins B,
Ortego-Centeno N, Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, IPBLN, CSIC, Granada,
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: STAT4 and IL23R loci represent common susceptibility genetic factors
in autoimmunity. We decided to investigate for the first time the possible role
of different STAT4/IL23R autoimmune disease-associated polymorphisms on the
susceptibility to develop non-anterior uveitis and its main clinical phenotypes.
METHODS: Four functional polymorphisms (rs3821236, rs7574865, rs7574070, and
rs897200) located within STAT4 gene as well as three independent polymorphisms
(rs7517847, rs11209026, and rs1495965) located within IL23R were genotyped using 
TaqMan® allelic discrimination in a total of 206 patients with non-anterior
uveitis and 1553 healthy controls from Spain.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences were found when allele and
genotype distributions were compared between non-anterior uveitis patients and
controls for any STAT4 (rs3821236: P=0.39, OR=1.12, CI 95%=0.87-1.43; rs7574865: 
P=0.59 OR=1.07, CI 95%=0.84-1.37; rs7574070: P=0.26, OR=0.89, CI 95%=0.72-1.10;
rs897200: P=0.22, OR=0.88, CI 95%=0.71-1.08;) or IL23R polymorphisms (rs7517847: 
P=0.49, OR=1.08, CI 95%=0.87-1.33; rs11209026: P=0.26, OR=0.78, CI 95%=0.51-1.21;
rs1495965: P=0.51, OR=0.93, CI 95%=0.76-1.15).
CONCLUSION: Our results do not support a relevant role, similar to that described
for other autoimmune diseases, of IL23R and STAT4 polymorphisms in the
non-anterior uveitis genetic predisposition. Further studies are needed to
discard a possible weak effect of the studied variant.

PMCID: PMC3843656
PMID: 24312163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):259-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301370. Epub 2013 Nov
27.

Altered IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated immunity and transcriptional expression patterns in
N-Ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced STAT4 mutants confer susceptibility to acute
typhoid-like disease.

Eva MM(1), Yuki KE, Dauphinee SM, Schwartzentruber JA, Pyzik M, Paquet M, Lathrop
M, Majewski J, Vidal SM, Malo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 0B1,
Canada;

Salmonella enterica is a ubiquitous Gram-negative intracellular bacterium that
continues to pose a global challenge to human health. The etiology of Salmonella 
pathogenesis is complex and controlled by pathogen, environmental, and host
genetic factors. In fact, patients immunodeficient in genes in the IL-12,
IL-23/IFN-<U+03B3> pathway are predisposed to invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella
infection. Using a forward genomics approach by N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)
germline mutagenesis in mice, we identified the Ity14 (Immunity to Typhimurium
locus 14) pedigree exhibiting increased susceptibility following in vivo
Salmonella challenge. A DNA-binding domain mutation (p.G418_E445) in Stat4
(Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription Factor 4) was the causative
mutation. STAT4 signals downstream of IL-12 to mediate transcriptional regulation
of inflammatory immune responses. In mutant Ity14 mice, the increased splenic and
hepatic bacterial load resulted from an intrinsic defect in innate cell function,
IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated immunity, and disorganized granuloma formation. We further show
that NK and NKT cells play an important role in mediating control of Salmonella
in Stat4(Ity14/Ity14) mice. Stat4(Ity14/Ity14) mice had increased expression of
genes involved in cell-cell interactions and communication, as well as increased 
CD11b expression on a subset of splenic myeloid dendritic cells, resulting in
compromised recruitment of inflammatory cells to the spleen during Salmonella
infection. Stat4(Ity14/Ity14) presented upregulated compensatory mechanisms,
although inefficient and ultimately Stat4(Ity14/Ity14) mice develop fatal
bacteremia. The following study further elucidates the pathophysiological impact 
of STAT4 during Salmonella infection.

PMID: 24285835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4002-3. doi: 10.2337/db13-1416.

STAT4: an initiator of meta-inflammation in adipose tissue?

Knudsen NH(1), Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Department of Nutrition, Division
of Biological Sciences, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4109-21.

PMCID: PMC3837030
PMID: 24264401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2014 Jan;26(1):56-63. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000003.

Genetics of Behçet's disease: lessons learned from genomewide association
studies.

Gül A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of
Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Behçet's disease is a complex disease, and genetic
susceptibility plays a critical role. This review aimed to discuss the recent
genomewide association study (GWAS) findings and their implications to the
pathogenesis of Behçet's disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: GWAS data confirmed the major role of HLA-B51 in Behçet's
disease susceptibility, and the discovery of epistatic interactions between
HLA-B51 and ERAP1 variants provided some hints about its possible pathogenic
mechanisms. Investigation of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) Class I region showed 
weaker but independent associations around HLA-A and HLA-C regions. Genomewide
studies also established associations with IL10, IL23R, CCR1, STAT4, KLRC4,
GIMAP2/GIMAP4, and UBAC2 genes in Behçet's disease patients of different
ethnicities. Deep resequencing of targeted genes identified additional
associations with rare variants in TLR4, MEFV, and NOD2 genes.
SUMMARY: GWAS data established a major step forward by providing insights into
the underlying mechanisms in Behçet's disease with the discovery of new
susceptibility genes. These variations may implicate defects in the sensing and
processing of microbial and endogenous danger signals as well as in the
regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses in Behçet's disease.
Association findings with HLA Class I antigens as well as IL23R, ERAP1, IL10, and
MEFV genes also suggest shared inflammatory pathways with spondyloarthropathies.

PMID: 24257369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Feb;44(2):450-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343477. Epub 2013 Nov
15.

STAT4 is critical for immunity but not for antileishmanial activity of
antimonials in experimental visceral leishmaniasis.

Oghumu S(1), Gupta G, Snider HM, Varikuti S, Terrazas CA, Papenfuss TL, Kaplan
MH, Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH,
USA; Department of Oral Biology, Ohio State University College of Dentistry,
Columbus, OH, USA.

We and others have previously shown that IL-12 is indispensable for immunity and 
is required for the optimal antiparasitic activity of antimonials in experimental
visceral leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania donovani. Here we investigated the
role of STAT4 in immunity against L. donovani using STAT4 knockout mice and also 
determined the effect of STAT4 deficiency in response to antimonial therapy. Upon
infection with L. donovani, stat4<U+207B>/<U+207B> BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice showed enhanced
susceptibility to Leishmania during late time points of infection which was
associated with a marked reduction in Th1 responses and hepatic immunopathology. 
Interestingly, these defects in Th1 responses in stat4<U+207B>/<U+207B> did not impair the
antimonial chemotherapy as both stat4<U+207B>/<U+207B> and WT mice showed comparable levels of 
parasite clearance from the liver and spleen. These findings highlight the role
of STAT4 in immunity to L. donovani infection and also provide evidence that
STAT4 is dispensable for antimonial-based chemotherapy.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3946220
PMID: 24242758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):939-48. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.09.013.

Lung airway-surveilling CXCR3(hi) memory CD8(+) T cells are critical for
protection against influenza A virus.

Slütter B(1), Pewe LL, Kaech SM, Harty JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Inducing memory CD8(+) T cells specific for conserved antigens from influenza A
virus (IAV) is a potential strategy for broadly protective vaccines. Here we show
that memory CD8(+) T cells in the airways played an important role in early
control of IAV. Expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 was critical for
memory CD8(+) T cells to populate the airways during the steady state and
vaccination approaches were designed to favor the establishment of memory CD8(+) 
T cells in the airways. Specifically, we found that interleukin-12 (IL-12)
signaling shortly after immunization limited CXCR3 expression on memory CD8(+)
T cells. Neutralization of IL-12 or adjuvants that did not induce high amounts of
IL-12 enhanced CXCR3 expression, sustained airway localization of memory CD8(+)
T cells, and resulted in superior protection against IAV.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3872058
PMID: 24238342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Nov 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Virus-specific CD4 and CD8 T cell responses in the absence of Th1-associated
transcription factors.

Mollo SB(1), Ingram JT, Kress RL, Zajac AJ, Harrington LE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Cell, Developmental, and Integrative Biology, Biology, and
Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Effector and memory CD4 and CD8 T cell responses are critical for the control of 
many intracellular pathogens. The development of these populations is governed by
transcription factors that molecularly control their differentiation, function,
and maintenance. Two transcription factors known to be involved in these
processes are Tbet and STAT4. Although Tbet has been shown to regulate CD8 T cell
fate decisions and effector CD4 T cell choices, the contribution of STAT4 is less
well understood. To address this, we examined the impact of STAT4 on T cell
responses in the presence or absence of Tbet, following LCMV infection by using
mice lacking Tbet, STAT4, or both transcription factors. STAT4 was not required
for Tbet or Eomes expression; however, virus-specific effector CD8 T cells are
skewed toward a memory-precursor phenotype in the absence of STAT4. This altered 
proportion of memory precursors did not result in an increase in memory CD8 T
cells after the resolution of the infection. We also demonstrate that
virus-specific effector and memory CD4 T cells formed independently of Tbet and
STAT4, although a slight reduction in the number of antigen-specific CD4 T cells 
was apparent in mice lacking both transcription factors. Collectively, we have
discovered distinct roles for Tbet and STAT4 in shaping the phenotype and
function of virus-specific T cell responses.

PMCID: PMC3984968
PMID: 24231259  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


205. Internist (Berl). 2014 Feb;55(2):128-34. doi: 10.1007/s00108-013-3305-9.

[Genetic risk factors for vasculitis].

[Article in German]

Holle JU(1), Gross WL.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Rheumatologie und Immunologie, Klinikum Bad Bramstedt,
Oskar-Alexander-Str. 26, 24576, Bad Bramstedt, Deutschland,
j.holle@klinikumbb.de.

Among the vasculitides, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have so far been
performed for Behçet's disease, Kawasaki disease, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (GPA) and microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). These studies delivered
valuable information with respect to the pathogenesis and therapeutic targets:
Apart from HLA-B51 and HLA-A26, distinct polymorphisms in cytokine (IL-10) or
cytokine receptor (IL-12R/IL-23R) genes, transcription factors (STAT4) and genes 
encoding for proteins involved in antigen presentation (ERAP-1) have been
identified as risk factors for Behçet's disease. The results of two GWAS
performed for antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) associated vasculitis
GPA and MPA in Europe and the USA confirmed that the HLA-DP locus is the most
relevant risk factor for GPA. Furthermore, the European GWAS confirmed SERPINA-1,
a deficiency allele of the a-1-antitrypsin gene, as a genetic risk factor in GPA 
and identified a polymorphism in the proteinase 3 gene (PR3), one of the target
antigens of ANCA, as a risk factor for GPA and PR3-ANCA-associated vasculitis.

PMID: 24217527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 28;8(10):e77315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077315.
eCollection 2013.

Replication of genome wide association studies on hepatocellular carcinoma
susceptibility loci in a Chinese population.

Chen K(1), Shi W, Xin Z, Wang H, Zhu X, Wu X, Li Z, Li H, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified three loci
(rs17401966 in KIF1B, rs7574865 in STAT4, rs9275319 in HLA-DQ) as being
associated with hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV-related
HCC) in a Chinese population, two loci (rs2596542 in MICA, rs9275572 located
between HLA-DQA and HLA-DQB) with hepatitis C virus-related HCC (HCV-related HCC)
in a Japanese population. In the present study, we sought to determine whether
these SNPs are predictive for HBV-related HCC development in other Chinese
population as well.
METHOD AND FINDINGS: We genotyped 4 SNPs, rs2596542, rs9275572, rs17401966,
rs7574865, in 506 HBV-related HCC patients and 772 chronic hepatitis B (CHB)
patients in Han Chinese by TaqMan methods. Odds ratio(OR)and 95% confidence
interval (CI) were calculated by logistic regression. In our case-control study, 
significant association between rs9275572 and HCC were observed (P = 0.02, OR =
0.73, 95% CI = 0.56-0.95). In the further haplotype analysis between rs2596542 at
6p21.33 and rs9275572 at 6p21.3, G-A showed a protective effect on HBV-related
HCC occurrence (P<0.001, OR = 0.66, 95% CI = 0.52-0.84).
CONCLUSION: These findings provided convincing evidence that rs9275572
significantly associated with HBV-related HCC.

PMCID: PMC3810470
PMID: 24204805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Nov;28(11):1431-5. doi: 10.1111/jdv.12299.
Epub 2013 Oct 31.

Genetic markers associated with progression in early mycosis fungoides.

Johnson VE(1), Vonderheid EC, Hess AD, Eischen CM, McGirt LY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Dermatology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is a rare, but potentially devastating
malignancy. It classically presents with cutaneous patches and plaques and can
progress to tumours on the skin with lymph node, blood and visceral involvement. 
While most patients with MF have a relatively benign disease course, a subset of 
patients will develop progressive disease that is often fatal.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify genetic markers in early MF
limited to the skin (stages IA-IIA) that distinguish those patients who will have
progressive disease from those who will not, so that early appropriate treatment 
may be instituted.
METHODS: The study includes 18 patients who were diagnosed with early stage MF at
the time of biopsy and had follow-up to determine which patients developed
progressive disease. RNA was extracted from skin biopsy specimens and analysed
for expression of CD3, FOXP3, IFN<U+03B3>, Interleukin (IL)-4, IL-13, KIR3DL2, MICB,
PLS3 and STAT4 by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Reduced expression of FOXP3 and STAT4 and increased
expression of IL-4 relative to CD3 expression levels were significantly
associated with MF progression. Further studies will be needed to fully assess
the usefulness of these genetic markers to predict disease progression and guide 
treatment options in patients diagnosed with early MF.

© 2013 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMCID: PMC4007415
PMID: 24171863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2013 May-Jun;31(3 Suppl 77):108-17. Epub 2013 Sep 9.

Behçet's syndrome: a critical digest of the 2012-2013 literature.

Hatemi G(1), Seyahi E, Fresko I, Hamuryudan V.

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Istanbul, Turkey. gulenhatemi@yahoo.com.

Recent work on the epidemiology of Behçet's syndrome confirm the previous
contention that the prevalence increases from North to South and that the disease
follows a more severe course in patients with an early age of onset, also when
specifically studied in patients with eye and gastrointestinal involvement.
Imputation analyses of genome wide association studies revealed new associations 
such as ERAP-1, CCR1-CCR3, KLRC4 and STAT4. Further work suggested that the BS
associated variant of STAT4 is not related to the previously reported one
associated with autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic
lupus erythematosus. The prognosis of eye involvement seems to have improved over
the last decade with better visual acuity and less frequent severe complications 
in patients reported in the 2000s compared to the 1990s. Immunosuppresssives and 
corticosteroids were observed to improve the outcome of cardiac involvement in
BS. Recurrence and complications were common in these patients when surgery was
performed without immunosuppressives. The cognitive dysfunction in BS patients
with neurological involvement seemed to be severely impaired and worse than that 
of multiple sclerosis patients, suggesting a more severe 'frontal'-executive
dysfunction. Gastrointestinal involvement seemed to be brought to a remission in 
the majority of BS within 5 years, with about one fourth of the patients
following a relapsing or chronic disease course. TNF-a inhibitors have become
standard treatment for patients resistant to conventional immunosuppressives.
Switching to another biologic can be effective when the first or even the second 
biologic agent fails or is stopped due to adverse events.

PMID: 24064024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4119-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-505180. Epub 2013 
Oct 18.

The histone methyltransferase Ezh2 is a crucial epigenetic regulator of
allogeneic T-cell responses mediating graft-versus-host disease.

He S(1), Xie F, Liu Y, Tong Q, Mochizuki K, Lapinski PE, Mani RS, Reddy P,
Mochizuki I, Chinnaiyan AM, Mineishi S, King PD, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine.

Posttranscriptional modification of histones by methylation plays an important
role in regulating Ag-driven T-cell responses. We have recently drawn
correlations between allogeneic T-cell responses and the histone
methyltransferase Ezh2, which catalyzes histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. The 
functional relevance of Ezh2 in T-cell alloimmunity remains unclear. Here, we
identify a central role of Ezh2 in regulating allogeneic T-cell proliferation,
differentiation, and function. Conditional loss of Ezh2 in donor T cells
inhibited graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in mice after allogeneic bone marrow
(BM) transplantation. Although Ezh2-deficient T cells were initially activated to
proliferate upon alloantigenic priming, their ability to undergo continual
proliferation and expansion was defective during late stages of GVHD induction.
This effect of Ezh2 ablation was largely independent of the proapoptotic molecule
Bim. Unexpectedly, as a gene silencer, Ezh2 was required to promote the
expression of transcription factors Tbx21 and Stat4. Loss of Ezh2 in T cells
specifically impaired their differentiation into interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-producing
effector cells. However, Ezh2 ablation retained antileukemia activity in
alloreactive T cells, leading to improved overall survival of the recipients. Our
findings justify investigation of modulating Ezh2 as a therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of GVHD and other T cell-mediated inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC3862282
PMID: 24141370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1284-92. doi: 10.1038/ng.2792. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Variants at multiple loci implicated in both innate and adaptive immune responses
are associated with Sjögren's syndrome.

Lessard CJ(1), Li H, Adrianto I, Ice JA, Rasmussen A, Grundahl KM, Kelly JA,
Dozmorov MG, Miceli-Richard C, Bowman S, Lester S, Eriksson P, Eloranta ML, Brun 
JG, Gøransson LG, Harboe E, Guthridge JM, Kaufman KM, Kvarnström M, Jazebi H,
Cunninghame Graham DS, Grandits ME, Nazmul-Hossain AN, Patel K, Adler AJ,
Maier-Moore JS, Farris AD, Brennan MT, Lessard JA, Chodosh J, Gopalakrishnan R,
Hefner KS, Houston GD, Huang AJ, Hughes PJ, Lewis DM, Radfar L, Rohrer MD, Stone 
DU, Wren JD, Vyse TJ, Gaffney PM, James JA, Omdal R, Wahren-Herlenius M, Illei
GG, Witte T, Jonsson R, Rischmueller M, Rönnblom L, Nordmark G, Ng WF; UK Primary
Sjögren's Syndrome Registry, Mariette X, Anaya JM, Rhodus NL, Segal BM, Scofield 
RH, Montgomery CG, Harley JB, Sivils KL.

Author information: 
(1)1] Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. [2] Department of Pathology,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Sjögren's syndrome is a common autoimmune disease (affecting ~0.7% of European
Americans) that typically presents as keratoconjunctivitis sicca and xerostomia. 
Here we report results of a large-scale association study of Sjögren's syndrome. 
In addition to strong association within the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region
at 6p21 (Pmeta = 7.65 × 10(-114)), we establish associations with IRF5-TNPO3
(Pmeta = 2.73 × 10(-19)), STAT4 (Pmeta = 6.80 × 10(-15)), IL12A (Pmeta = 1.17 ×
10(-10)), FAM167A-BLK (Pmeta = 4.97 × 10(-10)), DDX6-CXCR5 (Pmeta = 1.10 ×
10(-8)) and TNIP1 (Pmeta = 3.30 × 10(-8)). We also observed suggestive
associations (Pmeta < 5 × 10(-5)) with variants in 29 other regions, including
TNFAIP3, PTTG1, PRDM1, DGKQ, FCGR2A, IRAK1BP1, ITSN2 and PHIP, among others.
These results highlight the importance of genes that are involved in both innate 
and adaptive immunity in Sjögren's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3867192
PMID: 24097067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1361-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2779. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

A genome-wide association study in Han Chinese identifies a susceptibility locus 
for primary Sjögren's syndrome at 7q11.23.

Li Y(1), Zhang K, Chen H, Sun F, Xu J, Wu Z, Li P, Zhang L, Du Y, Luan H, Li X,
Wu L, Li H, Wu H, Li X, Li X, Zhang X, Gong L, Dai L, Sun L, Zuo X, Xu J, Gong H,
Li Z, Tong S, Wu M, Li X, Xiao W, Wang G, Zhu P, Shen M, Liu S, Zhao D, Liu W,
Wang Y, Huang C, Jiang Q, Liu G, Liu B, Hu S, Zhang W, Zhang Z, You X, Li M, Hao 
W, Zhao C, Leng X, Bi L, Wang Y, Zhang F, Shi Q, Qi W, Zhang X, Jia Y, Su J, Li
Q, Hou Y, Wu Q, Xu D, Zheng W, Zhang M, Wang Q, Fei Y, Zhang X, Li J, Jiang Y,
Tian X, Zhao L, Wang L, Zhou B, Li Y, Zhao Y, Zeng X, Ott J, Wang J, Zhang F.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of
Education, Beijing, China. [2].

Primary Sjögren's syndrome is one of the most common autoimmune diseases. So far,
genetic studies of Sjögren's syndrome have relied mostly on candidate gene
approaches. To identify new genetic susceptibility loci for primary Sjögren's
syndrome, we performed a three-stage genome-wide association study in Han
Chinese. In the discovery stage, we analyzed 556,134 autosomal SNPs in 542 cases 
and 1,050 controls. We then validated promising associations in 2 replication
stages comprising 1,303 cases and 2,727 controls. The combined analysis
identified GTF2I at 7q11.23 (rs117026326: Pcombined = 1.31 × 10(-53), combined
odds ratio (ORcombined) = 2.20) as a new susceptibility locus for primary
Sjögren's syndrome. Our analysis also confirmed previously reported associations 
in Europeans in the regions of STAT4, TNFAIP3 and the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC). Fine mapping of the region around GTF2I showed that rs117026326 in
GTF2I had the most significant association, with associated SNPs extending from
GTF2I to GTF2IRD1-GTF2I.

PMID: 24097066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Apr;21(4):521-32. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.132. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

Mapping the p53 transcriptome universe using p53 natural polymorphs.

Wang B(1), Niu D(1), Lam TH(2), Xiao Z(1), Ren EC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Immunology Network, A*STAR, 8A Biomedical Grove, 138648 Singapore.
(2)1] Singapore Immunology Network, A*STAR, 8A Biomedical Grove, 138648 Singapore
[2] Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 117597 Singapore.

The tumor suppressor p53 has defined roles in varied cellular processes including
apoptosis and DNA repair. While conventional genomic approaches have suggested a 
large number of p53 targets, there is a need for a systematic approach to
validate these putative genes. We developed a method to identify and validate
p53's transcriptional behavior by utilizing 16 non-synonymous p53
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants. Five SNPs located within the
DNA-binding domain of p53 were found to be functionally null, whereas the other
11 SNPs were p53WT-like in behavior. By integrating p53 ChIP-seq analysis with
transcriptome data from the p53 SNP variants, 592 genes were identified as novel 
p53 targets. Many of these genes mapped to previously less well-characterized
aspects of p53 function, such as cell signalling, metabolism, central nervous
system, and immune system. These data provide pivotal insights into the
involvement of p53 in diverse pathways of normal physiological processes and open
new avenues for investigation of p53 function.

PMCID: PMC3950315
PMID: 24076587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 Jul;44(4):558-62.

[Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 gene polymorphisms associated
with dilated cardiomyopathy in Chinese Han population].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu K(1), Peng Y, Li YJ, Xie Q, Yang H, Zhou B, Rao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between signal transducer and activator
of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene polymorphism and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).
METHODS: Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) (rs7574865 and rs11889341) in 
STAT4 gene were determined using PCR-RFLP method. The genotype and allele
frequencies of these two SNPs were compared between 294 DCM patients and 334
normal controls to test whether SNPs in STAT4 was associated with DCM.
RESULTS: Compared to healthy controls, the frequency of GG genotype (55.8% in
patients vs. 47.9% in controls, P = 0.039) and the G allele in rs11889341 (76.4% 
in patients vs. 70.7% in controls, P = 0.023) were significantly increased in D C
M patients. We found that increased DCM risk is associated with CC+AC genotypes
of rs574865 (94.2% in patients vs. 89.2% in controls, P = 0.025). No significant 
difference was observed in the distribution of allele frequency in rs7874865
between DCM patients and the controls.
CONCLUSION: SNPs in STAT4 gene is associated with DCM. G allele and GG genotype
in rs11889341, and CC+AC genotypes in rs7574865, may be associated with
significantly increased risk of DCM.

PMID: 24059108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1190-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.2712. Epub 2013 Sep 22.

Expression and regulation of intergenic long noncoding RNAs during T cell
development and differentiation.

Hu G(1), Tang Q, Sharma S, Yu F, Escobar TM, Muljo SA, Zhu J, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)1] Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2].

Although intergenic long noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been linked to gene
regulation in various tissues, little is known about lincRNA transcriptomes in
the T cell lineages. Here we identified 1,524 lincRNA clusters in 42 T cell
samples, from early T cell progenitors to terminally differentiated helper T cell
subsets. Our analysis revealed highly dynamic and cell-specific expression
patterns for lincRNAs during T cell differentiation. These lincRNAs were located 
in genomic regions enriched for genes that encode proteins with immunoregulatory 
functions. Many were bound and regulated by the key transcription factors T-bet, 
GATA-3, STAT4 and STAT6. We found that the lincRNA LincR-Ccr2-5'AS, together with
GATA-3, was an essential component of a regulatory circuit in gene expression
specific to the TH2 subset of helper T cells and was important for the migration 
of TH2 cells.

PMCID: PMC3805781
PMID: 24056746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Dec;35(6):1829-37. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.09.011.
Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Genomic structure and immunological response of an STAT4 family member from rock 
bream (Oplegnathus fasciatus).

Premachandra HK(1), Elvitigala DA, Bathige SD, Whang I, Lee Y, De Zoysa M, Lee J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Life Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences, Jeju
National University, Jeju Special Self-Governing Province 690-756, Republic of
Korea.

The Janus tyrosine kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(STAT) signaling pathway plays a critical role in host defense against viral and 
bacterial infections. STAT proteins are a group of transcription factors that
translocate into the nucleus and are critical for the induction of many genes
crucial for the allergic cascade and immune defense. In the present study, a
member of the STAT4 family was identified from rock bream (RbSTAT4) at the
genomic level, and its transcriptional regulation in response to different
pathological stimuli under in vivo conditions was investigated. The genomic
sequence of RbSTAT4 is approximately 15.6 kb in length, including a putative core
promoter region and 24 exons interrupted by 23 introns. Bioinformatics analysis
of RbSTAT4 identified the presence of typical and conserved features of the STAT4
family, including the STAT_int domain, STAT alpha domain, STAT bind domain,
linker domain, SH2 domain, and transcriptional activation domain. According to
the phylogenetic analysis, RbSTAT4 exhibited the closest evolutionary proximity
with the STAT4 member from mandarin fish (Siniperca chuatsi). The RbSTAT4
transcript in healthy rock breams was detected to have ubiquitous expression in
11 different tissues examined, where liver and spleen tissues showed moderate
expressions compared with the highest expression level detected in gill tissue.
The time-course in vivo immune stimulation of rock bream with lipopolysaccharide,
poly I:C, live Edwardsiella tarda, and rock bream iridovirus caused significant
transcriptional regulation of the RbSTAT4 expression in gill, head kidney, and
spleen tissues, suggesting that RbSTAT4 is involved in immune regulation
mechanisms and/or signaling cascades, orchestrating against both bacterial and
viral pathogens.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;31(7):522-5.

[The effect of suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides on interferon-<U+03B3> and
phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription 4
expression of silica-induced pulmonary inflammation in mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Lei P(1), Kong HX, Zhang JS, He N, Wang SX, Weng YG.

Author information: 
(1)College of Laboratory Medicine of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effect of suppressive
oligodeoxynucleotides (Sup ODN) on interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and signal transducers
and activators of transcription (pSTAT4) expression of Silica-induced pulmonary
inflammation in Mice.
METHODS: Sixty Balb/c mice were randomly divided into 4 groups, normal control
group, silicious group, suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides (Sup ODN) group,
control oligodeoxynucleotides (Con ODN) group. Except the normal control group
injected normal saline, the rest groups were induced by the intratracheal
instillation of 0.1 ml (5 g/L) of sterilized silica suspension. Sup ODN group and
Con ODN group were treated by i.p. injection of 0.3 ml (1mg/mL) of suppressive or
control ODN 3 h before silica administration. After 7 days, the animals were
killed and levels of IFN-<U+03B3> were detected by ELISA. The pathologic changes in lung
tissues of mice were observed with HE staining. Expressions of IFN-<U+03B3> and pSTAT4
in lung tissue were detected with immunohistochemistry and quantified by
Image-Pro Plus 7.0.
RESULTS: HE staining showed that the lung tissue of silicious group were damaged 
seriously than Sup ODN group. Compared with the normal control group (serum:
(280.1±41.3) pg/ml, lung tissue: (0.249±0.373), IFN-<U+03B3> increased in silicious
group (serum: (886.3±81.7) pg/ml, lung tissue: (0.270±0.300) (P < 0.05). Compared
with the normal control group and Con ODN group [(894.5±91.6) pg/ml], IFN-<U+03B3> in
the serum of Sup ODN group decreased significantly (P < 0.01). Compared with the 
silicious group , IFN-<U+03B3> in lung tissue decreased in Sup ODN group (0.241±0.250)
(P < 0.05). Compared with the normal control group (0.279±0.353), pSTAT4 in lung 
tissue increased significantly in silicious group (0.313±0.231) (P < 0.01).
Compared with the silicious group, pSTAT4 in lung tissue decreased significantly 
in Sup ODN group (0.269±0.523) (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Sup ODN attained protective effect on Silica treated mice by
suppressing expression of IFN-<U+03B3> and pSTAT4.

PMID: 24053920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Front Immunol. 2013 Sep 6;4:266. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00266.

The role of type 1 interferon in systemic sclerosis.

Wu M(1), Assassi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , Houston, TX ,
USA.

Systemic Sclerosis (Scleroderma, SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by
vasculopathy, inflammation, and fibrosis that can lead to loss of organ function.
Type I interferons (IFNs) are family of cytokines that mitigate the deleterious
effects of viral and bacterial infections in the innate immunity system. Past
several years, research efforts have been focused on the role of type I IFN and
IFN-inducible genes in the pathogenesis of SSc. Polymorphisms in the Interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-5, IRF7, and IRF8 are associated with SSc, Similarly,
polymorphism of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)-4, has
been established as a genetic risk factor of SSc. IRFs and STAT4 proteins are key
activators of type I IFN signaling pathways. An IFN signature (increased
expression and activation of IFN-regulated genes) has been observed in the
peripheral blood and skin biopsy samples of patients with SSc. Furthermore, a
plasma IFN-inducible chemokine score correlated with markers of disease severity 
and autoantibody subtypes in SSc. In this review, we summarize our current
knowledge of the role of type I IFNs and IFN-inducible genes in the pathogenesis 
of SSc and their potential role as biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3764426
PMID: 24046769  [PubMed]


218. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e74375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074375. eCollection
2013.

Lack of association of variants previously associated with anti-TNF medication
response in rheumatoid arthritis patients: results from a homogeneous Greek
population.

Zervou MI(1), Myrthianou E, Flouri I, Plant D, Chlouverakis G, Castro-Giner F,
Rapsomaniki P, Barton A, Boumpas DT, Sidiropoulos P, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, Medical School of Crete, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Treatment strategies blocking tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) have proven very
successful in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), showing beneficial effects
in approximately 50-60% of the patients. However, a significant subset of
patients does not respond to anti-TNF agents, for reasons that are still unknown.
The aim of this study was to validate five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
of PTPRC, CD226, AFF3, MyD88 and CHUK gene loci that have previously been
reported to predict anti-TNF outcome. In addition, two markers of RA
susceptibility, namely TRAF1/C5 and STAT4 were assessed, in a cohort of
anti-TNF-treated RA patients, from the homogeneous Greek island of Crete, Greece.
The RA patient cohort consisted of 183 patients treated with either of 3 anti-TNF
biologic agents (infliximab, adalimumab and etanercept) from the Clinic of
Rheumatology of the University Hospital of Crete. The SNPs were genotyped by
TaqMan assays or following the Restriction Fragments Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs)
approach. Disease activity score in 28 joints (DAS28) at baseline and after 6
months were available for all patients and analysis of good versus poor response 
at 6 months was performed for each SNP. None of the 7 genetic markers correlated 
with treatment response. We conclude that the gene polymorphisms under
investigation are not strongly predictive of anti-TNF response in RA patients
from Greece.

PMCID: PMC3769251
PMID: 24040234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 6;8(9):e73146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073146. eCollection 
2013.

c-Myc is essential to prevent endothelial pro-inflammatory senescent phenotype.

Florea V(1), Bhagavatula N, Simovic G, Macedo FY, Fock RA, Rodrigues CO.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

The proto-oncogene c-Myc is vital for vascular development and promotes tumor
angiogenesis, but the mechanisms by which it controls blood vessel growth remain 
unclear. In the present work we investigated the effects of c-Myc knockdown in
endothelial cell functions essential for angiogenesis to define its role in the
vasculature. We provide the first evidence that reduction in c-Myc expression in 
endothelial cells leads to a pro-inflammatory senescent phenotype, features
typically observed during vascular aging and pathologies associated with
endothelial dysfunction. c-Myc knockdown in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells using lentivirus expressing specific anti-c-Myc shRNA reduced proliferation
and tube formation. These functional defects were associated with morphological
changes, increase in senescence-associated-ß-galactosidase activity, upregulation
of cell cycle inhibitors and accumulation of c-Myc-deficient cells in G1-phase,
indicating that c-Myc knockdown in endothelial cells induces senescence. Gene
expression analysis of c-Myc-deficient endothelial cells showed that senescent
phenotype was accompanied by significant upregulation of growth factors, adhesion
molecules, extracellular-matrix components and remodeling proteins, and a cluster
of pro-inflammatory mediators, which include Angptl4, Cxcl12, Mdk, Tgfb2 and
Tnfsf15. At the peak of expression of these cytokines, transcription factors
known to be involved in growth control (E2f1, Id1 and Myb) were downregulated,
while those involved in inflammatory responses (RelB, Stat1, Stat2 and Stat4)
were upregulated. Our results demonstrate a novel role for c-Myc in the
prevention of vascular pro-inflammatory phenotype, supporting an important
physiological function as a central regulator of inflammation and endothelial
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3765198
PMID: 24039874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 30;8(8):e72989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072989. eCollection
2013.

Testing agents for prevention or reversal of type 1 diabetes in rodents.

Grant CW(1), Moran-Paul CM, Duclos SK, Guberski DL, Arreaza-Rubín G, Spain LM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Models (BRM), Inc., Worcester and Springfield,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

We report the results of an independent laboratory's tests of novel agents to
prevent or reverse type 1 diabetes (T1D) in the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse,
BioBreeding diabetes prone (BBDP) rat, and multiple autoimmune disease prone
(MAD) rat models. Methods were developed to better mimic human clinical trials,
including: prescreening, randomization, blinding, and improved glycemic care of
the animals. Agents were suggested by the research community in an open call for 
proposals, and selected for testing by an NIDDK appointed independent review
panel. Agents selected for testing to prevent diabetes at later stages of
progression in a rodent model were a STAT4 antagonist (DT22669), alpha1
anti-trypsin (Aralast NP), celastrol (a natural product with anti-inflammatory
properties), and a Macrophage Inflammatory Factor inhibitor (ISO-092). Agents
tested for reversal of established T1D in rodent models were: alpha1 anti-trypsin
(Aralast NP), tolerogenic peptides (Tregitopes), and a long-acting formulation of
GLP-1 (PGC-GLP-1). None of these agents were seen to prevent or reverse type 1
diabetes, while the positive control interventions were effective: anti-CD3
treatment provided disease reversal in the NOD mouse, dexamethasone prevented T1D
induction in the MAD rat, and cyclosporin prevented T1D in the BBDP rat. For some
tested agents, details of previous formulation, delivery, or dosing, as well as
laboratory procedure, availability of reagents and experimental design, could
have impacted our ability to confirm prior reports of efficacy in preclinical
animal models. In addition, the testing protocols utilized here provided
detection of effects in a range commonly used in placebo controlled clinical
trials (for example, 50% effect size), and thus may have been underpowered to
observe more limited effects. That said, we believe the results compiled here,
showing good control and repeatability, confirm the feasibility of screening
diverse test agents in an independent laboratory.

PMCID: PMC3758263
PMID: 24023664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 30;8(8):e72551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072551. eCollection
2013.

Analysis of gender differences in genetic risk: association of TNFAIP3
polymorphism with male childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus in the
Japanese population.

Kadota K(1), Mori M, Yanagimachi M, Miyamae T, Hara T, Kanetaka T, Nozawa T,
Kikuchi M, Hara R, Imagawa T, Kaneko T, Yokota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic multisystem
autoimmune disorder influenced by genetic background and environmental factors.
Our aim here was to replicate findings of associations between 7 of the
implicated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in IRF5, BLK, STAT4, TNFAIP3,
SPP1, TNIP1 and ETS1 genes with susceptibility to childhood-onset SLE in the
Japanese population. In particular, we focused on gender differences in allelic
frequencies.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The 7 SNPs were genotyped using TaqMan assays in 
75 patients with childhood-onset SLE and in 190 healthy controls. The
relationship between the cumulative number of risk alleles and SLE manifestations
was explored in childhood-onset SLE. Logistic regression was used to test the
effect of each polymorphism on susceptibility to SLE, and Wilcoxon rank sum
testing was used for comparison of total risk alleles. Data on rs7574865 in the
STAT4 gene and rs9138 in SPP1 were replicated for associations with SLE when
comparing cases and controls (corrected P values ranging from 0.0043 to 0.027).
The rs2230926 allele of TNFAIP3 was associated with susceptibility to SLE in
males, but after Bonferroni correction there were no significant associations
with any of the other four SNPs in IRF5, BLK, TNIP1 and ETS1 genes. The
cumulative number of risk alleles was significantly increased in childhood-onset 
SLE relative to healthy controls (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0000041). Male SLE patients had a
slightly but significantly higher frequency of the TNFAIP3 (rs2230926G) risk
allele than female patients (odds ratio [OR]<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.05, 95% confidence interval
[95%CI]<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.46-11.2 P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Associations of polymorphisms in STAT4 and SPP1 with childhood-onset
SLE were confirmed in a Japanese population. Although these are preliminary
results for a limited number of cases, TNFAIP3 rs2230926G may be an important
predictor of disease onset in males. We also replicated findings that the
cumulative number of risk alleles was significantly increased in childhood-onset 
SLE.

PMCID: PMC3758304
PMID: 24023622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Lupus. 2013 Nov;22(13):1336-40. doi: 10.1177/0961203313504479. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

A redundant epistatic interaction between IRF5 and STAT4 of the type I interferon
pathway in susceptibility to lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.

Kim K(1), Cho SK, Han TU, Kim JH, Kang SJ, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Two transcription factors in the type I interferon pathway, IRF5 and
STAT4, have been genetically associated with susceptibility to both systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This study aimed to
determine whether these two genes interact with each other to affect the disease 
susceptibilities.
METHODS: The genetic interactions between IRF5 and STAT4 polymorphisms in SLE and
RA susceptibility were examined using the epistasis options in PLINK software.
This study analyzes the genetic data from 2558 unrelated Korean participants
including 589 SLE patients, 987 RA patients, and 982 controls.
RESULTS: All 12 polymorphisms were individually associated with SLE
susceptibility (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.49<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8) to 0.00360). Among the three SLE-associated
polymorphisms of IRF5, rs77571059, alternatively called CGGGG(3-4) indel,
exhibited the lowest p value (4.60<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) and accounted for the observed
associations of the other two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Among the
nine SLE-associated SNPs of STAT4, rs16833215 exhibited the lowest p value
(2.49<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) and accounted for all the other associations. These two
polymorphisms, rs77571059 of IRF5 and rs16833215 of STAT4, interacted with each
other for SLE susceptibility in a redundant manner (ORinteraction<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.77, P
epistasis<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.040). Furthermore, these two polymorphisms, which had been
individually associated with RA susceptibility, also interacted for RA
susceptibility in the same manner (ORinteraction<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.75, P epistasis<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: A redundant interaction between IRF5 and STAT4 polymorphisms was
found in susceptibility to the type I interferon pathway-associated rheumatic
autoimmune diseases, SLE and RA, calling for further studies on confirmation of
these findings.

PMID: 24014567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 22;8(8):e71382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071382. eCollection
2013.

Association of STAT4 polymorphisms with susceptibility to type-1 autoimmune
hepatitis in the Japanese population.

Migita K(1), Nakamura M, Abiru S, Jiuchi Y, Nagaoka S, Komori A, Hashimoto S,
Bekki S, Yamasaki K, Komatsu T, Shimada M, Kouno H, Hijioka T, Kohjima M,
Nakamuta M, Kato M, Yoshizawa K, Ohta H, Nakamura Y, Takezaki E, Nishimura H,
Sato T, Ario K, Hirashima N, Oohara Y, Naganuma A, Muro T, Sakai H, Mita E, Sugi 
K, Yamashita H, Makita F, Yatsuhashi H, Ishibashi H, Yasunami M.

Author information: 
(1)NHO-AIH Study Group, Nagasaki Medical Center, Omura, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recent studies demonstrated an association of STAT4
polymorphisms with autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus and
rheumatoid arthritis, indicating multiple autoimmune diseases share common
susceptibility genes. We therefore investigated the influence of STAT4
polymorphisms on the susceptibility and phenotype of type-1 autoimmune hepatitis 
in a Japanese National Hospital Organization (NHO) AIH multicenter cohort study.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genomic DNA from 460 individuals of Japanese
origin including 230 patients with type-1 autoimmune hepatitis and 230 healthy
controls was analyzed for two single nucleotide polymorphisms in the STAT4 gene
(rs7574865, rs7582694). The STAT4 rs7574865T allele conferred risk for type-1
autoimmune hepatitis (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.61, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.23-2.11; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001), and patients
without accompanying autoimmune diseases exhibited an association with the
rs7574865T allele (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.50, 95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.13-1.99; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005). Detailed
genotype-phenotype analysis of type-1 autoimmune hepatitis patients with (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>44)
or without liver cirrhosis (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>186) demonstrated that rs7574865 was not
associated with the development of liver cirrhosis and phenotype (biochemical
data and the presence of auto-antibodies).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first study to show a positive association 
between a STAT4 polymorphism and type-1 autoimmune hepatitis, suggesting that
autoimmune hepatitis shares a gene commonly associated with risk for other
autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3750035
PMID: 23990947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3876-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300530. Epub 2013
Aug 28.

Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides containing suppressive TTAGGG motifs inhibit AIM2
inflammasome activation.

Kaminski JJ(1), Schattgen SA, Tzeng TC, Bode C, Klinman DM, Fitzgerald KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605.

Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) comprised of the immunosuppressive motif
TTAGGG block TLR9 signaling, prevent STAT1 and STAT4 phosphorylation and
attenuate a variety of inflammatory responses in vivo. In this study, we
demonstrate that such suppressive ODN abrogate activation of cytosolic nucleic
acid-sensing pathways. Pretreatment of dendritic cells and macrophages with the
suppressive ODN-A151 abrogated type I IFN, TNF-a, and ISG induction in response
to cytosolic dsDNA. In addition, A151 abrogated caspase-1-dependent IL-1ß and
IL-18 maturation in dendritic cells stimulated with dsDNA and murine CMV.
Inhibition was dependent on A151's phosphorothioate backbone, whereas
substitution of the guanosine residues for adenosine negatively affected potency.
A151 mediates these effects by binding to AIM2 in a manner that is competitive
with immune-stimulatory DNA and as a consequence prevents AIM2 inflammasome
complex formation. Collectively, these findings reveal a new route by which
suppressive ODNs modulate the immune system and unveil novel applications for
suppressive ODNs in the treatment of infectious and autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3878640
PMID: 23986531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Genes Immun. 2013 Dec;14(8):527-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.45. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Association of IRF5 polymorphism with MPO-ANCA-positive vasculitis in a Japanese 
population.

Kawasaki A(1), Inoue N, Ajimi C, Sada KE, Kobayashi S, Yamada H, Furukawa H,
Sumida T, Tohma S, Miyasaka N, Matsuo S, Ozaki S, Hashimoto H, Makino H, Harigai 
M, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan [2] School of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) are shared susceptibility genes for various autoimmune
diseases. In this study, we investigated whether these genes also contribute to
susceptibility to anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated
vasculitis (AAV) in a Japanese population. A case-control study was carried out
on IRF5 rs10954213 and STAT4 rs7574865 in 232 Japanese myeloperoxidase
(MPO)-ANCA-positive AAV patients, including 177 microscopic polyangiitis and 710 
healthy controls. IRF5 rs10954213G was significantly increased in
MPO-ANCA-positive AAV (additive model, P=0.023, odds ratio=1.27, 95% confidence
interval=1.03-1.57). The risk allele was previously shown to be associated with
lower mRNA level of IRF5. On the other hand, significant association of STAT4
rs7574865T with AAV was not detected. These observations suggested that IRF5 may 
contribute to susceptibility to MPO-ANCA-positive AAV in a Japanese population.

PMID: 23985571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4109-21. doi: 10.2337/db12-1275. Epub 2013 Aug 12.

STAT4 deficiency reduces obesity-induced insulin resistance and adipose tissue
inflammation.

Dobrian AD(1), Galkina EV, Ma Q, Hatcher M, Aye SM, Butcher MJ, Ma K, Haynes BA, 
Kaplan MH, Nadler JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk, Virginia; the.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4002-3.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 is one of the seven
members of the STAT family. STAT4 has a prominent role in mediating
interleukin-12-induced T-helper cell type 1 lineage differentiation. T cells are 
key players in the maintenance of adipose tissue (AT) inflammation. The role of
STAT4 in obesity and AT inflammation is unknown. We sought to determine the role 
of STAT4 in AT inflammation in obesity-induced insulin resistance. We studied
STAT4-null mice on the C57Bl6/J background. We have found that STAT4(-/-)C57Bl6/J
mice develop high-fat diet-induced obesity (DIO) similar to wild-type controls,
but that they have significantly improved insulin sensitivity and better glucose 
tolerance. Using flow cytometry and real-time PCR, we show that STAT4(-/-) mice
with DIO produce significantly reduced numbers of inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines in adipocytes, have reduced numbers of CD8(+) cells, and display
increased alternative (M2) macrophage polarization. CD8(+) cells, but not CD4(+) 
cells, from STAT4(-/-) mice displayed reduced in vitro migration. Also, we found 
that adipocyte inflammation is reduced and insulin signaling is improved in
STAT4(-/-) mice with DIO. We have identified STAT4 as a key contributor to
insulin resistance and AT inflammation in DIO. Targeting STAT4 activation could
be a novel approach to reducing AT inflammation and insulin resistance in
obesity.

PMCID: PMC3837053
PMID: 23939393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Br J Dermatol. 2013 Dec;169(6):1188-97. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12578.

Lessons learned from gene expression profiling of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Dulmage BO(1), Geskin LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, 200 Lothrop St,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, U.S.A.

Gene expression studies of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) span a decade, yet
the pathogenesis is poorly understood and diagnosis remains a challenge. This
review examines the varied approaches to gene expression analysis of CTCL, with
emphasis on cell populations, control selection and expression data collection.
Despite discordant results, several dysregulated genes have been identified
across multiple studies, including PLS3, KIR3DL2, TWIST1 and STAT4. Here, we
provide an overview of the most consistently expressed genes across different
studies and bring them together through common pathways biologically relevant to 
CTCL. Four pathways - evasion of activation-induced cell death, T helper 2
lymphocyte differentiation, transforming growth factor-ß receptor expression, and
tumour necrosis factor receptor ligands - appear to encompass the most frequently
affected genes, hypothetically providing insight into the disease pathogenesis.

© 2013 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMCID: PMC3954533
PMID: 23937674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Inflammation. 2013 Dec;36(6):1548-52. doi: 10.1007/s10753-013-9698-8.

Association of STAT4 rs7574865 with susceptibility to systemic lupus
erythematosus in Iranian population.

Mirkazemi S(1), Akbarian M, Jamshidi AR, Mansouri R, Ghoroghi S, Salimi Y,
Tahmasebi Z, Mahmoudi M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences
(International Campus), Yazd, Iran.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multifactorial autoimmune disease with
complex genetic inheritance that affecting different organs and systems. STAT4
has been newly identified as a susceptible gene in the development of SLE.
According to recent studies, STAT4 has been associated with SLE in various
populations. We investigated whether STAT4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were associated with susceptibility and clinical features of SLE in Iranian
patients. The study group comprised 280 patients with SLE and 281 sex-, age-, and
ethnicity-matched healthy controls of Iranian ancestry. Two SNPs (rs7574865 and
rs7601754) were genotyped using the TaqMan MGB Allelic Discrimination method. Our
results showed a significant association between rs7574865 T allele (odds ratio
(OR) = 1.50, 95 % CI = 1.18-1.92, P = 0.002) and susceptibility to SLE. The
rs7574865TT genotype (P = 0.02, OR = 1.94, 95 % CI = 1.74-3.19) and GT genotype
(P = 0.008, OR = 1.71, 95 % CI = 1.19-2.45) showed a significant association with
the risk of SLE in the Iranian population. We concluded that STAT4 rs7574865 is
associated with SLE susceptibility in the Iranian population and this SNP might
be a factor in the pathogenesis of SLE. However, further studies are required to 
investigate the mechanism by which polymorphisms in this gene lead to SLE.

PMID: 23912645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):380-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.07.002. Epub 2013
Aug 1.

Differential expression and function of human IL-12Rß2 polymorphic variants.

de Paus RA(1), Geilenkirchen MA, van Riet S, van Dissel JT, van de Vosse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

The receptor for interleukin-12, formed by IL-12Rß1 and IL-12Rß2, mediates the
type I immune responses of various types of lymphocytes. Polymorphisms in
IL12RB2, the gene encoding IL-12Rß2, were reported to be associated with several 
immune related diseases, such as Crohn's disease. Because the IL23R and IL12RB2
genes are located in close proximity on the genome, the reported associations
might also be attributable to linked polymorphisms in IL23R, which were found to 
be associated with immune related diseases as well. To clarify the role of
IL-12Rß2 in immune diseases, we investigated the functional consequences of
thirteen amino acid substitutions in IL-12Rß2. We developed a model with
retroviral expression of IL-12Rß2 in B cell lines. With the use of this model the
expression and function of the variants was compared within the same genetic
background. Four of the IL-12Rß2 variants, N271Y, R313G, A604V and L808R showed
reduced IL-12 responses compared to the wild type variant. Two of these are
relatively common in some populations and may be used in future association
studies to reveal a role for IL-12 in infectious and/or immune related diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Dec 15;22(24):4952-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt343. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

Combining genetic mapping with genome-wide expression in experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis highlights a gene network enriched for T cell functions and
candidate genes regulating autoimmunity.

Thessen Hedreul M(1), Möller S, Stridh P, Gupta Y, Gillett A, Daniel Beyeen A,
Öckinger J, Flytzani S, Diez M, Olsson T, Jagodic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Neuroimmunology Unit, Center for
Molecular Medicine L8:04, Karolinska Institutet, L8:04, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden.

The experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an autoimmune disease of
the central nervous system commonly used to study multiple sclerosis (MS). We
combined clinical EAE phenotypes with genome-wide expression profiling in spleens
from 150 backcross rats between susceptible DA and resistant PVG rat strains
during the chronic EAE phase. This enabled correlation of transcripts with
genotypes, other transcripts and clinical EAE phenotypes and implicated potential
genetic causes and pathways in EAE. We detected 2285 expression quantitative
trait loci (eQTLs). Sixty out of 599 cis-eQTLs overlapped well-known EAE QTLs and
constitute positional candidate genes, including Ifit1 (Eae7), Atg7 (Eae20-22),
Klrc3 (eEae22) and Mfsd4 (Eae17). A trans-eQTL that overlaps Eae23a regulated a
large number of small RNAs and implicates a master regulator of transcription. We
defined several disease-correlated networks enriched for pathways involved in
cell-mediated immunity. They include C-type lectins, G protein coupled receptors,
mitogen-activated protein kinases, transmembrane proteins, suppressors of
transcription (Jundp2 and Nr1d1) and STAT transcription factors (Stat4) involved 
in interferon signaling. The most significant network was enriched for T cell
functions, similar to genetic findings in MS, and revealed both established and
novel gene interactions. Transcripts in the network have been associated with T
cell proliferation and differentiation, the TCR signaling and regulation of
regulatory T cells. A number of network genes and their family members have been 
associated with MS and/or other autoimmune diseases. Combining disease and
genome-wide expression phenotypes provides a link between disease risk genes and 
distinct molecular pathways that are dysregulated during chronic autoimmune
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3836475
PMID: 23900079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Sep 15;86(6):836-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.07.006. Epub
2013 Jul 19.

Role of hepatic resident and infiltrating macrophages in liver repair after acute
injury.

You Q(1), Holt M, Yin H, Li G, Hu CJ, Ju C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotherapy, Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210011, China.

Treatment of liver disease, caused by hepatotoxins, viral infections, alcohol
ingestion, or autoimmune conditions, remains challenging and costly. The liver
has a powerful capacity to repair and regenerate, thus a thorough understanding
of this tightly orchestrated process will undoubtedly improve clinical means of
restoring liver function after injury. Using a murine model of acute liver injury
caused by overdose of acetaminophen (APAP), our studies demonstrated that the
combined absence of liver resident macrophages (Kupffer cells, KCs), and
infiltrating macrophages (IMs) resulted in a marked delay in liver repair, even
though the initiation and extent of peak liver injury was not impacted. This
delay was not due to impaired hepatocyte proliferation but rather prolonged
vascular leakage, which is caused by APAP-induced liver sinusoidal endothelial
cell (LSEC) injury. We also found that KCs and IMs express an array of angiogenic
factors and induce LSEC proliferation and migration. Our mechanistic studies
suggest that hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) may be involved in regulating the
angiogenic effect of hepatic macrophages (Macs), as we found that APAP challenge 
resulted in hypoxia and stabilization of HIF in the liver and hepatic Macs.
Together, these data indicate an important role for hepatic Macs in liver blood
vessel repair, thereby contributing to tissue recovery from acute injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3863645
PMID: 23876342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Gene. 2013 Sep 25;527(2):435-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.074. Epub 2013 Jul
13.

Polymorphisms in STK17A gene are associated with systemic lupus erythematosus and
its clinical manifestations.

da Silva Fonseca AM(1), de Azevedo Silva J, Pancotto JA, Donadi EA, Segat L,
Crovella S, Sandrin-Garcia P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology Keizo Asami (LIKA), Federal University of
Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder with several
clinical manifestations. SLE etiology has a strong genetic component, which plays
a key role in disease's predisposition, as well as participation of environmental
factors, such and UV light exposure. In this regard, we investigated whether
polymorphisms in STK17A, a DNA repair related gene, encoding for
serine/threonine-protein kinase 17A, are associated with SLE susceptibility. A
total of 143 SLE patients and 177 healthy controls from Southern Brazil were
genotyped for five STK17A TagSNPs. Our results indicated association of rs7805969
SNP (A and G/A genotype, OR=1.40 and OR=1.73, respectively) with SLE
predisposition and the following clinical manifestations: arthritis, cutaneous
and immunological alterations. When analyzing haplotypes distribution, we found
association between TGGTC, TAGTC and AAGAT haplotypes and risk to develop SLE.
When considering clinical manifestations, the haplotypes TGGTT and TAGTC were
associated with protection against cutaneous alterations and the haplotype TAGTC 
to hematological alterations. We also observed association between SLE clinical
manifestations and ethnicity, with the European-derived patients being more
susceptible to cutaneous and hematological alterations.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23860322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int J Med Microbiol. 2013 Dec;303(8):433-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2013.05.004.
Epub 2013 May 28.

Yersinia enterocolitica inactivates NK cells.

Koch I(1), Dach K, Heesemann J, Hoffmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Maximilians University, Max von Pettenkofer Institut, Department of
Bacteriology, 80336 Munich, Germany.

Natural Killer (NK) cells serve as an important source of proinflammatory
cytokines early during infection. Hypothesizing that Yersinia enterocolitica
might interact with and inactivate NK cells, we examined NK cell-Y.
enterocolitica interactions in vitro and in vivo. Y. enterocolitica adheres to NK
cells in an Invasin dependent manner and inhibits NK cell cytotoxicity and IFN-<U+03B3> 
production induced by IL-12+IL-18 or IL-12 alone. YopP, an acetyltransferase
known to inhibit MAPK and NF<U+03BA>B signaling, suppresses IL-12 and IL-12+IL-18
mediated IFN-<U+03B3> production in NK cells by inhibiting phosphorylation of Tyk2 and
STAT4 in addition to MAPK. YopP inhibits induction of all genes whose expression 
is induced by IL-12+IL-18 in NK cells. Y. enterocolitica-mediated adherence to
and inactivation of NK cells also occurs after infection in vivo. Thus, we
present the first report of a bacterial pathogen inactivating NK cells, and
report interaction with Tyk2-STAT4 signaling as a novel function of YopP.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Immunol. 2013 Sep;74(9):1194-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.06.018. Epub 2013 
Jun 15.

Investigation of juvenile idiopathic arthritis susceptibility loci: results from 
a Greek population.

Dimopoulou DG(1), Zervou MI, Trachana M, Myrthianou E, Pratsidou-Gertsi P,
Kardassis D, Garyfallos A, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, 4th Department of Internal Medicine, Aristotle University
of Thessaloniki, Hippocration Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.

The strategy of studying the putative role of RA susceptibility genetic factors
in the development of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), an autoimmune disease 
characterized by persistent chronic arthritis, has been proven highly successful 
so far. Moreover, accumulated evidence indicates that an ethnic heterogeneity of 
genetic factors exists for rheumatic disorders. We investigated whether five
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), previously found to be associated with
JIA in various populations so far, are also associated with JIA in Greece. The
sample set consisted of 128 Caucasian JIA patients and 221 healthy controls from 
Northern Greece. Five Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) markers, namely
TRAF1/C5 rs10818488, PTPN22 rs2476601, STAT4 rs7574865, CD247 rs1773560 and PTPN2
rs7234029 SNPs were genotyped in a case-control study with Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs) or Taqman primer-probe sets. This study demonstrated
for the first time in a Greek population that the PTPN22, TRAF1/C5 and CD247
polymorphisms examined are associated with an increased susceptibility to JIA,
thus suggesting that the respective risk alleles may confer susceptibility to
clinically distinct disorders. However, our results did not demonstrate any
association of STAT4 and PTPN2 SNPs with the disease in our population, thus
highlighting the importance of comparative studies in different ethnic
populations.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23777930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Int J Rheum Dis. 2013 Apr;16(2):178-84. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12093.

Association of STAT4 gene polymorphism with increased susceptibility of
rheumatoid arthritis in a northern Chinese Han subpopulation.

Zhao Y(1), Liu X, Liu X, Su Y, Li Y, Zhang X, Zhu L, Wang S, Wang T, Jiang Q, Liu
X, Li X, Huang C, Jia R, Lu X, Guo J, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Allergy, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Several studies have reported STAT4 polymorphism is strongly
associated with increased susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, a
study from China showed no association between STAT4 and RA susceptibility in a
Chinese Han subpopulation. Since the northern Hans are known to be genetically
different from the southern Hans, the aim of this study was to investigate the
association of STAT4 polymorphism with RA in a large cohort of a northern Chinese
Han subpopulation.
METHODS: 640 RA patients and 662 healthy controls were enrolled. DNA samples were
genotyped for STAT4 rs7574865 by direct sequencing. The association of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7574865 with RA susceptibility was calculated and
the relationship between rs7574865 polymorphism and RA subgroups stratified by
clinical features was estimated.
RESULTS: We confirmed a significant association of STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism
with RA susceptibility in northern Chinese Han population. The frequency of the
minor T allele in RA was significantly higher than in healthy controls (35.2% vs.
31.1%; P = 0.029, OR 1.2 [95% CI 1.02-1.41]). There was also a significant
difference in the distribution of the genotypes of SNP rs7574865 between RA
patients and healthy controls (P = 0.02). Stratification analyses showed no
associations between the genetic risk and clinical/serologic features, but a
potential high frequency of TT genotype in a rheumatoid factor-negative subgroup,
although it did not reach statistical significance (P = 0.084, OR 2.01 [95% CI
0.91-4.45]).
CONCLUSION: STAT4 rs7574865 is significantly associated with RA susceptibility in
northern Chinese Han subpopulations. The genetic differences of Han
subpopulations should be considered when genetic susceptibility for diseases is
studied.

© 2013 The Authors International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases © 2013 Asia
Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty
Ltd.

PMID: 23773642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):902-11. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203229. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Opposing roles of STAT4 and Dnmt3a in Th1 gene regulation.

Pham D(1), Yu Q, Walline CC, Muthukrishnan R, Blum JS, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The STAT transcription factor STAT4 is a critical regulator of Th1
differentiation and inflammatory disease. Yet, how STAT4 regulates gene
expression is still unclear. In this report, we define a STAT4-dependent sequence
of events including histone H3 lysine 4 methylation, Jmjd3 association with STAT4
target loci, and a Jmjd3-dependent decrease in histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation and DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) 3a association with STAT4 target 
loci. Dnmt3a has an obligate role in repressing Th1 gene expression, and in Th1
cultures deficient in both STAT4 and Dnmt3a, there is recovery in the expression 
of a subset of Th1 genes that is sufficient to increase IFN-<U+03B3> production.
Moreover, although STAT4-deficient mice are protected from the development of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, mice deficient in STAT4 and
conditionally deficient in Dnmt3a in T cells develop paralysis. Th1 genes that
are derepressed in the absence of Dnmt3a have greater induction after the ectopic
expression of the Th1-associated transcription factors T-bet and Hlx1. Together, 
these data demonstrate that STAT4 and Dnmt3a play opposing roles in regulating
Th1 gene expression, and that one mechanism for STAT4-dependent gene programming 
is in establishing a derepressed genetic state susceptible to transactivation by 
additional fate-determining transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3703830
PMID: 23772023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Leuk Res. 2013 Sep;37(9):1120-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.05.003. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

Polymorphisms in JAK/STAT signaling pathway genes and risk of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Chen Y(1), Lan Q, Zheng T, Zhao N, Holford TR, Lerro C, Dai M, Huang H, Liang J, 
Ma S, Leaderer B, Boyle P, Chanock S, Rothman N, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Hospital/Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China.

Impaired function of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway genes leads to immunodeficiency and
various hematopoietic disorders. We evaluated the association between genetic
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 JAK/STAT pathway genes (JAK3, STAT1, STAT2, STAT3,
STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT6, SCOS1, SCOS2, SCOS3, and SCOS4) and NHL risk in a
population-based case-control study of Connecticut women. We identified three
SNPs in STAT3 (rs12949918 and rs6503695) and STAT4 (rs932169) associated with NHL
risk after adjustment for multiple comparison. Our results suggest that genetic
variation in JAK/STAT pathway genes may play a role in lymphomagenesis and
warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3998836
PMID: 23768868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Genet Mol Res. 2013 May 13;12(2):1593-602. doi: 10.4238/2013.May.13.13.

An SduI polymorphism at intron 20 of the Chinese Holstein cow STAT4 gene and its 
effect on milk performance traits.

Song XM(1), Zhang L, Jiang JF, Shi FX, Jiang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Zhejiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, China. songxuemei@yeah.net

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) genes are responsive 
to a wide range of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones, and thus control
important biological processes. In humans, STAT4 mutations have been identified
as genetic markers for rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
primary Sjögren's syndrome, whereas little research has been conducted on bovine 
STAT4 mutations and their potential effects. Herein, 585 Chinese Holstein cows
were used to investigate STAT4 mutations and their effects on milk performance
traits. One haplotype block, containing g.95879G>A, g.96013G>C, was identified in
intron 20 of the bovine STAT4 gene by restriction fragment length
polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing. Two single nucleotide 
polymorphisms were significantly associated with milk yield at 305 days (P <
0.05), and with protein percentage (P < 0.05). Chinese Holstein cows with the
haplotype GGGG had higher milk yields at 305 days and lower protein percentages. 
These results suggest that the 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms of STAT4 could
be used as genetic markers for milk performance traits in Chinese Holstein cows.

PMID: 23765966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jun;43(6):1511-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.201243218.

IL-12-mediated STAT4 signaling and TCR signal strength cooperate in the induction
of CD40L in human and mouse CD8+ T cells.

Stark R(1), Hartung A, Zehn D, Frentsch M, Thiel A.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Immunology and Aging, Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative 
Therapies, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jun;43(6):1445-8.

CD40L is one of the key molecules bridging the activation of specific T cells and
the maturation of professional and nonprofessional antigen-presenting cells
including B cells. CD4(+) T cells have been regarded as the major T-cell subset
that expresses CD40L upon cognate activation; however, we demonstrate here that a
putative CD8(+) helper T-cell subset expressing CD40L is induced in human and
murine CD8(+) T cells in vitro and in mice immunized with antigen-pulsed
dendritic cells. IL-12 and STAT4-mediated signaling was the major instructive
cytokine signal boosting the ability of CD8(+) T cells to express CD40L both in
vitro and in vivo. Additionally, TCR signaling strength modulated CD40L
expression in CD8(+) T cells after primary differentiation in vitro as well as in
vivo. The induction of CD40L in CD8(+) T cells regulated by IL-12 and TCR
signaling may enable CD8(+) T cells to respond autonomously of CD4(+) T cells.
Thus, we propose that under proinflammatory conditions, a self-sustaining
positive feedback loop could facilitate the efficient priming of T cells
stimulated by high affinity peptide displaying APCs.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23765345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):678-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203360. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

STAT4 and T-bet are required for the plasticity of IFN-<U+03B3> expression across Th2
ontogeny and influence changes in Ifng promoter DNA methylation.

Williams CL(1), Schilling MM, Cho SH, Lee K, Wei M, Aditi, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN
37232, USA.

CD4(+) T cells developing toward a Th2 fate express IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 while
inhibiting production of cytokines associated with other Th types, such as the
Th1 cytokine IFN- <U+03B3>. IL-4-producing Th2 effector cells give rise to a long-lived 
memory population committed to reactivation of the Th2 cytokine gene expression
program. However, reactivation of these effector-derived cells under Th1-skewing 
conditions leads to production of IFN-<U+03B3> along with IL-4 in the same cell. We now 
show that this flexibility ("plasticity") of cytokine expression is preceded by a
loss of the repressive DNA methylation of the Ifng promoter acquired during Th2
polarization yet requires STAT4 along with T-box expressed in T cells.
Surprisingly, loss of either STAT4 or T-box expressed in T cells increased Ifng
promoter CpG methylation in both effector and memory Th2 cells. Taken together,
our data suggest a model in which the expression of IFN-<U+03B3> by Th2-derived memory
cells involves attenuation of epigenetic repression in memory Th2 cells, combined
with Th1-polarizing signals after their recall activation.

PMCID: PMC3702659
PMID: 23761633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2013 Apr-Jun;26(2):473-8.

STAT4 is a genetic risk factor for systemic sclerosis in a Chinese population.

Yi L(1), Wang JC, Guo XJ, Gu YH, Tu WZ, Guo G, Yang L, Xiao R, Yu L, Mayes MD,
Assassi S, Jin L, Zou HJ, Zhou XD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an immune-mediated and complex genetic disease. An
association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the STAT4 gene with SSc 
has been reported in European Caucasians, North Americans and Japanese. We
undertook the current study to examine whether the STAT4 SNPs are also associated
with susceptibility to SSc and SSc subsets in a Han Chinese population. A total
of 453 Han Chinese patients with SSc and 534 healthy controls were examined in
the study. The SNPs rs7574865, rs10168266 and rs3821236 of the STAT4 gene were
examined with SNP TaqMan assays. The T-allele carriers of rs7574865 and
rs10168266 were strongly associated with the presence of anti-topoisomerase I
(ATA) and pulmonary fibrosis in SSc patients, as well as with diffuse cutaneous
SSc (dcSSc). The presence of anti-centromere (ACA) and limited cutaneous SSc
(lcSSc) did not show significant association with any of the examined SNPs. The
results were consistent with previous reports in other ethnic populations in
supporting the notion that polymorphisms of STAT4 may play an important role in
susceptibility to SSc. It also revealed different genetic aspects of SSc subsets 
in a Han Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC4105920
PMID: 23755762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Aug;18:257-61. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.025. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

A trivial role of STAT4 variant in chronic hepatitis B induced hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Clark A(1), Gerlach F, Tong Hv, Hoan NX, Song le H, Toan NL, Bock CT, Kremsner
PG, Velavan TP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Two polymorphisms in the STAT4 and HLA-DQ loci were more recently reported to
associate with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
We utilised an independent Vietnamese cohort of clinically classified HBV
patients of chronic hepatitis B carriers (n=206), liver cirrhosis (n=222) and
hepatocellular carcinoma (n=239) and assessed the influence of the reported
variants. The STAT4 variant (rs7574865) was marginally associated with HCC
susceptibility in CHB carriers in allelic and recessive genetic models (OR=0.84, 
95%CI=0.7-0.99, P=0.048 and OR=0.7, 95%CI=0.5-0.99, P=0.047). No significant
association between the studied variant with several clinical parameters such as 
liver enzymes (ALT, AST), total and direct bilirubin, AFP, HBV genotype and viral
loads were observed. Our study highlights the reported variant to be a trivial
factor and possibly other confounding factors may regulate STAT4 expression
during HCC development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1240-5. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202675. Epub 
2013 Jun 5.

Ethnic specificity of lupus-associated loci identified in a genome-wide
association study in Korean women.

Lee HS(1), Kim T, Bang SY, Na YJ, Kim I, Kim K, Kim JH, Chung YJ, Shin HD, Kang
YM, Shim SC, Suh CH, Park YB, Kim JS, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, , Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To identify novel genetic candidates for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in the Korean population, and to validate the risk loci for SLE identified 
in previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
METHODS: We performed a GWAS in 400 Korean female SLE patients and 445 controls. 
Selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were then replicated in an
independent cohort of 385 SLE patients and 583 controls (replication cohort 1),
and in a further 811 SLE patients and 1502 controls (replication cohort 2).
RESULTS: In the GWAS phase, rs9275428 located near HLA-DQB1 showed the strongest 
association with SLE (OR 0.50, false discovery rate (FDR) p=3.07×10(-6)).
Although no loci reached genome-wide significance outside major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), C8orf13-BLK, STAT4, CSMD1, DIAPH3, GLDC and
TNFSF4 showed FDR p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Our results suggest that STAT4, BLK, IRF5,
PTTG1-miR-146a, UBE2L3 and TNFAIP3 are shared susceptibility loci among
Caucasians and Asians, while ETS1, IKZF1, SLC15A4 are likely to be Asian-specific
loci. In a combined analysis of 1596 SLE patients and 2540 controls for selected 
22 candidate SNP, STAT4 and BLK as positive controls showed a strong association 
with SLE (FDR p=9.85×10(-13) and 2.28×10(-8), respectively). Of these, 16
candidates (PEX5L, TRAJ50, MYO18B, SOS1, ARHGAP26, SMURF1, CADPS, HAND1, FAM78B, 
DIAPH3, TBL1XR1, CSMD1, ZBTB20, C3orf21, HIPK1 and AP001042.1) showed only
nominal significance (7.05×10(-4)=FDR p=4.38×10(-2)).
CONCLUSIONS: There are similarities and differences in genetic susceptibility for
SLE between Caucasian and Asian ethnic groups. Although 16 putative novel loci
for SLE have been suggested in the Korean population, further research on a
larger sample is required to discriminate truth from error.

PMID: 23740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gene. 2013 Sep 10;526(2):259-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.022. Epub 2013 May
30.

Replication study of STAT4 rs7574865 G/T polymorphism and risk of rheumatoid
arthritis in a Chinese population.

Shen L(1), Liu R, Zhang H, Huang Y, Sun R, Tang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changzhou First People's Hospital,
Changzhou 213003, China.

AIM: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) are common
systemic autoimmune diseases with genetic and environmental predisposing factors.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) transmits signals
induced by interleukin-12, interleukin-23 and interferon-<U+03B3>, which are key
cytokines and play important roles in the development of autoimmune diseases.
Previous studies confirmed the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T locus to be associated with
RA. Thus we conducted a replication study to investigate STAT4 rs7574865 G/T
polymorphism and RA/AS susceptibility in a Chinese population.
METHODS: We studied STAT4 rs7574865 G/T gene polymorphism in 520 patients with
RA, 100 AS patients and 520 controls in a Chinese population. Genotyping was done
using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS).
RESULTS: When the STAT4 rs7574865 GG homozygote genotype was used as the
reference group, the GT or GT/TT genotypes were associated with the risk for RA. 
After stratification analyses, a significantly increased risk for RA associated
with the STAT4 rs7574865 GT genotype was evident among the rheumatoid factor
(RF)-positive patients, patients with higher erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
level and patients with higher RA disease activity score (DAS28) compared with
the STAT4 rs7574865 GG genotype. A significantly increased risk for RA associated
with the STAT4 rs7574865 TT genotype was evident among older patients and
RF-negative patients compared with the STAT4 rs7574865 GG genotype. STAT4
rs7574865 G/T was not associated with susceptibility to AS.
CONCLUSION: This replication study confirmed that STAT4 rs7574865 G/T
polymorphism was associated with the risk of RA.
CONDENSED ABSTRACT: STAT4 polymorphisms are associated with rheumatoid arthritis 
risk.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2013 Oct;27(5):413-24. doi: 10.1007/s10557-013-6464-y.

Pitavastatin regulates helper T-cell differentiation and ameliorates autoimmune
myocarditis in mice.

Tajiri K(1), Shimojo N, Sakai S, Machino-Ohtsuka T, Imanaka-Yoshida K, Hiroe M,
Tsujimura Y, Kimura T, Sato A, Yasutomi Y, Aonuma K.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan, ktajiri@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2013 Oct;27(5):365-9.

PURPOSE: Experimental autoimmune myocarditis (EAM) is a mouse model of
inflammatory cardiomyopathy, and the involvement of T helper (Th) 1 and Th17
cytokines has been demonstrated. Accumulated evidence has shown that statins have
anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects; however, the mechanism has not
been fully elucidated. This study was designed to test the hypothesis that
pitavastatin affects T cell-mediated autoimmunity through inhibiting Th1 and Th17
responses and reduces the severity of EAM in mice.
METHODS: The EAM model was established in BALB/c mice by immunization with murine
a-myosin heavy chain. Mice were fed pitavastatin (5 mg/kg) or vehicle once daily 
for 3 weeks from day 0 to day 21 after immunization.
RESULTS: Pitavastatin reduced the pathophysiological severity of the myocarditis.
Pitavastatin treatment inhibited the phosphorylation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)3 and STAT4, which have key roles in the Th1 and
Th17 lineage commitment, respectively, in the heart, and suppressed production of
Th1 cytokine interferon-<U+03B3> and Th17 cytokine interleukin-17 from autoreactive
CD4(+) T cells. In in vitro T-cell differentiation experiments,
pitavastatin-treated T cells failed to differentiate into Th1 and Th17 cells
through inhibiting the transcription of T-box expressed in T-cells (T-bet) and
RAR-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>t (ROR<U+03B3>T) which have critical roles in the
development of Th1 and Th17 cells, respectively, and this failure was rescued by 
adding mevalonate.
CONCLUSIONS: Pitavastatin inhibits Th1 and Th17 responses and ameliorates EAM.
These results suggest that statins may be a promising novel therapeutic strategy 
for the clinical treatment of myocarditis and inflammatory cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 23722419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Med Chem. 2013 Jun 13;56(11):4521-36. doi: 10.1021/jm400266t. Epub 2013 May 29.

Lead optimization of a 4-aminopyridine benzamide scaffold to identify potent,
selective, and orally bioavailable TYK2 inhibitors.

Liang J(1), van Abbema A, Balazs M, Barrett K, Berezhkovsky L, Blair W, Chang C, 
Delarosa D, DeVoss J, Driscoll J, Eigenbrot C, Ghilardi N, Gibbons P, Halladay J,
Johnson A, Kohli PB, Lai Y, Liu Y, Lyssikatos J, Mantik P, Menghrajani K, Murray 
J, Peng I, Sambrone A, Shia S, Shin Y, Smith J, Sohn S, Tsui V, Ultsch M, Wu LC, 
Xiao Y, Yang W, Young J, Zhang B, Zhu BY, Magnuson S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. liang.jun@gene.com

Herein we report our lead optimization effort to identify potent, selective, and 
orally bioavailable TYK2 inhibitors, starting with lead molecule 3. We used
structure-based design to discover 2,6-dichloro-4-cyanophenyl and
(1R,2R)-2-fluorocyclopropylamide modifications, each of which exhibited improved 
TYK2 potency and JAK1 and JAK2 selectivity relative to 3. Further optimization
eventually led to compound 37 that showed good TYK2 enzyme and interleukin-12
(IL-12) cell potency, as well as acceptable cellular JAK1 and JAK2 selectivity
and excellent oral exposure in mice. When tested in a mouse IL-12 PK/PD model,
compound 37 showed statistically significant knockdown of cytokine interferon-<U+03B3>
(IFN<U+03B3>), suggesting that selective inhibition of TYK2 kinase activity might be
sufficient to block the IL-12 pathway in vivo.

PMID: 23668484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 15;190(12):6287-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300431. Epub 2013 
May 6.

STAT4-dependent and -independent Th2 responses correlate with protective immunity
against lung infection with Pneumocystis murina.

Myers RC(1), Dunaway CW, Nelson MP, Trevor JL, Morris A, Steele C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Although it is clear that the loss of CD4(+) T cells is a predisposing factor for
the development of Pneumocystis pneumonia, specific Th mechanisms mediating
protection are not well understood. Th1, Th2, and Th17 responses have each been
implicated in protective responses during infection. As STAT4 may promote Th1 and
Th17 development, yet antagonize Th2 development, we investigated its role in
Pneumocystis murina host defense. STAT4 was required for Th1 and, unexpectedly,
Th2 responses in the lungs of C57BL/6 (BL/6) and BALB/c mice 14 d postchallenge, 
but only BALB/c Stat4(-/-) mice demonstrated susceptibility to P. murina lung
infection. BL/6 Stat4(-/-), but not BALB/c Stat4(-/-), mice maintained an
enhanced alternatively activated (M2) macrophage signature in the lungs, which we
have previously reported to be associated with enhanced P. murina clearance. In
addition, anti-P. murina class-switched Abs were increased in BL/6 Stat4(-/-)
mice, but not BALB/c Stat4(-/-) mice. Supporting our experimental observations,
plasma from HIV-infected individuals colonized with Pneumocystis jirovecii
contained significantly lower levels of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13
compared with HIV-infected individuals who were not colonized. Collectively, our 
data suggest that robust local and systemic Th2-mediated responses are critical
for immunity to Pneumocystis.

PMCID: PMC3679253
PMID: 23650614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 14;110(20):8134-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1306352110. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

Targeted resequencing implicates the familial Mediterranean fever gene MEFV and
the toll-like receptor 4 gene TLR4 in Behçet disease.

Kirino Y(1), Zhou Q, Ishigatsubo Y, Mizuki N, Tugal-Tutkun I, Seyahi E, Özyazgan 
Y, Ugurlu S, Erer B, Abaci N, Ustek D, Meguro A, Ueda A, Takeno M, Inoko H,
Ombrello MJ, Satorius CL, Maskeri B, Mullikin JC, Sun HW, Gutierrez-Cruz G, Kim
Y, Wilson AF, Kastner DL, Gül A, Remmers EF.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Disease Section, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1849, USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are a powerful means of identifying genes 
with disease-associated common variants, but they are not well-suited to
detecting genes with disease-associated rare and low-frequency variants. In the
current study of Behçet disease (BD), nonsynonymous variants (NSVs) identified by
deep exonic resequencing of 10 genes found by GWAS (IL10, IL23R, CCR1, STAT4,
KLRK1, KLRC1, KLRC2, KLRC3, KLRC4, and ERAP1) and 11 genes selected for their
role in innate immunity (IL1B, IL1R1, IL1RN, NLRP3, MEFV, TNFRSF1A, PSTPIP1,
CASP1, PYCARD, NOD2, and TLR4) were evaluated for BD association. A differential 
distribution of the rare and low-frequency NSVs of a gene in 2,461 BD cases
compared with 2,458 controls indicated their collective association with disease.
By stringent criteria requiring at least a single burden test with study-wide
significance and a corroborating test with at least nominal significance, rare
and low-frequency NSVs in one GWAS-identified gene, IL23R (P = 6.9 × 10(-5)), and
one gene involved in innate immunity, TLR4 (P = 8.0 × 10(-4)), were associated
with BD. In addition, damaging or rare damaging NOD2 variants were nominally
significant across all three burden tests applied (P = 0.0063-0.045).
Furthermore, carriage of the familial Mediterranean fever gene (MEFV) mutation
Met694Val, which is known to cause recessively inherited familial Mediterranean
fever, conferred BD risk in the Turkish population (OR, 2.65; P = 1.8 × 10(-12)).
The disease-associated NSVs in MEFV and TLR4 implicate innate immune and
bacterial sensing mechanisms in BD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3657824
PMID: 23633568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Hum Immunol. 2013 Aug;74(8):986-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.04.034. Epub 2013 
Apr 27.

Meta-analysis reveals an association of STAT4 polymorphisms with systemic
autoimmune disorders and anti-dsDNA antibody.

Zheng J(1), Yin J, Huang R, Petersen F, Yu X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Autoimmunity, The Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen
University, 361005 Xiamen, China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) has been recently
identified as a susceptibility gene for multiple autoimmune diseases. Here we
performed a comprehensive analysis of the association between STAT4 and several
different autoimmune disorders to identify potential common inflammatory
principles behind this association. Our meta-analysis revealed that the STAT4
rs7574865 polymorphism is associated with four autoimmune diseases with systemic 
pathology, including systemic lupus erythematosus (OR = 1.52; 95% CI = 1.48 -
1.56, P<1.0 × 10(-16)), rheumatoid arthritis (OR = 1.27; 95% CI = 1.21 - 1.33, P 
< 1.00 × 10(-16)), systemic sclerosis (OR = 1.38; 95% CI = 1.27 - 1.50, P < 1.44 
× 10(-14)), and primary Sjogren's syndrome (OR = 1.32; 95% CI = 1.01 - 1.73, P = 
4.40 × 10(-2)), while no association was found with type I diabetes, juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. Furthermore, the
stratified meta-analysis also demonstrate that the STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism
is associated with the presence of autoantibodies with systemic reactivity
(anti-ds-DNA antibodies) in SLE patients (OR = 1.37; 95% CI = 1.21 - 1.56, P =
1.12 × 10(-6)). However, no such specific association was seen in RA with regard 
to the presence of non-systemically reacting antibodies, including rheumatoid
factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies. Taken together, these
results suggest that STAT4 polymorphisms are associated with autoimmune diseases 
which are characterized by a systemic pathology and anti-dsDNA antibody.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23628400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Tradit Chin Med. 2013 Feb;33(1):78-84.

Effects of Sijunzi decoction and Yupingfeng powder on expression of janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription signal pathway in the
brain of spleen-deficiency model rats.

Xiong B(1), Qian H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medicine, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Beijing 100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the influence of Sijunzi decoction and Yupingfeng powder on
the expression of the relevant DNAs of janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) signal pathway of the brain in
spleen-deficiency model rats.
METHODS: Eighty male Wistar rats of sanitary degree were divided randomly into
four groups: normal group, model group, treatment group 1, treatment group 2.
Besides the rats in the normal group, all the rats in other 3 groups were
prepared as spleen deficiency model. The treatment group 1 were treated with
Sijunzi decoction and the treatment group 2 were treated with Yupingfeng powder. 
After treatment for 6 weeks, perfusion was given and the brain was taken for
detection of the expression of the relevant DNAs of JAK-STAT signal pathway of
the brain in SD rats bygene chip method.
RESULTS: Spleen deficiency could lead to increase expression of JAK1, STAT1 and
Interleukin 4 (IL-4) in the brain, but the decrease expression of Suppressor of
cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), prolactin receptor (PRLR) and binding protein 3
(GATA 3). Sijunzi decoction could increase expression of STAT3, Prolactin (PRL)
and GATA3, but decrease expression of JAK1, STAT, STAT4, Interleukin 10 receptor,
alpha (IL10RA), Coagulation factor II (F2), PRLR, MAD homolog 3 (SMAD3) and IL-4.
Yupingfeng powder could decrease expression of JAK1, STAT1, STAT4, SOCS4_
predicted, Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), PRLR, High mobility group
AT-hook 1 (HMGA10), IL-4.
CONCLUSION: Sijunzi decoction and Yupingfeng powder can improve immune function
of the rat through influencing the genetic expression of JAK-STAT signal pathway.

PMID: 23596817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(7):1357-74. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.03.053.
Epub 2013 Apr 10.

The genetics of complex cholestatic disorders.

Hirschfield GM(1), Chapman RW, Karlsen TH, Lammert F, Lazaridis KN, Mason AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Liver Research, National Institute for Health Research Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, England.

Cholestatic liver diseases are caused by a range of hepatobiliary insults and
involve complex interactions among environmental and genetic factors. Little is
known about the pathogenic mechanisms of specific cholestatic diseases, which has
limited our ability to manage patients with these disorders. However, recent
genome-wide studies have provided insight into the pathogenesis of gallstones,
primary biliary cirrhosis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis. A lithogenic
variant in the gene that encodes the hepatobiliary transporter ABCG8 has been
identified as a risk factor for gallstone disease; this variant has been
associated with altered cholesterol excretion and metabolism. Other variants of
genes encoding transporters that affect the composition of bile have been
associated with cholestasis, namely ABCB11, which encodes the bile salt export
pump, and ABCB4, which encodes hepatocanalicular phosphatidylcholine floppase. In
contrast, studies have associated primary biliary cirrhosis and primary
sclerosing cholangitis with genes encoding major histocompatibility complex
proteins and identified loci associated with microbial sensing and immune
regulatory pathways outside this region, such as genes encoding IL12, STAT4,
IRF5, IL2 and its receptor (IL2R), CD28, and CD80. These discoveries have raised 
interest in the development of reagents that target these gene products. We
review recent findings from genetic studies of patients with cholestatic liver
disease. Future characterization of genetic variants in animal models,
stratification of risk alleles by clinical course, and identification of
interacting environmental factors will increase our understanding of these
complex cholestatic diseases.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3705954
PMID: 23583734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 23;110(17):6967-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304410110. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Stage-specific regulation of natural killer cell homeostasis and response against
viral infection by microRNA-155.

Zawislak CL(1), Beaulieu AM, Loeb GB, Karo J, Canner D, Bezman NA, Lanier LL,
Rudensky AY, Sun JC.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells function in the recognition and destruction of host
cells infected with pathogens. Many regulatory mechanisms govern the potent
responses of NK cells, both at the cellular and molecular level. Ablation of
microRNA (miRNA) processing enzymes demonstrated that miRNAs play critical roles 
in NK cell differentiation and function; however, the role of individual miRNAs
requires further investigation. Using mice containing a targeted deletion of
microRNA-155 (miR-155), we observed defects in NK cell maintenance and maturation
at steady state, as well as in homeostatic proliferation in lymphopenic mice. In 
addition, we discovered that miR-155 is up-regulated in activated NK cells during
mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection in response to signals from the
proinflammatory cytokines IL-12 and IL-18 and through signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) signaling. Although miR-155 was found to be 
dispensable for cytotoxicity and cytokine production when triggered through
activating receptors, NK cells lacking miR-155 exhibited severely impaired
effector and memory cell numbers in both lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues after
MCMV infection. We demonstrate that miR-155 differentially targets Noxa and
suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) in NK cells at distinct stages of
homeostasis and activation. NK cells constitutively expressing Noxa and SOCS1
exhibit profound defects in expansion during the response to MCMV infection,
suggesting that their regulation by miR-155 promotes antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC3637707
PMID: 23572582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059367. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 is preferentially expressed in Th1 and
Th17 T-helper cell subsets and is a direct STAT target gene.

Adamson A(1), Ghoreschi K, Rittler M, Chen Q, Sun HW, Vahedi G, Kanno Y,
Stetler-Stevenson WG, O'Shea JJ, Laurence A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA.

CD4(+) T helper (Th) cells differentiate into distinct effector subsets that are 
critical for host defense, but are also implicated in the pathogenesis of
autoimmune disorders. Thelper17 (Th17) cells in particular are emerging as
important drivers of multiple diseases including psoriasis, spondyloarthropathy
and multiple sclerosis. To gain insight into the function of Th17 cells, we
performed transcriptional profiling in hopes of elucidating products not
previously recognized as being functionally relevant in these T cells. Herein, we
demonstrate that tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1), a secreted
protein with pleiotropic effects on cellular growth, survival and integrity of
the extracellular matrix, is preferentially produced by Th17 and Th1 cells. We
further show that Th1 and Th17 cell TIMP1 regulation follows separate mechanisms 
with a requirement for STAT4 in the former and STAT3 in the latter. Finally, we
demonstrate that when restricted to T cells, expression of TIMP1 promotes
neuropathology in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.

PMCID: PMC3608653
PMID: 23555662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4478-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203172. Epub 2013
Mar 29.

Cutting edge: the pathogenicity of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells is independent of
T-bet.

Duhen R(1), Glatigny S, Arbelaez CA, Blair TC, Oukka M, Bettelli E.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

During the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the
proportion of pathogenic and myelin-specific cells within CNS-infiltrating
cytokine-producing Th cells is unknown. Using an IL-17A/IFN-<U+03B3> double reporter
mouse and I-A(b)/myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 38-49 tetramer, we show in
this study that IL-17(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) Th cells, which are expanded in the CNS during
EAE, are highly enriched in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-specific T cells.
We further demonstrate that IL-23 is essential for the generation and expansion
of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells independently of the Th1-associated transcription
factors T-bet, STAT1, and STAT4. Furthermore, Th17 and IL-17(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) Th cells 
can induce CNS autoimmunity independently of T-bet. Whereas T-bet is crucial for 
Th1-mediated EAE, it is dispensable for Th17 cell-mediated autoimmunity. Our
results suggest the existence of different epigenetic programs that regulate
IFN-<U+03B3> expression in Th1 and Th17 cells.

PMCID: PMC3633668
PMID: 23543757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;132(2):313-20.e15. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.01.051. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Genome-wide association study identifies TH1 pathway genes associated with lung
function in asthmatic patients.

Li X(1), Hawkins GA, Ampleford EJ, Moore WC, Li H, Hastie AT, Howard TD, Boushey 
HA, Busse WW, Calhoun WJ, Castro M, Erzurum SC, Israel E, Lemanske RF Jr, Szefler
SJ, Wasserman SI, Wenzel SE, Peters SP, Meyers DA, Bleecker ER.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. xinli@wakehealth.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies in general
populations of European descent have identified 28 loci for lung function.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify novel lung function loci specifically for asthma
and to confirm lung function loci identified in general populations.
METHODS: Genome-wide association studies of lung function (percent predicted FEV1
[ppFEV1], percent predicted forced vital capacity, and FEV1/forced vital capacity
ratio) were performed in 4 white populations of European descent (n = 1544),
followed by meta-analyses.
RESULTS: Seven of 28 previously identified lung function loci (HHIP, FAM13A,
THSD4, GSTCD, NOTCH4-AGER, RARB, and ZNF323) identified in general populations
were confirmed at single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) levels (P < .05). Four of 
32 loci (IL12A, IL12RB1, STAT4, and IRF2) associated with ppFEV1 (P < 10(-4))
belong to the TH1 or IL-12 cytokine family pathway. By using a linear additive
model, these 4 TH1 pathway SNPs cumulatively explained 2.9% to 7.8% of the
variance in ppFEV1 values in 4 populations (P = 3 × 10(-11)). Genetic scores of
these 4 SNPs were associated with ppFEV1 values (P = 2 × 10(-7)) and the American
Thoracic Society severe asthma classification (P = .005) in the Severe Asthma
Research Program population. TH2 pathway genes (IL13, TSLP, IL33, and IL1RL1)
conferring asthma susceptibility were not associated with lung function.
CONCLUSION: Genes involved in airway structure/remodeling are associated with
lung function in both general populations and asthmatic subjects. TH1 pathway
genes involved in anti-virus/bacterial infection and inflammation modify lung
function in asthmatic subjects. Genes associated with lung function that might
affect asthma severity are distinct from those genes associated with asthma
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3746327
PMID: 23541324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2013 Mar 18;11(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1546-0096-11-12.

Independent replication analysis of genetic loci with previous evidence of
association with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Ellis JA(1), Chavez RA, Pezic A, Ponsonby AL, Akikusa JD, Allen RC, Munro JE.

Author information: 
(1)Genes, Environment & Complex Disease, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 50
Flemington Rd, Parkville, Vic, 3052, Australia. justine.ellis@mcri.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Over the last five years, there have been numerous reports of
association of juvenile idiopathic arthritis with single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) at various loci outside the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region.
However, the majority of these association findings have been generated using a
limited number of international cohorts, and thus there is benefit in further
independent replication. To address this, we examined a total of 56 SNPs in 42
non-MHC gene regions previously reported to be associated with JIA, in the
ChiLdhood Arthritis Risk factor Identification sTudY (CLARITY), a new Australian 
collection of cases and healthy child controls.
FINDINGS: Genotyping was performed on a total of 324 JIA cases (mean age 9.7
years, 67.3% female) and 568 controls (mean age 7.8 years, 40.7% female). We
demonstrated clear evidence for replication of association of JIA with SNPs in or
around c12orf30, c3orf1, PTPN22, STAT4, and TRAF1-C5, confirming the involvement 
of these loci in disease risk. Further, we generated evidence supportive of
replication of association of JIA with loci containing AFF3, CD226, MBL2,
PSTPIP1, and RANTES (CCL5). These results were robust to sensitivity analyses for
ethnicity.
CONCLUSION: We have provided valuable independent data as to the underlying
genetic architecture of this understudied pediatric autoimmune disease, further
confirming five loci outside the MHC, and supporting a role for a further five
loci in determining disease risk.

PMCID: PMC3606368
PMID: 23506417  [PubMed]


257. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3375-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-448902. Epub 2013 
Mar 8.

IL-12 receptor ß1 deficiency alters in vivo T follicular helper cell response in 
humans.

Schmitt N(1), Bustamante J, Bourdery L, Bentebibel SE, Boisson-Dupuis S, Hamlin
F, Tran MV, Blankenship D, Pascual V, Savino DA, Banchereau J, Casanova JL, Ueno 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Dallas, TX 75204, USA.
nathalis@baylorhealth.edu

Antibody responses represent a key immune protection mechanism. T follicular
helper (Tfh) cells are the major CD4(+) T-cell subset that provides help to B
cells to generate an antibody response. Tfh cells together with B cells form
germinal centers (GCs), the site where high-affinity B cells are selected and
differentiate into either memory B cells or long-lived plasma cells. We show here
that interleukin-12 receptor ß1 (IL-12Rß1)-mediated signaling is important for in
vivo Tfh response in humans. Although not prone to B cell-deficient-associated
infections, subjects lacking functional IL-12Rß1, a receptor for IL-12 and IL-23,
displayed substantially less circulating memory Tfh and memory B cells than
control subjects. GC formation in lymph nodes was also impaired in
IL-12Rß1-deficient subjects. Consistently, the avidity of tetanus toxoid-specific
serum antibodies was substantially lower in these subjects than in age-matched
controls. Tfh cells in tonsils from control individuals displayed the active form
of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), demonstrating that
IL-12 is also acting on Tfh cells in GCs. Thus, our study shows that the
IL-12-STAT4 axis is associated with the development and the functions of Tfh
cells in vivo in humans.

PMCID: PMC3637013
PMID: 23476048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Immunol Lett. 2013 Mar;151(1-2):54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.02.004. Epub
2013 Mar 5.

Protective role of synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides expressing immunosuppressive
TTAGGG motifs in concanavalin A-induced hepatitis.

Li N(1), Liu YH, Li SL, Fu CY, Zhou RR, Huang Y, Fan XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, People's Republic of China.

Synthetic suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) expressing TTAGGG motifs
selectively reduce Th1 cytokine production and have been proven effective in T
helper type 1 (Th1)-mediated autoimmune diseases. Concanavalin A (Con A)-induced 
hepatitis is characterized by elevated Th1 response. The present study aims to
reveal a profound hepatoprotective effect of suppressive ODNs on Con A-induced
hepatitis. BALB/c mice were injected with suppressive ODNs (i) prior to, (ii)
simultaneously with, or (iii) after Con A challenge. The effect of suppressive
ODNs on interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-4 expressions was determined. The
effect of suppressive ODNs on signal modulators for Th1/Th2 pathway was examined.
Our results showed that suppressive ODNs significantly reduced liver
necroinflammatory injury and serum IFN-<U+03B3> level, meanwhile increased IL-4 level.
The mortality of suppressive ODNs-treated mice was reduced from 30% to 0% in 8h
post Con A challenge. In the splenic lymphocytes, Western blot analysis showed
that suppressive ODNs down-regulated the phosphorylation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT4, and suppressed up-regulation of
T-bet, but did not impact the phosphorylation of STAT6 which are associated with 
a Th2 phenotype. Consistent with this in vivo observation, ELISA analysis
demonstrated that suppressive ODNs inhibited IFN-<U+03B3>, and augmented IL-4 production
in the differentiation of naive T cells in vitro. We concluded that suppressive
ODNs inhibit the development of Con A-induced hepatitis through down-regulation
of the STAT1/4 and T-bet pathways and may be of use in the treatment of
autoimmune or viral hepatitis in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23470496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jun;65(6):1457-67. doi: 10.1002/art.37923.

Rheumatoid arthritis in Latin Americans enriched for Amerindian ancestry is
associated with loci in chromosomes 1, 12, and 13, and the HLA class II region.

López Herráez D(1), Martínez-Bueno M, Riba L, García de la Torre I, Sacnún M,
Goñi M, Berbotto GA, Paira S, Musuruana JL, Graf CE, Alvarellos AJ, Messina OD,
Babini AM, Strusberg I, Marcos JC, Scherbarth H, Spindler AJ, Quinteros A, Toloza
SM, Moreno JL, Catoggio LJ, Tate G, Eimon A, Citera G, Catalán Pellet A,
Nasswetter GG, Cardiel MH, Miranda P, Ballesteros F, Esquivel-Valerio JA,
Maradiaga-Ceceña MA, Acevedo-Vásquez EM, García García C, Pons-Estel BA,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucía de Genómica e
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To identify susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Latin
American individuals with admixed European and Amerindian genetic ancestry.
METHODS: Genotyping was performed in 1,475 patients with RA and 1,213 control
subjects, using a customized BeadArray containing 196,524 markers covering loci
previously associated with various autoimmune diseases. Principal components
analysis (EigenSoft package) and Structure software were used to identify
outliers and define the population substructure. REAP software was used to define
cryptic relatedness and duplicates, and genetic association analyses were
conducted using Plink statistical software.
RESULTS: A strong genetic association between RA and the major histocompatibility
complex region was observed, localized within BTNL2/DRA-DQB1- DQA2 (P = 7.6 ×
10(-10) ), with 3 independent effects. We identified an association in the
PLCH2-HES5-TNFRSF14-MMEL1 region of chromosome 1 (P = 9.77 × 10(-6) ), which was 
previously reported in Europeans, Asians, and Native Canadians. We identified one
novel putative association in ENOX1 on chromosome 13 (P = 3.24 × 10(-7) ).
Previously reported associations were observed in the current study, including
PTPN22, SPRED2, STAT4, IRF5, CCL21, and IL2RA, although the significance was
relatively moderate. Adjustment for Amerindian ancestry improved the association 
of a novel locus in chromosome 12 at C12orf30 (NAA25) (P = 3.9 × 10(-6) ).
Associations with the HLA region, SPRED2, and PTPN22 improved in individuals
positive for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Our data define, for the first time, the contribution of Amerindian
ancestry to the genetic architecture of RA in an admixed Latin American
population by confirming the role of the HLA region and supporting the
association with a locus in chromosome 1. In addition, we provide data for novel 
putative loci in chromosomes 12 and 13.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 23460240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jun;65(6):1663-7. doi: 10.1002/art.37913.

Susceptibility to childhood-onset rheumatoid arthritis: investigation of a
weighted genetic risk score that integrates cumulative effects of variants at
five genetic loci.

Prahalad S(1), Conneely KN, Jiang Y, Sudman M, Wallace CA, Brown MR, Ponder LA,
Rohani-Pichavant M, Zwick ME, Cutler DJ, Angeles-Han ST, Vogler LB, Kennedy C,
Rouster-Stevens K, Wise CA, Punaro M, Reed AM, Mellins ED, Bohnsack JF, Glass DN,
Thompson SD.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Children with childhood-onset rheumatoid arthritis (RA) include those 
with rheumatoid factor or anti-citrullinated protein antibody-positive juvenile
idiopathic arthritis. To test the hypothesis that adult-onset RA-associated
variants are also associated with childhood-onset RA, we investigated
RA-associated variants at 5 loci in a cohort of patients with childhood-onset RA.
We also assessed the cumulative association of these variants in susceptibility
to childhood-onset RA using a weighted genetic risk score (wGRS).
METHODS: A total of 155 children with childhood-onset RA and 684 healthy controls
were genotyped for 5 variants in the PTPN22, TRAF1/C5, STAT4, and TNFAIP3 loci.
High-resolution HLA-DRB1 genotypes were available for 149 cases and 373 controls.
We tested each locus for association with childhood-onset RA via logistic
regression. We also computed a wGRS for each subject, with weights based on the
natural log of the published odds ratios (ORs) for the alleles investigated, and 
used logistic regression to test the wGRS for association with childhood-onset
RA.
RESULTS: Childhood-onset RA was associated with TNFAIP3 rs10499194 (OR 0.60 [95% 
confidence interval 0.44-0.83]), PTPN22 rs2476601 (OR 1.61 [95% confidence
interval 1.11-2.31]), and STAT4 rs7574865 (OR 1.41 [95% confidence interval
1.06-1.87]) variants. The wGRS was significantly different between cases and
controls (P < 2 × 10(-16) ). Individuals in the third to fifth quintiles of wGRS 
had a significantly increased disease risk compared to baseline (individuals in
the first quintile). Higher wGRS was associated with increased risk of
childhood-onset RA, especially among males.
CONCLUSION: The magnitude and direction of the association between TNFAIP3,
STAT4, and PTPN22 variants and childhood-onset RA are similar to those observed
in RA, suggesting that adult-onset RA and childhood-onset RA share common genetic
risk factors. Using a wGRS, we have demonstrated the cumulative association of
RA-associated variants with susceptibility to childhood-onset RA.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3683854
PMID: 23450725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Front Immunol. 2012 Nov 26;3:351. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00351. eCollection
2012.

Natural killer cell functional dichotomy: a feature of chronic viral hepatitis?

Mondelli MU(1), Oliviero B, Mele D, Mantovani S, Gazzabin C, Varchetta S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Department of Infectious Diseases, Fondazione Istituto 
di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo Pavia, Italy ; 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pavia Pavia, Italy.

Natural killer (NK) cells are involved in innate immune responses to viral
infections either via direct cytotoxicity which destroys virus-infected cells or 
production of immunoregulatory cytokines which modulate adaptive immunity and
directly inhibit virus replication. These functions are mediated by different NK 
subpopulations, with cytotoxicity being generally performed by CD56(dim) NK
cells, whereas CD56(bright) NK cells are mainly involved in cytokine secretion.
NK functional defects are usually combined so that impaired degranulation is
often associated with deficient cytokine production. Innate immunity is thought
to be relevant in the control of hepatitis virus infections such as hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and recent findings reproducibly
indicate that NK cells in chronic viral hepatitis are characterized by a
functional dichotomy, featuring a conserved or enhanced cytotoxicity and a
reduced production of interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor-a. In chronic 
HCV infection this appears to be caused by altered IFN-a signaling resulting from
increased signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)
phosphorylation, which polarizes NK cells toward cytotoxicity, and a
concomitantly reduced IFN-a induced STAT4 phosphorylation yielding reduced IFN-<U+03B3> 
mRNA levels. These previously unappreciated findings are compatible on the one
hand with the inability to clear HCV and HBV from the liver and on the other they
may contribute to understand why these patients are often resistant to
IFN-a-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC3572686
PMID: 23420385  [PubMed]


262. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 Mar;15(3):588-96. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.01.024.
Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Microarray analysis of the inflammatory and immune responses in head kidney
turbot leucocytes treated with resveratrol.

Domínguez B(1), Pardo BG, Noia M, Millán A, Gómez-Tato A, Martínez P, Leiro J,
Lamas J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Ecología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
de Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

A DNA oligo-microarray enriched in genes and involved in inflammatory and immune 
responses was used to evaluate the effects of resveratrol on gene expression in
turbot head kidney leucocytes. Leucocytes were cultured for 3, 6 and 24 h, in the
presence or absence of resveratrol, or were stimulated with the membrane fraction
of the parasite Philasterides dicentrarchi or with the membrane plus resveratrol.
Gene expression changed considerably in control cells, and several of the
regulated genes were related to inflammatory and immune responses and to the
cytoskeleton. Similar changes in gene expression occurred in control cells and in
cells stimulated with P. dicentrarchi membrane fraction. Treatment with
resveratrol induced changes in the expression (mostly down-regulation) of several
genes involved in immune responses and inflammation. Thus, the down-regulation of
the transcription factor PU.1, pentraxin-multidomain protein, heme oxygenase 1,
S100 calcium-binding protein A-16 (S100A16) and the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 was observed after all three incubation times. The
down-regulation of the suppressor of cytokine signalling 3a, LPS-induced tumour
necrosis alpha, hepcidin, metallothionein, TLR8 and the calcium dependent lectin 
A was observed after 3 and 6 h. Resveratrol also decreased the expression of
CCL20, IL-8, apolipoprotein E and glutathione S-transferase after incubation for 
6 and 24 h, and of TNF-a after incubation for 3 and 24 h. Resveratrol also
induced strong regulation of several cytoskeleton-related genes. The use of the
turbot oligo-microarray enabled us to discover genes whose expression was not
previously suspected of being modulated by this polyphenol.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23419489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Tissue Antigens. 2013 Mar;81(3):137-40. doi: 10.1111/tan.12057. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Association study of STAT4 polymorphisms and type 1 diabetes in Northeastern
Chinese Han population.

Bi C(1), Li B, Cheng Z, Hu Y, Fang Z, Zhai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150001, China.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an organ-specific, T-cell-mediated disease resulting
from the selective destruction of pancreatic ß cells. The signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene is one of the most interesting genes
for the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, including T1D. In this study, a
case-control study was conducted in a Han population in northeastern China
comparing the genotypes of T1D patients to healthy controls for the presence of
two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the STAT4 gene. The study
population comprised of 410 T1D patients and 407 healthy individuals. Two SNPs
(rs7574865 and rs3024866) of STAT4 were genotyped with Multiplex SNaPShot method.
Data were analyzed with spss 13.0 to determine if a statistical association
existed between these genotypes and T1D. One of the two SNPs (rs7574865) was
strongly associated with T1D in Northeastern Chinese population compared to
healthy controls (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), whereas the other tested SNP (rs3024866)
demonstrated no significant relationship. In conclusion, the STAT4 gene may play 
an important role in facilitating susceptibility to T1D in this Han Chinese
population.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23360093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53562. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053562. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Transcriptomic analyses of sexual dimorphism of the zebrafish liver and the
effect of sex hormones.

Zheng W(1), Xu H, Lam SH, Luo H, Karuturi RK, Gong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

The liver is one of the most sex-dimorphic organs in both oviparous and
viviparous animals. In order to understand the molecular basis of the difference 
between male and female livers, high-throughput RNA-SAGE (serial analysis of gene
expression) sequencing was performed for zebrafish livers of both sexes and their
transcriptomes were compared. Both sexes had abundantly expressed genes involved 
in translation, coagulation and lipid metabolism, consistent with the general
function of the liver. For sex-biased transcripts, from in addition to the high
enrichment of vitellogenin transcripts in spawning female livers, which
constituted nearly 80% of total mRNA, it is apparent that the female-biased genes
were mostly involved in ribosome/translation, estrogen pathway, lipid transport, 
etc, while the male-biased genes were enriched for oxidation reduction,
carbohydrate metabolism, coagulation, protein transport and localization, etc.
Sexual dimorphism on xenobiotic metabolism and anti-oxidation was also noted and 
it is likely that retinol x receptor (RXR) and liver x receptor (LXR) play
central roles in regulating the sexual differences of lipid and cholesterol
metabolisms. Consistent with high ribosomal/translational activities in the
female liver, female-biased genes were significantly regulated by two important
transcription factors, Myc and Mycn. In contrast, Male livers showed activation
of transcription factors Ppargc1b, Hnf4a, and Stat4, which regulate lipid and
glucose metabolisms and various cellular activities. The transcriptomic responses
to sex hormones, 17ß-estradiol (E2) or 11-keto testosterone (KT11), were also
investigated in both male and female livers and we found that female livers were 
relatively insensitive to sex hormone disturbance, while the male livers were
readily affected. E2 feminized male liver by up-regulating female-biased
transcripts and down-regulating male-biased transcripts. The information obtained
in this study provides comprehensive insights into the sexual dimorphism of
zebrafish liver transcriptome and will facilitate further development of the
zebrafish as a human liver disease model.

PMCID: PMC3547925
PMID: 23349717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-4.

Comprehensive meta-analysis of Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
(STAT) genomic binding patterns discerns cell-specific cis-regulatory modules.

Kang K(1), Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA. kangk2@niddk.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Cytokine-activated transcription factors from the STAT (Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription) family control common and
context-specific genetic programs. It is not clear to what extent cell-specific
features determine the binding capacity of seven STAT members and to what degree 
they share genetic targets. Molecular insight into the biology of STATs was
gained from a meta-analysis of 29 available ChIP-seq data sets covering
genome-wide occupancy of STATs 1, 3, 4, 5A, 5B and 6 in several cell types.
RESULTS: We determined that the genomic binding capacity of STATs is primarily
defined by the cell type and to a lesser extent by individual family members. For
example, the overlap of shared binding sites between STATs 3 and 5 in T cells is 
greater than that between STAT5 in T cells and non-T cells. Even for the top
1,000 highly enriched STAT binding sites, ~15% of STAT5 binding sites in mouse
female liver are shared by other STATs in different cell types while in T cells
~90% of STAT5 binding sites are co-occupied by STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6. In
addition, we identified 116 cis-regulatory modules (CRM), which are recognized by
all STAT members across cell types defining a common JAK-STAT signature. Lastly, 
in liver STAT5 binding significantly coincides with binding of the cell-specific 
transcription factors HNF4A, FOXA1 and FOXA2 and is associated with cell-type
specific gene transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genomic binding of STATs is primarily
determined by the cell type and further specificity is achieved in part by
juxtaposed binding of cell-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3564941
PMID: 23324445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051858. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Activation mechanisms of natural killer cells during influenza virus infection.

Hwang I(1), Scott JM, Kakarla T, Duriancik DM, Choi S, Cho C, Lee T, Park H,
French AR, Beli E, Gardner E, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.

During early viral infection, activation of natural killer (NK) cells elicits the
effector functions of target cell lysis and cytokine production. However, the
cellular and molecular mechanisms leading to NK cell activation during viral
infections are incompletely understood. In this study, using a model of acute
viral infection, we investigated the mechanisms controlling cytotoxic activity
and cytokine production in response to influenza (flu) virus. Analysis of
cytokine receptor deficient mice demonstrated that type I interferons (IFNs), but
not IL-12 or IL-18, were critical for the NK cell expression of both IFN-<U+03B3> and
granzyme B in response to flu infection. Further, adoptive transfer experiments
revealed that NK cell activation was mediated by type I IFNs acting directly on
NK cells. Analysis of signal transduction molecules showed that during flu
infection, STAT1 activation in NK cells was completely dependent on direct type I
IFN signaling, whereas STAT4 activation was only partially dependent. In
addition, granzyme B induction in NK cells was mediated by signaling primarily
through STAT1, but not STAT4, while IFN-<U+03B3> production was mediated by signaling
through STAT4, but not STAT1. Therefore, our findings demonstrate the importance 
of direct action of type I IFNs on NK cells to mount effective NK cell responses 
in the context of flu infection and delineate NK cell signaling pathways
responsible for controlling cytotoxic activity and cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC3534084
PMID: 23300570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Hum Immunol. 2013 May;74(5):586-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.11.033. Epub 2013 
Jan 19.

Association between polymorphism in STAT4 gene and risk of rheumatoid arthritis: 
a meta-analysis.

Tong G(1), Zhang X, Tong W, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang,
PR China. ghtong@126.com

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common chronic inflammatory autoimmune
disease, affecting 1% of the population worldwide. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) gene are suspected to have some relationship with the risk of RA. This
meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the relationship between the polymorphism
rs7574865 in STAT4 gene with RA and also examine whether the associations that
have been reported in these studies differ between ethnic groups.
METHODS: We retrieved the relevant articles from PubMed, EMBASE and the China
National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) databases. The odds ratios (ORs) and
their 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) associated with the minor T allele of
STAT4 rs7574865 SNP were extracted from the published studies and included in the
analysis. Meta-analyses were performed on the total data set and separately for
the major ethnic groups and RF and anti-CCP status. All analyses were performed
using the Stata software.
RESULTS: Twenty-three articles were included in the present analysis.
Meta-analysis showed an association between the STAT4 polymorphism and RA in all 
subjects (OR=1.299, 95%CI=1.230-1.371, P<0.001). Stratified analyses indicated
that the STAT4 rs7574865 T allele was significantly associated with RA in both
Caucasians and Asians, in both positive and negative RF patients versus controls,
also significantly in the presence of anti-CCP, both positive and negative. As
for genotypes of rs7574865 polymorphism, all the results were significant, no
matter in total subjects or stratified analyses by ethnic groups or by RF and
anti-CCP status.
CONCLUSION: Genetic polymorphism rs7574865 in STAT4 gene might be associated with
RA susceptibility in total subjects, major ethnic groups and different status of 
anti-CCP or RF.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23295549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Nat Genet. 2013 Feb;45(2):202-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.2520. Epub 2013 Jan 6.

Genome-wide association analysis identifies new susceptibility loci for Behçet's 
disease and epistasis between HLA-B*51 and ERAP1.

Kirino Y(1), Bertsias G, Ishigatsubo Y, Mizuki N, Tugal-Tutkun I, Seyahi E,
Ozyazgan Y, Sacli FS, Erer B, Inoko H, Emrence Z, Cakar A, Abaci N, Ustek D,
Satorius C, Ueda A, Takeno M, Kim Y, Wood GM, Ombrello MJ, Meguro A, Gül A,
Remmers EF, Kastner DL.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Disease Section, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Individuals with Behçet's disease suffer from episodic inflammation often
affecting the orogenital mucosa, skin and eyes. To discover new susceptibility
loci for Behçet's disease, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of
779,465 SNPs with imputed genotypes in 1,209 Turkish individuals with Behçet's
disease and 1,278 controls. We identified new associations at CCR1, STAT4 and
KLRC4. Additionally, two SNPs in ERAP1, encoding ERAP1 p.Asp575Asn and
p.Arg725Gln alterations, recessively conferred disease risk. These findings were 
replicated in 1,468 independent Turkish and/or 1,352 Japanese samples (combined
meta-analysis P < 2 × 10(-9)). We also found evidence for interaction between
HLA-B*51 and ERAP1 (P = 9 × 10(-4)). The CCR1 and STAT4 variants were associated 
with gene expression differences. Three risk loci shared with ankylosing
spondylitis and psoriasis (the MHC class I region, ERAP1 and IL23R and the MHC
class I-ERAP1 interaction), as well as two loci shared with inflammatory bowel
disease (IL23R and IL10) implicate shared pathogenic pathways in the
spondyloarthritides and Behçet's disease.

PMCID: PMC3810947
PMID: 23291587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2012;35(6):503-10.

[Analysis of disease-pathway by identifying susceptible genes to primary biliary 
cirrhosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences.

Erratum in
    Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2013;36(1):1. Makamura, Minoru [corrected to
Nakamura, Minoru].

High concordance rate in monozygotic twins and familial clustering of patients
with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) indicate the involvement of strong genetic
factors in the development of PBC. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
and subsequent meta-analyses in European descent have identified HLA and 21
non-HLA susceptibility loci which are involved in IL12/IL12R signaling,
TNF/TLR-NFKB signaling and B cell differentiation in the development of PBC. To
identify susceptibility loci for PBC in Japanese population, a GWAS and
subsequent replication study was performed in a total of 1327 PBC cases and 1120 
healthy controls. In addition to the most significant susceptibility region at
HLA, two significant (p<5×10(-8)) susceptibility loci (TNFSF15 and POU2AF1) were 
identified. Although these susceptibility loci are different from those
identified in European descent (IL12A, IL12RB2, SPIB), these loci are involved in
the same signaling pathways, differentiation of T lymphocyte to Th1 cells and
differentiation of B lymphocyte to plasma cells. Among 21 non-HLA susceptibility 
loci for PBC identified in GWASs of European descent, 10 loci (CD80, IKZF3, IL7R,
NFKB1, STAT4, TNFAIP2, CXCR5, MAP3K7IP1, rs6974491, DENND1B) showed significant
associations in the Japanese population. The comparative analysis of
disease-susceptibility genes in multiple ethnicities may provide an important
clue for the dissection of disease-pathogenesis.

PMID: 23291485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2013 Oct;45(2):170-9. doi: 10.1007/s12016-012-8346-7.

Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis - a comprehensive review.

Kurkó J(1), Besenyei T, Laki J, Glant TT, Mikecz K, Szekanecz Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Institute of Medicine, University of Debrecen
Medical and Health Science Center, Nagyerdei str 98, Debrecen, 4032, Hungary.

The "Bermuda triangle" of genetics, environment and autoimmunity is involved in
the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Various aspects of genetic
contribution to the etiology, pathogenesis and outcome of RA are discussed in
this review. The heritability of RA has been estimated to be about 60 %, while
the contribution of HLA to heritability has been estimated to be 11-37 %. Apart
from known shared epitope (SE) alleles, such as HLA-DRB1*01 and DRB1*04, other
HLA alleles, such as HLA-DRB1*13 and DRB1*15 have been linked to RA
susceptibility. A novel SE classification divides SE alleles into S1, S2, S3P and
S3D groups, where primarily S2 and S3P groups have been associated with
predisposition to seropositive RA. The most relevant non-HLA gene single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with RA include PTPN22, IL23R, TRAF1, 
CTLA4, IRF5, STAT4, CCR6, PADI4. Large genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have identified more than 30 loci involved in RA pathogenesis. HLA and some
non-HLA genes may differentiate between anti-citrullinated protein antibody
(ACPA) seropositive and seronegative RA. Genetic susceptibility has also been
associated with environmental factors, primarily smoking. Some GWAS studies
carried out in rodent models of arthritis have confirmed the role of human genes.
For example, in the collagen-induced (CIA) and proteoglycan-induced arthritis
(PgIA) models, two important loci - Pgia26/Cia5 and Pgia2/Cia2/Cia3,
corresponding the human PTPN22/CD2 and TRAF1/C5 loci, respectively - have been
identified. Finally, pharmacogenomics identified SNPs or multiple genetic
signatures that may be associated with responses to traditional disease-modifying
drugs and biologics.

PMCID: PMC3655138
PMID: 23288628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Feb;60:112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.11.004. Epub 2012
Dec 4.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of new N-alkylcarbazole derivatives as STAT3 
inhibitors: preliminary study.

Saturnino C(1), Palladino C, Napoli M, Sinicropi MS, Botta A, Sala M, Carcereri
de Prati A, Novellino E, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, University of Salerno, Via Ponte Don
Melillo 8, 84024 Fisciano (SA), Italy. saturnino@unisa.it

The signalling pathway of Janus tyrosine Kinases-Signal Transducers and
Activators of Transcription (JAK-STAT) is activated by a number of cytokines,
hormones (GH, erythropoietin and prolactin), and growth factors. JAK-STAT
signalling is involved in regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. These activities are due to different members of JAK-STAT family
consisting of: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, Tyk2 and STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a,
STAT5b, STAT6. Recent studies suggest a key role for STAT family proteins, in
particular for STAT3, in selectively inducing and maintaining a pro-carcinogenic 
inflammatory microenvironment, that promote tumour cells transformation.
Moreover, a striking correlation between cancer development/progression and STAT3
persistent activation exists, probably due to STAT3 promoting of the
pro-oncogenic inflammatory pathways, like NF-kB, IL-6 and JAK family kinases.
Recent study demonstrated that carbazoles can inhibit STAT3 mediated
transcription. From these evidences, STAT3 represents a therapeutic target, so we
have synthesized a new set of N-alkylcarbazole derivatives substituted in
positions 2, 4 and 6, to evaluate their activity on STAT3. Some of these
compounds showed an interesting activity as STAT3 selective inhibitors; in
particular, compounds 9a 9b and 9c revealed to inhibit the STAT3 activation for
the 50%, 90% and 95%, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23287056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052319. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Gene expression profiling combined with bioinformatics analysis identify
biomarkers for Parkinson disease.

Diao H(1), Li X, Hu S, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

Parkinson disease (PD) progresses relentlessly and affects approximately 4% of
the population aged over 80 years old. It is difficult to diagnose in its early
stages. The purpose of our study is to identify molecular biomarkers for PD
initiation using a computational bioinformatics analysis of gene expression. We
downloaded the gene expression profile of PD from Gene Expression Omnibus and
identified differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and dysfunctional pathways in 
PD patients compared to controls. Besides, we built a regulatory network by
mapping the DCGs to known regulatory data between transcription factors (TFs) and
target genes and calculated the regulatory impact factor of each transcription
factor. As the results, a total of 1004 genes associated with PD initiation were 
identified. Pathway enrichment of these genes suggests that biological processes 
of protein turnover were impaired in PD. In the regulatory network, HLF, E2F1 and
STAT4 were found have altered expression levels in PD patients. The expression
levels of other transcription factors, NKX3-1, TAL1, RFX1 and EGR3, were not
found altered. However, they regulated differentially expressed genes. In
conclusion, we suggest that HLF, E2F1 and STAT4 may be used as molecular
biomarkers for PD; however, more work is needed to validate our result.

PMCID: PMC3532340
PMID: 23284986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nat Genet. 2013 Jan;45(1):72-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2483. Epub 2012 Dec 16.

Genetic variants in STAT4 and HLA-DQ genes confer risk of hepatitis B
virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jiang DK(1), Sun J, Cao G, Liu Y, Lin D, Gao YZ, Ren WH, Long XD, Zhang H, Ma XP,
Wang Z, Jiang W, Chen TY, Gao Y, Sun LD, Long JR, Huang HX, Wang D, Yu H, Zhang
P, Tang LS, Peng B, Cai H, Liu TT, Zhou P, Liu F, Lin X, Tao S, Wan B, Sai-Yin
HX, Qin LX, Yin J, Liu L, Wu C, Pei Y, Zhou YF, Zhai Y, Lu PX, Tan A, Zuo XB, Fan
J, Chang J, Gu X, Wang NJ, Li Y, Liu YK, Zhai K, Zhang H, Hu Z, Liu J, Yi Q,
Xiang Y, Shi R, Ding Q, Zheng W, Shu XO, Mo Z, Shugart YY, Zhang XJ, Zhou G, Shen
H, Zheng SL, Xu J, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

To identify genetic susceptibility loci for hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the Chinese population, we carried out a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 2,514 chronic HBV carriers (1,161 HCC
cases and 1,353 controls) followed by a 2-stage validation among 6 independent
populations of chronic HBV carriers (4,319 cases and 4,966 controls). The joint
analyses showed that HCC risk was significantly associated with two independent
loci: rs7574865 at STAT4, P(meta) = 2.48 × 10(-10), odds ratio (OR) = 1.21; and
rs9275319 at HLA-DQ, P(meta) = 2.72 × 10(-17), OR = 1.49. The risk allele G at
rs7574865 was significantly associated with lower mRNA levels of STAT4 in both
the HCC tissues and nontumor tissues of 155 individuals with HBV-related HCC
(P(trend) = 0.0008 and 0.0002, respectively). We also found significantly lower
mRNA expression of STAT4 in HCC tumor tissues compared with paired adjacent
nontumor tissues (P = 2.33 × 10(-14)).

PMCID: PMC4105840
PMID: 23242368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Genome Res. 2013 Mar;23(3):462-72. doi: 10.1101/gr.147652.112. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Spatial congregation of STAT binding directs selective nuclear architecture
during T-cell functional differentiation.

Hakim O(1), Sung MH, Nakayamada S, Voss TC, Baek S, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Ofir.Hakim@biu.ac.il

Higher-order genome organization shows tissue-specific patterns. However,
functional relevance and the mechanisms shaping the genome architecture are
poorly understood. Here we report a profound shift from promiscuous to highly
selective genome organization that accompanies the effector lineage choice of
differentiating T cells. As multipotent naive cells receive antigenic signals and
commit to a T helper (Th) pathway, the genome-wide contacts of a lineage-specific
cytokine locus are preferentially enriched for functionally relevant genes.
Despite the establishment of divergent interactomes and global reprogramming of
transcription in Th1 versus Th2, the overall expression status of the contact
genes is surprisingly similar between the two lineages. Importantly, during
differentiation, the genomic contacts are retained and strengthened precisely at 
DNA binding sites of the specific lineage-determining STAT transcription factor. 
In cells from the specific STAT knock-out mouse, the signature cytokine locus is 
unable to shed the promiscuous contacts established in the naive T cells,
indicating the importance of genomic STAT binding. Altogether, the global
aggregation of STAT binding loci from genic and nongenic regions highlights a new
role for differentiation-promoting transcription factors in direct specification 
of higher-order nuclear architecture through interacting with regulatory regions.
Such subnuclear environments have significant implications for efficient
functioning of the mature effector lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC3589535
PMID: 23212947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 1;288(5):3048-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.361709. Epub 2012
Dec 3.

Proviral integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus (PIM) kinases promote
human T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Tahvanainen J(1), Kyläniemi MK, Kanduri K, Gupta B, Lähteenmäki H, Kallonen T,
Rajavuori A, Rasool O, Koskinen PJ, Rao KV, Lähdesmäki H, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi, 20520
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of human primary T helper 1 (Th1) cells from naïve precursor 
cells is regulated by a complex, interrelated signaling network. The
identification of factors regulating the early steps of Th1 cell polarization can
provide important insight in the development of therapeutics for many
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. The serine/threonine-specific proviral
integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus (PIM) kinases PIM1 and PIM2
have been implicated in the cytokine-dependent proliferation and survival of
lymphocytes. We have established that the third member of this family, PIM3, is
also expressed in human primary Th cells and identified a new function for the
entire PIM kinase family in T lymphocytes. Although PIM kinases are expressed
more in Th1 than Th2 cells, we demonstrate here that these kinases positively
influence Th1 cell differentiation. Our RNA interference results from human
primary Th cells also suggest that PIM kinases promote the production of IFN<U+03B3>,
the hallmark cytokine produced by Th1 cells. Consistent with this, they also seem
to be important for the up-regulation of the critical Th1-driving factor, T box
expressed in T cells (T-BET), and the IL-12/STAT4 signaling pathway during the
early Th1 differentiation process. In summary, we have identified PIM kinases as 
new regulators of human primary Th1 cell differentiation, thus providing new
insights into the mechanisms controlling the selective development of human Th
cell subsets.

PMCID: PMC3561529
PMID: 23209281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Transplantation. 2013 Jan 15;95(1):203-8. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318277e2f6.

Genetic variants of STAT-4 affect the development of graft fibrosis after liver
transplantation for HCV-induced liver disease.

Eurich D(1), Boas-Knoop S, Struecker B, Neuhaus R, Neuhaus P, Bahra M.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Campus Virchow, Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation
Surgery, Berlin, Germany. dennis.eurich@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) reinfection after liver transplantation may
lead to recirrhosis and seems to be influenced by genetic factors. The aim of our
study was to evaluate the role of STAT-4-polymorphisms in the development of
HCV-related graft disease based on protocol biopsies.
METHODS: One hundred sixty transplant patients with HCV recurrence were genotyped
for STAT-4 (rs7574865) by polymerase chain reaction. Fibrosis stages were
determined based on Desmet and Scheuer classification. SPSS was used for the
statistical analysis of genotype distribution and of time to the development of
advanced fibrosis among the genotypes.
RESULTS: During a comparable observation period of 86.2 months (P=0.654), 65
patients (46.5%) developed advanced fibrosis. Advanced fibrosis was observed
significantly more frequent in patients (n=34) with at least one T-allele (53.1
vs. 32.3%; P=0.013) compared with homozygotes for G-allele (n=31). Significant
differences in the duration of advanced fibrosis development were detected
between patients with at least one T-allele compared with G-allele (34.4 vs. 49.0
months; P=0.022). No impact was observed regarding the outcome of
interferon-based antiviral treatment (P=0.297) and the occurrence of acute
cellular rejection (P=0.365).
CONCLUSION: Present results indicate a possible impact of genetic confounders in 
the recipient on graft fibrogenesis, thus explaining significantly different
graft behavior observed after transplantation for HCV-associated liver disease.
STAT-4-T-allele is identified as fibrogenic factor and seems to have a negative
impact on HCV-induced fibrosis development.

PMID: 23202532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Front Med. 2012 Dec;6(4):354-9. doi: 10.1007/s11684-012-0234-2. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

The genetics of Behçet's disease in a Chinese population.

Hou S(1), Kijlstra A, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China.

Behçet's disease is defined as a multisystemic inflammatory disease. Although the
precise pathogenesis and etiology is still a mystery, accumulating evidence shows
that genetic variants of immune-related genes have a profound influence on the
development of Behçet's disease. To explore the genetic factors for Behçet's
disease, our group investigated the association of Behçet's disease with multiple
immune response genes and has identified multiple Behçet's disease-related
immunoregulatory pathways in the Chinese Han population. A large number of gene
polymorphisms were studied including STAT4, IL23R, CD40, CCR1/CCR3, STAT3, OPN,
IL17, JAK2, MCP-1, CTLA4, PD-1, PD-L1, PD-L2, TGRBR3, CCR6, PTPN22, FCRL3, IRF5, 
SUMO4 and UBAC2. Significant associations were found between Behçet's disease and
STAT4, IL23R, CD40, CCR1/CCR3, STAT3, MCP-1, TGFBR3, FCRL3, SUMO4, UBAC2. These
genetic predisposition studies support an important role for both lymphocyte
differentiation as well as ubiquitination pathways. These findings are helpful in
elucidating the pathogenesis of Behçet's disease and hopefully will allow the
development of novel treatment regimes.

PMID: 23161479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Mol Med (Berl). 2013 Apr;91(4):485-95. doi: 10.1007/s00109-012-0964-2. Epub
2012 Oct 12.

Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate modulates differentiation of naïve CD4<U+207A> T
cells into specific lineage effector cells.

Wang J(1), Pae M, Meydani SN, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Immunology Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging, Tufts University, 711 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

CD4(+) T helper (Th) subsets Th1, Th9, and Th17 cells are implicated in inducing 
autoimmunity whereas regulatory T cells (Treg) have a protective effect. We and
others have previously shown that epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) attenuates
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) and alters CD4(+) T cell
subpopulations. In this study, we investigated how EGCG impacts differentiation
of naïve CD4(+) T cells into different effector lineages and report that EGCG
impeded Th1, Th9, and Th17 differentiation and prevented IL-6-induced suppression
of Treg development. We further showed that EGCG inhibited T-bet, PU.1, and
ROR<U+03B3>t, the specific transcription factors for Th1, Th9, and Th17 differentiation,
respectively. These effects, in turn, may be mediated by EGCG-induced
downregulation of transducers p-STAT1 and p-STAT4 for Th1, and p-STAT3 for Th17. 
EGCG-induced change in Th17/Treg balance may be mediated by its inhibition of
IL-6 signaling because EGCG inhibited soluble IL-6R, membrane gp130, and
IL-6-induced phosphorylation of STAT3. This notion was further supported by the
in vivo results showing inhibited IL-6 and soluble IL-6R but increased soluble
gp130 levels in plasma from EAE mice fed EGCG. Together, our results suggest that
EGCG modulates development of CD4(+) T cell lineages through impacting their
respective and interactive regulatory networks ultimately leading to an
attenuated autoimmune response.

PMID: 23064699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Aging (Albany NY). 2012 Sep;4(9):648-59.

Increased IL-21 secretion by aged CD4+T cells is associated with prolonged STAT-4
activation and CMV seropositivity.

Agrawal A(1), Su H, Chen J, Osann K, Agrawal S, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Basic and Clinical Immunology, University 
of California, Irvine, CA 92617, USA. aagrawal@uci.edu

Advancing age leads to significant decline in immune functions. IL-21 is produced
primarily by T follicular helper (Tfh) cells and is required for effective immune
cell functions. Here we compared the induction of IL-21 in aged and young
subjects. Our investigation demonstrates that CD4+T cells from healthy elderly
individuals (age = 65) secreted significantly higher levels of IL-21 on priming
with aged and young dendritic cells (DC). Though the aged and young DCs secreted 
comparable levels of IL-12 on stimulation with anti-CD40 antibody and LPS,
culture of DCs with aged CD4+ T cells resulted in increased production of IL-21
as compared to that with young CD4+ T cells. Further examination revealed that
the response of aged naïve CD4+ T cells to IL-12 was altered, resulting in
increased differentiation of aged Th cells towards Tfh cells. Investigation into 
the signaling mechanism suggested that phosphorylation of STAT-4 in response to
IL-12 was sustained for a longer duration in aged CD4+ T cells as compared to
CD4+ T cells from young subjects. Additional analysis demonstrated that increased
IL-21 secretion correlated with chronic CMV infection in aged subjects. These
findings indicate that chronic CMV infection alters the response of aged CD4+ T
cells to IL-12 resulting in an increased secretion of IL-21 and that aging
affects Tfh cell responses in humans which may contribute to age-associated
inflammation and immune dysfunctions.

PMCID: PMC3492228
PMID: 23064011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Dec;39(12):10627-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1952-x. Epub 2012
Oct 7.

Genome-wide pathway analysis of genome-wide association studies on systemic lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.

Lee YH(1), Bae SC, Choi SJ, Ji JD, Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
Anam Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine, 126-1, 5-ga, Anam-dong,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, Korea. lyhcgh@korea.ac.kr

The aim of this study was to explore candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and candidate mechanisms of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Two SLE genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
datasets were included in this study. Meta-analysis was conducted using 737,984
SNPs in 1,527 SLE cases and 3,421 controls of European ancestry, and 4,429 SNPs
that met a threshold of p < 0.01 in a Korean RA GWAS dataset was used.
ICSNPathway (identify candidate causal SNPs and pathways) analysis was applied to
the meta-analysis results of the SLE GWAS datasets, and a RA GWAS dataset. The
most significant result of SLE GWAS meta-analysis concerned rs2051549 in the
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region (p = 3.36E-22). In the non-HLA region,
meta-analysis identified 6 SNPs associated with SLE with genome-wide significance
(STAT4, TNPO3, BLK, FAM167A, and IRF5). ICSNPathway identified five candidate
causal SNPs and 13 candidate causal pathways. This pathway-based analysis
provides three hypotheses of the biological mechanism involved. First, rs8084 and
rs7192 <U+2192> HLA-DRA <U+2192> bystander B cell activation. Second, rs1800629 <U+2192> TNF <U+2192>
cytokine network. Third, rs1150752 and rs185819 <U+2192> TNXB <U+2192> collagen metabolic
process. ICSNPathway analysis identified three candidate causal non-HLA SNPs and 
four candidate causal pathways involving the PADI4, MTR, PADI2, and TPH2 genes of
RA. We identified five candidate SNPs and thirteen pathways, involving bystander 
B cell activation, cytokine network, and collagen metabolic processing, which may
contribute to SLE susceptibility, and we revealed candidate causal non-HLA SNPs, 
genes, and pathways of RA.

PMID: 23053960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45356. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045356. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Further evidence of subphenotype association with systemic lupus erythematosus
susceptibility loci: a European cases only study.

Alonso-Perez E(1), Suarez-Gestal M, Calaza M, Ordi-Ros J, Balada E, Bijl M,
Papasteriades C, Carreira P, Skopouli FN, Witte T, Endreffy E, Marchini M,
Migliaresi S, Sebastiani GD, Santos MJ, Suarez A, Blanco FJ, Barizzone N,
Pullmann R, Ruzickova S, Lauwerys BR, Gomez-Reino JJ, Gonzalez A; European
Consortium of SLE DNA Collections.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Investigacion 10 and Rheumatology Unit, Instituto de
Investigacion Sanitaria - Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) shows a spectrum of clinical
manifestations that complicate its diagnosis, treatment and research. This
variability is likely related with environmental exposures and genetic factors
among which known SLE susceptibility loci are prime candidates. The first
published analyses seem to indicate that this is the case for some of them, but
results are still inconclusive and we aimed to further explore this question.
METHODS: European SLE patients, 1444, recruited at 17 centres from 10 countries
were analyzed. Genotypes for 26 SLE associated SNPs were compared between
patients with and without each of 11 clinical features: ten of the American
College of Rheumatology (ACR) classification criteria (except ANAs) and age of
disease onset. These analyses were adjusted for centre of recruitment, top
ancestry informative markers, gender and time of follow-up. Overlap of samples
with previous studies was excluded for assessing replication.
RESULTS: THERE WERE THREE NEW ASSOCIATIONS: the SNPs in XKR6 and in FAM167A-BLK
were associated with lupus nephritis (OR=0.76 and 1.30, P(corr)<U+200A>=0.007 and 0.03, 
respectively) and the SNP of MECP2, which is in chromosome X, with earlier age of
disease onset in men. The previously reported association of STAT4 with early age
of disease onset was replicated. Some other results were suggestive of the
presence of additional associations. Together, the association signals provided
support to some previous findings and to the characterization of lupus nephritis,
autoantibodies and age of disease onset as the clinical features more associated 
with SLE loci.
CONCLUSION: Some of the SLE loci shape the disease phenotype in addition to
increase susceptibility to SLE. This influence is more prominent for some
clinical features than for others. However, results are only partially consistent
between studies and subphenotype specific GWAS are needed to unravel their
genetic component.

PMCID: PMC3458859
PMID: 23049788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2012 Nov;8(11):632. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2012.179. Epub 2012
Oct 9.

Genetics: GWAS identifies STAT4 as a susceptibility locus for Behçet disease in
Han Chinese people.

Buckland J.

PMID: 23045256  [PubMed]


283. Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):660-73. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.09.007. Epub 2012 
Oct 4.

The transcription factor T-bet is induced by multiple pathways and prevents an
endogenous Th2 cell program during Th1 cell responses.

Zhu J(1), Jankovic D, Oler AJ, Wei G, Sharma S, Hu G, Guo L, Yagi R, Yamane H,
Punkosdy G, Feigenbaum L, Zhao K, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):591-3.

T-bet is a critical transcription factor for T helper 1 (Th1) cell
differentiation. To study the regulation and functions of T-bet, we developed a
T-bet-ZsGreen reporter mouse strain. We determined that interleukin-12 (IL-12)
and interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) were redundant in inducing T-bet in mice infected with
Toxoplasma gondii and that T-bet did not contribute to its own expression when
induced by IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3>. By contrast, T-bet and the transcription factor Stat4
were critical for IFN-<U+03B3> production whereas IFN-<U+03B3> signaling was dispensable for
inducing IFN-<U+03B3>. Loss of T-bet resulted in activation of an endogenous program
driving Th2 cell differentiation in cells expressing T-bet-ZsGreen. Genome-wide
analyses indicated that T-bet directly induced many Th1 cell-related genes but
indirectly suppressed Th2 cell-related genes. Our study revealed redundancy and
synergy among several Th1 cell-inducing pathways in regulating the expression of 
T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>, and a critical role of T-bet in suppressing an endogenous Th2
cell-associated program.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3717271
PMID: 23041064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Oct 4;14(5):R210. doi: 10.1186/ar4048.

TLR4-mediated IL-12 production enhances IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-1ß production, which
inhibits TGF-ß production and promotes antibody-induced joint inflammation.

Kim HS, Chung DH.

INTRODUCTION: Toll-like receptor (TLR)4 promotes joint inflammation in mice.
Despite that several studies report a functional link between TLR4 and
interleukin-(IL-)1ß in arthritis, TLR4-mediated regulation of the complicated
cytokine network in arthritis is poorly understood. To address this, we
investigated the mechanisms by which TLR4 regulates the cytokine network in
antibody-induced arthritis.
METHODS: To induce arthritis, we injected mice with K/BxN serum. TLR4-mediated
pathogenesis in antibody-induced arthritis was explored by measuring joint
inflammation, cytokine levels and histological alteration.
RESULTS: Compared to wild type (WT) mice, TLR4-/- mice showed attenuated
arthritis and low interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, IL-12p35 and IL-1ß transcript levels in the
joints, but high transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß expression. Injection of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) enhanced arthritis and exaggerated joint cytokine
alterations in WT, but not TLR4-/- or IL-12p35-/- mice. Moreover, STAT4
phosphorylation in joint cells and intracellular IL-12p35 expression in
macrophages, mast cells and Gr-1+ cells were detected in WT mice with arthritis
and enhanced by LPS injection. Therefore, IL-12p35 appears to act downstream of
TLR4 in antibody-induced arthritis. TLR4-mediated IL-12 production enhanced IFN-<U+03B3>
and IL-1ß production via T-bet and pro-IL-1ß production. Recombinant IL-12, IFN-<U+03B3>
and IL-1ß administration restored arthritis, but reduced joint TGF-ß levels in
TLR4-/- mice. Moreover, a TGF-ß blockade restored arthritis in TLR4-/- mice.
Adoptive transfer of TLR4-deficient macrophages and mast cells minimally altered 
joint inflammation and cytokine levels in macrophage- and mast cell-depleted WT
mice, respectively, whereas transfer of WT macrophages or mast cells restored
joint inflammation and cytokine expression. Gr-1+ cell-depleted splenocytes
partially restored arthritis in TLR4-/- mice.
CONCLUSION: TLR4-mediated IL-12 production by joint macrophages, mast cells and
Gr-1+ cells enhances IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-1ß production, which suppresses TGF-ß
production, thereby promoting antibody-induced arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3580522
PMID: 23036692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Oct;4(10):1112-25. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201272.

A guanidine-rich regulatory oligodeoxynucleotide improves type-2 diabetes in
obese mice by blocking T-cell differentiation.

Cheng X(1), Wang J, Xia N, Yan XX, Tang TT, Chen H, Zhang HJ, Liu J, Kong W,
Sjöberg S, Folco E, Libby P, Liao YH, Shi GP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Immunology, Institute of Cardiology, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technolog,
Laboratory of Biological Targeted Therapy of the Ministry of Education, Wuhan, P.
R. China. nathancx@mail.hust.edu.cn

T lymphocytes exhibit pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory activities in obesity
and diabetes, depending on their subtypes. Guanidine-rich immunosuppressive
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) effectively control Th1/Th2-cell counterbalance.
This study reveals a non-toxic regulatory ODN (ODNR01) that inhibits Th1- and
Th17-cell polarization by binding to STAT1/3/4 and blocking their phosphorylation
without affecting Th2 and regulatory T cells. ODNR01 improves glucose tolerance
and insulin sensitivity in both diet-induced obese (DIO) and genetically
generated obese (ob/ob) mice. Mechanistic studies show that ODNR01 suppresses
Th1- and Th17-cell differentiation in white adipose tissue, thereby reducing
macrophage accumulation and M1 macrophage inflammatory molecule expression
without affecting M2 macrophages. While ODNR01 shows no effect on diabetes in
lymphocyte-free Rag1-deficient DIO mice, it enhances glucose tolerance and
insulin sensitivity in CD4(+) T-cell-reconstituted Rag1-deficient DIO mice,
suggesting its beneficial effect on insulin resistance is T-cell-dependent.
Therefore, regulatory ODNR01 reduces obesity-associated insulin resistance
through modulation of T-cell differentiation.

Copyrights © 2012 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3491840
PMID: 23027613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3374-82. doi: 10.1002/art.34567.

European genetic ancestry is associated with a decreased risk of lupus nephritis.

Richman IB(1), Taylor KE, Chung SA, Trupin L, Petri M, Yelin E, Graham RR, Lee A,
Behrens TW, Gregersen PK, Seldin MF, Criswell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: African Americans, East Asians, and Hispanics with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) are more likely to develop renal disease than are SLE
patients of European descent. This study was undertaken to investigate whether
European genetic ancestry protects against the development of lupus nephritis,
with the aim of exploring the genetic and socioeconomic factors that might
explain this effect.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of SLE patients from a multiethnic case
collection. Participants were genotyped for 126 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) informative for ancestry. A subset of participants was also genotyped for 
80 SNPs in 14 candidate genes for renal disease in SLE. Logistic regression was
used to test the association between European ancestry and renal disease.
Analyses were adjusted for continental ancestries, socioeconomic status (SES),
and candidate genes.
RESULTS: Participants (n = 1,906) had, on average, 62.4% European, 15.8% African,
11.5% East Asian, 6.5% Amerindian, and 3.8% South Asian ancestry. Among the
participants, 656 (34%) had renal disease. A 10% increase in the proportion of
European ancestry estimated in each participant was associated with a 15%
reduction in the odds of having renal disease, after adjustment for disease
duration and sex (odds ratio 0.85, 95% confidence interval 0.82-0.87; P = 1.9 ×
10(-30) ). Adjustment for other genetic ancestries, measures of SES, or SNPs in
the genes most associated with renal disease (IRF5 [rs4728142], BLK [rs2736340], 
STAT4 [rs3024912], and HLA-DRB1*0301 and DRB1*1501) did not substantively alter
this relationship.
CONCLUSION: European ancestry is protective against the development of renal
disease in SLE, an effect that is independent of other genetic ancestries,
candidate risk alleles, and socioeconomic factors.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3865923
PMID: 23023776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Dec;64(12):4104-13. doi: 10.1002/art.37708.

Identification of a susceptibility locus in STAT4 for Behçet's disease in Han
Chinese in a genome-wide association study.

Hou S(1), Yang Z, Du L, Jiang Z, Shu Q, Chen Y, Li F, Zhou Q, Ohno S, Chen R,
Kijlstra A, Rosenbaum JT, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University and Chongqing
Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify susceptibility loci for Behçet's disease (BD) and
elucidate their functional role.
METHODS: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) and functional studies were
conducted. A total of 149 patients and 951 controls were enrolled in the initial 
GWAS, and 554 patients and 1,159 controls were enrolled in the replication study.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction, luciferase reporter assay, and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay were performed.
RESULTS: Our GWAS and replication studies identified a susceptibility locus
around STAT4 (single-nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs] rs7574070, rs7572482, and
rs897200; P = 3.36 × 10(-7) to 6.20 × 10(-9) ). Increased expression of STAT4 was
observed in individuals carrying the rs897200 risk genotype AA. Consistent with
the idea that STAT4 regulates the production of interleukin-17 (IL-17) and
interferon-<U+03B3>, IL17 messenger RNA and protein levels were increased in individuals
carrying the rs897200 risk genotype AA. Interestingly, the risk allele A of
rs897200 creates a putative transcription factor binding site. To test whether it
directly affects STAT4 transcription, an in vitro luciferase reporter gene assay 
was performed. Higher transcription activity was observed in individuals carrying
the risk allele A, suggesting that rs897200 is likely to directly affect STAT4
expression. Additionally, 2 SNPs, rs7574070 and rs7572482, which are tightly
linked with rs897200, were cis-expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) SNPs,
suggesting that SNP rs897200 is an eQTL SNP. Most importantly, the clinical
disease severity score was higher in individuals with the rs897200 risk genotype 
AA.
CONCLUSION: These findings strongly suggest that STAT4 is a novel locus
underlying BD. We propose a model in which up-regulation of STAT4 expression and 
subsequent STAT4-driven production of inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-17,
constitute a potential pathway leading to BD.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 23001997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Oct 5;91(4):721-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.010. Epub
2012 Sep 20.

Genome-wide association study identifies TNFSF15 and POU2AF1 as susceptibility
loci for primary biliary cirrhosis in the Japanese population.

Nakamura M(1), Nishida N, Kawashima M, Aiba Y, Tanaka A, Yasunami M, Nakamura H, 
Komori A, Nakamuta M, Zeniya M, Hashimoto E, Ohira H, Yamamoto K, Onji M, Kaneko 
S, Honda M, Yamagiwa S, Nakao K, Ichida T, Takikawa H, Seike M, Umemura T, Ueno
Y, Sakisaka S, Kikuchi K, Ebinuma H, Yamashiki N, Tamura S, Sugawara Y, Mori A,
Yagi S, Shirabe K, Taketomi A, Arai K, Monoe K, Ichikawa T, Taniai M, Miyake Y,
Kumagi T, Abe M, Yoshizawa K, Joshita S, Shimoda S, Honda K, Takahashi H, Hirano 
K, Takeyama Y, Harada K, Migita K, Ito M, Yatsuhashi H, Fukushima N, Ota H,
Komatsu T, Saoshiro T, Ishida J, Kouno H, Kouno H, Yagura M, Kobayashi M, Muro T,
Masaki N, Hirata K, Watanabe Y, Nakamura Y, Shimada M, Hirashima N, Komeda T,
Sugi K, Koga M, Ario K, Takesaki E, Maehara Y, Uemoto S, Kokudo N, Tsubouchi H,
Mizokami M, Nakanuma Y, Tokunaga K, Ishibashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization (NHO) Nagasaki
Medical Center, and Department of Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School
of Biomedical Sciences, Omura, Nagasaki 856-8562, Japan. nakamuram@nmc.hosp.go.jp

For the identification of susceptibility loci for primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC), a genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed in 963 Japanese
individuals (487 PBC cases and 476 healthy controls) and in a subsequent
replication study that included 1,402 other Japanese individuals (787 cases and
615 controls). In addition to the most significant susceptibility region, human
leukocyte antigen (HLA), we identified two significant susceptibility loci,
TNFSF15 (rs4979462) and POU2AF1 (rs4938534) (combined odds ratio [OR] = 1.56, p =
2.84 × 10(-14) for rs4979462, and combined OR = 1.39, p = 2.38 × 10(-8) for
rs4938534). Among 21 non-HLA susceptibility loci for PBC identified in GWASs of
individuals of European descent, three loci (IL7R, IKZF3, and CD80) showed
significant associations (combined p = 3.66 × 10(-8), 3.66 × 10(-9), and 3.04 ×
10(-9), respectively) and STAT4 and NFKB1 loci showed suggestive association with
PBC (combined p = 1.11 × 10(-6) and 1.42 × 10(-7), respectively) in the Japanese 
population. These observations indicated the existence of ethnic differences in
genetic susceptibility loci to PBC and the importance of TNF signaling and B cell
differentiation for the development of PBC in individuals of European descent and
Japanese individuals.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3484650
PMID: 23000144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2012 Nov 1;120(18):3718-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-05-428672. Epub 2012
Sep 11.

Regulating type 1 IFN effects in CD8 T cells during viral infections: changing
STAT4 and STAT1 expression for function.

Gil MP(1), Ploquin MJ, Watford WT, Lee SH, Kim K, Wang X, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ,
Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Type 1 IFNs can conditionally activate all of the signal transducers and
activators of transcription molecules (STATs), including STAT4. The
best-characterized signaling pathways use STAT1, however, and type 1 IFN
inhibition of cell proliferation is STAT1 dependent. We report that type 1 IFNs
can basally stimulate STAT1- and STAT4-dependent effects in CD8 T cells, but that
CD8 T cells responding to infections of mice with lymphocytic choriomenigitis
virus have elevated STAT4 and lower STAT1 expression with significant
consequences for modifying the effects of type 1 IFN exposure. The phenotype was 
associated with preferential type 1 IFN activation of STAT4 compared with STAT1. 
Stimulation through the TCR induced elevated STAT4 expression, and STAT4 was
required for peak expansion of antigen-specific CD8 T cells, low STAT1 levels,
and resistance to type 1 IFN-mediated inhibition of proliferation. Thus, a
mechanism is discovered for regulating the consequences of type 1 IFN exposure in
CD8 T cells, with STAT4 acting as a key molecule in driving optimal
antigen-specific responses and overcoming STAT1-dependent inhibition of
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3488885
PMID: 22968462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2012 Nov;22(11):784-95. doi:
10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283589a76.

Limited contribution of common genetic variants to risk for liver injury due to a
variety of drugs.

Urban TJ(1), Shen Y, Stolz A, Chalasani N, Fontana RJ, Rochon J, Ge D, Shianna
KV, Daly AK, Lucena MI, Nelson MR, Molokhia M, Aithal GP, Floratos A, Pe'er I,
Serrano J, Bonkovsky H, Davern TJ, Lee WM, Navarro VJ, Talwalkar JA, Goldstein
DB, Watkins PB; Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network; DILIGEN; EUDRAGENE; Spanish
DILI Registry; International Serious Adverse Events Consortium.

Collaborators: Daly AK, Aithal GP, Dillon JF, Pirmohamed M, Day CP, Donaldson PT,
Bernal W, Park BK, Khoo S, Gilmore I, Henderson J, Davies C, Hawkins K, Hanson A,
Evely J, Hussaini H, Mills P, Griffiths W, Collier J, Brind A, Fisher N, Shearman
J, Elias E, Grant A, Austin A, Gordon F, Cramp M, Saksena S, McMurtry HJ,
Thompson N, Williams R, Morgan M, Phillips EM, Patel M, Mitchison H, Kingham JG, 
Das D, Collier J, Hellier S, Groome M, Miller M, McKeigue P, Stricker B, Yue QY, 
Wadelius M, Eliasson E, Hallberg P, Melhus H, Carvajal A, Ibáñez L,
Bondon-Guitton E, Lapeyre-Mestre M, Montastruc JL, Conforti A, Velo G, Eichelbaum
M, Salado I, Sainz M, Vendrell L, Succurro F, Smerghetto M, Buyukcelik R, Arp P, 
Andrade RJ, Lucena MI, Stephens C, Ulzurrun E, Borraz Y, Ruiz-Cabello F,
Lopez-Nevot MA, Romero-Gomez M, Fernández MC, Peláez G, Casado M, Navarro JM,
Guarner C, Soriano G, Roman EM, Muñoz-Yague T, Solís-Herruzo JA, Castiella A,
Zapata EM, Moreno M, Calleja JL, de la Revilla J, Lo Lacono O.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a serious adverse drug
event that is suspected to have a heritable component. We carried out a
genome-wide association study of 783 individuals of European ancestry who
experienced DILI due to more than 200 implicated drugs.
METHODS: DILI patients from the US-based Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network
(n=401) and three international registries (n=382) were genotyped with the
Illumina 1Mduo BeadChip and compared with population controls (n=3001). Potential
associations were tested in 307 independent Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network
cases.
RESULTS: After accounting for known major histocompatibility complex risk alleles
for flucloxacillin-DILI and amoxicillin/clavulanate-DILI, there were no
genome-wide significant associations, including in the major histocompatibility
complex region. Stratification of DILI cases according to clinical phenotypes
(injury type, latency, age of onset) also did not show significant associations. 
An analysis of hepatocellular DILI (n=285) restricted to 193 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms previously associated with autoimmune disease showed a trend
association for rs7574865, in the vicinity of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 4 (STAT4) (P=4.5×10(-4)). This association was replicated in an
independent cohort of 168 hepatocellular DILI cases (P=0.011 and 1.5×10(-5) for
combined cohorts). No significant associations were found with stratification by 
other clinical or demographic variables.
CONCLUSION: Although not significant at the genome-wide level, the association
between hepatocellular DILI and STAT4 is consistent with the emerging role of the
immune system in DILI. However, the lack of genome-wide association study
findings supports the idea that strong genetic determinants of DILI may be
largely drug-specific or may reflect rare genetic variations, which were not
assessed in our study.

PMCID: PMC3636716
PMID: 22968431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):501-10. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.05.031. Epub 2012 
Sep 6.

T-bet(+) Treg cells undergo abortive Th1 cell differentiation due to impaired
expression of IL-12 receptor ß2.

Koch MA(1), Thomas KR, Perdue NR, Smigiel KS, Srivastava S, Campbell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):443-4.

Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells limit inflammatory responses and maintain
immune homeostasis. Although comprised of several phenotypically and functionally
distinct subsets, the differentiation of specialized Treg cell populations within
the periphery is poorly characterized. We demonstrate that the development of
T-bet(+) Treg cells that potently inhibit T helper 1 (Th1) cell responses was
dependent on the transcription factor STAT1 and occurred directly in response to 
interferon-<U+03B3> produced by effector T cells. Additionally, delayed induction of the
IL-12Rß2 receptor component after STAT1 activation helped ensure that Treg cells 
do not readily complete STAT4-dependent Th1 cell development and lose their
ability to suppress effector T cell proliferation. Thus, we define a pathway of
abortive Th1 cell development that results in the specialization of peripheral
Treg cells and demonstrate that impaired expression of a single cytokine receptor
helps maintain Treg cell-suppressive function in the context of inflammatory Th1 
cell responses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3501343
PMID: 22960221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Trends Immunol. 2012 Dec;33(12):598-606. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2012.07.006. Epub 2012
Sep 5.

Cytokine-induced cytokine production by conventional and innate lymphoid cells.

Guo L(1), Junttila IS, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
lguo@niaid.nih.gov

Innate immune and differentiated T cells produce signature cytokines in response 
to cytokine stimulation. Optimal production requires stimulation by an NF-<U+03BA>B
inducer, most commonly an interleukin (IL)-1 family member, and a STAT activator.
Usually, there is linkage between the IL-1 family member, the activated STAT and 
the cytokines produced: IFN<U+03B3> producers respond to the IL-1 family member, IL-18
and IL-12, a STAT4 activator; IL-13 producers respond to IL-33 (although for ILC2
cells this may be replaced by IL-25) and STAT5 activators; for cells producing
IL-17A or IL-22, the combination is IL-1 and a STAT3 inducer. Cytokine-induced
cytokine production may have broad significance in orchestrating innate responses
to distinct infectious agents and in maintaining inflammatory responses after
elimination of the inciting antigen.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4799496
PMID: 22959641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36896-904. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.409516. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

Adiponectin induces pro-inflammatory programs in human macrophages and CD4+ T
cells.

Cheng X(1), Folco EJ, Shimizu K, Libby P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Abundant experimental and clinical data support a modulatory role for adiponectin
in inflammation, dysmetabolism, and disease. Because the activation of cells
involved in innate and adaptive immunity contributes to the pathogenesis of
diseases such as atherosclerosis and obesity, this study investigated the role of
adiponectin in human macrophage polarization and T cell differentiation.
Examination of the adiponectin-induced transcriptome in primary human macrophages
revealed that adiponectin promotes neither classical (M1) nor alternative (M2)
macrophage activation but elicits a pro-inflammatory response that resembles M1
more closely than M2. Addition of adiponectin to polyclonally activated CD4(+) T 
lymphocytes did not affect cell proliferation but induced mRNA expression and
protein secretion of interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-6. Adiponectin
treatment of CD4(+) T cells increased phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and signal transducer and activation of transcription
(STAT) 4 and augmented T-bet expression. Inhibition of p38 with SB203580
abrogated adiponectin-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production, indicating that adiponectin
enhances T(H)1 differentiation through the activation of the p38-STAT4-T-bet
axis. Collectively, our results demonstrate that adiponectin can induce
pro-inflammatory functions in isolated macrophages and T cells, concurring with
previous observations that adiponectin induces a limited program of inflammatory 
activation that likely desensitizes these cells to further pro-inflammatory
stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3481292
PMID: 22948153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043661. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

The TT genotype of the STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism is associated with high
disease activity and disability in patients with early arthritis.

Lamana A(1), Balsa A, Rueda B, Ortiz AM, Nuño L, Miranda-Carus ME,
Gonzalez-Escribano MF, Lopez-Nevot MA, Pascual-Salcedo D, Martin J,
González-Álvaro I.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Service, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria Princesa, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The number of copies of the HLA-DRB1 shared epitope, and the minor
alleles of the STAT4 rs7574865 and the PTPN22 rs2476601 polymorphisms have all
been linked with an increased risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis. In the
present study, we investigated the effects of these genetic variants on disease
activity and disability in patients with early arthritis.
METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS: We studied 640 patients with early arthritis (76% women;
median age, 52 years), recording disease-related variables every 6 months during 
a 2-year follow-up. HLA-DRB1 alleles were determined by PCR-SSO, while rs7574865 
and rs2476601 were genotyped with the Taqman 5' allelic discrimination assay.
Multivariate analysis was performed using generalized estimating equations for
repeated measures. After adjusting for confounding variables such as gender, age 
and ACPA, the TT genotype of rs7574865 in STAT4 was associated with increased
disease activity (DAS28) as compared with the GG genotype (ß coefficient [95%
confidence interval] = 0.42 [0.01-0.83], p = 0.044). Conversely, the presence of 
the T allele of rs2476601 in PTPN22 was associated with diminished disease
activity during follow-up in a dose-dependent manner (CT genotype = -0.27 [-0.56-
-0.01], p = 0.042; TT genotype = -0.68 [-1.64- -0.27], p = 0.162). After
adjustment for gender, age and disease activity, homozygosity for the T allele of
rs7574865 in STAT4 was associated with greater disability as compared with the GG
genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that patients with early arthritis who are
homozygous for the T allele of rs7574865 in STAT4 may develop a more severe form 
of the disease with increased disease activity and disability.

PMCID: PMC3427144
PMID: 22937072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Jun;42(6):891-900. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2012.04003.x.

Reduced T-bet in addition to enhanced STAT6 and GATA3 expressing T cells
contribute to human allergen-induced late responses.

Eifan AO(1), Furukido K, Dumitru A, Jacobson MR, Schmidt-Weber C, Banfield G,
Durham SR, Nouri-Aria KT.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: T-bet and GATA-3 are transcriptional factors involved in Th1 and Th2 
cell differentiation, although their concomitant roles at protein levels in
target organs during human allergic disease have not been assessed.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in nasal and
cutaneous models of Th2 (grass-pollen allergen) and a cutaneous model of Th1
(PPD) responses in man.
METHODS: Nasal biopsies were obtained at 8 h and skin biopsies at 8 and 48 h
after allergen and PPD challenges, respectively, from 10 allergic rhinitics and 6
non-atopic controls. T cells were assessed using immunofluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: There were increases in CD3(+)STAT6(+)cells (P = 0.01 for nose and skin)
and CD3(+)GATA3(+)cells (P = 0.03 for skin) in response to allergen compared with
diluent in allergics. When compared with non-atopics after allergen challenge the
difference between the two groups was also significant for CD3(+)STAT6(+)
(P = 0.001 and 0.03) and for CD3(+)GATA3(+)cells (P = 0.04 and 0.001) for nose
and skin respectively. Following PPD challenge CD3(+)STAT4(+)cells and
CD3(+)T-bet(+)cells increased in both groups compared with diluent (P = 0.02 and 
0.03 for both TFs), whereas only CD3(+)T-bet(+) cells were significantly greater 
in non-atopics compared with allergics (P = 0.04). The ratio of GATA3(+):T-bet(+)
T cells in allergen-induced responses was significantly greater in the allergics 
(P = 0.008 and 0.01 nose and skin respectively), whereas the ratio of
T-bet:GATA3(+)T cells was significantly higher in the non-atopics during
PPD-induced responses (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Dysregulation of Th1 transcription may
contribute to heightened expression of STAT6 and GATA3 leading to exaggerated
Th2-driven manifestations of allergic disease.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22909160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2012 Aug 25;64(4):372-8.

[Amino acids 395-416 in DNA binding domain of STAT4 is involved in IL-12-induced 
nuclear import of STAT4].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang YM(1), Wen YP, Li XA, Yuan Y, Luo QZ, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical College, Xiangya Medical College,
Central South University, Changsha 410078, China.

The purpose of the present study is to explore the mechanism of IL-12-induced
nuclear import of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4).
Assayed by analyses of homology alignment of STATs, amino acids 395-416 in DNA
binding domain was found to be a potential dimer-specific nuclear localization
signal (dsNLS) of STAT4. Therefore, several plasmids were constructed. Wild-type 
STAT4 was inserted into the SalI and BamHI sites of pEGFP-C1 for the construction
of plasmid pEGFP-STAT4. The DNA fragment of STAT4 with the deletion of amino
acids 395-416 was amplified by RCR and introduced into the SalI and BamHI sites
of pEGFP-C1 which was named pEGFP-STAT4-Del. Classic NLS DNA sequence of SV40 T
antigen was inserted into the XhoI and HindIII sites of pEGFP-C1. This plasmid
was named as pEGFP-NLS and used as a positive control. Plasmid
pEGFP-NLS-STAT4-Del was constructed by inserting STAT4-Del into SalI and BamHI
sites of pEGFP-NLS. These plasmids were transiently transfected into Caski cells,
respectively. The results showed that, after these transfected cells were
stimulated by IL-12, wild type STAT4 existed in the cytoplasm at 0 min, and was
predominantly localized to the nucleus at 45 min, and distributed in both
cytoplasm and nucleus at 60 min, suggesting that STAT4 translocates from
cytoplasm into nucleus and finally re-entries into the cytoplasm during the
stimulation of IL-12. However, deletion mutant of STAT4 was arrested in cytoplasm
during the IL-12 stimulation. Leptomycin B, which specifically blocks protein
export from nucleus into cytoplasm, was used to further demonstrate whether
STAT4-Del is transferred into nucleus even with stimulation of IL-12. After the
transfected cells were pre-treated by leptomycin B, the wild type STAT4 was
mainly localized in nucleus after the IL-12 stimulation, suggesting that STAT4
was translocated from cytoplasm into nucleus by the stimulation of IL-12. On the 
other hand, the deletion mutant of STAT4 distributed in cytoplasm throughout,
implying that the mutant STAT4 lacking of amino acids 395-416 cannot move into
nucleus. Furthermore, the insertion of classic NLS into EGFP-STAT4-Del restored
nuclear import of STAT4-Del. These results suggest the amino acids 395-416 is a
dsNLS mediating IL-12-stimulated nuclear import of activated STAT4.

PMID: 22907297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):2712-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201528. Epub 2012
Aug 10.

Cutting edge: a novel mechanism bridging innate and adaptive immunity: IL-12
induction of CD25 to form high-affinity IL-2 receptors on NK cells.

Lee SH(1), Fragoso MF, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Biology and
Medicine and Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, RI
02912, USA.

NK cell expression and use of the IL-2Ra-chain (CD25), required for the
high-affinity IL-2R, remain poorly understood. The studies reported in this
article demonstrate that infections with murine CMV (MCMV), but not with
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, induce CD25 on NK cells, along with high
levels of IL-12 and IL-18. The cytokines act ex vivo to increase CD25 levels, and
IL-12, IL-12R, and STAT4, but not the NK activating receptor Ly49H, are required 
for peak induction in vivo. All examined NK cell populations are driven into
proliferation and incorporate BrdU in response to high ex vivo concentrations of 
IL-2, but only those from MCMV infection respond to low ex vivo concentrations of
IL-2. The numbers of NK cells elicited during MCMV infection are reduced by IL-2 
neutralization. Thus, a link between innate and adaptive immunity is established 
by which composition of innate cytokine responses sets up to promote NK cell use 
of a factor supporting adaptive responses.

PMCID: PMC3437601
PMID: 22888135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 1;189(5):2084-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200774. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

Cutting edge: influence of Tmevpg1, a long intergenic noncoding RNA, on the
expression of Ifng by Th1 cells.

Collier SP(1), Collins PL, Williams CL, Boothby MR, Aune TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):533.

The majority of the genome is noncoding and was thought to be nonfunctional.
However, it is now appreciated that transcriptional control of protein coding
genes resides within these noncoding regions. Thousands of genes encoding long
intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been recently identified throughout the
genome, which positively or negatively regulate transcription of neighboring
target genes. Both TMEVPG1 and its mouse ortholog encode lincRNAs and are
positioned near the IFN-<U+03B3> gene (IFNG). In this study, we show that transcription 
of both mouse and human TMEVPG1 genes is Th1 selective and dependent on Stat4 and
T-bet, transcription factors that drive the Th1 differentiation program. Ifng
expression is partially restored in Stat4-/-Tbx21-/- cells through coexpression
of T-bet and Tmevpg1, and Tmevpg1 expression contributes to, but alone is not
sufficient to, drive Th1-dependent Ifng expression. Our results suggest that
TMEVPG1 belongs to the general class of lincRNAs that positively regulate gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3424368
PMID: 22851706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Jul 20;13:58. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-58.

Genetic polymorphisms located in genes related to immune and inflammatory
processes are associated with end-stage renal disease: a preliminary study.

Jimenez-Sousa MA(1), López E, Fernandez-Rodríguez A, Tamayo E, Fernández-Navarro 
P, Segura-Roda L, Heredia M, Gómez-Herreras JI, Bustamante J, García-Gómez JM,
Bermejo-Martin JF, Resino S.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Epidemiología Molecular de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Centro Nacional
de Microbiología, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (Campus Majadahonda), Carretera
Majadahonda-Pozuelo Km 2,2, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease progression has been linked to
pro-inflammatory cytokines and markers of inflammation. These markers are also
elevated in end-stage renal disease (ESRD), which constitutes a serious public
health problem.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located 
in genes related to immune and inflammatory processes, could be associated with
ESRD development.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A retrospective case-control study was carried out on 276
patients with ESRD and 288 control subjects. Forty-eight SNPs were genotyped via 
SNPlex platform. Logistic regression was used to assess the relationship between 
each sigle polymorphism and the development of ESRD.
RESULTS: Four polymorphisms showed association with ESRD: rs1801275 in the
interleukin 4 receptor (IL4R) gene (OR: 0.66 (95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.46-0.95); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025;
overdominant model), rs4586 in chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) gene (OR:
0.70 (95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.54-0.90); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005; additive model), rs301640 located in an
intergenic binding site for signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) (OR: 1.82 (95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.17-2.83); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006; additive model) and rs7830 in
the nitric oxide synthase 3 (NOS3) gene (OR: 1.31 (95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.01-1.71); p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.043;
additive model). After adjusting for multiple testing, results lost significance.
CONCLUSION: Our preliminary data suggest that four genetic polymorphisms located 
in genes related to inflammation and immune processes could help to predict the
risk of developing ESRD.

PMCID: PMC3412707
PMID: 22817530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:361730. doi: 10.1155/2012/361730. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

In situ expression of regulatory cytokines by heart inflammatory cells in Chagas'
disease patients with heart failure.

Rocha Rodrigues DB(1), dos Reis MA, Romano A, Pereira SA, Teixeira Vde P, Tostes 
S Jr, Rodrigues V Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University
of Triângulo Mineiro, 38125-180 Uberaba, MG, Brazil.

Chagas' disease is caused by the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. The immune
system plays an important role in the reduction of parasite load, but may also
contribute to the development of lesions observed during the chronic phase of the
disease. We analyzed cytokines produced by inflammatory heart cells in 21 autopsy
samples obtained from patients with Chagas' disease divided according to the
presence or absence of heart failure (HF). Left ventricular sections were
analyzed by immunohistochemistry using antibodies against human IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3>,
TGF-ß, TNF-a, and NOS2. In situ mRNA expression was quantified by a Low Density
Array. The number of IFN-<U+03B3>-positive cells was significantly higher than IL-4
positive cells. TNF-a, TGF-ß and NOS2 were detected in 65%, 62% and 94% of
samples respectively. There was an association between TNF-a-producing cells and 
the presence of HF. Subjects with HF presented higher levels of STAT4 mRNA,
whereas FoxP3 and STAT6 levels were similar in the two groups. A Th1 cytokine
pattern predominated in the cardiac inflammatory cell infiltrate of Chagas'
disease patients associated with HF. High degree of fibrosis was associated with 
low NOS2 expression. These results support the idea that Th1 immune responses are
involved in heart lesions of Chagas' disease patients.

PMCID: PMC3397162
PMID: 22811738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 15;189(4):2054-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201097. Epub 2012
Jul 13.

Chronic exposure to staphylococcal superantigen elicits a systemic inflammatory
disease mimicking lupus.

Chowdhary VR(1), Tilahun AY, Clark CR, Grande JP, Rajagopalan G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. chowdhary.vaidehi@mayo.edu

Chronic nasal and skin colonization with superantigen (SAg)-producing
Staphylococcus aureus is well documented in humans. Given that trans-mucosal and 
trans-cutaneous absorption of SAgs can occur, we determined whether chronic
exposure to small amounts of SAg per se could activate autoreactive CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells and precipitate any autoimmune disease without further external
autoantigenic stimulation. Because HLA class II molecules present SAg more
efficiently than do mouse MHC class II molecules, HLA-DQ8 transgenic mice were
implanted s.c. with mini-osmotic pumps capable of continuously delivering the
SAg, staphylococcal enterotoxin B (total of 10 µg/mouse), or PBS over 4 wk.
Chronic exposure to staphylococcal enterotoxin B resulted in a multisystem
autoimmune inflammatory disease with features similar to systemic lupus
erythematosus. The disease was characterized by mononuclear cell infiltration of 
lungs, liver, and kidneys, accompanied by the production of anti-nuclear Abs and 
deposition of immune complexes in the renal glomeruli. The inflammatory
infiltrates in various organs predominantly consisted of CD4(+) T cells bearing
TCR Vß8. The extent of immunopathology was markedly reduced in mice lacking
CD4(+) T cells and CD28, indicating that the disease is CD4(+) T cell mediated
and CD28 dependent. The absence of disease in STAT4-deficient, as well as
IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient, HLA-DQ8 mice suggested the pathogenic role of Th1-type
cytokines, IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3>. In conclusion, our study suggests that chronic
exposure to extremely small amounts of bacterial SAg could be an etiological
factor for systemic lupus erythematosus.

PMCID: PMC3462343
PMID: 22798666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 Aug;4(8):925-36. doi: 10.1039/c2ib20053h. Epub 2012 Jul 
9.

A quantitative systems approach to identify paracrine mechanisms that locally
suppress immune response to Interleukin-12 in the B16 melanoma model.

Kulkarni YM(1), Chambers E, McGray AJ, Ware JS, Bramson JL, Klinke DJ 2nd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West 
Virginia University, P.O. Box 6102, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL12) enhances anti-tumor immunity when delivered to the tumor
microenvironment. However, local immunoregulatory elements dampen the efficacy of
IL12. The identity of these local mechanisms used by tumors to suppress
immunosurveillance represents a key knowledge gap for improving tumor
immunotherapy. From a systems perspective, local suppression of anti-tumor
immunity is a closed-loop system - where system response is determined by an
unknown combination of external inputs and local cellular cross-talk. Here, we
recreated this closed-loop system in vitro and combined quantitative high content
assays, in silico model-based inference, and a proteomic workflow to identify the
biochemical cues responsible for immunosuppression. Following an induction
period, the B16 melanoma cell model, a transplantable model for spontaneous
malignant melanoma, inhibited the response of a T helper cell model to IL12. This
paracrine effect was not explained by induction of apoptosis or creation of a
cytokine sink, despite both mechanisms present within the co-culture assay.
Tumor-derived Wnt-inducible signaling protein-1 (WISP-1) was identified to exert 
paracrine action on immune cells by inhibiting their response to IL12. Moreover, 
WISP-1 was expressed in vivo following intradermal challenge with B16F10 cells
and was inferred to be expressed at the tumor periphery. Collectively, the data
suggest that (1) biochemical cues associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition can shape anti-tumor immunity through paracrine action and (2)
remnants of the immunoselective pressure associated with evolution in cancer
include both sculpting of tumor antigens and expression of proteins that
proactively shape anti-tumor immunity.

PMCID: PMC3428131
PMID: 22777646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Sep;303(5):L469-75. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00158.2012. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Experimental Pneumocystis lung infection promotes M2a alveolar macrophage-derived
MMP12 production.

Nelson MP(1), Christmann BS, Dunaway CW, Morris A, Steele C.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Among several bacterial and viral pathogens, the atypical fungal organism
Pneumocystis jirovecii has been implicated as a contributor to the pathogenesis
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In a previous study, we reported
that Pneumocystis-colonized HIV-positive subjects had worse obstruction of
airways and higher sputum levels of macrophage elastase/matrix metalloproteinase 
12 (MMP12), a protease strongly associated with the development of COPD. Here, we
examined parameters of Pneumocystis-induced MMP12 in the lungs of mice and its
role in the lung immune response to murine Pneumocystis. Initial studies
demonstrated that P. murina exposure induced Mmp12 mRNA expression in whole lungs
and alveolar macrophages (AMs), which was dependent on the presence of CD4+ T
cells as well as signal transducer and activator of transcription 6. Mmp12 mRNA
expression was upregulated in AMs by interleukin (IL)-4 treatment, but
downregulated by interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, indicating preferential expression in
alternatively activated (M2a) macrophages. IL-4 treatment induced the 54-kDa
proenzyme form of MMP12 and the 22-kDa fully processed and active form, whereas
IFN-<U+03B3> failed to induce either. Despite a reported antimicrobial role in
macrophage phagolysosomes, mice deficient in MMP12 were not found to be more
susceptible to lung infection with P. murina. Collectively, our data indicate
that MMP12 induction is a component of the P. murina-induced M2 response and thus
provides insight into the link between Pneumocystis colonization/infection and
exacerbations in COPD.

PMCID: PMC3468423
PMID: 22773692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Rheumatol. 2012 Aug;39(8):1509-16. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.111284. Epub 2012 Jul 1.

Variants within STAT genes reveal association with anticitrullinated protein
antibody-negative rheumatoid arthritis in 2 European populations.

Seddighzadeh M(1), Gonzalez A, Ding B, Ferreiro-Iglesias A, Gomez-Reino JJ;
Rheumatoid Arthritis Network and Coordinated Project, Klareskog L, Alfredsson L, 
Dunussi-Joannopoulos K, Clark JD, Padyukov L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden. maria.seddighzadeh@ki.se

OBJECTIVE: STAT3 and 4 are, among other factors, critical for the interleukin 12 
(IL-12)-mediated Th1 response, for transfer of IL-23 signals, and for survival
and expansion of Th17 cells. We investigated the association of STAT3 and STAT4
polymorphisms with serologically distinct subgroups of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: A total of 41 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) within STAT3 and
STAT1-STAT4 loci were investigated in a Swedish cohort of 2043 RA cases and 1115 
controls. Nine of the associated SNP were tested in a Spanish cohort of 1223 RA
cases and 1090 controls.
RESULTS: Fourteen SNP in the STAT3 and STAT1-STAT4 loci were associated with
anticitrullinated protein antibody (ACPA)-negative RA in the Swedish cohort.
Three of the SNP in STAT4 and 2 SNP in STAT3 remained associated with
ACPA-negative RA after considering the Spanish results. In addition, rs7574865
and rs10181656, in STAT4, were associated with ACPA-positive RA in the Swedish
study. One of these SNP, rs7574865, showed a similar pattern of the association
in serologically distinct subgroups of RA in a metaanalysis of all 7 published
studies.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that variants in STAT genes may contribute
differentially to susceptibility to RA in seropositive and in seronegative
patients.

PMID: 22753649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30228-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.343947. Epub
2012 Jun 27.

The oncoprotein HBXIP uses two pathways to up-regulate S100A4 in promotion of
growth and migration of breast cancer cells.

Liu S(1), Li L, Zhang Y, Zhang Y, Zhao Y, You X, Lin Z, Zhang X, Ye L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of 
Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

We have reported that hepatitis B X-interacting protein (HBXIP) promotes the
proliferation and migration of breast cancer cells. However, the underlying
mechanism is poorly understood. In this study, we report that HBXIP works in the 
event through up-regulating S100A4. We observed that HBXIP expression was
positively correlated to that of S100A4 in 87 clinical breast cancer tissue
samples. Then, we identified that HBXIP was able to up-regulate S100A4 expression
in breast cancer cells. Notably, we observed the HBXIP nuclear localization,
implying that HBXIP may be associated with the promoter of S100A4. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) 
showed that HBXIP was able to bind to the nucleotides +200~+239 region of S100A4 
promoter, containing two putative recognition motif of transcription factor STAT4
and GRß. It suggests that HBXIP is able to activate S100A4 promoter via
interacting with STAT4 in breast cancer cells, leading to the up-regulation of
S100A4. In addition, we identified another pathway of S100A4 up-regulation
mediated by HBXIP. We found that HBXIP activated the PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling by
inducing DNA methylation of PTEN, which subsequently boosted S100A4 expression.
In function, we demonstrated that HBXIP enhanced the growth or migration of
breast cancer cells through S100A4 in vivo and in vitro. Collectively, we
conclude that HBXIP up-regulates S100A4 through activating S100A4 promoter
involving STAT4 and inducing PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling to promote growth and
migration of breast cancer cells. Our finding provides new insight into the
mechanism of HBXIP in promotion of the development of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3436276
PMID: 22740693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Jan;72(1):96-103. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201364. Epub 
2012 Jun 23.

Genome-wide profiling of target genes for the systemic lupus
erythematosus-associated transcription factors IRF5 and STAT4.

Wang C(1), Sandling JK, Hagberg N, Berggren O, Sigurdsson S, Karlberg O, Rönnblom
L, Eloranta ML, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) are encoded by two of 
the strongest susceptibility genes for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the target genes and functional roles of IRF5 and STAT4
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) was performed in
PBMCs stimulated to activate IRF5 and STAT4. The expression of the target genes
of IRF5 and STAT4 was investigated in a publicly available dataset generated from
PBMCs from patients with SLE and healthy controls. The genomic regions bound by
the transcription complexes mediated by IRF5 and STAT4 were examined for
transcription factor binding motifs and SLE-associated sequence variants.
RESULTS: More than 7000 target genes for IRF5 and STAT4 were identified in
stimulated PBMCs. These genes were enriched to functional pathways in the type I 
interferon system, and have key roles in the inflammatory response. The
expression patterns of the target genes were characteristic for patients with
SLE. The transcription factors high mobility group-I/Y, specificity protein 1,
and paired box 4 may function cooperatively with IRF5 and STAT4 in
transcriptional regulation. Eight of the target regions for IRF5 and STAT4
contain SLE-associated sequence variants.
CONCLUSIONS: By participating in transcription complex with other co-factors,
IRF5 and STAT4 harbour the potential of regulating a large number of target
genes, which may contribute to their strong association with SLE.

PMID: 22730365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Sep;39(9):8861-6. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1752-3. Epub 2012
Jun 24.

Contribution of STAT4 gene single-nucleotide polymorphism to systemic lupus
erythematosus in the Polish population.

Piotrowski P(1), Lianeri M, Wudarski M, Olesinska M, Jagodzinski PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St., 60-781 Poznan, Poland.

The STAT4 has been found to be a susceptible gene in the development of systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) in various populations. There are evident population
differences in the context of clinical manifestations of SLE, therefore we
investigated the prevalence of the STAT4 G > C (rs7582694) polymorphism in
patients with SLE (n = 253) and controls (n = 521) in a sample of the Polish
population. We found that patients with the STAT4 C/G and CC genotypes exhibited 
a 1.583-fold increased risk of SLE incidence (95 % CI = 1.168-2.145, p = 0.003), 
with OR for the C/C versus C/G and G/G genotypes was 1.967 (95 % CI =
1.152-3.358, p = 0.0119). The OR for the STAT4 C allele frequency showed a
1.539-fold increased risk of SLE (95 % CI = 1.209-1.959, p = 0.0004). We also
observed an increased frequency of STAT4 C/C and C/G genotypes in SLE patients
with renal symptoms OR = 2.259 (1.365-3.738, p = 0.0014), (p (corr) = 0.0238) and
in SLE patients with neurologic manifestations OR = 2.867 (1.467-5.604, p =
0.0016), (p (corr) = 0.0272). Moreover, we found a contribution of STAT4 C/C and 
C/G genotypes to the presence of the anti-snRNP Ab OR = 3.237 (1.667-6.288, p =
0.0003), (p (corr) = 0.0051) and the presence of the anti-Scl-70 Ab OR = 2.665
(1.380-5.147, p = 0.0028), (p (corr) = 0.0476). Our studies confirmed an
association of the STAT4 C (rs7582694) variant with the development of SLE and
occurrence of some clinical manifestations of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3404285
PMID: 22729903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(17):9409-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00947-12. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

STAT4 regulates antiviral gamma interferon responses and recurrent disease during
herpes simplex virus 2 infection.

Svensson A(1), Tunbäck P, Nordström I, Shestakov A, Padyukov L, Eriksson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology & Inflammation Research, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

STAT4 is an important transcription factor that contributes to the incidence and 
severity of different autoimmune diseases and is implicated in the antiviral
immune responses in mice. In this study, we evaluated the role of STAT4 in human 
and murine herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) infections. We show that STAT4
regulates antiviral gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) responses and disease severity
during chronic HSV-2 infections in humans and vaccine-induced IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated
protection against HSV-2 infection in mice. In a cohort of 228 HSV-2-infected
individuals, representing both patients with recurrent disease and asymptomatic
HSV-2 carriers, we found that genetic variations in the STAT4 gene were
associated with asymptomatic HSV-2 infection, as well as with increased in vitro 
secretion of IFN-<U+03B3> in response to the virus. Mice that lacked STAT4 had impaired 
HSV-2-specific IFN-<U+03B3> production and delayed-type hypersensitivity responses
following vaccination, which led to impaired viral clearance in the genital tract
of vaccinated animals after a genital HSV-2 challenge. We conclude that STAT4
plays an important role in IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated HSV-2-specific immunity, affecting the 
severity of genital HSV-2 infection.

PMCID: PMC3416106
PMID: 22718836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Sep;39(9):8873-82. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1754-1. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Association of STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism with autoimmune diseases: a
meta-analysis.

Liang YL(1), Wu H, Shen X, Li PQ, Yang XQ, Liang L, Tian WH, Zhang LF, Xie XD.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou City 730000, Gansu Province, 
China.

The association between the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) gene rs7574865 single nucleotide polymorphism and different autoimmune
diseases remains controversial and ambiguous. We conducted this study to
investigate whether combined evidence shows the association between STAT4
rs7574865 polymorphism and autoimmune diseases. Comprehensive Medline search and 
review of the references were used to get the relevant reports published before
September 2011. Meta-analysis was conducted for genotype T/T (recessive effect), 
T/T + G/T (dominant effect) and T allele in random effects models. 40 studies
with 90 comparisons including 32 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 19
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 3 type 1 diabetes (T1D), 11 Systemeric Sclerosis
(SSc), 4 inflammatory bowed diseases (IBD), 3 Primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS), 4
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 2 Primary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), 1
Autoimmune thyroid diseases, 1 multiple sclerosis, 1 Psoriasis, 1 Wegener's
granulomatosis, 1 Type 2 diabetes, and 1 giant cell arteritis disease were
available for this meta-analysis. The overall odds ratios for rs7574865 T-allele 
significantly increased in SLE, RA, T1D, SSc, JIA, and APS (OR = 1.56, 1.25,
1.13, 1.34, 1.25, and 2.15, respectively, P < 0.00001) and in IBD-UC and pSS (OR 
= 1.11 and 1.33, respectively, P < 0.05). This meta-analysis demonstrates that
the STAT4 rs7574865 T allele confers susceptibility to SLE, RA, T1D, SSc, JIA,
APS, IBD-UC, and pSS patients, supporting the hypothesis of association between
STAT4 gene polymorphism and subgroup of autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 22714917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Clin Immunol. 2012 Aug;144(2):83-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.05.007. Epub 2012
May 24.

Disseminated Mycobacterium genavense infection in a patient with a novel partial 
interleukin-12/23 receptor ß1 deficiency.

Potjewijd J(1), de Paus RA, van Wengen A, Damoiseaux J, Verbon A, van de Vosse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical and Experimental
Immunology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
jpotjewijd@hotmail.com

A patient presented with late onset disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterium
(NTM) infection due to a novel interleukin-12/interleukin-23 receptor ß1
(IL-12/IL-23Rß1) mutation, r.1561C>G, leading to the amino acid substitution
R521G. This is the second patient reported with a partial IL-12/IL-23Rß1 defect.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22695533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 15;189(2):832-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200854. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

Twist1 regulates Ifng expression in Th1 cells by interfering with Runx3 function.

Pham D(1), Vincentz JW, Firulli AB, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

A transcription factor network that includes STAT4, T-bet, and Runx3 promotes the
differentiation of Th1 cells and inflammatory immune responses. How additional
transcription factors regulate the function of Th1 cells has not been defined. In
this study we show that the negative regulatory factor Twist1 decreases
expression of T-bet, Runx3, and IL-12Rß2 as it inhibits IFN-<U+03B3> production. Ectopic
expression of Runx3, but not T-bet or IL-12Rß2, compensates for the effects of
Twist1 on IFN-<U+03B3> production, and Twist1 regulation of Ifng depends on complex
formation with Runx3. Twist1 decreases Runx3 and T-bet binding at the Ifng locus,
and it decreases chromatin looping within the Ifng locus. These data define an
IL-12/STAT4-induced negative regulatory loop that impacts multiple components of 
the Th1 transcriptional network and provide further insight into regulation of
Th1 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3392532
PMID: 22685315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Dec;71(12):1984-90. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-201225.
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Genetic markers of rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility in anti-citrullinated
peptide antibody negative patients.

Viatte S(1), Plant D, Bowes J, Lunt M, Eyre S, Barton A, Worthington J.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

INTRODUCTION: There are now over 30 confirmed loci predisposing to rheumatoid
arthritis (RA). Studies have been largely undertaken in patients with anticyclic 
citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) positive RA, and some genetic associations
appear stronger in this subgroup than in anti-CCP negative disease, although few 
studies have had adequate power to address the question. The authors therefore
investigated confirmed RA susceptibility loci in a large cohort of anti-CCP
negative RA subjects.
METHODS: RA patients and controls, with serological and genetic data, were
available from UK Caucasian patients (n=4068 anti-CCP positive, 2040 anti-CCP
negative RA) and 13,009 healthy controls. HLA-DRB1 genotypes and 36 single
nucleotide polymorphisms were tested for association between controls and
anti-CCP positive or negative RA.
RESULTS: The shared epitope (SE) showed a strong association with anti-CCP
positive and negative RA, although the effect size was significantly lower in the
latter (effect size ratio=3.18, p<1.0E-96). A non-intronic marker at TNFAIP3,
GIN1/C5orf30, STAT4, ANKRD55/IL6ST, BLK and PTPN22 showed association with RA
susceptibility, irrespective of the serological status, the latter three markers 
remaining significantly associated with anti-CCP negative RA, after correction
for multiple testing. No significant association with anti-CCP negative RA was
detected for other markers (eg, AFF3, CD28, intronic marker at TNFAIP3), though
the study power for those markers was over 80%.
DISCUSSION: In the largest sample size studied to date, the authors have shown
that the strength of association, the effect size and the number of known RA
susceptibility loci associated with disease is different in the two disease
serotypes, confirming the hypothesis that they might be two genetically different
subsets.

PMCID: PMC3595982
PMID: 22661644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 Nov;48(3):493-500. Epub 2012 May 29.

Effects of PACAP on intracellular signaling pathways in human retinal pigment
epithelial cells exposed to oxidative stress.

Fabian E(1), Reglodi D, Mester L, Szabo A, Szabadfi K, Tamas A, Toth G, Kovacs K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, PTE-MTA Lendulet PACAP Research Team, University of
Pecs, 7624 Pecs, Szigeti u 12, Hungary.

The integrity of retinal pigment epithelial cells is critical for photoreceptor
survival and vision. Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP)
exerts retinoprotective effects against several types of injuries in vivo,
including optic nerve transection, retinal ischemia, excitotoxic injuries,
UVA-induced lesion, and diabetic retinopathy. In a recent study, we have proven
that PACAP is also protective in oxidative stress-induced injury in human pigment
epithelial cells (ARPE-19 cells). The aim of the present study was to investigate
the possible mechanisms of this protection. ARPE cells were exposed to a 24-h
hydrogen peroxide treatment. Expressions of kinases and apoptotic markers were
studied by complex array kits and Western blot. Oxidative stress induced the
activation of several apoptotic markers, including Bad, Bax, HIF-1a, several heat
shock proteins, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, and Fas-associated protein
with death domain, while PACAP treatment decreased them. The changes in the
expression of MAP kinases showed that PACAP activated the protective ERK1/2 and
downstream CREB, and decreased the activation of the pro-apoptotic p38MAPK and
c-Jun N-terminal kinase, an effect opposite to that observed with only oxidative 
stress. Furthermore, PACAP increased the activation of the protective Akt
pathway. In addition, the effects of oxidative stress on several other signaling 
molecules were counteracted by PACAP treatment (Chk2, Yes, Lyn, paxillin, p53,
PLC, STAT4, RSK). These play a role in cell death, cell cycle, inflammation,
adhesion, differentiation and proliferation. In summary, PACAP, acting at several
levels, influences the balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic factors in favor
of anti-apoptosis, thereby providing protection in oxidative stress-induced
injury of human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

PMID: 22644900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Pharmacogenomics. 2012 May;13(7):735-8. doi: 10.2217/pgs.12.45.

Genetic basis of susceptibility to drug-induced liver injury: what have we
learned and where do we go from here?

Urban TJ, Goldstein DB, Watkins PB.

PMCID: PMC3641893
PMID: 22594502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 15;188(12):5887-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102941. Epub 2012 
May 14.

Protein kinase C-<U+03B8> promotes Th17 differentiation via upregulation of Stat3.

Kwon MJ(1), Ma J, Ding Y, Wang R, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Although protein kinase C-<U+03B8> (PKC-<U+03B8>)-deficient mice are resistant to the induction
of Th17-dependent experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, the function of
PKC-<U+03B8> in Th17 differentiation remains unknown. In this article, we show that
purified, naive CD4 PKC-<U+03B8>(-/-) T cells were defective in Th17 differentiation,
whereas Th1 and Th2 differentiation appeared normal. Activation of PKC-<U+03B8> with PMA
promoted Th17 differentiation in wild type (WT) but not PKC-<U+03B8>(-/-) T cells.
Furthermore, PKC-<U+03B8>(-/-) T cells had notably lower levels of Stat3, a
transcription factor required for Th17 differentiation, and PMA markedly
stimulated the expression of Stat3 in WT but not PKC-<U+03B8>(-/-) T cells. In contrast,
activation of Stat4 and Stat6, which are critical for Th1 and Th2
differentiation, was normal in PKC-<U+03B8>(-/-) T cells. Forced expression of Stat3
significantly increased Th17 differentiation in PKC-<U+03B8>(-/-) T cells, suggesting
that reduced Stat3 levels were responsible for impaired Th17 differentiation, and
that Stat3 lies downstream of PKC-<U+03B8>. Constitutively active PKC-<U+03B8>, or WT PKC-<U+03B8>
activated by either PMA or TCR cross-linking, stimulated expression of a
luciferase reporter gene driven by the Stat3 promoter. PKC-<U+03B8>-mediated activation 
of the Stat3 promoter was inhibited by dominant-negative AP-1 and I<U+03BA>B kinase-ß,
but stimulated by WT AP-1 and I<U+03BA>B kinase-ß, suggesting that PKC-<U+03B8> stimulates
Stat3 transcription via the AP-1 and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. Lastly, conditions favoring 
Th17 differentiation induced the highest activation level of PKC-<U+03B8>. Altogether,
the data indicate that PKC-<U+03B8> integrates the signals from TCR signaling and Th17
priming cytokines to upregulate Stat3 via NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1, resulting in the
stimulation of Th17 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3484892
PMID: 22586032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Autoimmun. 2012 Dec;39(4):323-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2012.04.003. Epub 2012
May 10.

Definition of IFN-<U+03B3>-related pathways critical for chemically-induced systemic
autoimmunity.

Pollard KM(1), Hultman P, Toomey CB, Cauvi DM, Hoffman HM, Hamel JC, Kono DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, MEM125, Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. mpollard@scripps.edu

IFN-<U+03B3> is essential for idiopathic and murine mercury-induced systemic
autoimmunity (mHgIA), and heterozygous IFN-<U+03B3>(+/-) mice also exhibit reduced
disease. This suggests that blocking specific IFN-<U+03B3>-related pathways that may
only partially inhibit IFN-<U+03B3> production or function will also suppress
autoimmunity. To test this hypothesis, mice deficient in genes regulating IFN-<U+03B3>
expression (Casp1, Nlrp3, Il12a, Il12b, Stat4) or function (Ifngr1, Irf1) were
examined for mHgIA susceptibility. Absence of either Ifngr1 or Irf1 resulted in a
striking reduction of disease, while deficiency of genes promoting IFN-<U+03B3>
expression had modest to no effect. Furthermore, both Irf1- and Ifng-deficiency
only modestly reduced the expansion of CD44(hi) and CD44(hi)CD55(lo) CD4(+) T
cells, indicating that they are not absolutely required for T cell activation.
Thus, there is substantial redundancy in genes that regulate IFN-<U+03B3> expression in 
contrast to those that mediate later signaling events. These findings have
implications for the therapeutic targeting of IFN-<U+03B3> pathways in systemic
autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3570757
PMID: 22578563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 Oct;57(10):2600-7. Epub 2012 May 9.

Abnormal genetic and epigenetic changes in signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases.

Kim SW(1), Kim ES, Moon CM, Kim TI, Kim WH, Cheon JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Changes in the expression of signal transducer and activator
of transcription 4 (STAT4) contribute to the development of a variety of
autoimmune diseases including inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs). Moreover,
epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation, are considered a basis for
differentiation of T helper cells and regulation of cytokines. In this study, we 
investigated the methylation status of STAT4 gene in IBD patients and the
associations between its genetic and epigenetic alterations in IBD patients.
METHODS: Blood and colonic mucosa samples were obtained from Korean patients with
IBD and healthy controls. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were
isolated, and total RNA and genomic DNA were isolated from the PBMCs and colon
mucosa tissues. The mRNA level and DNA methylation status of the promoter were
determined by real-time RT-PCR and pyrosequencing, respectively. The chosen SNPs 
(rs11889341, rs7574865, rs8179673, rs6752770, rs925847, rs10168266, rs10181656,
and rs11685878) were genotyped using the TaqMan nuclease assay.
RESULTS: Elevated expression of STAT4 was observed in the colonic mucosa and
PBMCs of IBD patients. IBD patients showed a lower degree of methylation of the
STAT4 promoter than did the healthy controls. Moreover, a significant correlation
between risk alleles and methylation status at -172 of the STAT4 promoter was
observed, and mRNA levels of STAT4 in IBD patients were correlated inversely with
the T-risk allele (rs7574865).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrated that the DNA methylation status of STAT4 is
associated with genetic polymorphisms, providing insights into the interactions
between genetic and epigenetic aberrances in STAT4 that contribute to the
development of IBD.

PMID: 22569826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Hum Immunol. 2012 Jul;73(7):740-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.04.013. Epub 2012
Apr 23.

Non-HLA autoimmunity genetic factors contributing to Autoimmune Polyglandular
Syndrome type II in Tunisian patients.

Fourati H(1), Bouzid D, Abida O, Kharrat N, Mnif F, Haddouk S, Fesel C, Costa J, 
Ben Ayed M, Abid M, Rebai A, Penha-Gonçalves C, Masmoudi H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, University of Sfax, Sfax,
Tunisia. hajerfourati@yahoo.fr

Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome Type II (APSII) is characterized by the
co-occurrence of clinical insufficiency of at least two endocrine glands.
Although, HLA determinants of APSII predisposition have been identified, little
attention has been paid to non-HLA genes. Here, we used SNP genotyping in a
Sequenom platform and genetic association tests to study a cohort of 60 APSII
Tunisian patients presenting highly frequent co-occurrence of Autoimmune Thyroid 
Disease (AITD) and Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) and lower frequency of Addison's disease
(AD). We tested the high a priori possibility that well-established non-HLA
autoimmunity loci were involved in APSII and confirmed five association signals
to APSII, namely: (1) two T1D-associated SNPs, in CTLA4 and IL2RA, suggest their 
involvement in T1D pathogenesis in this cohort; (2) two SNPs in STAT4 and IL15
not previously associated to endocrinopathies, are possibly involved in
co-occurrence of organ autoimmunity in APSII, and; (3) one SNP in TNF alpha
showed association to APSII irrespective of AD. While this work was performed in 
a relatively small cohort, these results support the notion that the non-HLA
genetic component of APSII include genetic factors specific of particular
autoimmune manifestations as well as genetic factors that promote the
co-occurrence of multiple autoimmune endocrinopathies.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22537753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034554. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

An essential regulatory role of downstream of kinase-1 in the ovalbumin-induced
murine model of asthma.

Lee CM(1), Jung ID, Noh KT, Lee JS, Park JW, Heo DR, Park JH, Chang JH, Choi IW, 
Kim JS, Shin YK, Park SJ, Han MK, Lee CG, Cho WK, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical Research Institute, Pusan
National University School of Medicine, Yang-san, South Korea.

The downstream of kinase (DOK)-1 is involved in the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK)
pathway in mast cells, but the role of DOK-1 in the pathogenesis of asthma has
not been defined. In this study, we have demonstrated a novel regulatory role of 
DOK-1 in airway inflammation and physiologic responses in a murine model of
asthma using lentiviral vector containing DOK-1 cDNA or DOK-1-specific ShRNA. The
OVA-induced inflammatory cells, airway hyperresponsiveness, Th2 cytokine
expression, and mucus response were significantly reduced in DOK-1 overexpressing
mice compared to OVA-challenged control mice. The transgenic introduction of
DOK-1 significantly stimulated the activation and expression of STAT-4 and T-bet,
while impressively inhibiting the activation and expression of STAT-6 and GATA-3 
in airway epithelial cells. On the other hand, DOK-1 knockdown mice enhanced
STAT-6 expression and its nuclear translocation compared to OVA-challenged
control mice. When viewed in combination, our studies demonstrate DOK-1 regulates
allergen-induced Th2 immune responses by selective stimulation and inhibition of 
STAT-4 and STAT-6 signaling pathways, respectively. These studies provide a novel
insight on the regulatory role of DOK-1 in allergen-induced Th2 inflammation and 
airway responses, which has therapeutic potential for asthma and other allergic
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3326039
PMID: 22514638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Exp Med. 2012 May 7;209(5):987-1000. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111024. Epub 2012 Apr
16.

Human invariant natural killer T cells acquire transient innate responsiveness
via histone H4 acetylation induced by weak TCR stimulation.

Wang X(1), Bishop KA, Hegde S, Rodenkirch LA, Pike JW, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and
Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Invariant NKT cells (iNKT cells) are innate T lymphocytes that are thought to
play an important role in producing an early burst of IFN-<U+03B3> that promotes
successful tumor immunosurveillance and antimicrobial immunity. The cellular
activation processes underlying innate IFN-<U+03B3> production remain poorly understood.
We show here that weak T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation that does not directly
activate iNKT cell IFN-<U+03B3> messenger RNA transcription nevertheless induces histone
H4 acetylation at specific regions near the IFNG gene locus. This renders the
iNKT cells able to produce IFN-<U+03B3> in an innate manner (i.e., not requiring
concurrent TCR stimulation) upon exposure to IL-12 and IL-18. The iNKT cells
retain the capacity for innate activation for hours to days after the initial
weak TCR stimulation, although their innate responsiveness gradually declines as 
a function of histone deacetylation. These results explain how iNKT cells are
able to mediate rapid innate IFN-<U+03B3> secretion in a manner that does not require
them to undergo permanent T(H1) differentiation. Moreover, our results also
indicate that iNKT cell motility is maintained during activation by IL-12 and
IL-18. Therefore, iNKT cells activated through this pathway can continue to
migrate and may thus disseminate the IFN-<U+03B3> that they produce, which may amplify
its impact.

PMCID: PMC3348100
PMID: 22508835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Exp Med. 2012 May 7;209(5):947-54. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111760. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Proinflammatory cytokine signaling required for the generation of natural killer 
cell memory.

Sun JC(1), Madera S, Bezman NA, Beilke JN, Kaplan MH, Lanier LL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.

Although natural killer (NK) cells are classified as innate immune cells, recent 
studies demonstrate that NK cells can become long-lived memory cells and
contribute to secondary immune responses. The precise signals that promote
generation of long-lived memory NK cells are unknown. Using cytokine
receptor-deficient mice, we show that interleukin-12 (IL-12) is indispensible for
mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV)-specific NK cell expansion and generation of memory 
NK cells. In contrast to wild-type NK cells that proliferated robustly and
resided in lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues for months after MCMV infection,
IL-12 receptor-deficient NK cells failed to expand and were unable to mediate
protection after MCMV challenge. We further demonstrate that a STAT4-dependent
IFN-<U+03B3>-independent mechanism contributes toward the generation of memory NK cells 
during MCMV infection. Understanding the full contribution of inflammatory
cytokine signaling to the NK cell response against viral infection will be of
interest for the development of vaccines and therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3348098
PMID: 22493516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Life Sci. 2012 May 22;90(19-20):740-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.03.017. Epub 2012 
Mar 27.

Interactions between IL17A, IL23R, and STAT4 polymorphisms confer susceptibility 
to intestinal Behcet's disease in Korean population.

Kim ES(1), Kim SW, Moon CM, Park JJ, Kim TI, Kim WH, Cheon JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

AIMS: Although polymorphisms in IL23R have recently been proposed to predispose
to Behcet's disease (BD), associations between IL23R polymorphisms and intestinal
BD have yet to be elucidated. We therefore performed a study to evaluate whether 
IL17A, IL23R, and STAT4 polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to
intestinal BD in the Korean population.
MAIN METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the IL17A, IL23R, and
STAT4 genes were analyzed using DNA sequencing, denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography, and TaqMan genotyping assays.
KEY FINDINGS: Individual polymorphism analysis revealed that the TT genotype of
IL17A rs8193036 (odds ratio (OR) 2.10, 95% confidence interval (CI) (1.12-3.92), 
p=0.021), and GG+GT genotype of IL23R rs1884444 (OR 1.92, 95% CI (1.03-3.57),
p=0.034) was associated with the development of intestinal BD. When these two
genotypes were combined, the risk of BD increased compared to that of patients
with no-risk or one-risk genotype (OR 2.21, 95% CI (1.13-4.34), p=0.021).
Furthermore, statistically significant gene-gene interactions were observed
between G149R in IL23R vs. rs11685878 in STAT4, rs2275913 in IL17A vs. rs7574865 
in STAT4, and rs11889341 in STAT4 vs. rs2275913 in IL17A. The haplotypes of IL17A
had a positive association with intestinal BD risks, whereas those of IL23R were 
protective for disease development.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that the interaction of specific IL17A, IL23R,
and STAT4 SNPs modulate susceptibility to intestinal BD in the Korean population,
suggesting that the IL-17/23 axis plays a significant role in disease
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22483685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034349. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Analysis of IL12B gene variants in inflammatory bowel disease.

Glas J(1), Seiderer J, Wagner J, Olszak T, Fries C, Tillack C, Friedrich M,
Beigel F, Stallhofer J, Steib C, Wetzke M, Göke B, Ochsenkühn T, Diegelmann J,
Czamara D, Brand S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II-Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU),
Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: IL12B encodes the p40 subunit of IL-12, which is also part of IL-23. 
Recent genome-wide association studies identified IL12B and IL23R as
susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, the
phenotypic effects and potential gene-gene interactions of IL12B variants are
largely unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed IL12B gene variants regarding
association with Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Genomic DNA
from 2196 individuals including 913 CD patients, 318 UC patients and 965 healthy,
unrelated controls was analyzed for four SNPs in the IL12B gene region
(rs3212227, rs17860508, rs10045431, rs6887695). Our analysis revealed an
association of the IL12B SNP rs6887695 with susceptibility to IBD (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.035; OR 
1.15 [95% CI 1.01-1.31] including a trend for rs6887695 for association with CD
(OR 1.41; [0.99-1.31], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.066) and UC (OR 1.18 [0.97-1.43], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.092). CD
patients, who were homozygous C/C carriers of this SNP, had significantly more
often non-stricturing, non-penetrating disease than carriers of the G allele
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.8×10(-5); OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.84, 95% CI 1.66-4.84), while C/C homozygous UC patients
had less often extensive colitis than G allele carriers (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029; OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.36,
95% CI 0.14-0.92). In silico analysis predicted stronger binding of the minor C
allele of rs6887695 to the transcription factor RORa which is involved in Th17
differentiation. Differences regarding the binding to the major and minor allele 
sequence of rs6887695 were also predicted for the transcription factors HSF1,
HSF2, MZF1 and Oct-1. Epistasis analysis revealed weak epistasis of the IL12B SNP
rs6887695 with several SNPs (rs11889341, rs7574865, rs7568275, rs8179673,
rs10181656, rs7582694) in the STAT4 gene which encodes the major IL-12 downstream
transcription factor STAT4 (p<0.05) but there was no epistasis between IL23R and 
IL12B variants.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The IL12B SNP rs6887695 modulates the susceptibility
and the phenotype of IBD, although the effect on IBD susceptibilty is less
pronounced than that of IL23R gene variants.

PMCID: PMC3316707
PMID: 22479607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Jul;71(7):1197-202. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200901.
Epub 2012 Mar 22.

IRF5 polymorphism predicts prognosis in patients with systemic sclerosis.

Sharif R(1), Mayes MD, Tan FK, Gorlova OY, Hummers LK, Shah AA, Furst DE, Khanna 
D, Martin J, Bossini-Castillo L, Gonzalez EB, Ying J, Draeger HT, Agarwal SK,
Reveille JD, Arnett FC, Wigley FM, Assassi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of systemic sclerosis
(SSc) demonstrated three non-major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
susceptibility loci. The goal of this study was to investigate the impact of
these gene variants on survival and severity of interstitial lung disease (ILD)
in SSc.
METHODS: The authors examined 1443 Caucasian SSc patients enrolled in the
Genetics versus Environment In Scleroderma Outcome Study (GENISOS) and
Scleroderma Family Registry (n = 914 - discovery cohort) and The Johns Hopkins
Scleroderma Cohort (n = 529 - replication cohort). Forced vital capacity (FVC)%
predicted was used as a surrogate for ILD severity. Five single nucleotide
polymorphisms, IRF5 (rs10488631, rs12537284, rs4728142), STAT4 (rs3821236), CD247
(rs2056626) reached genome-wide significance in the SSc-GWAS and were examined in
the current study.
RESULTS: Overall, 15.5% of the patients had died over the follow-up period of 5.5
years. The IRF5 rs4728142 minor allele was predictive of longer survival in the
discovery cohort (p = 0.021) and in the independent replication cohort (p =
0.047) and combined group (HR: 0.75, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.90, p = 0.002). The
association of this SNP with survival was independent of age at disease onset,
disease type and autoantibody profile (anticentromere and antitopoisomerase
antibodies). The minor allele frequency of IRF5 rs4728142 was 49.4%. Moreover,
IRF5 rs4728142 minor allele correlated with higher FVC% predicted at enrolment (p
= 0.019). Finally, the IRF5 rs4728142 minor allele was associated with lower IRF5
transcript expression in patients and controls (p = 0.016 and p = 0.034,
respectively), suggesting that the IRF5, rs4728142 SNP, may be functionally
relevant.
CONCLUSION: An SNP in the IRF5 promoter region (rs4728142), associated with lower
IRF5 transcript levels, was predictive of longer survival and milder ILD in
patients with SSc.

PMCID: PMC3375372
PMID: 22440820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Radiat Res. 2012 May;177(5):676-84. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

HemoHIM ameliorates the persistent down-regulation of Th1-like immune responses
in fractionated <U+03B3>-irradiated mice by modulating the IL-12p70-STAT4 signaling
pathway.

Park HR(1), Jo SK, Choi NH, Jung U.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Research Division for Bio-Technology, Jeongeup Campus of Korea
Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), 1266 Sinjeong-dong Jeongeup-si Jeonbuk 
580-185, Republic of Korea.

Whole body irradiated mice appear to experience a down-regulation of the helper T
(Th)1-like immune response, and maintain a persistent immunological imbalance. In
the current study, we evaluated the effect of HemoHIM (an herbal product made
from Angelica Radix, Cnidium officinale , and Paeonia japonica cultivated in
Korea) to ameliorate the immunological imbalance induce in fractionated
<U+03B3>-irradiated mice. The mice were exposed to <U+03B3> rays twice a week (0.5 Gy
fractions) for a total dose of 5 Gy, and HemoHIM was administrated orally from 1 
week before the first irradiation to 1 week before the final analysis. All
experiments were performed 4 and 6 months after their first exposure. HemoHIM
ameliorated the Th1- and Th2-related immune responses normally occur in
irradiated mice with or without dinitrophenylated keyhole limpet hemocyanin
immunization. HemoHIM also restored the natural killer cell activities without
changing the percentage of natural killer cells in irradiated mice. Furthermore, 
the administration of HemoHIM prevented the reduction in levels of
interleukin-12p70 in irradiated mice. Finally, we found that HemoHIM enhanced the
phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 that
was reduced in irradiated mice. Our findings suggest that HemoHIM ameliorates the
persistent down-regulation of Th1-like immune responses by modulating the
IL-12p70/pSTAT4 signaling pathway.

PMID: 22439601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Oct;71(10):1646-50. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200839.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Positive association between STAT4 polymorphisms and polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in a Japanese population.

Sugiura T(1), Kawaguchi Y, Goto K, Hayashi Y, Tsuburaya R, Furuya T, Gono T,
Nishino I, Yamanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 10-22 Kawada-cho,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-0054, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate associations between signal transducer and activator
of transcription 4 (STAT4), one of the most commonly acknowledged genes for the
risk of multiple autoimmune diseases, with susceptibility to adult-onset
polymyositis/dermatomyositis among Japanese individuals.
METHODS: A single nucleotide polymorphism of STAT4, rs7574865, was genotyped
using TaqMan assay in 1143 Japanese individuals. The first set comprised 138
polymyositis/dermatomyositis patients and 289 controls and the second set
comprised 322 patients and 394 controls. 460 patients (273 polymyositis and 187
dermatomyositis patients) and 683 controls were genotyped.
RESULTS: rs7574865T conferred a risk of polymyositis/dermatomyositis with an OR
of 1.37 (95% CI 1.16 to 1.64; p=4x10(-4); p(corr)=0.0012). Both polymyositis and 
dermatomyositis exhibited high associations with the rs7574865T allele
(polymyositis: OR=1.36, 95% CI 1.11 to 1.67; p=0.0039; p(corr)=0.012;
dermatomyositis: OR=1.40, 95% CI 1.10 to 1.78; p=0.0054; p(corr)=0.016). The
association between this STAT4 polymorphism and interstitial lung disease (ILD)
was also investigated in the first set of polymyositis/dermatomyositis patients
(n=138); those with ILD (n=79) bore rs7574865T more frequently compared with
controls (OR 1.59, 95% CI 1.10 to 2.28; p=0.013; p(corr)=0.039).
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to show a positive association between a
STAT4 polymorphism and polymyositis/dermatomyositis, suggesting that
polymyositis/dermatomyositis shares a gene commonly associated with the risk of
other autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 22402141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2012 Jun;67(6):463-73. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0897.2012.01114.x. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

Glucocorticoid receptor mediates the effect of progesterone on uterine natural
killer cells.

Guo W(1), Li P, Zhao G, Fan H, Hu Y, Hou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Reproduction Biology Lab, Medical School & State Key Laboratory
of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, China.

PROBLEM: Uterine natural killer cells (uNK) do not express progesterone receptor,
but express glucocorticoid receptor (GR). So, we speculate that progesterone may 
regulate uNK cells through a GR-mediated process.
METHOD OF STUDY: After mouse NK cells were stimulated with CpG with or without
IL-12 in the presence or absence pre-treatment of progesterone, the effects of
progesterone on NK via GR were investigated by using RU486 (progesterone receptor
and GR antagonist) and CDB-2914 (progesterone receptor antagonist). The
expressions of CD69 and IFN-<U+03B3> were determined by flow cytometry and qPCR.
Phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>B and STAT4 was determined by Western blot. Furthermore, we 
purified uNK cells from human decidual tissues using anti-CD56 microbeads to
verify the effect of progesterone on uNK via GR.
RESULTS: Progesterone suppressed CD69 and IFN-<U+03B3> expression of mouse spleen NK
cells and human uNK cells induced by CpG combined with IL-12. CDB-2914 had no
effect on IFN-<U+03B3> expression suppressed by progesterone, while RU486 could abolish 
the inhibitory effect of progesterone. In addition, progesterone could decrease
the phosphorylation of both STAT4 and I<U+03BA>B.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we first prove that progesterone can regulate 
NK cells via GR. It is valuable for further understanding the role of uNK in
progesterone regulated gestation process.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22380541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Sep 1;84(1):266-73. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.11.027. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Intestinal irradiation and fibrosis in a Th1-deficient environment.

Linard C(1), Billiard F, Benderitter M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire, Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France. christine.linard@irsn.fr

PURPOSE: Changes in the Th1/Th2 immune balance may play a role in increasing the 
incidence of radiation-induced toxicity. This study evaluates the consequences of
Th1 deficiency on intestinal response (fibrosis and T cell trafficking) to
abdominal irradiation and examines in mucosa and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) the
differential involvement of the two Th1 pathways, T-bet/STAT1 and IL-12/STAT4, in
controlling this balance in mice.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Using T-bet-deficient mice (T-bet-/-), we evaluated the
mRNA and protein expression of the Th1 pathways (IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet/STAT1, and
IL-12/STAT4) and the CD4+ and CD8+ populations in ileal mucosa and MLN during the
first 3 months after 10 Gy abdominal irradiation.
RESULTS: The T-bet-deficient mice showed an increased fibrotic response to
radiation, characterized by higher TGF-ß1, col3a1 expression, and collagen
deposition in mucosa compared with wild-type mice. This response was associated
with drastically lower expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, the hallmark Th1 cytokine. Analysis
of the Th1 expression pathways, T-bet/STAT1 and IL-12/STAT4, showed their equal
involvement in the failure of Th1 polarization. A minimal IFN-<U+03B3> level depended on
the IL-23-p19/STAT4 level. In addition, the radiation-induced deficiency in the
priming of Th1 by IFN-<U+03B3> was related to the defective homing capacity of CD8+
cells in the mucosa.
CONCLUSION: Irradiation induces Th2 polarization, and the Th2 immune response may
play a role in potentiating irradiation-induced intestinal collagen deposition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22336200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Aug;71(8):1350-4. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200802. Epub 
2012 Feb 10.

Comprehensive assessment of rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci in a large
psoriatic arthritis cohort.

Bowes J(1), Ho P, Flynn E, Ali F, Marzo-Ortega H, Coates LC, Warren RB, McManus
R, Ryan AW, Kane D, Korendowych E, McHugh N, FitzGerald O, Packham J, Morgan AW, 
Bruce IN, Barton A.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: A number of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) susceptibility genes have been
identified in recent years. Given the overlap in phenotypic expression of
synovial joint inflammation between RA and psoriatic arthritis (PsA), the authors
explored whether RA susceptibility genes are also associated with PsA.
METHODS: 56 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapping to 41 genes previously
reported as RA susceptibility loci were selected for investigation. PsA was
defined as an inflammatory arthritis associated with psoriasis and subjects were 
recruited from the UK and Ireland. Genotyping was performed using the Sequenom
MassArray platform and frequencies compared with data derived from large UK
control collections.
RESULTS: Significant evidence for association with susceptibility to PsA was
found toa SNP mapping to the REL (rs13017599, p(trend)=5.2×10(4)) gene, while
nominal evidence for association (p(trend)<0.05) was found to seven other loci
including PLCL2 (rs4535211, p=1.7×10(-3)); STAT4 (rs10181656, p=3.0×10(-3)) and
the AFF3, CD28, CCL21, IL2 and KIF5A loci. Interestingly, three SNPs demonstrated
opposite effects to those reported for RA.
CONCLUSIONS: The REL gene, a key modulator of the NF<U+03BA>B pathway, is associated
with PsA but the allele conferring risk to RA is protective in PsA suggesting
that there are fundamental differences in the aetiological mechanisms underlying 
these two types of inflammatory arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3396450
PMID: 22328738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jun;39(6):6959-65. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1523-1. Epub 2012
Feb 7.

Molecular characterization of the porcine STAT4 and STAT6 genes.

Huang J(1), Ma G, Zhu M, Pan J, Zhang W, Zhao SH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education & Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of Ministry
of Agriculture, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic
of China.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are members of a
recently identified family of transcription factors that activate gene
transcription in response to a number of different cytokines. STAT4 and STAT6
were activated by interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-4 stimulation, which were important 
for the generation of Th1 and Th2 cells. In this study, we cloned the cDNA
sequences and analyzed the genomic structure of porcine STAT4 (poSTAT4) and STAT6
(poSTAT6) genes. Chromosome localization assigned these two genes to SSC15 and
SSC5, and they were most closely linked to maker SWR1002 and DK. The RT-PCR
revealed that both genes were expressed in eight diverse tissues, with the
highest level in small intestine, followed by lung, kidney, muscle and stomach,
whereas expressions in heart, liver and spleen were relatively weak. Transient
transfection indicated that poSTAT4 and poSTAT6 proteins distributed throughout
the whole porcine hip artery endothelial cell. A single nucleotide polymorphism
(A/G), which can be recognized by restriction enzyme TaiI, was identified at the 
3' untranslated region of poSTAT6, and genotyping results showed apparent
variation in allele frequency between Chinese indigenous and western breeds.

PMID: 22311028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Nat Immunol. 2012 Feb 5;13(3):290-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2227.

The composition and signaling of the IL-35 receptor are unconventional.

Collison LW(1), Delgoffe GM, Guy CS, Vignali KM, Chaturvedi V, Fairweather D,
Satoskar AR, Garcia KC, Hunter CA, Drake CG, Murray PJ, Vignali DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.

Interleukin 35 (IL-35) belongs to the IL-12 family of heterodimeric cytokines but
has a distinct functional profile. IL-35 suppresses T cell proliferation and
converts naive T cells into IL-35-producing induced regulatory T cells (iTr35
cells). Here we found that IL-35 signaled through a unique heterodimer of
receptor chains IL-12Rß2 and gp130 or homodimers of each chain. Conventional T
cells were sensitive to IL-35-mediated suppression in the absence of one receptor
chain but not both receptor chains, whereas signaling through both chains was
required for IL-35 expression and conversion into iTr35 cells. Signaling through 
the IL-35 receptor required the transcription factors STAT1 and STAT4, which
formed a unique heterodimer that bound to distinct sites in the promoters of the 
genes encoding the IL-12 subunits p35 and Ebi3. This unconventional mode of
signaling, distinct from that of other members of the IL-12 family, may broaden
the spectrum and specificity of IL-35-mediated suppression.

PMCID: PMC3529151
PMID: 22306691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):9972-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.288498. Epub 2012
Jan 31.

Mutated major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator up-regulates
interleukin-33-dependent differentiation of Th2 subset through Nod2 binding for
NLR (NOD-like receptor) signaling initiation.

Yang Z(1), Gu P, Shao X, Li Z, Zhou Y, Lu L, Chou KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, China.

Dominant-negative mutants of class II transactivator (mCIITAs) with N-terminal
depletion have been used to repress the transcription of class II genes in
xenotransplantation. Here, we report that mCIITA overexpressing myeloid cell line
Ana-1 (Ana-1-mCIITA) derived from a C57BL/6 mouse was able to down-regulate the
MHC class II expression and reverse immune responses from Th1
(IL-2(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+)STAT4(+)) to Th2 (IL-4(+)IL-5(+)IL-10(+)IL-13(+)STAT6(+)) when
cocultured with T cells. Mechanism analysis indicated that the mCIITA protein is 
able to initiate a NOD-like receptor-related signaling pathway via binding of the
cytoplasmic Nod2 protein, which was followed by activating RIP2, caspase 1, and
IKK-a/ß. This ensures the expression of the genes encoding the cytokines IL-33,
IL-1ß, and TNF-a; however, only the highly expressed IL-33 is responsible for
inducing the type 2 response, with a skewed Th2 cytokine secretion
(IL-4(+)IL-5(+)IL-10(+)IL-13(+)IL-2(-)IFN-<U+03B3>(-)), which was completely prevented
by the deactivation of the Nod2 gene with siRNA or by the blockage of the
IL-33-related signaling using the mAb ST2L against the IL-33 receptor.
mCIITA-mediated Th2 conversion was also successfully induced in vivo in a
mCIITA-transgenic C57BL/6 mouse model. These results indicate that the Th1/Th2
balance could be regulated by an N terminus-depleted CIITA molecule via NOD-like 
receptor-related signaling, a property valuable for disease control, especially
for inducing transplantation tolerance via the repression of class II expression 
and the attenuation of a Th1-dominant response.

PMCID: PMC3323048
PMID: 22294690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Curr Opin Immunol. 2012 Apr;24(2):191-5. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2011.12.004. Epub
2012 Jan 10.

Transcriptional mechanisms that regulate T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Oestreich KJ(1), Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Recent research has made great strides in uncovering the mechanisms by which the 
T helper 1 (Th1) cell gene expression program is established. In particular,
studies examining the transcription factors T-bet, STAT1, and STAT4 have
elucidated their roles in regulating Th1 signature genes, including Ifng, and
have started to address their contributions to the epigenetic states in Th1
cells. Additionally, new findings have provided information about how the
co-expression of T helper cell lineage-defining transcription factors impacts the
phenotype of the cell. In this review, we will briefly highlight the research
from the last few years examining the epigenetic states in T helper cells and the
mechanisms by which they are established. We will then discuss how this new
information contributes to our understanding of the flexibility of T helper cell 
genetic programs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319510
PMID: 22240120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;13(10):2054-62.

Primary Sjögren's syndrome and the type I interferon system.

Nordmark G(1), Eloranta ML, Ronnblom L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. Gunnel.Nordmark@medsci.uu.se

Patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) have an activated type I
interferon (IFN) system that contribute to the etiopathogenesis and clinical
manifestations of the disease. The type I IFN system consists of the stimuli for 
type I IFN production, the receptors, cells and transcription factors involved in
the synthesis of type I IFNs, the type I IFN-receptor and the effects on target
cells. Increased type I IFN activity has been demonstrated in sera from patients 
with pSS and IFN-a, the main type I IFN, has been detected in the minor salivary 
glands. Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
and minor salivary glands from pSS patients display an up-regulation of type I
IFN-induced genes, an "IFN signature". The professional IFN-a producing
plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pDC) shows a reduced frequency in the peripheral
blood, but has been detected in the salivary glands, possibly due to tissue
recruitment. Polymorphisms in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) genes in the type I
IFN system, are associated with increased risk for pSS. A postulated disease
model is that an initial viral infection induces type I IFN production in the
salivary glands with subsequent activation of the adaptive immune system
resulting in the production of autoantibodies against the RNA-binding proteins
SSA/SSB/RNP. Interferogenic immune complexes are formed, which trigger the pDCs
to an ongoing type I IFN production, which sustain the disease process. Potential
therapeutic targets can be identified within the type I IFN system.

PMID: 22208657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Cell Immunol. 2012;273(1):67-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.11.005. Epub 2011
Dec 4.

Influence of TRAF1/C5 and STAT4 genes polymorphisms on susceptibility and
severity of rheumatoid arthritis in Egyptian population.

Mohamed RH(1), Pasha HF, El-Shahawy EE.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common cause of adult inflammatory
arthritis. Recent genome-wide association scans have disclosed several
single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with RA susceptibility. The aim of
this study was to determine whether the polymorphisms of TRAF1/C5 (tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-receptor associated factor 1)/(complement component 5) and STAT4
(signal transducers and activators of transcription 4) confer susceptibility,
activity and severity to RA in Egyptian populations. One hundred and seventy-two 
RA patients and 160 controls were enrolled in the study. Polymorphisms of
TRAF1/C5 and STAT4 genes were determined using restriction fragment length
polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction. The TRAF1/C5 A and STAT4 T alleles were
significantly associated with RA in Egyptian population. TRAF1/C5 A allele and
STAT4 TT genotype were significantly associated with RA severity. In conclusion
the mutant alleles or genotypes of both examined polymorphisms are associated
with the development of RA in Egyptian population.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22196377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Immunity. 2011 Dec 23;35(6):919-31. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.11.012.

Early Th1 cell differentiation is marked by a Tfh cell-like transition.

Nakayamada S(1), Kanno Y, Takahashi H, Jankovic D, Lu KT, Johnson TA, Sun HW,
Vahedi G, Hakim O, Handon R, Schwartzberg PL, Hager GL, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. nakayamadas@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Feb;12(2):74.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells comprise an important subset of helper T cells;
however, their relationship with other helper lineages is incompletely
understood. Herein, we showed interleukin-12 acting via the transcription factor 
STAT4 induced both Il21 and Bcl6 genes, generating cells with features of both
Tfh and Th1 cells. However, STAT4 also induced the transcription factor T-bet.
With ChIP-seq, we defined the genome-wide targets of T-bet and found that it
repressed Bcl6 and other markers of Tfh cells, thereby attenuating the nascent
Tfh cell-like phenotype in the late phase of Th1 cell specification. Tfh-like
cells were rapidly generated after Toxoplasma gondii infection in mice, but T-bet
constrained Tfh cell expansion and consequent germinal center formation and
antibody production. Our data argue that Tfh and Th1 cells share a transitional
stage through the signal mediated by STAT4, which promotes both phenotypes.
However, T-bet represses Tfh cell functionalities, promoting full Th1 cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3244883
PMID: 22195747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2012 Jun;23(4):315-23. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2011.01243.x. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Association of variants in innate immune genes with asthma and eczema.

Sharma S(1), Poon A, Himes BE, Lasky-Su J, Sordillo JE, Belanger K, Milton DK,
Bracken MB, Triche EW, Leaderer BP, Gold DR, Litonjua AA.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. sunita.sharma@channing.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The innate immune pathway is important in the pathogenesis of asthma 
and eczema. However, only a few variants in these genes have been associated with
either disease. We investigate the association between polymorphisms of genes in 
the innate immune pathway with childhood asthma and eczema. In addition, we
compare individual associations with those discovered using a multivariate
approach.
METHODS: Using a novel method, case control based association testing (C2BAT),
569 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 44 innate immune genes were tested 
for association with asthma and eczema in children from the Boston Home Allergens
and Asthma Study and the Connecticut Childhood Asthma Study. The screening
algorithm was used to identify the top SNPs associated with asthma and eczema. We
next investigated the interaction of innate immune variants with asthma and
eczema risk using Bayesian networks.
RESULTS: After correction for multiple comparisons, 7 SNPs in 6 genes (CARD25,
TGFB1, LY96, ACAA1, DEFB1, and IFNG) were associated with asthma (adjusted
p-value<0.02), while 5 SNPs in 3 different genes (CD80, STAT4, and IRAKI) were
significantly associated with eczema (adjusted p-value < 0.02). None of these
SNPs were associated with both asthma and eczema. Bayesian network analysis
identified 4 SNPs that were predictive of asthma and 10 SNPs that predicted
eczema. Of the genes identified using Bayesian networks, only CD80 was associated
with eczema in the single-SNP study. Using novel methodology that allows for
screening and replication in the same population, we have identified associations
of innate immune genes with asthma and eczema. Bayesian network analysis suggests
that additional SNPs influence disease susceptibility via SNP interactions.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that innate immune genes contribute to the
pathogenesis of asthma and eczema, and that these diseases likely have different 
genetic determinants.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3412627
PMID: 22192168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. BMC Neurol. 2011 Dec 19;11:155. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-11-155.

Preliminary study: treatment with intramuscular interferon beta-1a results in
increased levels of IL-12Rß2+ and decreased levels of IL23R+ CD4+ T - Lymphocytes
in multiple sclerosis.

Kress-Bennett JM(1), Ehrlich GD, Bruno A, Post JC, Hu FZ, Scott TF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Sciences, Allegheny-Singer Research Institute, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15212, USA.

BACKGROUND: There are a lack of biomarkers which can be used to predict clinical 
outcomes for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients receiving interferon beta (IFN-ß). 
Thus the objective of this study was to characterize changes in CD4+ T-lymphocyte
expression in an unbiased manner following initiation of intramuscular (IM)
IFN-ß-1a treatment, and then to verify those findings using marker-specific
assays.
METHODS: Peripheral blood specimens were collected from twenty MS patients before
and after treatment with intramuscular (IM) IFN-ß-1a and were used for isolation 
of mononuclear cells (PBMCs). mRNA expression patterns of negatively-selected
CD4+ T-cells from the PBMCs were analyzed using microarray gene expression
technology. IL-12 and IL-23 receptor levels on PBMC-derived CD4+ T-cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry. The phosphorylation status of Stat4 was measured by
performing densitometry on western blots.
RESULTS: Microarray analyses demonstrated that mRNA expression of the IL-12Rß2
gene was uniformly up-regulated in response to IFN-ß-1a treatment and was
associated with an increased number of IL-12Rß2+ CD4+ T-cells by flow cytometry
in 4 of 6 patients. This finding was substantiated by demonstrating that Stat4
phosphorylation, a transcription factor for IL-12, was increased after treatment.
Conversely, the number of IL-23R+ CD4+ T-cells was decreased following treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The IL-12 receptor shares a common subunit, the IL-12Rß2, with the
IL-23 receptor. Both of these receptors have a probable role in regulating IL-17 
and TH-17 cells, important mediators of inflammation in multiple sclerosis (MS). 
Thus, the changes in the numbers of CD4+ T-cells expressing these receptors in
response to IFN-ß-1a treatment may point to an important mechanism of action for 
this drug, but further large scale studies are needed to confirm these
preliminary observations.

PMCID: PMC3292517
PMID: 22182694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dig Dis. 2011;29(6):554-61. doi: 10.1159/000332967. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

Contribution of gut microbiota to colonic and extracolonic cancer development.

Compare D(1), Nardone G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Gastroenterology Unit,
Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

It is estimated that 20% of malignancies worldwide can be attributed to
infections, i.e. about 1.2 million cases per year. A typical example of the
association between bacterial infection and gastrointestinal malignancies is
Helicobacter pylori infection with both gastric cancer and mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Bacteria are an important component of the human body. 
The human intestine contains >500 different types of microorganisms, the 'gut
microbiota', that play important functions such as energetic metabolism,
proliferation and survival of epithelial cells, and protection against pathogens.
Chronic alteration of intestinal microbiota homeostasis, 'dysbiosis', could
promote many diseases, including cancer. The mechanisms by which bacteria may
induce carcinogenesis include chronic inflammation, immune evasion, and immune
suppression. There are three effector pathways of T helper (Th) cell
differentiation: Th1 responses promoted by procarcinogenic signal transducer and 
activator of transcription (Stat)1 and Stat4 signaling, Th2 responses promoted by
Stat6 signaling, and Th17 responses promoted by Stat3 signaling. Interestingly,
Th1 responses, driven by IL-12 and characterized by IFN-<U+03B3> production, are
typically anticarcinogenic, whereas Th17 responses are activated in various
cancers. Furthermore, a T regulatory response, driven by IL-10 and TGF-ß,
counterbalances the proinflammatory effect of Th17 responses. Elevated numbers of
T regulatory cells suppress the innate and adaptive immune responses, thereby
contributing to tumor progression. The emerging relationship between gut
microbiota and cancer has prompted new ways of thinking about cancer prevention
and has led to the development of noninvasive diagnostic tests and innovative
treatments, such as with probiotics. However, although in vitro and animal model 
studies suggest a protective anticancer effect of probiotics, the results of
human epidemiological studies are controversial.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22179211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mod Rheumatol. 2012 Sep;22(5):695-703. doi: 10.1007/s10165-011-0574-9. Epub 2011 
Dec 16.

A meta-analysis of the association between cytokine gene polymorphisms and
systemic sclerosis.

Peng WJ(1), Pan HF, Tao JH, Wang BX, Lu MM, Wang S, He Q, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei 230032, Anhui, People's Republic of
China.

Erratum in
    Mod Rheumatol. 2012 Sep;22(5):704.

We conducted a comprehensive meta-analysis to quantitatively evaluate the
association of cytokine gene polymorphisms with systemic sclerosis (SSc)
susceptibility. Electronic databases were used to identify published studies
before July 2011. In total, 23 case-control studies including 3524 SSc cases and 
6086 healthy controls were included in the meta-analysis. We examined the
relationship between five gene polymorphisms [cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated
antigen 4 (CTLA-4) -1722T/C, CTLA-4 -318C/T, CTLA-4 +49A/G,
angiotensin-converting enzyme I/D, STAT-4 rs7574865] and susceptibility to SSc.
The combined odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (95% CI) was calculated
to estimate the strength of the association in a fixed or random effect model.
Heterogeneity and publication bias were also assessed. We found a significant
association between SSc and STAT rs7574865 (TT vs. GG: OR 0.44, 95% CI 0.36-0.54;
TT vs. TG + GG: OR 0.48, 95% CI 0.39-0.59; TT + TG vs. GG: OR 0.74, 95% CI
0.66-0.83; T vs. G: OR 0.72, 95% CI 0.66-0.79), but there were no other
statistically significant associations with other gene polymorphisms. Our study
suggested that SSc is associated with STAT gene rs7574865 polymorphism.

PMID: 22173230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Acta Histochem. 2012 Nov;114(7):641-6. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2011.11.010. Epub
2011 Dec 14.

Effects of 5-fluorouracil and gemcitabine on a breast cancer cell line (MCF-7)
via the JAK/STAT pathway.

Uluer ET(1), Aydemir I, Inan S, Ozbilgin K, Vatansever HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Celal Bayar
University, Dekanlik Binasi, Uncubozkoy, Manisa, Turkey. drelginturkoz@gmail.com

Aberrant activation of the JAK/STAT pathway may predispose to malignancy as a
consequence of the deregulation of cell proliferation, differentiation or
apoptosis such as in cancer of the blood, head and neck, and breast. In our study
we aimed to investigate the effects of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and gemcitabine on a
breast cancer cell line (MCF-7 cells) via the JAK/STAT pathway. Distribution of
JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5 were evaluated on MCF-7 cells
following gemcitabine and 5-FU treatment and in the absence of drug treatment by 
an indirect immunohistochemical method. It was observed that JAK1, JAK3, STAT5
and particularly STAT2 activation were more effective than the other JAK/STATs in
breast cancer progression. Following treatment with 5-FU, JAK1 and STAT5
immunoreactivities were decreased in MCF-7 cells in comparison with both
gemcitabine-treated and non-treated groups. These results suggest that the
JAK/STAT pathway plays an important role in breast cancer pathogenesis and may be
more affected after 5-FU treatment rather than gemcitabine. Drugs which block
STAT5 may provide a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of breast
cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Zhongguo Xue Xi Chong Bing Fang Zhi Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;23(1):61-4.

[Effects of signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 and 6 on
development of worms and granuloma formation in mice infected with Schistosoma
japonicum].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng YL(1), Song WJ, Kong Z, Wang T, Liu WQ, ei JH, Li YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology, School of Medicine, Jianghan University,
Wuhan 430056, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of STAT4 and STAT6 on the development of worms 
and granuloma formation in mice infected with Schistosoma japonicum.
METHODS: All the intact BALB/cJ mice and STAT4(-/-), STAT6(-/-) mice with the
same genetic background were infected with 25 S. japonicum cercariae. All the
mice were sacrificed on the 42nd day after infection and the worms were
collected. The total number of worms and the mean number of worm pairs were
counted. The liver of each mouse was removed for the count of eggs, the
histological examination and the determination of the size of single-egg
granulomas in the liver.
RESULTS: No significant differences were found in the total number of worms, the 
number of worm pairs and the number of eggs per pair of worms in the liver among 
STAT4(-/-), STAT6(-/-) and BALB/cJ mice. The size of single-egg granulomas in the
liver of STAT6(-/-) mice (213.3 +/- 68.6) microm was significantly smaller than
that in the liver of normal BALB/cJ mice (319.5 +/- 71.9) microm (P < 0.05). The 
liver granulomas were not well formed and the liver fibrosis decreased in
STAT6(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT4 or STAT6 deficiency has no conspicuous effect on the
development and fecundity of S. japonicum. STAT6 plays an important role for the 
granuloma formation and liver fibrosis.

PMID: 22164377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2011 Dec;91 Suppl 1:S82-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2011.10.016.
Epub 2011 Dec 5.

A defect in the synthesis of Interferon-<U+03B3> by the T cells of Complement-C5
deficient mice leads to enhanced susceptibility for tuberculosis.

Mashruwala MA(1), Smith AK, Lindsey DR, Moczygemba M, Wetsel RA, Klein JR, Actor 
JK, Jagannath C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) plays a major role during host defense against Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (Mtb). T cells produce IFN<U+03B3> in response to IL-12 and IL-18 secreted 
from Mtb infected macrophages. IFN<U+03B3> in turn, induces nitric oxide secretion in
macrophages that kills Mtb. IFN<U+03B3> knockout mice are thus hyper-susceptible to
tuberculosis. We reported earlier that Complement-C5 deficient (C5(-/-)) congenic
mice are more susceptible to tuberculosis and showed reduced IL-12 synthesis in
their macrophages. Using C5(-/-) congenic mice that carry a deletion in the C5
gene and the wild type C5(+/+) mice, we demonstrate here that, the C5(-/-)
derived CD3(+) T cells, have an additional defect in the synthesis of IFN<U+03B3>.
C5(-/-) T cells produced lower levels of IFN<U+03B3> upon stimulation by antigen
presenting cells (APCs) infected with Mtb or when stimulated directly with a
combination of IL-12 and IL-18. The latter was in part due to a reduced
phosphorylation of STAT4 following IL-12/IL-18 stimulation. Addition of C5a
peptide to IL-12/IL-18 partially restored STAT4 phosphorylation and IFN<U+03B3>
synthesis in C5(-/-) T cells indicating that IL-12/IL-18 mediated signaling
within CD3(+) T cells involves C5a peptide. Finally, C5(-/-) T cells derived from
M. bovis BCG or Mtb infected mice showed a reduced expression of T-bet (T-box
expressed in T cells) transcription factor, which correlated well with a reduced 
T cell secretion of IFN<U+03B3>. Since T-bet mediated IFN<U+03B3> synthesis facilitates Th1
expansion, C5(-/-) mouse derived T cells appear to have an intrinsic defect in
the production of IFN<U+03B3>, which is related to C5 deficiency and this may explain
their increased susceptibility to infection with Mtb and BCG.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3263371
PMID: 22154007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Dec 8;12:158. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-158.

Effects of endotoxin exposure on childhood asthma risk are modified by a genetic 
polymorphism in ACAA1.

Sordillo JE(1), Sharma S, Poon A, Lasky-Su J, Belanger K, Milton DK, Bracken MB, 
Triche EW, Leaderer BP, Gold DR, Litonjua AA.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. rejoa@channing.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the endotoxin-mediated TLR4 pathway genes have been 
associated with asthma and atopy. We aimed to examine how genetic polymorphisms
in innate immunity pathways interact with endotoxin to influence asthma risk in
children.
METHODS: In a previous analysis of 372 children from the Boston Home Allergens
and the Connecticut Childhood Asthma studies, 7 SNPs in 6 genes (CARD15, TGFB1,
LY96, ACAA1, DEFB1 and IFNG) involved in innate immune pathways were associated
with asthma, and 5 SNPs in 3 genes (CD80, STAT4, IRAK2) were associated with
eczema. We tested these SNPs for interaction with early life endotoxin exposure
(n = 291), in models for asthma and eczema by age 6.
RESULTS: We found a significant interaction between endotoxin and a SNP
(rs156265) in ACAA1 (p = 0.0013 for interaction). Increased endotoxin exposure
(by quartile) showed protective effects for asthma in individuals with at least
one copy of the minor allele (OR = 0.39 per quartile increase in endotoxin, 95%
CI 0.15 to 1.01). Endotoxin exposure did not reduce the risk of asthma in
children homozygous for the major allele.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that protective effects of endotoxin exposure on
asthma may vary depending upon the presence or absence of a polymorphism in
ACAA1.

PMCID: PMC3252252
PMID: 22151743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Hum Immunol. 2012 Jan;73(1):118-21. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.11.007. Epub 2011 
Nov 20.

The polymorphisms of T cell-specific TBX21 and STAT4 genes may contribute to the 
susceptibility of Chinese individuals to aplastic anemia.

Ge M(1), Zheng Y, Li X, Shi J, Ge J, Li H, Feng S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology &
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union
Medical College, Tianjin 300020, People's Republic of China.

T cell-specific T-box transcription factor gene (TBX21) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) have been suggested as 2 candidate genes for
conferring susceptibility to autoimmunity. We herein hypothesized that the
polymorphisms of TBX21 and STAT4 genes might contribute to the susceptibility of 
Chinese individuals to aplastic anemia (AA) as T cell-mediated immune disease
characterized by hypoplasia and pancytopenia. We investigated the distributions
of TBX21 (T-1993C and T-1514C) and STAT4 (rs7574862) polymorphisms in 202 adult
patients with AA and 195 healthy controls by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. The frequencies of T-1993C
(but not T-1514C) genotype and allele distribution were significantly higher in
AA patients than in controls. The T allele (TT + TG genotypes) of STAT4 variant
rs7574865 was associated with increased susceptibility of Chinese people to AA.
Our results indicated that single nucleotide polymorphisms in TBX21 and STAT4
might contribute to susceptibility to AA in the Chinese population.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22133489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Joint Bone Spine. 2012 Oct;79(5):471-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2011.10.007. Epub
2011 Nov 29.

TGF beta1 polymorphisms are candidate predictors of the clinical response to
rituximab in rheumatoid arthritis.

Daïen CI(1), Fabre S, Rittore C, Soler S, Daïen V, Tejedor G, Cadart D, Molinari 
N, Daurès JP, Jorgensen C, Touitou I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U844, Unité Génétique Clinique, Département Thérapeutique et Médecine
Physique Ostéoarticulaire, CHU de Montpellier, 34295 Montpellier, France.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between several candidate
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and responsiveness to rituximab in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Sixty-three RA patients were included. Nine genes (13 SNPs) were
subsequently analyzed, including those coding for cytokines involved in synovitis
(IL10, LTA, TGFß1, TNF-a, TNF receptor II) and genes associated with RA
susceptibility (-C5 TRAF1, STAT4, TNFAIP3 and PTPN22).
RESULTS: Forty-four patients were defined as responders and 19 as nonresponders. 
TGFß1 Codon 10 and TGFß1 Codon 25 SNPs were both associated with clinical
response (probability to respond to treatment with the Codon 10C/T genotype: OR =
1.6; P = 0.002, and with the Codon 25 G/C genotype: OR = 1.6; P = 0.025). The
probability to be a responder when the TGFß Codon10 C/T and TGFß Codon 25 G/C
genotypes were co-inherited, doubled (OR = 2.6; P = 0.008).
CONCLUSION: The TGFß1 SNPs are associated with a good response to rituximab
therapy and as such could be useful genetic biomarkers in predicting therapy
outcome.

Copyright © 2011 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22129793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Feb;52(2):155-66. doi: 10.1002/mc.21841. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

JAK/STAT/SOCS-signaling pathway and colon and rectal cancer.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Kadlubar SA, Bondurant KL, Wolff RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway is involved in immune function and cell growth. We evaluated
the association between genetic variation in JAK1 (10 SNPs), JAK2 (9 SNPs), TYK2 
(5 SNPs), suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 (2 SNPs), SOCS2 (2 SNPs),
STAT1 (16 SNPs), STAT2 (2 SNPs), STAT3 (6 SNPs), STAT4 (21 SNPs), STAT5A (2
SNPs), STAT5B (3 SNPs), STAT6 (4 SNPs) with risk of colorectal cancer. We used
data from population-based case-control studies (colon cancer n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1555 cases,
1,956 controls; rectal cancer n<U+2009>=<U+2009>754 cases, 959 controls). JAK2, SOCS2, STAT1,
STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6 were associated with colon cancer; STAT3, STAT4,
STAT6, and TYK2 were associated with rectal cancer. Given the biological role of 
the JAK/STAT-signaling pathway and cytokines, we evaluated interaction with IFNG,
TNF, and IL6; numerous statistically significant associations after adjustment
for multiple comparisons were observed. The following statistically significant
interactions were observed: TYK2 with aspirin/NSAID use; STAT1, STAT4, and TYK2
with estrogen status; and JAK2, STAT2, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6 with
smoking status and colon cancer risk; JAK2, STAT6, and TYK2 with aspirin/NSAID
use; JAK1 with estrogen status; STAT2 with cigarette smoking and rectal cancer.
JAK2, SOCS1, STAT3, STAT5, and TYK2 were associated with colon cancer survival
(hazard rate ratio (HRR) of 3.3 95% CI 2.01,5.42 for high mutational load). JAK2,
SOCS1, STAT1, STAT4, and TYK2 were associated with rectal cancer survival (HRR
2.80 95% CI 1.63,4.80). These data support the importance of the
JAK/STAT-signaling pathway in colorectal cancer and suggest targets for
intervention.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3430812
PMID: 22121102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2011 Dec 22;118(26):6793-802. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-356162. Epub 2011
Nov 10.

MicroRNA regulation of STAT4 protein expression: rapid and sensitive modulation
of IL-12 signaling in human natural killer cells.

Huang Y(1), Lei Y, Zhang H, Hou L, Zhang M, Dayton AI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, MD 20892, USA.

IL-12 exerts several regulatory effects on natural killer (NK) cells by
activating IL-12 signaling. IL-12 signaling is tightly auto-regulated to control 
its onset and termination, with prolonged IL-12 treatment resulting in IL-12
hyporesponsiveness. However, the mechanisms underlying IL-12 auto-regulation are 
still unclear. In this study we report that prolonged IL-12 treatment
significantly up-regulates microRNAs (miRNAs), including miR-132, -212, and -200a
in primary human NK cells. This up-regulation correlates temporally with
gradually decreasing STAT4 levels and decreasing IFN-<U+03B3> expression, after an
initial increase within the first 16 hours of IL-12 treatment. The IL-12
hyporesponsiveness is dependent on IL-12 concentration, and associated
up-regulation of miR-132, -212, and -200a. Furthermore, IL-12-hyporesponsive
cells regain responsiveness of IFN-<U+03B3> production 24 hours after IL-12 removal,
which correlates with decreases in miR-132, -212, and -200a levels.
Overexpression of miR-132, -212, and -200a by transfection into NK cells mimics
IL-12 priming, inducing IL-12 hyporesponsiveness, whereas transfection of
miR-132, -212, and -200a inhibitors largely abolishes IL-12 induction of IL-12
hyporesponsiveness. These data suggest that miR-132, -212, and -200a
up-regulation during prolonged IL-12 treatment, negatively regulates the IL-12
signaling pathway by reducing STAT4 expression in primary human NK cells.

PMID: 22077060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2011 Nov;27(8):867-71. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1263.

Evidence for the role of STAT4 as a general autoimmunity locus in the Korean
population.

Park Y(1), Lee HS, Park Y, Min D, Yang S, Kim D, Cho B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Bioengineering, Hanyang University College
of Medicine and Engineering, and Hanyang University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
parkys@hanyang.ac.kr

BACKGROUND: Recently, the association of a common STAT4 haplotype with type 1
diabetes (T1D) as well as rheumatoid arthritis has been documented in Caucasians 
and Koreans. STAT4 is involved in the signalling of interleukin-12 and <U+03B3>IFN, as
well as interleukin-23. To discover genes affecting the susceptibility of common 
autoimmune diseases, we studied the association of polymorphisms in STAT4 with
autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) as well as T1D in the Korean population.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Four single-nucleotide polymorphisms on the chromosome 2q
(rs11889341, rs7574865, rs8179673, and rs10181656), which were found to associate
with rheumatoid arthritis were examined for association in a Korean sample of 428
AITD, 418 T1D patients, and 1060 controls.
RESULTS: The minor alleles of all four single-nucleotide polymorphisms and the
reconstructed STAT4 haplotypes conferred significant degree of risk for AITD
(p=10(-2) to 10(-4)). Although we found a weak association of rs11889341 with T1D
(p<0.05), the same haplotypes were not associated with T1D susceptibility. When
we stratified T1D patients according to the age of onset, the minor alleles of
all four single-nucleotide polymorphisms and the same haplotypes showed
significant association with the susceptibility of T1D in the early-onset
subgroup (p<0.01), not in the late-onset subgroup.
CONCLUSION: STAT4 alleles and the same haplotypes might influence cytokine
signalling, and therefore the development of AITD as well as T1D. These results
reinforce the influence of STAT4 gene as a general autoimmune gene.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22069275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Ups J Med Sci. 2011 Nov;116(4):227-37. doi: 10.3109/03009734.2011.624649.

The type I interferon system in the etiopathogenesis of autoimmune diseases.

Rönnblom L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. Lars.Ronnblom@medsci.uu.se

Many patients with systemic autoimmune diseases have signs of a continuous
production of type I interferon (IFN) and display an increased expression of
IFN-a-regulated genes. The reason for the on-going IFN-a synthesis in these
patients seems to be an activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) by
immune complexes (ICs), consisting of autoantibodies in combination with DNA or
RNA-containing autoantigens. Such interferogenic ICs are internalized via the
Fc<U+03B3>RIIa expressed on pDCs, reach the endosome, and stimulate Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-7 or -9, which subsequently leads to IFN-a gene transcription. Variants of 
genes involved in both the IFN-a synthesis and response have been linked to an
increased risk to develop systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and other autoimmune
diseases. Among these autoimmunity risk genes are IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5),
which is involved in TLR signaling, and the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) that interacts with the type I IFN receptor. Several
other gene variants in the IFN signaling pathway also confer an increased risk to
develop an autoimmune disease. The observations that IFN-a therapy can induce
autoimmunity and that many autoimmune conditions have an on-going type I IFN
production suggest that the type I IFN system has a pivotal role in the
etiopathogenesis of these diseases. Possible mechanisms behind the dysregulated
type IFNsystem in autoimmune diseases and how the IFN-a produced can contribute
to the development of an autoimmune process will be reviewed.

PMCID: PMC3207297
PMID: 22066971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e27006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027006. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

Amelioration of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by plumbagin through
down-regulation of JAK-STAT and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathways.

Jia Y(1), Jing J, Bai Y, Li Z, Liu L, Luo J, Liu M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China.

Plumbagin (PL), a herbal compound derived from roots of the medicinal plant
Plumbago zeylanica, has been shown to have immunosuppressive properties. Present 
report describes that PL is a potent novel agent in control of encephalitogenic T
cell responses and amelioration of mouse experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), through down-regulation of JAK-STAT pathway. PL was
found to selectively inhibit IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 production by CD4(+) T cells, which 
was mediated through abrogated phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2. Consistent with 
IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 reduction was suppressed STAT1/STAT4/T-bet pathway which is
critical for Th1 differentiation, as well as STAT3/ROR pathway which is essential
for Th17 differentiation. In addition, PL suppressed pro-inflammatory molecules
such as iNOS, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-6, accompanied by inhibition of I<U+03BA>B degradation as
well as NF-<U+03BA>B phosphorylation. These data give new insight into the novel immune 
regulatory mechanism of PL and highlight the great value of this kind of herb
compounds in probing the complex cytokine signaling network and novel therapeutic
targets for autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3205001
PMID: 22066025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2011 Dec;33(4):714-22. doi:
10.3109/08923973.2011.564185. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Immunomodulatory effect of water extract of cinnamon on anti-CD3-induced cytokine
responses and p38, JNK, ERK1/2, and STAT4 activation.

Lee BJ(1), Kim YJ, Cho DH, Sohn NW, Kang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kangnam Korean Hospital, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, South Korea.

CONTEXT: Cinnamon bark is a very popular herb used in traditional medicine to
treat various disorders such as chronic gastric symptoms, arthritis, and the
common cold.
OBJECTIVE: The immunomodulatory effect of water extract of cinnamon bark (CWE) on
cytokine secretion and involvement of intracellular signaling molecules in
activated T cells have been examined.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice were orally administered CWE for 7 days. Serum was
obtained 90 min after intravenous injection of anti-CD3 antibody (Ab).
Splenocytes were cultured with anti-CD3 Ab and CWE for cytokine expression, cell 
cycle, apoptotic/necrotic changes, and viability. I<U+03BA>Ba, p38, JNK, ERK1/2, STAT4, 
and STAT6 were analyzed using western blotting.
RESULTS: Administration of CWE decreased systemic levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, but not the
levels of IL-4 or IL-2. In vitro, CWE inhibited anti-CD3 Ab-stimulated IFN-<U+03B3> and 
IL-4 at the mRNA and secreted protein levels. Despite its inhibition of IL-2
transcript, CWE enhanced IL-2 secretion. CWE treatment caused a reduction in the 
sub-G1 phase, accompanied by an increased ratio of apoptotic cells to necrotic
cells. The increased IL-2 secretion by CWE was not mediated by its direct effect 
on CD4 T cells. CWE inhibited the activation of p38, JNK, ERK1/2, and STAT4, but 
not I<U+03BA>Ba degradation or STAT6.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: These observations provided evidence that CWE was
able to down-regulate IFN-<U+03B3> expression in activated T cells without altering IL-2
production, involving inhibition of p38, JNK, ERK1/2, and STAT4. Our results
contribute to a better understanding of the immunomodulatory action of cinnamon
bark for the application of inflammatory disorders.

PMID: 22053946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Genes Immun. 2012 Apr;13(3):221-31. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.73. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Synovial expression of Th17-related and cancer-associated genes is regulated by
the arthritis severity locus Cia10.

Jenkins E(1), Brenner M, Laragione T, Gulko PS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Rheumatology, Center for Genomics and Human
Genetics, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

We have previously identified Cia10 as an arthritis severity and articular damage
quantitative trait locus. In this study, we used Illumina RatRef-12 microarrays
to analyze the expression of 21,922 genes in synovial tissues from
arthritis-susceptible DA and arthritis-protected DA.ACI(Cia10) congenics with
pristane-induced arthritis. 310 genes had significantly different expression. The
genes upregulated in DA, and reciprocally downregulated in DA.ACI(Cia10) included
IL-11, Ccl12 and Cxcl10, as well as genes implicated in Th17 responses such as
IL-17A, IL-6, Ccr6, Cxcr3 and Stat4. Suppressors of immune responses Tgfb and
Vdr, and inhibitors of oxidative stress were upregulated in congenics. There was 
an over-representation of genes implicated in cancer and cancer-related
phenotypes such as tumor growth and invasion among the differentially expressed
genes. Cancer-favoring genes like Ctsd, Ikbke, and Kras were expressed in
increased levels in DA, whereas inhibitors of cancer phenotypes such as Timp2,
Reck and Tgfbr3 were increased in DA.ACI(Cia10). These results suggest that Cia10
may control arthritis severity, synovial hyperplasia and joint damage via the
regulation of the expression of cancer-related genes, inflammatory mediators and 
Th17-related markers. These new findings have the potential to generate new
targets for therapies aimed at reducing arthritis severity and joint damage in
rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3339715
PMID: 22048456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Bioinformatics. 2011 Dec 1;27(23):3221-7. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr552.
Epub 2011 Oct 29.

TIP: a probabilistic method for identifying transcription factor target genes
from ChIP-seq binding profiles.

Cheng C(1), Min R, Gerstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06511, USA.

MOTIVATION: ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip experiments have been widely used to identify 
transcription factor (TF) binding sites and target genes. Conventionally, a
fairly 'simple' approach is employed for target gene identification e.g. finding 
genes with binding sites within 2 kb of a transcription start site (TSS).
However, this does not take into account the number of sites upstream of the TSS,
their exact positioning or the fact that different TFs appear to act at different
characteristic distances from the TSS.
RESULTS: Here we propose a probabilistic model called target identification from 
profiles (TIP) that quantitatively measures the regulatory relationships between 
TFs and target genes. For each TF, our model builds a characteristic, averaged
profile of binding around the TSS and then uses this to weight the sites
associated with a given gene, providing a continuous-valued 'regulatory' score
relating each TF and potential target. Moreover, the score can readily be turned 
into a ranked list of target genes and an estimate of significance, which is
useful for case-dependent downstream analysis.
CONCLUSION: We show the advantages of TIP by comparing it to the 'simple'
approach on several representative datasets, using motif occurrence and
relationship to knock-out experiments as metrics of validation. Moreover, we show
that the probabilistic model is not as sensitive to various experimental
parameters (including sequencing depth and peak-calling method) as the simple
approach; in fact, the lesser dependence on sequencing depth potentially utilizes
the result of a ChIP-seq experiment in a more 'cost-effective' manner.
CONTACT: mark.gerstein@yale.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3223362
PMID: 22039215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Hum Immunol. 2011 Dec;72(12):1204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.10.002. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The CREM gene is involved in genetic predisposition to inflammatory bowel disease
in the Tunisian population.

Bouzid D(1), Fourati H, Amouri A, Marques I, Abida O, Haddouk S, Ben Ayed M,
Tahri N, Penha-Gonçalves C, Masmoudi H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Medicine School and Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia. dorra-ing@voila.fr

The identification of susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is key to understanding pathogenic mechanisms. Recently, the results of genetic
association studies have highlighted many loci that are shared among several
autoimmune diseases. We aimed to study the genetic epidemiology of polymorphisms 
in specific genes previously associated with other autoimmune diseases, namely
the CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes. Twelve polymorphisms in the
CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes were genotyped in a cohort of 107 IBD
patients (39 Crohn's disease [CD] and 68 ulcerative colitis [UC]) and 162
controls from southern Tunisia. One CREM single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
displayed evidence for genetic association with IBD (p=8.7×10(-4), odds ratio
[OR]=2.84 [1.58; 5.09]). One STAT4 SNP (p=0.026; OR=1.65 [1.06; 2.58]) exhibited 
a marginal association with UC but not with CD. No significant association was
observed with the SNPs in STAT5a, IRF5, and STAT5b. These results suggest that
common variants of the CREM gene are involved in the genetic component conferring
general susceptibility to IBD, whereas STAT4 appears to be more specifically
associated with UC. This work provides motivation for studies aiming to replicate
these findings in larger populations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22019623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Nat Genet. 2011 Oct 16;43(11):1131-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.970.

Genome-wide association study identifies loci influencing concentrations of liver
enzymes in plasma.

Chambers JC, Zhang W, Sehmi J, Li X, Wass MN, Van der Harst P, Holm H, Sanna S,
Kavousi M, Baumeister SE, Coin LJ, Deng G, Gieger C, Heard-Costa NL, Hottenga JJ,
Kühnel B, Kumar V, Lagou V, Liang L, Luan J, Vidal PM, Mateo Leach I, O'Reilly
PF, Peden JF, Rahmioglu N, Soininen P, Speliotes EK, Yuan X, Thorleifsson G,
Alizadeh BZ, Atwood LD, Borecki IB, Brown MJ, Charoen P, Cucca F, Das D, de Geus 
EJ, Dixon AL, Döring A, Ehret G, Eyjolfsson GI, Farrall M, Forouhi NG, Friedrich 
N, Goessling W, Gudbjartsson DF, Harris TB, Hartikainen AL, Heath S, Hirschfield 
GM, Hofman A, Homuth G, Hyppönen E, Janssen HL, Johnson T, Kangas AJ, Kema IP,
Kühn JP, Lai S, Lathrop M, Lerch MM, Li Y, Liang TJ, Lin JP, Loos RJ, Martin NG, 
Moffatt MF, Montgomery GW, Munroe PB, Musunuru K, Nakamura Y, O'Donnell CJ,
Olafsson I, Penninx BW, Pouta A, Prins BP, Prokopenko I, Puls R, Ruokonen A,
Savolainen MJ, Schlessinger D, Schouten JN, Seedorf U, Sen-Chowdhry S,
Siminovitch KA, Smit JH, Spector TD, Tan W, Teslovich TM, Tukiainen T,
Uitterlinden AG, Van der Klauw MM, Vasan RS, Wallace C, Wallaschofski H, Wichmann
HE, Willemsen G, Würtz P, Xu C, Yerges-Armstrong LM; Alcohol Genome-wide
Association (AlcGen) Consortium; Diabetes Genetics Replication and Meta-analyses 
(DIAGRAM+) Study; Genetic Investigation of Anthropometric Traits (GIANT)
Consortium; Global Lipids Genetics Consortium; Genetics of Liver Disease (GOLD)
Consortium; International Consortium for Blood Pressure (ICBP-GWAS);
Meta-analyses of Glucose and Insulin-Related Traits Consortium (MAGIC), Abecasis 
GR, Ahmadi KR, Boomsma DI, Caulfield M, Cookson WO, van Duijn CM, Froguel P,
Matsuda K, McCarthy MI, Meisinger C, Mooser V, Pietiläinen KH, Schumann G,
Snieder H, Sternberg MJ, Stolk RP, Thomas HC, Thorsteinsdottir U, Uda M, Waeber
G, Wareham NJ, Waterworth DM, Watkins H, Whitfield JB, Witteman JC, Wolffenbuttel
BH, Fox CS, Ala-Korpela M, Stefansson K, Vollenweider P, Völzke H, Schadt EE,
Scott J, Järvelin MR, Elliott P, Kooner JS.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, 
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Bengtsson
Boström K, Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS,
Cornelis M, Couper DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR,
Fox CS, Franklin CS, Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ,
Guiducci C, Hadjadj S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR,
Jørgensen T, Kao WH, Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M,
Lieverse A, Lindgren CM, Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken
MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P, Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C,
Proença C, Prokopenko I, Rathmann W, William Rayner N, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G,
Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T,
Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van 
Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon
MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J, Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL,
Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA, Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso 
M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein
LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A, Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR,
Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ, Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS,
Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I, Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K,
Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Lango Allen H, Estrada K, Lettre G, Berndt
SI, Weedon MN, Rivadeneira F, Willer CJ, Jackson AU, Vedantam S, Raychaudhuri S, 
Ferreira T, Wood AR, Weyant RJ, Segrè AV, Speliotes EK, Wheeler E, Soranzo N,
Park JH, Yang J, Gudbjartsson D, Heard-Costa NL, Randall JC, Qi L, Smith AV, Mägi
R, Pastinen T, Liang L, Heid IM, Luan J, Thorleifsson G, Winkler TW, Goddard ME, 
Sin Lo K, Palmer C, Workalemahu T, Aulchenko YS, Johansson A, Zillikens MC,
Feitosa MF, Esko T, Johnson T, Ketkar S, Kraft P, Mangino M, Prokopenko I, Absher
D, Albrecht E, Ernst F, Glazer NL, Hayward C, Hottenga JJ, Jacobs KB, Knowles JW,
Kutalik Z, Monda KL, Polasek O, Preuss M, Rayner NW, Robertson NR,
Steinthorsdottir V, Tyrer JP, Voight BF, Wiklund F, Xu J, Zhao JH, Nyholt DR,
Pellikka N, Perola M, Perry JR, Surakka I, Tammesoo ML, Altmaier EL, Amin N,
Aspelund T, Bhangale T, Boucher G, Chasman DI, Chen C, Coin L, Cooper MN, Dixon
AL, Gibson Q, Grundberg E, Hao K, Juhani Junttila M, Kaplan LM, Kettunen J, König
IR, Kwan T, Lawrence RW, Levinson DF, Lorentzon M, McKnight B, Morris AP, Müller 
M, Suh Ngwa J, Purcell S, Rafelt S, Salem RM, Salvi E, Sanna S, Shi J, Sovio U,
Thompson JR, Turchin MC, Vandenput L, Verlaan DJ, Vitart V, White CC, Ziegler A, 
Almgren P, Balmforth AJ, Campbell H, Citterio L, De Grandi A, Dominiczak A, Duan 
J, Elliott P, Elosua R, Eriksson JG, Freimer NB, Geus EJ, Glorioso N, Haiqing S, 
Hartikainen AL, Havulinna AS, Hicks AA, Hui J, Igl W, Illig T, Jula A, Kajantie
E, Kilpeläinen TO, Koiranen M, Kolcic I, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Laitinen J, Liu J,
Lokki ML, Marusic A, Maschio A, Meitinger T, Mulas A, Paré G, Parker AN, Peden
JF, Petersmann A, Pichler I, Pietiläinen KH, Pouta A, Ridderstråle M, Rotter JI, 
Sambrook JG, Sanders AR, Schmidt CO, Sinisalo J, Smit JH, Stringham HM, Walters
GB, Widen E, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Zagato L, Zgaga L, Zitting P, Alavere H,
Farrall M, McArdle WL, Nelis M, Peters MJ, Ripatti S, van Meurs JB, Aben KK,
Ardlie KG, Beckmann JS, Beilby JP, Bergman RN, Bergmann S, Collins FS, Cusi D,
den Heijer M, Eiriksdottir G, Gejman PV, Hamsten A, Huikuri HV, Iribarren C,
Kähönen M, Kaprio J, Kathiresan S, Kiemeney L, Kocher T, Launer LJ, Lehtimäki T, 
Melander O, Mosley TH Jr, Musk AW, Nieminen MS, O'Donnell CJ, Ohlsson C, Oostra
B, Palmer LJ, Raitakari O, Ridker PM, Rioux JD, Rissanen A, Rivolta C, Schunkert 
H, Shuldiner AR, Siscovick DS, Stumvoll M, Tönjes A, Tuomilehto J, van Ommen GJ, 
Viikari J, Heath AC, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Province MA, Kayser M, Arnold AM, 
Atwood LD, Boerwinkle E, Chanock SJ, Deloukas P, Gieger C, Grönberg H, Hall P,
Hattersley AT, Hengstenberg C, Hoffman W, Lathrop GM, Salomaa V, Schreiber S, Uda
M, Waterworth D, Wright AF, Assimes TL, Barroso I, Hofman A, Mohlke KL, Boomsma
DI, Caulfield MJ, Cupples LA, Erdmann J, Fox CS, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Harris
TB, Hayes RB, Jarvelin MR, Mooser V, Munroe PB, Ouwehand WH, Penninx BW,
Pramstaller PP, Quertermous T, Rudan I, Samani NJ, Spector TD, Völzke H, Watkins 
H, Wilson JF, Groop LC, Haritunians T, Hu FB, Kaplan RC, Metspalu A, North KE,
Schlessinger D, Wareham NJ, Hunter DJ, O'Connell JR, Strachan DP, Wichmann HE,
Borecki IB, van Duijn CM, Schadt EE, Thorsteinsdottir U, Peltonen L, Uitterlinden
AG, Visscher PM, Chatterjee N, Loos RJ, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Ingelsson E,
Lindgren CM, Abecasis GR, Stefansson K, Frayling TM, Hirschhorn JN, Teslovich TM,
Musunuru K, Smith AV, Edmondson AC, Stylianou IM, Koseki M, Pirruccello JP,
Ripatti S, Chasman DI, Willer CJ, Johansen CT, Fouchier SW, Isaacs A, Peloso GM, 
Barbalic M, Ricketts SL, Bis JC, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, Feitosa MF,
Chambers J, Orho-Melander M, Melander O, Johnson T, Li X, Guo X, Li M, Cho YS, Go
MJ, Kim YJ, Lee JY, Park T, Kim K, Sim X, Ong RT, Croteau-Chonka DC, Lange LA,
Smith JD, Song K, Zhao JH, Yuan X, Luan J, Lamina C, Ziegler A, Zhang W, Zee RY, 
Wright AF, Witteman JC, Wilson JF, Willemsen G, Wichmann HE, Whitfield JB,
Waterworth DM, Wareham NJ, Waeber G, Vollenweider P, Voight BF, Vitart V,
Uitterlinden AG, Uda M, Tuomilehto J, Thompson JR, Tanaka T, Surakka I, Stringham
HM, Spector TD, Soranzo N, Smit JH, Sinisalo J, Silander K, Sijbrands EJ, Scuteri
A, Scott J, Schlessinger D, Sanna S, Salomaa V, Salomaa J, Sabatti C, Ruokonen A,
Rudan I, Rose LM, Roberts R, Rieder M, Psaty BM, Pramstaller PP, Pichler I,
Perola M, Penninx BW, Pedersen NL, Pattaro C, Pare G, Oostra BA, O'Donnell CJ,
Nieminen MS, Nickerson DA, Montgomery GW, Meitinger T, McPherson R, McCarthy MI, 
McArdle W, Masson D, Martin NG, Marroni F, Mangino M, Magnusson PK, Lucas G,
Luben R, Loos RJ, Lokki ML, Lettre G, Langenberg C, Launer LJ, Lakatta EG,
Laaksonen R, Kyvik KO, Kronenberg F, König IR, Khaw KT, Kaprio J, Kaplan LM,
Johansson A, Jarvelin MR, Janssens AC, Ingelsson E, Igl W, Hovingh GK, Hottenga
JJ, Hofman A, Hicks AA, Hengstenberg C, Heid IM, Hayward C, Havulinna AS, Hastie 
ND, Harris TB, Haritunians T, Hall AS, Gyllensten U, Guiducci C, Groop LC,
Gonzalez E, Gieger C, Gieger NB, Ferrucci L, Erdmann J, Elliott P, Ejebe KG,
Döring A, Dominiczak AF, Demissie S, Deloukas P, de Geus EJ, de Faire U, Crawford
G, Collins FS, Chen YD, Caulfield MJ, Campbell H, Burtt NP, Bonnycastle LL,
Boomsma DI, Boekholdt SM, Bergman RN, Barroso I, Bandinelli S, Ballantyne CM,
Ballantyne TL, Quertermous T, Altshuler D, Seielstad M, Wong TY, Tai ES, Feranil 
AB, Kuzawa CW, Adair LS, Taylor HA Jr, Borecki IB, Gabriel SB, Wilson JG, Holm H,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Gudnason V, Krauss RM, Mohlke KL, Ordovas JM, Munroe PB,
Kooner JS, Tall AR, Hegele RA, Kastelein JJ, Schadt EE, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, 
Strachan DP, Mooser V, Stefansson K, Reilly MP, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, Cupples
LA, Sandhu MS, Ridker PM, Rader DJ, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L, Abecasis GR,
Boehnke M, Kathiresan S, Speliotes EK, Yerges-Armstrong LM, Hernaez R, Kim LJ,
Palmer CD, Gudnason V, Eiriksdottir G, Garcia ME, Launer LJ, Nalls MA, Clark JM, 
Mitchell BD, Shuldiner AR, Butler JL, Tomas M, Hoffmann U, Hwang SJ, Massaro JM, 
O'Donnell CJ, Sahani DV, Salomaa V, Schadt EE, Schwartz SM, Siscovick DS, Voight 
BF, Carr JJ, Feitosa MF, Harris TB, Fox CS, Smith AV, Kao WH, Hirschhorn JN,
Borecki IB, Ehret GB, Munroe PB, Rice KM, Bochud M, Johnson AD, Chasman DI, Smith
AV, Tobin MD, Verwoert GC, Hwang SJ, Pihur V, Vollenweider P, O'Reilly PF, Amin
N, Bragg-Gresham JL, Teumer A, Glazer NL, Launer L, Zhao JH, Aulchenko Y, Heath
S, Sober S, Parsa A, Luan J, Arora P, Dehghan A, Zhang F, Lucas G, Hicks AA,
Jackson AU, Peden JF, Tanaka T, Wild SH, Rudan I, Igl W, Milaneschi Y, Parker AN,
Fava C, Chambers JC, Fox ER, Kumari M, Go MJ, van der Harst P, Kao WH, Sjogren M,
Vinay DG, Alexander M, Tabara Y, Shaw-Hawkins S, Whincup PH, Liu Y, Shi G,
Kuusisto J, Tayo B, Seielstad M, Sim X, Nguyen KD, Lehtimaki T, Matullo G, Wu Y, 
Gaunt TR, Onland-Moret NC, Cooper MN, Platou CG, Org E, Hardy R, Dahgam S, Palmen
J, Vitart V, Braund PS, Kuznetsova T, Uiterwaal CS, Adeyemo A, Palmas W, Campbell
H, Ludwig B, Tomaszewski M, Tzoulaki I, Palmer ND, Aspelund T, Garcia M, Chang
YP, O'Connell JR, Steinle NI, Grobbee DE, Arking DE, Kardia SL, Morrison AC,
Hernandez D, Najjar S, McArdle WL, Hadley D, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Hingorani AD, 
Day IN, Lawlor DA, Beilby JP, Lawrence RW, Clarke R, Collins R, Hopewell JC,
Ongen H, Dreisbach AW, Li Y, Young JH, Bis JC, Kahonen M, Viikari J, Adair LS,
Lee NR, Chen MH, Olden M, Pattaro C, Bolton JA, Kottgen A, Bergmann S, Mooser V, 
Chaturvedi NR, Frayling TM, Islam M, Jafar TH, Erdmann J, Kulkarni SR, Bornstein 
SR, Grassler J, Groop L, Voight BF, Kettunen J, Howard P, Taylor A, Guarrera S,
Ricceri F, Emilsson V, Plump A, Barroso I, Khaw KT, Weder AB, Hunt SC, Sun YV,
Bergman RN, Collins FS, Bonnycastle LL, Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Peltonen L,
Perola M, Vartiainen E, Brand SM, Staessen JA, Wang TJ, Burton PR, Artigas MS,
Dong Y, Snieder H, Wang X, Zhu H, Lohman KK, Rudock ME, Heckbert SR, Smith NL,
Wiggins KL, Doumatey A, Shriner D, Veldre G, Viigimaa M, Kinra S, Prabhakaran D, 
Tripathy V, Langefeld CD, Rosengren A, Thelle DS, Corsi AM, Singleton A,
Forrester T, Hilton G, McKenzie CA, Salako T, Iwai N, Kita Y, Ogihara T, Ohkubo
T, Okamura T, Ueshima H, Umemura S, Eyheramendy S, Meitinger T, Wichmann HE, Cho 
YS, Kim HL, Lee JY, Scott J, Sehmi JS, Zhang W, Hedblad B, Nilsson P, Smith GD,
Wong A, Narisu N, Stancakova A, Raffel LJ, Yao J, Kathiresan S, O'Donnell C,
Schwartz SM, Ikram MA, Longstreth WT Jr, Mosley TH, Seshadri S, Shrine NR, Wain
LV, Morken MA, Swift AJ, Laitinen J, Prokopenko I, Zitting P, Cooper JA,
Humphries SE, Danesh J, Rasheed A, Goel A, Hamsten A, Watkins H, Bakker SJ, van
Gilst WH, Janipalli CS, Mani KR, Yajnik CS, Hofman A, Mattace-Raso FU, Oostra BA,
Demirkan A, Isaacs A, Rivadeneira F, Lakatta EG, Orru M, Scuteri A, Ala-Korpela
M, Kangas AJ, Lyytikainen LP, Soininen P, Tukiainen T, Wurz P, Ong RT, Dorr M,
Kroemer HK, Volker U, Volzke H, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Zelenika D,
Deloukas P, Mangino M, Spector TD, Zhai G, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Terzic
J, Kumar MJ, Denniff M, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Wagenknecht LE, Fowkes FG,
Charchar FJ, Schwarz PE, Hayward C, Guo X, Rotimi C, Bots ML, Brand E, Samani NJ,
Polasek O, Talmud PJ, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Laan M, Hveem K, Palmer LJ, van der Schouw
YT, Casas JP, Mohlke KL, Vineis P, Raitakari O, Ganesh SK, Wong TY, Tai ES,
Cooper RS, Laakso M, Rao DC, Harris TB, Morris RW, Dominiczak AF, Kivimaki M,
Marmot MG, Miki T, Saleheen D, Chandak GR, Coresh J, Navis G, Salomaa V, Han BG, 
Zhu X, Kooner JS, Melander O, Ridker PM, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wright AF, 
Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Farrall M, Tuomilehto J, Pramstaller PP, Elosua R, Soranzo
N, Sijbrands EJ, Altshuler D, Loos RJ, Shuldiner AR, Gieger C, Meneton P,
Uitterlinden AG, Wareham NJ, Gudnason V, Rotter JI, Rettig R, Uda M, Strachan DP,
Witteman JC, Hartikainen AL, Beckmann JS, Boerwinkle E, Vasan RS, Boehnke M,
Larson MG, Jarvelin MR, Psaty BM, Abecasis GR, Chakravarti A, Elliott P, van
Duijn CM, Newton-Cheh C, Levy D, Caulfield MJ, Johnson T, Dupuis J, Langenberg C,
Prokopenko I, Saxena R, Soranzo N, Jackson AU, Wheeler E, Glazer NL, Bouatia-Naji
N, Gloyn AL, Lindgren CM, Mägi R, Morris AP, Randall J, Johnson T, Elliott P,
Rybin D, Thorleifsson G, Steinthorsdottir V, Henneman P, Grallert H, Dehghan A,
Hottenga JJ, Franklin CS, Navarro P, Song K, Goel A, Perry JR, Egan JM, Lajunen
T, Grarup N, Sparsø T, Doney A, Voight BF, Stringham HM, Li M, Kanoni S, Shrader 
P, Cavalcanti-Proença C, Kumari M, Qi L, Timpson NJ, Gieger C, Zabena C,
Rocheleau G, Ingelsson E, An P, O'Connell J, Luan J, Elliott A, McCarroll SA,
Payne F, Roccasecca RM, Pattou F, Sethupathy P, Ardlie K, Ariyurek Y, Balkau B,
Barter P, Beilby JP, Ben-Shlomo Y, Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Bergmann S, Bochud
M, Boerwinkle E, Bonnefond A, Bonnycastle LL, Borch-Johnsen K, Böttcher Y,
Brunner E, Bumpstead SJ, Charpentier G, Chen YD, Chines P, Clarke R, Coin LJ,
Cooper MN, Cornelis M, Crawford G, Crisponi L, Day IN, de Geus EJ, Delplanque J, 
Dina C, Erdos MR, Fedson AC, Fischer-Rosinsky A, Forouhi NG, Fox CS, Frants R,
Franzosi MG, Galan P, Goodarzi MO, Graessler J, Groves CJ, Grundy S, Gwilliam R, 
Gyllensten U, Hadjadj S, Hallmans G, Hammond N, Han X, Hartikainen AL, Hassanali 
N, Hayward C, Heath SC, Hercberg S, Herder C, Hicks AA, Hillman DR, Hingorani AD,
Hofman A, Hui J, Hung J, Isomaa B, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Jula A, Kaakinen M,
Kaprio J, Kesaniemi YA, Kivimaki M, Knight B, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Kyvik KO,
Lathrop GM, Lawlor DA, Le Bacquer O, Lecoeur C, Li Y, Lyssenko V, Mahley R,
Mangino M, Manning AK, Martínez-Larrad MT, McAteer JB, McCulloch LJ, McPherson R,
Meisinger C, Melzer D, Meyre D, Mitchell BD, Morken MA, Mukherjee S, Naitza S,
Narisu N, Neville MJ, Oostra BA, Orrù M, Pakyz R, Palmer CN, Paolisso G, Pattaro 
C, Pearson D, Peden JF, Pedersen NL, Perola M, Pfeiffer AF, Pichler I, Polasek O,
Posthuma D, Potter SC, Pouta A, Province MA, Psaty BM, Rathmann W, Rayner NW,
Rice K, Ripatti S, Rivadeneira F, Roden M, Rolandsson O, Sandbaek A, Sandhu M,
Sanna S, Sayer AA, Scheet P, Scott LJ, Seedorf U, Sharp SJ, Shields B,
Sigurethsson G, Sijbrands EJ, Silveira A, Simpson L, Singleton A, Smith NL, Sovio
U, Swift A, Syddall H, Syvänen AC, Tanaka T, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tönjes A, Tuomi
T, Uitterlinden AG, van Dijk KW, van Hoek M, Varma D, Visvikis-Siest S, Vitart V,
Vogelzangs N, Waeber G, Wagner PJ, Walley A, Walters GB, Ward KL, Watkins H,
Weedon MN, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Witteman JC, Yarnell JW, Zeggini E, Zelenika D, 
Zethelius B, Zhai G, Zhao JH, Zillikens MC, Borecki IB, Loos RJ, Meneton P,
Magnusson PK, Nathan DM, Williams GH, Hattersley AT, Silander K, Salomaa V, Smith
GD, Bornstein SR, Schwarz P, Spranger J, Karpe F, Shuldiner AR, Cooper C,
Dedoussis GV, Serrano-Ríos M, Morris AD, Lind L, Palmer LJ, Hu FB, Franks PW,
Ebrahim S, Marmot M, Kao WH, Pankow JS, Sampson MJ, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Hansen 
T, Pedersen O, Pramstaller PP, Wichmann HE, Illig T, Rudan I, Wright AF, Stumvoll
M, Campbell H, Wilson JF, Hamsten A, Bergman RN, Buchanan TA, Collins FS, Mohlke 
KL, Tuomilehto J, Valle TT, Altshuler D, Rotter JI, Siscovick DS, Penninx BW,
Boomsma DI, Deloukas P, Spector TD, Frayling TM, Ferrucci L, Kong A,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Aulchenko YS, Cao A, Scuteri A,
Schlessinger D, Uda M, Ruokonen A, Jarvelin MR, Waterworth DM, Vollenweider P,
Peltonen L, Mooser V, Abecasis GR, Wareham NJ, Sladek R, Froguel P, Watanabe RM, 
Meigs JB, Groop L, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Florez JC, Barroso.

Concentrations of liver enzymes in plasma are widely used as indicators of liver 
disease. We carried out a genome-wide association study in 61,089 individuals,
identifying 42 loci associated with concentrations of liver enzymes in plasma, of
which 32 are new associations (P = 10(-8) to P = 10(-190)). We used functional
genomic approaches including metabonomic profiling and gene expression analyses
to identify probable candidate genes at these regions. We identified 69 candidate
genes, including genes involved in biliary transport (ATP8B1 and ABCB11),
glucose, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism (FADS1, FADS2, GCKR, JMJD1C, HNF1A,
MLXIPL, PNPLA3, PPP1R3B, SLC2A2 and TRIB1), glycoprotein biosynthesis and cell
surface glycobiology (ABO, ASGR1, FUT2, GPLD1 and ST3GAL4), inflammation and
immunity (CD276, CDH6, GCKR, HNF1A, HPR, ITGA1, RORA and STAT4) and glutathione
metabolism (GSTT1, GSTT2 and GGT), as well as several genes of uncertain or
unknown function (including ABHD12, EFHD1, EFNA1, EPHA2, MICAL3 and ZNF827). Our 
results provide new insight into genetic mechanisms and pathways influencing
markers of liver function.

PMCID: PMC3482372
PMID: 22001757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Blood. 2011 Dec 1;118(23):6097-106. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-341867. Epub 2011 
Oct 13.

Acquired STAT4 deficiency as a consequence of cancer chemotherapy.

Lupov IP(1), Voiles L, Han L, Schwartz A, De La Rosa M, Oza K, Pelloso D, Sahu
RP, Travers JB, Robertson MJ, Chang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis
School of Science, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 4 (STAT4) is a transcription
factor that is activated by IL-12 signaling and promotes Th1-cell differentiation
and IFN-<U+03B3> production. Defective IFN-<U+03B3> production because of STAT4 mRNA and
protein deficiency occurs after autologous stem cell transplantation for
lymphoma. In the present study, we investigated the mechanisms of STAT4
deficiency in lymphoma patients. The tumor-bearing state is not responsible,
because STAT4 levels were not significantly different in PBMCs obtained from
healthy control subjects compared with those from lymphoma patients before
treatment. STAT4 protein levels were significantly decreased in PBMCs and T cells
obtained from lymphoma patients after standard-dose chemotherapy. Furthermore,
treatment of control PBMC cultures or a natural killer cell line with
chemotherapy drugs in vitro also resulted in reduced STAT4 protein and
diminished, IL-12-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production. Translation of STAT4 protein was not 
impaired in chemotherapy-treated cells, whereas the STAT4 protein half-life was
significantly reduced. Chemotherapy drugs promoted the ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation of STAT4. Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib reversed chemotherapy-induced STAT4 deficiency and defective IFN-<U+03B3>
production. We conclude that acquired STAT4 deficiency in lymphoma patients is a 
consequence of treatment with chemotherapy, results that have important
implications for the design of optimal immunotherapy for lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3234667
PMID: 21998209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Hum Immunol. 2011 Dec;72(12):1210-3. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.09.003. Epub 2011
Sep 24.

TRAF1/C5, eNOS, C1q, but not STAT4 and PTPN22 gene polymorphisms are associated
with genetic susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus in Turkey.

Zervou MI(1), Vazgiourakis VM, Yilmaz N, Kontaki E, Trouw LA, Toes RE, Bicakcigil
M, Boumpas DT, Yavuz S, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, Department of Medicine,
Medical School, University of Crete, and Department of Rheumatology, Clinical
Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece.

A significant source of variability in the literature on systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility genes has been the inability to replicate
genetic findings across different racial or ethnic groups. We investigated
whether a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the STAT4 (rs7574865), PTPN22
(rs2476601), TRAF1/C5 (rs10818488), and C1q (rs292001) genes as well as the 27-bp
VNTR polymorphism on intron 4 of eNOS, previously associated with SLE in other
populations, are also associated with SLE risk in Turkey. A group of 158 SLE
patients and 155 healthy controls were included in this study. A genetic
association of the TRAF1/C5, C1q, and eNOS gene polymorphism, but not of STAT4
and PTPN22, was found to confer a degree of risk for SLE. These data highlight
the importance of comparative studies in different populations to confirm the
previously detected genetic associations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21968398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biotechnol Prog. 2012 Jan-Feb;28(1):33-44. doi: 10.1002/btpr.704. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Timescale analysis of rule-based biochemical reaction networks.

Klinke DJ 2nd(1), Finley SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West 
Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 25606, USA. david.klinke@mail.wvu.edu

The flow of information within a cell is governed by a series of protein-protein 
interactions that can be described as a reaction network. Mathematical models of 
biochemical reaction networks can be constructed by repetitively applying
specific rules that define how reactants interact and what new species are formed
on reaction. To aid in understanding the underlying biochemistry, timescale
analysis is one method developed to prune the size of the reaction network. In
this work, we extend the methods associated with timescale analysis to reaction
rules instead of the species contained within the network. To illustrate this
approach, we applied timescale analysis to a simple receptor-ligand binding model
and a rule-based model of interleukin-12 (IL-12) signaling in naïve CD4+ T cells.
The IL-12 signaling pathway includes multiple protein-protein interactions that
collectively transmit information; however, the level of mechanistic detail
sufficient to capture the observed dynamics has not been justified based on the
available data. The analysis correctly predicted that reactions associated with
Janus Kinase 2 and Tyrosine Kinase 2 binding to their corresponding receptor
exist at a pseudo-equilibrium. By contrast, reactions associated with ligand
binding and receptor turnover regulate cellular response to IL-12. An empirical
Bayesian approach was used to estimate the uncertainty in the timescales. This
approach complements existing rank- and flux-based methods that can be used to
interrogate complex reaction networks. Ultimately, timescale analysis of
rule-based models is a computational tool that can be used to reveal the
biochemical steps that regulate signaling dynamics.

Copyright © 2011 American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE).

PMCID: PMC3381993
PMID: 21954150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Oct;41(10):2828-39. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141291. Epub 2011 Aug
31.

Regulation of the development of acute hepatitis by IL-23 through IL-22 and IL-17
production.

Xu M(1), Morishima N, Mizoguchi I, Chiba Y, Fujita K, Kuroda M, Iwakura Y, Cua
DJ, Yasutomo K, Mizuguchi J, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo Medical
University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

IL-23 plays a critical role in the expansion of highly proinflammatory Th17 cells
secreting IL-17 and IL-22. Recently, we demonstrated that Notch signaling drives 
IL-22 secretion through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and plays a
protective role in Con A-induced hepatitis. In this study, we investigated the
role of IL-23 in hepatitis using IL-23p19- and IL-17-deficient mice. In WT mice, 
the injection of Con A induced the upregulation of various cytokines, which
included IL-23, IL-22, IL-17, IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a. In IL-23p19-deficient mice,
exacerbated hepatitis was observed and serum IL-22 and IL-17 levels were greatly 
reduced, whereas in IL-17-deficient mice, ameliorated hepatitis was observed. The
injection of exogenous IL-22 protected p19-deficient mice from hepatitis, whereas
the injection of exogenous IL-23 significantly increased the serum levels of not 
only IL-22 but also IL-17, and less effectively protected against hepatitis in
IL-17-dependent and -independent manners. Finally, it was revealed that STAT3,
STAT4 and Notch contributed to the production of both the cytokines, and that the
AHR was important only for IL-22 production in response to Con A and IL-23 in
liver mononuclear cells. These results suggest that IL-23 plays a protective role
in hepatitis through IL-22 production and also a pathological role via
IL-17-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21953641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Leuk Lymphoma. 2012 Apr;53(4):688-98. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.626883. Epub
2012 Jan 3.

Effects of parathyroid hormone-related protein and macrophage inflammatory
protein-1a in Jurkat T-cells on tumor formation in vivo and expression of
apoptosis regulatory genes in vitro.

Shu ST(1), Dirksen WP, Lanigan LG, Martin CK, Thudi NK, Werbeck JL, Fernandez SA,
Hildreth BE 3rd, Rosol TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) and macrophage inflammatory
protein-1a (MIP-1a) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma, but their effects on T-cells have not been well studied. Here 
we analyzed the functions of PTHrP and MIP-1a on T-cell growth and death both in 
vitro and in vivo by overexpressing either factor in human Jurkat T-cells. PTHrP 
or MIP-1a did not affect Jurkat cell growth in vitro, but PTHrP increased their
sensitivity to apoptosis. Importantly, PTHrP and MIP-1a decreased both tumor
incidence and growth in vivo. To investigate possible mechanisms, polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) arrays and real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR assays
were performed. Both PTHrP and MIP-1a increased the expression of several factors
including signal transducer and activator of transcription 4, tumor necrosis
factor a, receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B ligand and death-associated
protein kinase 1, and decreased the expression of inhibitor of DNA binding 1,
interferon <U+03B3> and CD40 ligand in Jurkat cells. In addition, MIP-1a also increased 
the expression of transcription factor AP-2a and PTHrP increased expression of
the vitamin D3 receptor. These data demonstrate that PTHrP and MIP-1a exert a
profound antitumor effect presumably by increasing the sensitivity to apoptotic
signals through modulation of transcription and apoptosis factors in T-cells.

PMCID: PMC3314295
PMID: 21942940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Am J Pathol. 2011 Nov;179(5):2346-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.07.041. Epub
2011 Sep 15.

Opposing roles for CXCR3 signaling in central nervous system versus ocular
inflammation mediated by the astrocyte-targeted production of IL-12.

Krauthausen M(1), Ellis SL, Zimmermann J, Sarris M, Wakefield D, Heneka MT,
Campbell IL, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

CXCR3 and its ligands are important for the trafficking of activated CD4(+) T(H)1
T cells, CD8(+) T cells, and natural killer cells during inflammation. Recent
functional studies demonstrate a more diverse role of CXCR3 in inflammatory
diseases of the central nervous system (CNS). We examined the impact of CXCR3 on 
a less complex interferon-<U+03B3>-dependent, type 1 cell-mediated immune response in
the CNS, induced in mice by the transgenic production of glial fibrillary acidic 
protein IL-12 (GF-IL12) by astrocytes and retinal Müller cells. GF-IL12 mice
develop ataxia because of severe cerebellar inflammation but have little overt
ocular disease. Surprisingly, CXCR3-deficient GF-IL12 mice (GF-IL12/CXCR3KO) have
drastically reduced ataxia but developed cataracts, severe ocular inflammation,
and eye atrophy. Most GF-IL12/CXCR3KO mice had minimal cerebellar inflammation
but severe retinal disorganization, loss of photoreceptors, and lens destruction 
in the eye. The number of CD3(+), CD11b(+), and natural killer 1.1(+) cells were 
reduced in the CNS but highly increased in the eyes of GF-IL12/CXCR3KO compared
with GF-IL12 mice. High levels of interferon-<U+03B3>, IL-1, tumor necrosis factor a,
CXCL9, CXCL10, and CCL5 were found in GF-IL12 cerebelli and GF-IL12/CXCR3KO eyes.
Our findings demonstrate key but paradoxical functions for CXCR3 in IL-12-induced
immune disease in the CNS, promoting inflammation in the brain yet restricting it
in the eye. We conclude that the function of CXCR3 in cellular immune disease is 
driven by a common trigger and is controlled by tissue-specific factors.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3204010
PMID: 21925471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Rheumatol Int. 2012 Oct;32(10):3097-102. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Combined influence of genetic and environmental factors in age of rheumatoid
arthritis onset.

Rodríguez-Rodríguez L(1), Lamas JR, Varadé J, Tornero-Esteban P, Abasolo L, de la
Concha EG, Jover JA, Urcelay E, Fernández-Gutiérrez B.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Service, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, C/Profesor Martín Lagos
s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

To study the combined effect of both genetic and environmental factors in the age
of rheumatoid arthritis onset. Patients (n = 507). Shared epitope
characterization was performed using Lifecodes HLA-SSO. Genotyping of protein
tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor 22 (PTPN22) rs2476601 and signal transducers
and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) rs7574865 polymorphism was performed
using fast real-time PCR System. Shared epitope, antibodies directed against
cyclic citrulinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies and a higher level of education
were associated with a younger age at disease onset (P = 0.033, P = 0.004 and P <
0.0001, respectively). Neither carriers of the minor allele of PTPN22 rs2476601
nor STAT4 rs7574 polymorphisms showed a significant association with a younger
age at disease onset (P = 0.355, P = 0.065, respectively). We found an additive
effect of the three genetic markers in the age at onset: subjects with three
markers were associated with a disease onset 9.56, 8.61, and 6.41 years before
than those with none, one, or two genetic markers (P = 0.004, P = 0.006 and P =
0.043, respectively). We also described the additive effect of shared epitope,
anti-CCP antibodies, educational level, PTPN22, and STAT4 polymorphisms in age at
onset. Patients with two, three, four, or five variables were associated with a
significant younger age of disease onset (4.72 [0.05-9.38] years (P = 0.048),
9.56 [4.72-14.40] years (P < 0.0001), 12.74 [6.84-18.64] years (P < 0.0001), and 
20.87 [10.40-37.17] years (P < 0.0001)). Risk factors for the development of
rheumatoid arthritis are also associated, with an additive effect, with a younger
age at disease onset.

PMID: 21922340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):442-56. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.004. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

The role of stat1b in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Song H(1), Yan YL, Titus T, He X, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, 1425 E. 13th Avenue, Eugene, 
OR 97403, USA. hsong@uoregon.edu

STAT1 mediates response to interferons and regulates immunity, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and sensitivity of Fanconi Anemia cells to apoptosis
after interferon signaling; the roles of STAT1 in embryos, however, are not
understood. To explore embryonic functions of STAT1, we investigated stat1b, an
unstudied zebrafish co-ortholog of human STAT1. Zebrafish stat1a encodes all five
domains of the human STAT1-alpha splice form but, like the human STAT1-beta
splice variant, stat1b lacks a complete transactivation domain; thus, two
unlinked zebrafish paralogs encode protein forms translated from two splice
variants of a single human gene, as expected by sub-functionalization after
genome duplication. Phylogenetic and conserved synteny studies showed that stat1b
and stat1a arose as duplicates in the teleost genome duplication (TGD) and
clarified the evolutionary origin of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B
and STAT6 by tandem and genome duplication. RT-PCR revealed maternal expression
of stat1a and stat1b. In situ hybridization detected stat1b but not stat1a
expression in embryonic hematopoietic tissues. Morpholino knockdown of stat1b,
but not stat1a, decreased expression of the myeloid and granulocyte markers spi
and mpo and increased expression of the hematopoietic progenitor marker scl, the 
erythrocyte marker gata1, and hemoglobin. These results suggest that zebrafish
Stat1b promotes myeloid development at the expense of erythroid development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3223297
PMID: 21914475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2802-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1108781108. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

Integrated molecular profiles of invasive breast tumors and ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) reveal differential vascular and interleukin signaling.

Kristensen VN(1), Vaske CJ, Ursini-Siegel J, Van Loo P, Nordgard SH,
Sachidanandam R, Sørlie T, Wärnberg F, Haakensen VD, Helland Å, Naume B, Perou
CM, Haussler D, Troyanskaya OG, Børresen-Dale AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, and Cancer Clinic, Oslo
University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, 0310 Oslo, Norway.

We use an integrated approach to understand breast cancer heterogeneity by
modeling mRNA, copy number alterations, microRNAs, and methylation in a pathway
context utilizing the pathway recognition algorithm using data integration on
genomic models (PARADIGM). We demonstrate that combining mRNA expression and DNA 
copy number classified the patients in groups that provide the best predictive
value with respect to prognosis and identified key molecular and stromal
signatures. A chronic inflammatory signature, which promotes the development
and/or progression of various epithelial tumors, is uniformly present in all
breast cancers. We further demonstrate that within the adaptive immune lineage,
the strongest predictor of good outcome is the acquisition of a gene signature
that favors a high T-helper 1 (Th1)/cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response at the
expense of Th2-driven humoral immunity. Patients who have breast cancer with a
basal HER2-negative molecular profile (PDGM2) are characterized by high
expression of protumorigenic Th2/humoral-related genes (24-38%) and a low Th1/Th2
ratio. The luminal molecular subtypes are again differentiated by low or high
FOXM1 and ERBB4 signaling. We show that the interleukin signaling profiles
observed in invasive cancers are absent or weakly expressed in healthy tissue but
already prominent in ductal carcinoma in situ, together with ECM and cell-cell
adhesion regulating pathways. The most prominent difference between low and high 
mammographic density in healthy breast tissue by PARADIGM was that of STAT4
signaling. In conclusion, by means of a pathway-based modeling methodology
(PARADIGM) integrating different layers of molecular data from whole-tumor
samples, we demonstrate that we can stratify immune signatures that predict
patient survival.

PMCID: PMC3286992
PMID: 21908711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):39-48. doi: 10.1002/hep.24628. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Early changes in interferon signaling define natural killer cell response and
refractoriness to interferon-based therapy of hepatitis C patients.

Edlich B(1), Ahlenstiel G, Zabaleta Azpiroz A, Stoltzfus J, Noureddin M, Serti E,
Feld JJ, Liang TJ, Rotman Y, Rehermann B.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Section, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and
Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells exhibit a polarized phenotype with increased
cytotoxicity and decreased interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) production in chronic
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Here, we asked whether this is caused by type 
I interferon (IFN)-induced expression and phosphorylation levels of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) molecules in NK cells and
whether it affects the response and refractoriness of NK cells to IFN-a-based
therapy of HCV. STAT1 levels in NK cells were significantly higher in patients
with chronic HCV infection than in uninfected controls. STAT1 levels and
induction of phosphorylated STAT1 (pSTAT1) increased further during IFN-a-based
therapy with preferential STAT1 over STAT4 phosphorylation. Induction of pSTAT1
correlated with increased NK cytotoxicity (tumor necrosis
factor-apoptosis-inducing ligand [TRAIL] expression and degranulation) and
decreased IFN-<U+03B3> production. NK cells from patients with a greater than 2 log(10) 
first-phase HCV RNA decline to IFN-a-based therapy (>99% IFN effectiveness)
displayed strong pSTAT1 induction in vivo and were refractory to further
stimulation in vitro. In contrast, NK cells from patients with a less than 2
log(10) first-phase HCV RNA decline exhibited lower pSTAT1 induction in vivo (P =
0.024), but retained greater IFN-a responsiveness in vitro (P = 0.024). NK cells 
of all patients became refractory to in vivo and in vitro stimulation by IFN-a
during the second-phase virological response.CONCLUSION: These data show that
IFN-a-induced modulation of STAT1/4 phosphorylation underlies the polarization of
NK cells toward increased cytotoxicity and decreased IFN-<U+03B3> production in HCV
infection, and that NK cell responsiveness and refractoriness correlate to the
antiviral effectiveness of IFN-a-based therapy.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3353526
PMID: 21898483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. BMC Immunol. 2011 Aug 31;12:51. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-12-51.

Inhibitory effects of the JAK inhibitor CP690,550 on human CD4(+) T lymphocyte
cytokine production.

Migita K(1), Miyashita T, Izumi Y, Koga T, Komori A, Maeda Y, Jiuchi Y, Aiba Y,
Yamasaki S, Kawakami A, Nakamura M, Ishibashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Research Center, NHO Nagasaki Medical 
Center, Kubara 2-1001-1, Omura 856-8652, Japan. migita@nmc.hosp.go.jp

BACKGROUND: The new JAK3 inhibitor, CP690,550, has shown efficacy in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. The present study was undertaken to assess the
effects of CP690,550 on cytokine production and cellular signaling in human
CD4(+) T cells.
RESULTS: CD4(+) T cells produced IL-2, IL-4, IL-17, IL-22 and IFN-<U+03B3> in following 
stimulation with a CD3 antibody. At the optimal concentration, CP690,550 almost
completely inhibited the production of IL-4, IL-17, IL-22 and IFN-<U+03B3> from these
activated CD4(+) T cells, but only had marginal effects on IL-2 production.
Moreover CP690,550 inhibited anti-CD3-induced phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT3,
STAT4, STAT5, and STAT6, but not the TCR-associated phosphorylation of ZAP-70.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, CP690,550-mediated modification of the JAK/STAT pathway
may be a new immunosuppressive strategy in the treatment of autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3179939
PMID: 21884580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Biol Reprod. 2011 Dec;85(6):1222-31. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092379. Epub
2011 Aug 31.

Mediators of the Jak/STAT signaling pathway in human spermatozoa.

Lachance C(1), Leclerc P.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Obstétrique et de Gynécologie, Centre de recherche en biologie
de la reproduction, Université Laval, Unité de recherche en Ontogénie et
Reproduction, Centre de recherche du CHUQ-CHUL, Québec, Québec, Canada.

In their journey to acquire the ability to fertilize the egg, numerous
intracellular signaling systems are activated in spermatozoa, leading to an
increase in protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Although the JAK/STAT signaling
pathway is usually associated with the activation of transcription of specific
genes, our laboratory previously demonstrated the presence of the IL6 receptor
(IL6R) and the Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) in human spermatozoa, a cell that is mostly 
transcriptionally inactive. In order to determine the importance of the JAK/STAT 
signaling pathway, our objectives were to identify and characterize the mediators
of this system in human sperm. Cell fractionation and surface biotinylation
assays clearly demonstrated that IL6R is expressed at the sperm membrane surface.
The kinase JAK1 is enriched in membrane fractions and is activated during human
sperm capacitation as suggested by its increase in phosphotyrosine content. Many 
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are expressed in
human sperm, including STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, and STAT6. Among them, only
STAT1 and STAT5 were detected in the cytosolic fraction. All the detected STAT
proteins were enriched in the cytoskeletal structures. STAT4 was present in the
perinuclear theca, whereas JAK1, STAT1, and STAT5 were detected in the fibrous
sheath. Indirect immunofluorescence studies showed that JAK1 and STAT1
colocalized in the neck region and that STAT4 is present at the equatorial
segment and flagella. The presence of STAT proteins in sperm structural
components suggests that their role is different from their well-known
transcription factor activity in somatic cells, but further investigations are
required to determine their role in sperm function.

PMCID: PMC4480430
PMID: 21880948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Diabetes. 2011 Oct;60(10):2645-53. doi: 10.2337/db11-0364. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

Genetic analysis of adult-onset autoimmune diabetes.

Howson JM(1), Rosinger S, Smyth DJ, Boehm BO; ADBW-END Study Group, Todd JA.

Collaborators: Aldinger G, Aufschild J, Bechtold J, Becker G, Beischer W, Bickel 
R, Blagieva R, Boehm BO, Brückel J, Claudi-Boehm S, Dapp A, Eiermann T, Ermerling
R, Gloyer J, Haak T, Haenle M, Hecker W, Holl R, Holland A, Höpfer S, Jung S,
Junginger W, Jütting G, Käser T, Kieferle J, Koenig W, Kratzer W, Kristen P,
Kühnl P, Kurkhaus A, Limberg G, Lippmann-Grob B, Lobmann R, Maas U, Manfras B,
Merger S, Müller KA, Nikolaus T, Offensperger W-, Renner H, Rosak C, Rosinger S, 
Schilling S, Schreiber GH, Schuler A, Schwinn GJ, Siegel E, Sing R, Spohr E,
Standop M, Trischler G, Weickert U, Wildemann-Gilbert G, Wörner D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome
Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K. joanna.howson@cimr.cam.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: In contrast with childhood-onset type 1 diabetes, the genetics of
autoimmune diabetes in adults are not well understood. We have therefore
investigated the genetics of diabetes diagnosed in adults positive for
autoantibodies.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: GAD autoantibodies (GADAs), insulinoma-associated
antigen-2 antibodies (IA-2As), and islet cell autoantibodies were measured at
time of diagnosis. Autoantibody-positive diabetic subjects (n = 1,384) and
population-based control subjects (n = 2,235) were genotyped at 20
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes loci and FCRL3, GAD2, TCF7L2, and FTO.
RESULTS: PTPN22 (1p13.2), STAT4 (2q32.2), CTLA4 (2q33.2), HLA (6p21), IL2RA
(10p15.1), INS (11p15.5), ERBB3 (12q13.2), SH2B3 (12q24.12), and CLEC16A
(16p13.13) were convincingly associated with autoimmune diabetes in adults (P =
0.002), with consistent directions of effect as reported for pediatric type 1
diabetes. No evidence of an HLA-DRB1*03/HLA-DRB1*04 (DR3/4) genotype effect was
obtained (P = 0.55), but it remained highly predisposing (odds ratio 26.22).
DR3/4 was associated with a lower age at diagnosis of disease, as was DR4 (P =
4.67 × 10(-6)) but not DR3. DR3 was associated with GADA positivity (P = 6.03 ×
10(-6)) but absence of IA-2A (P = 3.22 × 10(-7)). DR4 was associated with IA-2A
positivity (P = 5.45 × 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the genetics of 
autoimmune diabetes in adults and children are differentiated by only relatively 
few age-dependent genetic effects. The slower progression toward autoimmune
insulin deficiency in adults is probably due to a lower genetic load overall
combined with subtle variation in the HLA class II gene associations and
autoreactivity.

PMCID: PMC3178303
PMID: 21873553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022637. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Immune response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in the parietal pleura of
patients with tuberculous pleurisy.

Caramori G(1), Lasagna L, Casalini AG, Adcock IM, Casolari P, Contoli M, Tafuro
F, Padovani A, Chung KF, Barnes PJ, Papi A, Rindi G, Bertorelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Respiratory Diseases, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
gaetano.caramori@unife.it

The T lymphocyte-mediated immune response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
in the parietal pleura of patients with tuberculous pleurisy is unknown. The aim 
of this study was to investigate the immune response in the parietal pleura of
tuberculous pleurisy compared with nonspecific pleuritis. We have measured the
numbers of inflammatory cells particularly T-cell subsets (Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg
cells) in biopsies of parietal pleura obtained from 14 subjects with proven
tuberculous pleurisy compared with a control group of 12 subjects with
nonspecific pleuritis. The number of CD3+, CD4+ and CCR4+ cells and the
expression of RORC2 mRNA were significantly increased in the tuberculous pleurisy
patients compared with the nonspecific pleuritis subjects. The number of
toluidine blue+ cells, tryptase+ cells and GATA-3+ cells was significantly
decreased in the parietal pleura of patients with tuberculous pleurisy compared
with the control group of nonspecific pleuritis subjects. Logistic regression
with receiver operator characteristic (ROC) analysis for the three single markers
was performed and showed a better performance for GATA-3 with a sensitivity of
75%, a specificity of 100% and an AUC of 0.88. There was no significant
difference between the two groups of subjects in the number of CD8, CD68,
neutrophil elastase, interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, STAT4, T-bet, CCR5, CXCR3, CRTH2, STAT6 
and FOXP3 positive cells. Elevated CD3, CD4, CCR4 and Th17 cells and decreased
mast cells and GATA-3+ cells in the parietal pleura distinguish patients with
untreated tuberculous pleurisy from those with nonspecific pleuritis.

PMCID: PMC3145659
PMID: 21829471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002216. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

Genome-wide association analysis of autoantibody positivity in type 1 diabetes
cases.

Plagnol V(1), Howson JM, Smyth DJ, Walker N, Hafler JP, Wallace C, Stevens H,
Jackson L, Simmonds MJ; Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium, Bingley PJ, Gough
SC, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. v.plagnol@ucl.ac.uk

The genetic basis of autoantibody production is largely unknown outside of
associations located in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) region. The aim of this study is the discovery of new
genetic associations with autoantibody positivity using genome-wide association
scan single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data in type 1 diabetes (T1D) patients 
with autoantibody measurements. We measured two anti-islet autoantibodies,
glutamate decarboxylase (GADA, n = 2,506), insulinoma-associated antigen 2
(IA-2A, n = 2,498), antibodies to the autoimmune thyroid (Graves') disease (AITD)
autoantigen thyroid peroxidase (TPOA, n = 8,300), and antibodies against gastric 
parietal cells (PCA, n = 4,328) that are associated with autoimmune gastritis.
Two loci passed a stringent genome-wide significance level (p<10(-10)):
1q23/FCRL3 with IA-2A and 9q34/ABO with PCA. Eleven of 52 non-MHC T1D loci showed
evidence of association with at least one autoantibody at a false discovery rate 
of 16%: 16p11/IL27-IA-2A, 2q24/IFIH1-IA-2A and PCA, 2q32/STAT4-TPOA,
10p15/IL2RA-GADA, 6q15/BACH2-TPOA, 21q22/UBASH3A-TPOA, 1p13/PTPN22-TPOA,
2q33/CTLA4-TPOA, 4q27/IL2/TPOA, 15q14/RASGRP1/TPOA, and 12q24/SH2B3-GADA and
TPOA. Analysis of the TPOA-associated loci in 2,477 cases with Graves' disease
identified two new AITD loci (BACH2 and UBASH3A).

PMCID: PMC3150451
PMID: 21829393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. MBio. 2011 Aug 9;2(4). pii: e00169-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00169-11. Print 2011.

Type 1 interferon induction of natural killer cell gamma interferon production
for defense during lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection.

Mack EA(1), Kallal LE, Demers DA, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Medicine, Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells are equipped to innately produce the cytokine gamma
interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) in part because they basally express high levels of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). Type 1 interferons (IFNs)
have the potential to activate STAT4 and promote IFN-<U+03B3> expression, but concurrent
induction of elevated STAT1 negatively regulates access to the pathway. As a
consequence, it has been difficult to detect type 1 IFN stimulation of NK cell
IFN-<U+03B3> during viral infections in the presence of STAT1 and to understand the
evolutionary advantage for maintaining the pathway. The studies reported here
evaluated NK cell responses following infections with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) in the compartment handling the earliest events
after infection, the peritoneal cavity. The production of type 1 IFNs, both IFN-a
and IFN-ß, was shown to be early and of short duration, peaking at 30 h after
challenge. NK cell IFN-<U+03B3> expression was detected with overlapping kinetics and
required activating signals delivered through type 1 IFN receptors and STAT4. It 
took place under conditions of high STAT4 levels but preceded elevated STAT1
expression in NK cells. The IFN-<U+03B3> response reduced viral burdens. Interestingly, 
increases in STAT1 were delayed in NK cells compared to other peritoneal exudate 
cell (PEC) populations. Taken together, the studies demonstrate a novel mechanism
for stimulating IFN-<U+03B3> production and elucidate a biological role for type 1 IFN
access to STAT4 in NK cells.IMPORTANCE: Pathways regulating the complex and
sometimes paradoxical effects of cytokines are poorly understood. Accumulating
evidence indicates that the biological consequences of type 1 interferon (IFN)
exposure are shaped by modifying the concentrations of particular STATs to change
access to the different signaling molecules. The results of the experiments
presented conclusively demonstrate that NK cell IFN-<U+03B3> can be induced through type
1 IFN and STAT4 at the first site of infection during a period with high STAT4
but prior to induction of elevated STAT1 in the cells. The response mediates a
role in viral defense. Thus, a very early pathway to and source of IFN-<U+03B3> in
evolving immune responses to infections are identified by this work. The
information obtained helps resolve long-standing controversies and advances the
understanding of mechanisms regulating key type 1 IFN functions, in different
cells and compartments and at different times of infection, for accessing
biologically important functions.

PMCID: PMC3150756
PMID: 21828218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Nov;63(11):3493-501. doi: 10.1002/art.30563.

Identification of novel genetic susceptibility loci in African American lupus
patients in a candidate gene association study.

Sánchez E(1), Comeau ME, Freedman BI, Kelly JA, Kaufman KM, Langefeld CD, Brown
EE, Alarcón GS, Kimberly RP, Edberg JC, Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, Reveille JD,
Vilá LM, Merrill JT, Tsao BP, Kamen DL, Gilkeson GS, James JA, Vyse TJ;
International Consortium on the Genetics of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Gaffney
PM, Jacob CO, Niewold TB, Richardson BC, Harley JB, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Sawalha 
AH.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Candidate gene and genome-wide association studies have identified
several disease susceptibility loci in lupus patients. These studies have largely
been performed in lupus patients who are Asian or of European ancestry. This
study was undertaken to examine whether some of these same susceptibility loci
increase lupus risk in African American individuals.
METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms tagging 15 independent lupus
susceptibility loci were genotyped in a set of 1,724 lupus patients and 2,024
healthy controls of African American descent. The loci examined included PTPN22, 
FCGR2A, TNFSF4, STAT4, CTLA4, PDCD1, PXK, BANK1, MSH5 (HLA region), CFB (HLA
region), C8orf13-BLK region, MBL2, KIAA1542, ITGAM, and MECP2/IRAK1.
RESULTS: We found the first evidence of genetic association between lupus in
African American patients and 5 susceptibility loci (C8orf13-BLK, BANK1, TNFSF4, 
KIAA1542, and CTLA4; P = 8.0 × 10<U+207B>6, P = 1.9 × 10<U+207B>5, P = 5.7 × 10<U+207B>5, P = 0.00099,
and P = 0.0045, respectively). Further, we confirmed the genetic association
between lupus and 5 additional lupus susceptibility loci (ITGAM, MSH5, CFB,
STAT4, and FCGR2A; P = 7.5 × 10<U+207B>¹¹, P = 5.2 × 10<U+207B>8, P = 8.7 × 10<U+207B>7 , P = 0.0058, 
and P = 0.0070, respectively), and provided evidence, for the first time, of
genome-wide significance for the association between lupus in African American
patients and ITGAM and MSH5 (HLA region).
CONCLUSION: These findings provide evidence of novel genetic susceptibility loci 
for lupus in African Americans and demonstrate that the majority of lupus
susceptibility loci examined confer lupus risk across multiple ethnicities.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3205224
PMID: 21792837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Jul;7(4):449-62. doi: 10.1586/eci.11.26.

Deciphering the genetic background of systemic sclerosis.

Broen JC(1), Coenen MJ, Radstake TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a severe autoimmune connective tissue disease. Over
the years, evidence for a genetic background of SSc susceptibility has clearly
accumulated. This article aims to provide an extensive overview of genetics in
SSc research. We discuss indicators for a genetic component present in SSc,
family studies, chromosomal aberrances, the involvement of the HLA region and
multiple candidate genes and, finally, genome-wide association studies.

PMID: 21790288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Jul;7(4):445-8. doi: 10.1586/eci.11.31.

Targeting STAT4 in systemic sclerosis: a promising new direction.

Barnes J(1), Agarwal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):800-9.

Evaluation of: Avouac J, Fürnrohr BG, Tomcik M et al. Inactivation of the
transcription factor STAT-4 prevents inflammation-driven fibrosis in animal
models of systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Rheum. 63(3), 800-809 (2011). STAT4 has
been identified as a genetic risk factor for the development of autoimmune
diseases including systemic sclerosis. STAT4 regulates Th1 cell development and
cell-mediated immunity, but it is not known how it may regulate the development
of dermal fibrosis. Using the bleomycin-induced dermal fibrosis model, it has now
been demonstrated that STAT4-deficient mice have reduced dermal fibrosis in part 
via STAT4-dependent alterations in T-cell proliferation and cytokine production. 
These data stress the importance of STAT4 in autoimmune diseases such as systemic
sclerosis and provide an important direction for future research to improve our
understanding of systemic sclerosis pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3269303
PMID: 21790287  [PubMed]


376. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Oct;70(10):1793-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.144576. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

Association of variants in MMEL1 and CTLA4 with rheumatoid arthritis in the Han
Chinese population.

Danoy P(1), Wei M, Johanna H, Jiang L, He D, Sun L, Zeng X, Visscher PM, Brown
MA, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Group, The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute,
University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.

Erratum in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Dec;70(12):2240.

BACKGROUND: The genome-wide association study era has made great progress in
identifying susceptibility genes and genetic loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
in populations of White European ancestry. However, few studies have tried to
dissect disease aetiopathogenesis in other ethnic populations.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate these associations in the Han Chinese population.
METHODS: Haplotypes from the HapMap database Chinese population were used to
select tag-single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (r(2)=0.8) across 19 distinct
RA genomic regions. A two phase case-control association study was performed,
with 169 SNPs genotyped in phase I (n=571 cases, n=880 controls), and 64 SNPs
achieving p<0.2 in the first phase being genotyped in phase II (n=464 cases,
n=822 controls). Association statistics were calculated using permutation tests
both unadjusted and adjusted for the number of markers studied.
RESULTS: Robust association was detected for MMEL1 and CTLA4, and modest
association was identified for another six loci: PADI4, STAT4, PRDM1, CDK6,
TRAF1-C5 and KIF5A-PIP4K2C. All three markers genotyped in MMEL1 demonstrated
association, with peak signal for rs3890745 (p=2.6 × 10(-5) unadjusted, p=0.003
adjusted, OR=0.79). For CTLA4, significance was detected for three of five
variants showing association, with peak association for marker rs12992492 (p=4.3 
× 10(-5) unadjusted, p=0.0021 adjusted, OR=0.77). Lack of association of common
variants in PTPN22 with RA in Han Chinese was confirmed.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies MMEL1 and CTLA4 as RA susceptibility genes,
provides suggestive evidence of association for a further six loci in the Han
Chinese population and confirms lack of PTPN22 association in Asian populations. 
It also confirms the value of multiethnic population studies to help dissect
disease aetiopathogenesis.

PMID: 21784728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Immunol Lett. 2011 Dec 30;141(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.06.007. Epub 2011
Jul 12.

The complexity of Sjögren's syndrome: novel aspects on pathogenesis.

Jonsson R(1), Vogelsang P, Volchenkov R, Espinosa A, Wahren-Herlenius M, Appel S.

Author information: 
(1)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, The Gade Institute, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway. roland.jonsson@gades.uib.no

In Sjögren's syndrome, like in most other autoimmune diseases, the enigma leading
to a pathogenic attack against self has not yet been solved. By definition, the
disease must be mediated by specific immune reactions against endogenous tissues 
to qualify as an autoimmune disease. In Sjögren's syndrome the autoimmune
response is directed against the exocrine glands, which, as histopathological
hallmark of the disease, display persistent and progressive focal mononuclear
cell infiltrates. Clinically, the disease in most patients is manifested by two
severe symptoms: dryness of the mouth (xerostomia) and the eyes
(keratoconjunctivitis sicca). A number of systemic features have also been
described and the presence of autoantibodies against the ubiquitously expressed
ribonucleoprotein particles Ro (Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A - SSA) and
La (SSB) further underline the systemic nature of Sjögren's syndrome. The
original explanatory concept for the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome proposed 
a specific, self-perpetuating, immune mediated loss of acinar and ductal cells as
the principal cause of salivary gland hypofunction. Although straightforward and 
plausible, the hypothesis, however, falls short of accommodating several
Sjögren's syndrome-related phenomena and experimental findings. Consequently,
researchers considered immune-mediated salivary gland dysfunction prior to
glandular destruction and atrophy as potential molecular mechanisms underlying
the symptoms of dryness in Sjögren's syndrome. Accordingly, apoptosis, fibrosis
and atrophy of the salivary glands would represent consequences of salivary gland
hypofunction. The emergence of advanced bio-analytical platforms further enabled 
the identification of potential biomarkers with the intent to improve Sjögren's
syndrome diagnosis, promote the development of prognostic tools for Sjögren's
syndrome and the long-term goal to identify possible processes for therapeutic
treatment interventions. In addition, such approaches allowed us to glimpse at
the apparent complexity of Sjögren's syndrome.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011 Oct;50(10):1794-801. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/ker227. Epub 2011 Jul 12.

Glucocorticoids enhance Th17/Th1 imbalance and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 expression in systemic lupus erythematosus patients.

Prado C(1), de Paz B, Gómez J, López P, Rodríguez-Carrio J, Suárez A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Biology, Immunology Area, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oviedo, C/Julián Clavería s/n, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relative amounts of Th17 and Th1 cells present in
SLE patients and the possible effects of treatments or disease features on these 
populations.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were collected from 75 SLE patients
and 19 healthy controls and the proportion of Th17 and Th1 populations were
assessed by flow cytometry measuring the amount of IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3>-producing
cells. Gene expression of signal transducers and activators of transcription 3
(STAT3), STAT4, IL-6R and IL-12R were determined in 30 patients and 8 healthy
individuals by real-time RT-PCR. Data were related to clinical and immunological 
parameters and to the treatment followed during the past 3 months.
RESULTS: Th17 cells and the Th17/Th1 ratio were significantly increased in SLE
patients treated with glucocorticoids compared with healthy individuals,
untreated patients or those under other treatments. No association was detected
with clinical parameters, but patients with anti-ENA antibodies also displayed
increased Th17 responses. Disease activity (SLEDAI) is associated with the
Th17/Th1 index only in glucocorticoid-treated patients. In line with these
results, gene expression of STAT3 and IL-6R was up-regulated in patients taking
these drugs. Accordingly, we found a positive correlation between the Th17/Th1
ratio and STAT3 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The present work provides the first evidence that aberrant Th17/Th1 
balance in SLE is linked to the use of glucocorticoids and suggests that the
up-regulatory effect of these drugs on the Th17 population could be associated
with their ability to increase STAT3 and IL-6R expression. Additionally, anti-ENA
positivity could represent a potential biomarker for Th17 bias.

PMID: 21750002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;764:153-68. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-188-8_10.

Five-step process for screening antisense compounds for efficacy: gene target
IL-12Rb2.

Marshall NB(1), Hauck LL, Mourich DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
marshaln@onid.orst.edu

Antisense technologies are widely used for the inhibition of gene expression.
Although traditionally the AUG start codon of the open reading frame is targeted 
to disrupt ribosome assembly and initiation, an emerging approach is targeting
sequences to disrupt pre-mRNA splicing. The primary advantage to using this
approach is a positive read-out for an antisense effect through detection of a
novel splice product, but additional benefit can be found in generating a novel
splice product with altered functional properties. The antisense compounds used
here are phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers conjugated to an arginine-rich
cell penetrating peptide (P-PMO). We describe a five-step process for selecting
the best candidate antisense compound for altering IL-12Rb2 expression including 
(1) detecting mRNA splice products by RT-PCR, (2) measuring protein expression,
(3) evaluating protein function, (4) checking cellular viability, and (5)
validating efficacy of the final candidate compound. The significance of
targeting exons composed of a number of base pairs divisible by 3 is also
discussed. The five steps described here for selecting the best candidate P-PMO
to alter IL-12Rb2 expression should be applied for designing and screening
antisense compounds for other gene targets.

PMID: 21748639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Oct 9;412(21-22):1899-904. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.06.020.
Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Association of STAT4 polymorphisms with susceptibility to primary membranous
glomerulonephritis and renal failure.

Chen SY(1), Chen CH, Huang YC, Chan CJ, Hsieh YY, Yu MC, Tsai CH, Tsai FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Center, Department of Medical Research, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. chenshihy@yahoo.com.tw

BACKGROUND: Membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN) is one of common causes of
idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in adults, and 25% of MGN patients proceed to
end-stage renal disease. STAT4 gene polymorphisms have been reported to be
associated with many inflammatory diseases. The objective of this study was to
clarify the relationship between STAT4 gene polymorphisms and the pathogenesis of
MGN.
METHODS: We investigated the association of three STAT4 gene polymorphisms
(rs3024912, rs3024908, and rs3024877) with the susceptibility to MGN in 403
Taiwanese populations (138 MGN patients and 265 controls).
RESULTS: The results indicated that the statistically significant difference in
genotype frequency distribution was found at rs3024908 SNP in MGN patients and
control groups (p=0.014). In addition, the individuals with the GG genotype at
rs3024912 SNP may have a higher risk in kidney failure of MGN patients (adjusted 
odds ratio [OR]=3.255; 95% confidence interval [CI]=1.155-9.176, p=0.026).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide a new information that the STAT4 (rs3024912 and
rs3024908) polymorphisms may be the underlying cause of MGN, and these
polymorphisms revealed by this study warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21740896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Immunity. 2011 Jul 22;35(1):45-58. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.014. Epub 2011
Jun 30.

Signaling by the phosphatase MKP-1 in dendritic cells imprints distinct effector 
and regulatory T cell fates.

Huang G(1), Wang Y, Shi LZ, Kanneganti TD, Chi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA.

Comment in
    Immunotherapy. 2011 Dec;3(12):1427-8.

Naive T cells respond to antigens by differentiating into effector and regulatory
lineages. Whereas the roles of T cell-intrinsic pathways have been extensively
studied, how T cell lineage choices are controlled by innate immune signals
remains elusive. Here we report that dendritic cell (DC)-expressed phosphatase
MKP-1, a negative regulator of the MAP kinases, programmed reciprocal T helper 1 
(Th1) and Th17 cell differentiation by modulating IL-12-STAT4 and IL-6-STAT3 axes
and cytokine receptor expression at the DC-T cell interface. MKP-1 was regulated 
by innate recognition signals and its deficiency disrupted antimicrobial
responses and promoted T cell-mediated inflammation. Moreover, MKP-1 inhibited
induction of regulatory T cells by downregulating TGF-ß2 production from DCs. Our
findings identify a regulatory circuit linking MKP-1 signaling in DCs, production
of polarizing cytokines, and integration of DC-derived signals in responding
T cells, that bridges innate and adaptive immunity to coordinate protective
immunity and immunopathology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3142929
PMID: 21723158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Oct;70(10):1752-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.2011.154104. Epub 2011
Jun 30.

Phenotypic associations of genetic susceptibility loci in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Sanchez E(1), Nadig A, Richardson BC, Freedman BI, Kaufman KM, Kelly JA, Niewold 
TB, Kamen DL, Gilkeson GS, Ziegler JT, Langefeld CD, Alarcón GS, Edberg JC,
Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, Brown EE, Kimberly RP, Reveille JD, Vilá LM, Merrill
JT, Anaya JM, James JA, Pons-Estel BA, Martin J, Park SY, Bang SY, Bae SC, Moser 
KL, Vyse TJ, Criswell LA, Gaffney PM, Tsao BP, Jacob CO, Harley JB,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME; BIOLUPUS and GENLES, Sawalha AH.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus is a clinically heterogeneous autoimmune 
disease. A number of genetic loci that increase lupus susceptibility have been
established. This study examines if these genetic loci also contribute to the
clinical heterogeneity in lupus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 4001 European-derived, 1547 Hispanic, 1590
African-American and 1191 Asian lupus patients were genotyped for 16 confirmed
lupus susceptibility loci. Ancestry informative markers were genotyped to
calculate and adjust for admixture. The association between the risk allele in
each locus was determined and compared in patients with and without the various
clinical manifestations included in the ACR criteria.
RESULTS: Renal disorder was significantly correlated with the lupus risk allele
in ITGAM (p=5.0 × 10(-6), OR 1.25, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.35) and in TNFSF4 (p=0.0013, 
OR 1.14, 95% CI 1.07 to 1.25). Other significant findings include the association
between risk alleles in FCGR2A and malar rash (p=0.0031, OR 1.11, 95% CI 1.17 to 
1.33), ITGAM and discoid rash (p=0.0020, OR 1.20, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.33), STAT4 and
protection from oral ulcers (p=0.0027, OR 0.89, 95% CI 0.83 to 0.96) and IL21 and
haematological disorder (p=0.0027, OR 1.13, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.22). All these
associations are significant with a false discovery rate of <0.05 and pass the
significance threshold using Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.
CONCLUSION: Signifi cant associations were found between clinical manifestations 
and the FCGR2A, ITGAM, STAT4, TNSF4 and IL21 genes. The findings suggest that
genetic profiling might be a useful tool to predict disease manifestations in
lupus patients in the future.

PMCID: PMC3232181
PMID: 21719445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Immunol. 2011 Aug 1;187(3):1298-303. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100857. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

Autoimmune disease risk variant of IFIH1 is associated with increased sensitivity
to IFN-a and serologic autoimmunity in lupus patients.

Robinson T(1), Kariuki SN, Franek BS, Kumabe M, Kumar AA, Badaracco M, Mikolaitis
RA, Guerrero G, Utset TO, Drevlow BE, Zaacks LS, Grober JS, Cohen LM, Kirou KA,
Crow MK, Jolly M, Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Increased IFN-a signaling is a heritable risk factor for systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). IFN induced with helicase C domain 1 (IFIH1) is a
cytoplasmic dsRNA sensor that activates IFN-a pathway signaling. We studied the
impact of the autoimmune-disease-associated IFIH1 rs1990760 (A946T) single
nucleotide polymorphism upon IFN-a signaling in SLE patients in vivo. We studied 
563 SLE patients (278 African-American, 179 European-American, and 106
Hispanic-American). Logistic regression models were used to detect genetic
associations with autoantibody traits, and multiple linear regression was used to
analyze IFN-a-induced gene expression in PBMCs in the context of serum IFN-a in
the same blood sample. We found that the rs1990760 T allele was associated with
anti-dsDNA Abs across all of the studied ancestral backgrounds (meta-analysis
odds ratio = 1.34, p = 0.026). This allele also was associated with lower serum
IFN-a levels in subjects who had anti-dsDNA Abs (p = 0.0026). When we studied
simultaneous serum and PBMC samples from SLE patients, we found that the IFIH1
rs1990760 T allele was associated with increased IFN-induced gene expression in
PBMCs in response to a given amount of serum IFN-a in anti-dsDNA-positive
patients. This effect was independent of the STAT4 genotype, which modulates
sensitivity to IFN-a in a similar way. Thus, the IFIH1 rs1990760 T allele was
associated with dsDNA Abs, and in patients with anti-dsDNA Abs this risk allele
increased sensitivity to IFN-a signaling. These studies suggest a role for the
IFIH1 risk allele in SLE in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3304466
PMID: 21705624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2011 Sep 15;143(1-2):20-6. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2011.05.025. Epub 2011 May 26.

Lesional skin in atopic dogs shows a mixed Type-1 and Type-2 immune
responsiveness.

Schlotter YM(1), Rutten VP, Riemers FM, Knol EF, Willemse T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Y.M.Schlotter@uu.nl

Canine atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory and pruritic skin disease
which shares several characteristics with its human counterpart. In chronic patch
test lesions of human with AD mainly a Th1-type cellular response is found.
Besides, non-lesional AD skin is already skewed for inflammation and therefore
different from healthy skin. The goal of this study was to characterize local
immune responsiveness in chronic canine AD lesions as compared to that in
non-lesional AD skin by defining T cell subset relevant cytokine- and
transcription factor expression profiles. The gene expression of the Th1
cytokines IL-12p35, IL-12p40 and IFN-<U+03B3> and their related transcription factors
STAT4, SOCS5 and T-bet, the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 and transcription
factors STAT6, SOCS3 and GATA-3 and the regulatory cytokines IL-10 and TGF-ß and 
the transcription factor FOXP3 was evaluated in healthy control and atopic dogs. 
In non-lesional (NLS) and chronic lesional skin (LS) of atopic dogs and control
skin (CS) from healthy dogs mRNA expression of cytokines and transcription
factors were measured by quantitative real-time PCR. Significantly different
values were found for the following factors: IL-12p40 mRNA was lower in LS when
compared to NLS. Expression of STAT4 was higher in LS compared to CS and NLS.
More IL-13 and SOCS3 were found in LS and NLS when compared to CS and also in LS 
compared to NLS. GATA-3 was lower in LS compared to NLS. IL-10 expression was
higher in both LS and NLS compared to CS and more IL-10 was present in LS
compared to NLS. These findings indicate that both Th1- and Th2-type as well as T
regulatory cells are present in NLS and LS in canine atopic skin.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Life Sci. 2011 Aug 1;89(5-6):171-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2011.05.012. Epub 2011 Jun
12.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 gene polymorphisms associated 
with rheumatoid arthritis in Northwestern Chinese Han population.

Liang YL(1), Wu H, Li PQ, Xie XD, Shen X, Yang XQ, Cheng X, Liang L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University, China.

AIMS: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene encode a
transcriptional factor that transmits signals induced by several key cytokines
which play important roles in the development of autoimmune diseases. Recently,
several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in STAT4 gene have been reported
to be significantly associated with Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in different ethnic
populations. We undertook this study to investigate whether the association of
STAT4 genetic polymorphisms with RA is present in Northwestern Chinese Han
population.
MAIN METHODS: A case-control association study in individuals with RA (n=208) and
healthy controls (n=312) was conducted. Four SNPs (rs7574865, rs8179673,
rs10181656, rs11889341) in STAT4 gene were genotyped by using polymerase chain
reaction followed by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography
(PCR-DHPLC) and DNA sequencing.
KEY FINDINGS: The genotype and allele distributions of four polymorphisms were
significantly different in individuals with RA compared to controls, with SNP
rs7574865 T allele and T/T genotype showing the most significant association with
susceptibility to RA (uncorrected P=1×10(-4), OR=1.645, 95% CI=1.272-2.129;
uncorrected P=4.8×10(-5), OR=3.111, 95% CI=1.777-5.447, respectively).
Stratification studies showed that STAT4 gene polymorphisms were significantly
associated with anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) positive subgroup in
Northwestern Chinese Han population.
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings strongly suggest that STAT4 genetic polymorphisms
are associated with RA in Northwestern Chinese Han population, and support the
hypothesis of STAT4 gene polymorphisms increasing the risk for RA across major
populations.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2011;155 Suppl 1:71-6. doi: 10.1159/000327300. Epub
2011 Jun 1.

STAT4 is required for IFN-ß-induced MCP-1 mRNA expression in murine mast cells.

Iida K(1), Suzuki K, Yokota M, Nakagomi D, Wakashin H, Iwata A, Kawashima H,
Takatori H, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells are immunocompetent cells that are found in almost all
tissues and function as sentinels of immune responses. Recently, it has been
shown that mast cells play significant roles in innate immune responses. However,
it is still largely unknown whether signal transducers and activators of
transcription 4 (STAT4), one of the STAT proteins under type I IFN signaling, is 
involved in type I IFN-mediated gene expression in mast cells.
METHODS: We investigated the role of STAT4 in IFN-ß-induced gene expression in
mast cells by using STAT4-deficient (STAT4(-/-)) bone marrow-derived mast cells
(BMMCs).
RESULTS: STAT4 was expressed in BMMCs and activated in response to IFN-ß but not 
to IL-12 or IL-23. The development of BMMCs as well as IgE-induced degranulation 
of BMMCs was normal in STAT4(-/-) mice. On the other hand, while IFN-ß-induced
mRNA expression of interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1
(IFIT-1), protein kinase interferon-inducible double stranded RNA dependent
(PKR), and myxovirus resistance 1 (Mx1) was similar between STAT4(-/-) BMMCs and 
wild-type (WT) BMMCs, IFN-ß-induced MCP-1 mRNA expression was severely diminished
in STAT4(-/-) BMMCs as compared with WT BMMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT4 plays an essential role in IFN-ß-induced MCP-1 mRNA expression
in mast cells.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21646799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011 May 27;13(3):218. doi: 10.1186/ar3318.

Aspects of innate immunity in Sjögren's syndrome.

Low HZ(1), Witte T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Immunology and Rheumatology, Medical School Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str, 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Previously, a dominant role of the adaptive immune system in the pathogenesis of 
Sjögren's syndrome was suspected. Recent advances, however, have revealed a major
role of the type I IFN pathway, documented by an increased circulating type I IFN
activity and an IFN 'signature' in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and minor
salivary gland biopsies from the patients. Polymorphisms in the genes IRF5 and
STAT4 leading to increased IFN activation are associated with disease
susceptibility. In the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome, the activation of
salivary gland epithelial cells appears to be the initial event. Once
intrinsically activated, they express costimulatory and Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) and MHC class I and II molecules, can present autoantigens and produce
proinflammatory cytokines. The subsequent activation of plasmacytoid dendritic
cells induces the production of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines in
individuals with the risk alleles of the susceptibility genes IRF5 and STAT4.
Under the influence of the high IFN concentration in the glands and through TLR
ligation, B-cell activating factor is produced by epithelial cells and, together 
with autoantigen presentation on salivary gland epithelial cells, stimulates the 
adaptive immune system. In view of the central role of IFNalpha in at least the
initiation of the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome, blockade of this cytokine
may be a rational therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3218872
PMID: 21635716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Int Immunol. 2011 Jul;23(7):415-20. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr029. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

An updated view on transcription factor GATA3-mediated regulation of Th1 and Th2 
cell differentiation.

Yagi R(1), Zhu J, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

CD4 T(h) are critical for orchestrating adaptive immune responses. The expression
of the transcription factor GATA3 (GATA-binding protein 3) is up-regulated or
down-regulated during T(h)2 or T(h)1 cell differentiation, respectively.
Furthermore, GATA3 is responsible for induction of T(h)2 differentiation and
represses T(h)1 differentiation. In this review, we present an updated view on
the molecular mechanisms through which GATA3 regulates T(h)1/T(h)2
differentiation. During T(h)2 cell differentiation, GATA3 directly binds to the
T(h)2 cytokine gene locus at several regions and regulates expression. On the
other hand, GATA3 inhibits T(h)1 cell differentiation by preventing up-regulation
of IL-12 receptor ß2 and STAT4 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 
4) and neutralization of Runx3 (runt-related transcription factor 3) function
through protein-protein interaction. GATA3 may also directly act on the Ifng
gene. In summary, GATA3 serves as a transcriptional activator or repressor
through direct action on transcriptional machinery and/or affecting chromatin
remodeling at many critical loci encoding cytokines, cytokine receptors,
signaling molecules as well as transcription factors that are involved in the
regulation of T(h)1 and T(h)2 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3123974
PMID: 21632975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Genes Immun. 2011 Oct;12(7):568-74. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.30. Epub 2011 May 26.

Non-HLA genes modulate the risk of rheumatoid arthritis associated with HLA-DRB1 
in a susceptible North American Native population.

El-Gabalawy HS(1), Robinson DB, Daha NA, Oen KG, Smolik I, Elias B, Hart D,
Bernstein CN, Sun Y, Lu Y, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Siminovitch KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada. elgabalh@cc.umanitoba.ca

Most of the genetic risk for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is conferred by 'shared
epitope' (SE), encoding alleles of HLA-DRB1. Specific North American Native (NAN)
populations have RA prevalence rates of 2-5%, representing some of the highest
rates estimated worldwide. As many NAN populations also demonstrate a high
background frequency of SE, we sought to determine whether other genetic factors 
contribute to disease risk in this predisposed population. RA patients (n=333)
and controls (n=490) from the Cree/Ojibway NAN population in Central Canada were 
HLA-DRB1 typed and tested for 21 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that have
previously been associated with RA, including PTPN22, TRAF1-C5, CTLA4, PADI4,
STAT4, FCRL3, CCL21, MMEL1-TNFRSF14, CDK6, PRKCQ, KIF5A-PIP4K2C, IL2RB, TNFAIP3, 
IL10-1082G/A and REL. Our findings indicate that SE is prevalent and represents a
major genetic risk factor for RA in this population (82% cases versus 68%
controls, odds ratio=2.2, 95% confidence interval 1.6-3.1, P<0.001). We also
demonstrate that in the presence of SE, the minor allele of MMEL1-TNFRSF14
significantly reduces RA risk in a dominant manner, whereas TRAF1-C5 increases
the risk. These findings point to the importance of non-HLA genes in determining 
RA risk in a population with a high frequency of disease predisposing HLA-DRB1
alleles.

PMID: 21614018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Zhongguo Gu Shang. 2011 Apr;24(4):295-8.

[Comparison of the status of STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation in peripheral
T-lymphocytes induced by IL-12 in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun ZJ(1), Zhang YJ, Sun TZ, Xiong A, Liu RB, Lü HS.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Clinic and Research Center, People's Hospital of Peking University, 
Beijing 100035, China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the levels of STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation in peripheral 
T-lymphocytes induced by IL-12 in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis
(OA).
METHODS: From May 2007 to August 2009, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
were isolated from RA patients [RA group, all the cases were female, the age was 
from 28 to 55 years with an average of (45.0 +/- 13.0) years] and OA patients [OA
group, all the cases also were female; the age was from 55 to 75 years with an
average of (67.0 +/- 9.6) years]. The purity of T-lymphocytes from PBMCs was
accredited by flow cytometry. The IL-12 of 50 ng/ml added in T-lymphocytes, the
levels of STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation were detected by western blot after
different time intervals (0, 10, 30, 60 min).
RESULTS: The purity of T-lymphocytes were above 91% through diremption and
depuration for peripheral blood monouclear cells. The levels of STAT4 tyrosine
phosphorylation in T-lymphocytes from RA induced by IL-12 were higher than that
from OA in the different times (10, 30, 60 min); after 30 min, its levels from RA
and OA achieved to crest value.
CONCLUSION: STAT4 in peripheral T-lymphocytes of rheumatoid arthritis was more
easily to be activated than osteoarthritis.

PMID: 21604524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Toxicology. 2011 Aug 15;286(1-3):28-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.05.002. Epub 2011
May 12.

Dysregulation of immune responses in an allergic mouse model following low-level 
toluene exposure.

Fujimaki H(1), Win-Shwe TT, Yoshida Y, Kunugita N, Arashidani K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8506, Japan. fujimaki@nies.go.jp

To investigate the effect of low-level toluene inhalation on immune regulation in
an allergic mouse model, C3H/HeN mice were exposed to 0, 5, 50, or 500ppm of
toluene for 6h/day, 5 days/week for 3 or 6 weeks. For allergic mouse model, half 
of the mice in each group were immunized with ovalbumin (OVA). Allergic mice
exposed to toluene for 3 weeks did not exhibit any changes in their plasma, lung 
or spleen samples. Although exposure to toluene alone for 6 weeks did not
increase the number of inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, 
coexposure to 50ppm toluene and OVA increased the number of BAL cells.
Histological changes and increased amounts of fibronectin were observed in the
lungs of OVA-immunized, 50-ppm-toluene-exposed mice. Exposure to 500ppm
significantly increased the expressions of transcription factors STAT3, STAT4 and
STAT5a mRNAs in spleen. In spleens from the allergic mouse model, the expressions
of STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT6, GATA3 and Foxp3 mRNAs were significantly enhanced
following exposure to 50ppm toluene for 6 weeks, but the expression of T-bet mRNA
was not increased. Regarding the Th1/Th2 balance, the expressions of IL-4 and
IL-12 mRNAs were enhanced in the spleens of toluene-exposed mice. Total IgG1
antibody production in the plasma was significantly increased in the
50-ppm-toluene-exposed allergic mouse model. These results indicate that
low-level toluene exposure might dysregulate the allergic responses to OVA in
C3H/HeN mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. PLoS One. 2011 May 10;6(5):e18553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018553.

Antigen-independent IFN-<U+03B3> production by human naïve CD4 T cells activated by
IL-12 plus IL-18.

Munk RB(1), Sugiyama K, Ghosh P, Sasaki CY, Rezanka L, Banerjee K, Takahashi H,
Sen R, Longo DL.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Unit, Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, 
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America.

The role of T cells in innate immunity is not well defined. In this report, we
show that a subset of human peripheral blood CD4(+) T cells responds to IL-12
plus IL-18, but not to IL-12 or IL-18 alone, by producing IFN-<U+03B3> in the absence of
any antigenic stimulation or cell proliferation. Intracellular staining reveals a
small percentage of resting CD4(+) T cells (0.5 to 1.5%) capable of producing
IFN-<U+03B3> in response to IL-12 plus IL-18. Interestingly, both naïve (CD45RA(+)) and 
memory (CD45RO(+)) CD4(+) populations were responsive to IL-12 plus IL-18
stimulation in producing IFN-<U+03B3>. The expression of IFN-<U+03B3>induced by IL-12 and IL-18
is sensitive to rapamycin and SB203580, indicating the possible involvement of
mTOR and p38 MAP kinase, respectively, in this synergistic pathway. While p38MAP 
kinase is involved in transcription, mTOR is involved in message stabilization.
We have also shown that NF<U+03BA>B family member, cRel, but not GADD45ß and GADD45<U+03B3>,
plays an important role in IL-12 plus IL-18-induced IFN-<U+03B3> transcription. Thus,
the present study suggests that naïve CD4(+) T cells may participate in innate
immunity or amplify adaptive immune responses through cytokine-induced
antigen-independent cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC3091853
PMID: 21572994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;56(7):503-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.49. Epub 2011 May 12.

Cumulative association of eight susceptibility genes with systemic lupus
erythematosus in a Japanese female population.

Koga M(1), Kawasaki A, Ito I, Furuya T, Ohashi J, Kyogoku C, Ito S, Hayashi T,
Matsumoto I, Kusaoi M, Takasaki Y, Hashimoto H, Sumida T, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Biomedical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Although large-scale studies established many susceptibility genes to systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), effect of each gene is not sufficiently large to be
used alone to identify individuals with strong genetic predisposition. In this
study, we analyzed the cumulative number of risk alleles at eight established
susceptibility loci, HLA-DRB1, IRF5, STAT4, BLK, TNFAIP3, TNIP1, FCGR2B and
TNFSF13, in 282 Japanese female SLE and 222 healthy female controls. The average 
number of risk alleles was significantly increased in SLE (8.07±1.60) than
healthy controls (7.02±1.64) (P=1.63 × 10(-12)). Significant gene-gene
interaction was not detected. When the subjects carrying seven risk alleles were 
used as a reference, the odds ratio (OR) for individuals carrying 10 and 11-13
risk alleles were 4.17 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.89-9.19, P=0.0002) and
8.77 (95% CI 1.92-40.0, P=0.0016), respectively. In contrast, subjects with =4
risk alleles were significantly decreased in SLE (OR 0.15, CI 0.03-0.67,
P=0.007). The proportion of the patients with neurologic disorder was
significantly increased in those carrying =10 risk alleles than those with <10
(OR 2.30, CI 1.09-4.83, P=0.025). This study suggested that the cumulative number
of risk alleles may efficiently distinguish groups with high and low genetic
predisposition to SLE and its severe manifestation.

PMID: 21562514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Gastroenterol. 2011 Aug;46(8):1020-30. doi: 10.1007/s00535-011-0408-8. Epub
2011 May 11.

Differential alteration of CD56(bright) and CD56 (dim) natural killer cells in
frequency, phenotype, and cytokine response in chronic hepatitis C virus
infection.

Miyagi T(1), Shimizu S, Tatsumi T, Nishio K, Hiramatsu N, Kanto T, Hayashi N,
Takehara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Natural killer (NK) cells play an important role in immune responses 
to virus infection. The cell population consists of CD56(bright) (bright-subset) 
and CD56(dim) (dim-subset) subsets that possess armed functions of cytokine
production and cytolysis, respectively. How these subsets are involved in chronic
hepatitis C virus infection (CHC) remains obscure.
METHODS: We investigated the frequency, phenotype, and cytokine response of these
subsets in blood from CHC patients and healthy subjects (HS).
RESULTS: Dim-subset, but not bright-subset, showed lower frequency in the
patients than in HS. Bright-subset from the patients more frequently expressed
the NKG2A/CD94 inhibitory receptor than that from HS, while both subsets from the
patients expressed lower levels of the NKG2D activating receptor. Both subsets
from the patients displayed a significantly higher level of the signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT) 1, compared with the HS. Upon stimulation
with interferon-a, bright-subset activated less STAT4, required for interferon-<U+03B3> 
production, and dim-subset activated more STAT1, required for cytolysis, in the
patients than in HS.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate alterations of NK cell subsets in frequency, 
phenotype, and cytokine response in CHC, which might be associated with the
immune pathogenesis of CHC.

PMID: 21559771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19366. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019366.

Interferon-alpha triggers B cell effector 1 (Be1) commitment.

de Goër de Herve MG(1), Durali D, Dembele B, Giuliani M, Tran TA, Azzarone B, Eid
P, Tardieu M, Delfraissy JF, Taoufik Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-1012 and Université Paris-Sud, Bicêtre, France.

B-cells can contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases not only
through auto-antibody secretion but also via cytokine production. Therapeutic
depletion of B-cells influences the functions and maintenance of various T-cell
subsets. The mechanisms governing the functional heterogeneity of B-cell subsets 
as cytokine-producing cells are poorly understood. B-cells can differentiate into
two functionally polarized effectors, one (B-effector-1-cells) producing a
Th-1-like cytokine pattern and the other (Be2) producing a Th-2-like pattern.
IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3> play a key role in Be1 polarization, but the initial trigger of
Be1 commitment is unclear. Type-I-interferons are produced early in the immune
response and prime several processes involved in innate and adaptive responses.
Here, we report that IFN-a triggers a signaling cascade in resting human naive
B-cells, involving STAT4 and T-bet, two key IFN-<U+03B3> gene imprinting factors. IFN-a 
primed naive B-cells for IFN-<U+03B3> production and increased IFN-<U+03B3> gene responsiveness
to IL-12. IFN-<U+03B3> continues this polarization by re-inducing T-bet and
up-regulating IL-12Rß2 expression. IFN-a and IFN-<U+03B3> therefore pave the way for the
action of IL-12. These results point to a coordinated action of IFN-a, IFN-<U+03B3> and 
IL-12 in Be1 polarization of naive B-cells, and may provide new insights into the
mechanisms by which type-I-interferons favor autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3084831
PMID: 21559410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Exp Med. 2011 Jun 6;208(6):1163-77. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102555. Epub 2011 May 9.

Innate and cytokine-driven signals, rather than microbial antigens, dominate in
natural killer T cell activation during microbial infection.

Brigl M(1), Tatituri RV, Watts GF, Bhowruth V, Leadbetter EA, Barton N, Cohen NR,
Hsu FF, Besra GS, Brenner MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
mbrigl@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT cells) are critical for host defense
against a variety of microbial pathogens. However, the central question of how
iNKT cells are activated by microbes has not been fully explained. The example of
adaptive MHC-restricted T cells, studies using synthetic pharmacological
a-galactosylceramides, and the recent discovery of microbial iNKT cell ligands
have all suggested that recognition of foreign lipid antigens is the main driver 
for iNKT cell activation during infection. However, when we compared the role of 
microbial antigens versus innate cytokine-driven mechanisms, we found that iNKT
cell interferon-<U+03B3> production after in vitro stimulation or infection with diverse
bacteria overwhelmingly depended on toll-like receptor-driven IL-12. Importantly,
activation of iNKT cells in vivo during infection with Sphingomonas yanoikuyae or
Streptococcus pneumoniae, pathogens which are known to express iNKT cell antigens
and which require iNKT cells for effective protection, also predominantly
depended on IL-12. Constitutive expression of high levels of IL-12 receptor by
iNKT cells enabled instant IL-12-induced STAT4 activation, demonstrating that
among T cells, iNKT cells are uniquely equipped for immediate, cytokine-driven
activation. These findings reveal that innate and cytokine-driven signals, rather
than cognate microbial antigen, dominate in iNKT cell activation during microbial
infections.

PMCID: PMC3173255
PMID: 21555485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Autoimmun Rev. 2011 Aug;10(10):599-608. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.04.021. Epub
2011 Apr 22.

An overview on the genetic of rheumatoid arthritis: a never-ending story.

Perricone C(1), Ceccarelli F, Valesini G.

Author information: 
(1)Reumatologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Sapienza 
Università di Roma, Rome, Italy. carlo.perricone@gmail.com

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic, inflammatory, multi-factorial
disease sustained by environmental and genetic factors. These seem to be
necessary but not sufficient in the disease development, nonetheless they can be 
responsible of different clinical pictures and response to therapy, and they can 
represent potential therapeutic targets. Several genes have been indicated so far
in the pathogenesis of RA. The most important region is the Human Leukocyte
Antigen (HLA) that contributes to approximately half of the genetic
susceptibility for RA. The association seems to be stronger or specific for
anti-citrullinated protein antibodies positive disease. Several alleles in the
epitope-recognition part of the HLA molecule that show the highest association
with RA susceptibility, also share a common string of amminoacid residues (the
so-called shared-epitope hypothesis). Other variants in potentially pathogenic
genes located in non-MHC regions have been implicated by recently performed
genome wide analysis studies. These genes include PTPN22, TRAF1-C5, PADI4, STAT4.
Other polymorphisms seem to be responsible for more aggressive disease phenotype 
such as those located at TNF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-4, IL-5, OPN, PRF1. However, still
nowadays, the genetic background of RA remains to be clearly depicted, and the
efforts in the post-genomic era can bring to an estimation of the real likelihood
of the genetic effect on RA. Finally, the discovery of new genes associated with 
the disease can be relevant in finding potential biomarkers, potentially useful
in disease diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21545847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Leukoc Biol. 2011 Jul;90(1):87-97. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1210674. Epub 2011 May 4.

Interleukin-12 treatment down-regulates STAT4 and induces apoptosis with
increasing ROS production in human natural killer cells.

Huang Y(1), Lei Y, Zhang H, Zhang M, Dayton A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 1401 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20892, USA.

NK cells are prominent mediators of the immunomodulating and antiangiogenic
activity of IL-12. However, the effect of prolonged IL-12 treatment on NK cells
is unclear. In this study, we observed that IL-12 initially activates NK cells,
but prolonged IL-12 treatment specifically down-regulates IL-12 signaling and
induces NK cell apoptosis associated with a significant reduction in cytolytic
activity and IFN-<U+03B3> production in response to further IL-12 stimulation. Further
results demonstrate that prolonged IL-12 stimulation of NK cells specifically
decreases the level of activated STAT4 protein, a critical IL-12 signaling
component, through decreasing STAT4 mRNA and protein levels rather than inducing 
STAT4 protein degradation. IL-12 treatment induces NK cell activation as well as 
levels of ROS, but prolonged IL-12 treatment causes ROS accumulation, which in
turn, results in the loss of <U+0394><U+03C8>(m), the release of cytochrome c, and the
activation of caspase-3, resulting in NK cell apoptosis. These findings provide
new insights into IL-12 regulation in human NK cells, where IL-12 initially
promotes NK cell activation but subsequently limits this response through a
negative-feedback mechanism.

PMID: 21543583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Crit Rev Immunol. 2011;31(2):99-114.

Non-major histocompatibility complex rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility genes.

Kunz M(1), Ibrahim SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

Recent results from genetic and treatment studies have shed new light on chronic 
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In
particular, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have provided supportive
evidence that RA is a disease with a strong genetic background. Interestingly, a 
series of candidate genes have been identified outside of the classical major
histocompatibility (MHC) locus, which had long been regarded as the major
contributor to the pathogenesis of this disease. Among these genes, PTPN22 plays 
an outstanding role. CD40, STAT4, PRM1, and TNFAIP3 also seem to be of relevance.
Interestingly, there is a significant overlap between RA susceptibility genes and
those of other autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
type 1 diabetes, which suggests common pathogenic mechanisms. Genetic analyses
may not only provide new insights into the pathogenesis of RA, but may also open 
new avenues for therapeutic approaches, because overactive immune-signaling
pathways might specifically be addressed by biologic therapies. However, the
predictive value of many of the recent findings of large-scale genetic analyses
in identifying new genetic polymorphisms remains low. We describe the current
knowledge about the role of non-MHC genes in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid
arthritis.

PMID: 21542789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Semin Liver Dis. 2011 May;31(2):147-56. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1276644. Epub 2011
May 2.

Progress in the genetics of primary biliary cirrhosis.

Hirschfield GM(1), Invernizzi P.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Centre, Toronto Western Hospital and Department of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. gideon.hirschfield@uhn.on.ca

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease that has a
prevalence of 1 in 1000 women over the age of 40. Treatment is presently limited 
to ursodeoxycholic acid, a hydrophilic bile acid that has nonspecific,
choleretic, effects in cholestatic liver disease. PBC has strong autoimmune
features, including highly specific loss of tolerance to a ubiquitous
mitochondrial antigen. Both environmental and genetic factors are considered
important in the pathogenesis of disease. Prior to the advent of genome-wide
association studies, only class II human leucocyte antigen (HLA) loci
(HLA-DRB1*08, *11, and *13) had been reproducibly shown to associate with
disease. Non-HLA loci were suggested for several genes (e.g., CTLA-4, MDR3), but 
often inconclusively replicated. With the application of genome-wide technology, 
HLA was confirmed as the strongest association and many other risk loci have been
identified, with equivalent effect size to HLA, including IL12A, IL12RB2, STAT4, 
IRF5-TNPO3, 17q12.21, MMEL1, SPIB, and CTLA-4. These collectively support an
important role for innate and adaptive immunity in development of disease.
Further insights are predicted as studies with larger cohorts are assembled, and 
different approaches are taken to further discover common and uncommon gene
variants associated with disease. Disease subphenotypes such as response to
therapy, clinical progression, and symptoms remain additional areas for further
dedicated studies, and in which different genetic risk factors may be relevant.
Identification of risk loci associated with disease has the potential to aid
development of rational, disease-specific, therapies in the future.

© 2011 Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.

PMID: 21538281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Food Sci. 2010 Oct;75(8):H244-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2010.01787.x. Epub
2010 Sep 20.

The antiallergic effect of kefir Lactobacilli.

Hong WS(1), Chen YP, Chen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Animal Science and Technology, Natl. Taiwan Univ., Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC.

This study demonstrated that oral feeding of heat-inactivated Lactobacillus (L
b.) kefiranofaciens M1 from kefir grains effectively inhibited immunoglobulin
(Ig) E production in response to ovalbumin (OVA) in vivo. The pattern of cytokine
production by splenocyte cells revealed that the levels of cytokines produced by 
T helper (Th) 1 cells increased, and those of cytokines produced by Th2 cells
decreased in the heat-inactivated M1 feeding group. These findings indicated that
Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens M1 in the kefir played an important role in
antiallergic activities. By additional analysis using flow cytometry and
microarray, the mechanism of suppression of IgE production by oral feeding of the
heat-inactivated M1 probably occurs because of upregulation of the expression of 
Cd2, Stat4, and Ifnr leading to skewing the Th1/Th2 balance toward Th1 dominance,
elevation of the CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T (Treg) percentage, and reduction of
activated CD19(+) B cells. Downregulation of complement system and components was
also involved in suppression of IgE production. Practical Application: Kefir has 
long been considered good for health. Its health benefits include
immunoregulatory effects. However, there is a lack of knowledge concerning the
immunoregulatory effects induced by kefir lactic acid bacteria (LAB). Our data
clearly demonstrated the antiallergic activity of kefir LAB, Lactobacillus (L b.)
kefiranofaciens M1. By additional analysis using flow cytometry and microarray,
the possible mechanism of suppression of IgE production by oral feeding of the
heat-inactivated M1 was also elucidated. Our findings indicated that
Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens M1 may have a great potential for utilization in
functional food products.

PMID: 21535502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Immunol. 2011 Jun 1;186(11):6597-606. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1004074. Epub 2011 
Apr 27.

Stat4 is critical for the balance between Th17 cells and regulatory T cells in
colitis.

Xu J(1), Yang Y, Qiu G, Lal G, Yin N, Wu Z, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Th17 play a central role in autoimmune inflammatory responses. Th1 are also
necessary for autoimmune disease development. The interplay of Th1 signals and
how they coordinate with Th17 during inflammatory disease pathogenesis are
incompletely understood. In this study, by adding Stat4 deficiency to Stat6/T-bet
double knockout, we further dissected the role of Stat4 in Th1 development and
colitis induction. We showed that in the absence of the strong Th2 mediator
Stat6, neither Stat4 nor T-bet is required for IFN-<U+03B3> production and Th1
development. However, addition of Stat4 deficiency abolished colitis induced by
Stat6/T-bet double-knockout cells, despite Th1 and Th17 responses. The failure of
colitis induction by Stat4/Stat6/T-bet triple-knockout cells is largely due to
elevated Foxp3(+) regulatory T cell (Treg) development. These results highlight
the critical role of Stat4 Th1 signals in autoimmune responses in suppressing
Foxp3(+) Treg responses and altering the balance between Th17 and Tregs to favor 
autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3098937
PMID: 21525389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Aug;217(2):518-24. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.03.043. Epub 2011 Apr 9.

Activation of Th17/Th1 and Th1, but not Th17, is associated with the acute
cardiac event in patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Zhao Z(1), Wu Y, Cheng M, Ji Y, Yang X, Liu P, Jia S, Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: Th1 activation and regulatory T (Treg) cell suppression have been
observed in acute coronary syndrome (ACS), including unstable angina (UA) and
acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However, the role of Th17 cell or IL-17A
remains controversial in ACS patients, and little is known about the role of
recently discovered Th17/Th1 cells, a subset of Th17 cells, in coronary artery
disease (CAD). The purpose of this study is to investigate functional changes of 
Th17/Th1, Th17, Th1, Th2 and Treg cells in ACS patients.
METHODS: The contents of Th17/Th1, Th17, Th1, Th2 and Treg cells, related gene
expression, and plasma cytokines from CAD and control patients with normal
coronary arteries (NCA) were measured by flow cytometry, real-time quantitative
PCR and ELISA.
RESULTS: Th17/Th1 and Th1 cell contents and related gene expression (T-bet,
IFN-<U+03B3>, STAT4, ROR<U+03B3>t, STAT3 and IL-17) were significantly increased in ACS
patients, whereas plasma IFN-<U+03B3> only increased in CAD patients. In contrast, Treg 
cell population, Foxp3 levels, and plasma TGF-ß1 were decreased in ACS patients
compared with stable angina (SA) and NCA patients.
CONCLUSION: The study showed activation of Th17/Th1 and Th1 cell in ACS patients,
which may provide insight into the mechanisms underlying culprit plaque relevant 
T-cell activation in ACS patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21524750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Int J Cancer. 2012 Mar 15;130(6):1459-69. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26152. Epub 2011 Aug
26.

A small molecule, LLL12 inhibits constitutive STAT3 and IL-6-induced STAT3
signaling and exhibits potent growth suppressive activity in human multiple
myeloma cells.

Lin L(1), Benson DM Jr, DeAngelis S, Bakan CE, Li PK, Li C, Lin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Childhood Cancer, The Research Institute 
at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA. lin.674@osu.edu

We characterized the effects of a newly developed signal transducers and
activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) inhibitor, LLL12 in multiple myeloma (MM)
cells. LLL12 specifically inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation, nuclear localization, 
DNA binding activity, down-regulated STAT3 downstream genes, and induced
apoptosis in MM cells. Importantly, LLL12 significantly inhibited STAT3
phosphorylation, induced apoptosis in primary MM cells which came from patients
that were clinically resistant to lenalidomide and bortezomib. LLL12 is a potent 
inhibitor of cell proliferation with IC50 values ranging between 0.26 and 1.96 µM
in MM and primary MM cells. LLL12 also inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation induced by
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interferon-a but not STAT1, STAT2, STAT4 and STAT6
phosphorylation induced by interferon-a, interferon-<U+03B3> and IL-4 indicating the
selectivity of LLL12 for STAT3. The selectively of LLL12 on STAT3 was further
demonstrated on 21 protein kinases, which LLL12 had IC50 values = 73.92 µM. In
addition, the pretreatment of LLL12 blocked the promotion of the cell
proliferation and resistance to lenalidomide by IL-6. Furthermore, LLL12
significantly blocked tumor growth of MM cells in mouse model. Our results
indicate that LLL12 blocks constitutive STAT3 and IL-6 induced STAT3 signaling
and may be a potential therapeutic agent for MM.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3228889
PMID: 21520044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Med Rep. 2010 Nov-Dec;3(6):941-5. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2010.349. Epub 2010 Aug
26.

Role of the JAK-STAT pathway in proliferation and differentiation of human
hypertrophic scar fibroblasts induced by connective tissue growth factor.

Tao L(1), Liu J, Li Z, Dai X, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Southwestern Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the JAK-STAT pathway
participates in the processes of proliferation and differentiation induced by
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in human hypertrophic scar fibroblasts
(hHSF). hHSF were grown as primary cultures, then treated with or without CTGF.
Western blotting was used to detect JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, TYK2, STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, 
STAT4, STAT5 and STAT6 protein expression in the hHSF at various time points
after stimulation with CTGF. Immunofluorescence and the electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay (EMSA) were used to identify the interacting signalling molecules and
to investigate their activation, respectively. After the signalling molecules of 
interest were selected, a specific inhibitor (STAT1 ASODN) was used to block the 
JAK-STAT pathway. The MTT assay was used to detect the proliferation of hHSF, and
differentiation was assessed by evaluating changes in a-SMA expression by RT-PCR.
Based on the results of Western blotting, immunofluorescence and EMSA,
proliferation and differentiation were much higher in hHSF treated with CTGF
(p<0.05). After blocking the pathway with STAT1 ASODN, hHSF proliferation was
markedly, though not entirely, inhibited, while a-SMA expression was not
significantly altered. JAK1 and STAT1 are therefore likely to participate in the 
proliferation and differentiation of hHSF induced by CTGF. However, though the
STAT1 signalling pathway plays a key role in the CTGF-induced proliferation of
hHSF, it is not the only pathway controlling this process. JAK1 may be an
upstream element of STAT1, and may also participate in the CTGF-induced
proliferation of hHSF. These results elucidate the signal transduction mechanism 
of CTGF-induced hHSF proliferation, and may aid in the development of a novel
method for the inhibition of scar fibrosis and contraction.

PMID: 21472337  [PubMed]


406. Mucosal Immunol. 2011 Sep;4(5):574-83. doi: 10.1038/mi.2011.18. Epub 2011 Apr 6.

The endogenous cannabinoid system in the gut of patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease.

Di Sabatino A(1), Battista N, Biancheri P, Rapino C, Rovedatti L, Astarita G,
Vanoli A, Dainese E, Guerci M, Piomelli D, Pender SL, MacDonald TT, Maccarrone M,
Corazza GR.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Centro
per lo Studio e la Cura delle Malattie Infiammatorie Croniche Intestinali,
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. a.disabatino@smatteo.pv.it

Erratum in
    Mucosal Immunol. 2011 Jul4(4):479.

Activation of cannabinoid receptors (CBs) by endocannabinoids impacts on a number
of gastrointestinal functions. Recent data indicate that CB1 agonists improve
2,4-dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis in mice, thus suggesting a role 
for the endocannabinoid agonist anandamide (AEA) in protecting the gut against
inflammation. We here examined the gut endocannabinoid system in inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) patients, and investigated the ex vivo and in vitro effects
of the non-hydrolysable AEA analog methanandamide (MAEA) on the mucosal
proinflammatory response. The content of AEA, but not of 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol 
and N-palmitoylethanolamine, was significantly lower in inflamed than uninflamed 
IBD mucosa, and this was paralleled by lower activity of the AEA-synthesizing
enzyme N-acyl-phosphatidylethanolamine-specific phospholipase D and higher
activity of the AEA-degrading enzyme fatty acid amide hydrolase. MAEA
significantly downregulated interferon-<U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor-a secretion by
both organ culture biopsies and lamina propria mononuclear cells. Although these 
results are promising, further studies are needed to determine the role of
cannabinoid pathways in gut inflammation.

PMID: 21471961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Apr;63(4):884-93. doi: 10.1002/art.30235.

Genome-wide association study of rheumatoid arthritis in Koreans:
population-specific loci as well as overlap with European susceptibility loci.

Freudenberg J(1), Lee HS, Han BG, Shin HD, Kang YM, Sung YK, Shim SC, Choi CB,
Lee AT, Gregersen PK, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research and North Shore-Long Island Jewish
Health System, Manhasset, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in Koreans in order 
to identify susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We generated high-quality genotypes for 441,398 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 801 RA cases and 757 controls. We then tested 79 markers 
from 46 loci for replication in an independent sample of 718 RA cases and 719
controls.
RESULTS: Genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10(-08) ) was attained by markers from
the major histocompatibility complex region and from the PADI4 gene. The
replication data showed nominal association signals (P < 5 × 10(-02) ) for
markers from 11 of the 46 replicated loci, greatly exceeding random expectation. 
Genes that were most significant in the replication stage and in the combined
analysis include the known European RA loci BLK, AFF3, and CCL21. Thus, in
addition to the previously associated STAT4 alleles, variants at these three loci
may contribute to RA not only among Europeans, but also among Asians. In
addition, we observed replication signals near the genes PTPN2, FLI1, ARHGEF3,
LCP2, GPR137B, TRHDE, and CGA1. Based on the excess of small P values in the
replication stage study, we estimate that more than half of these loci are
genuine RA susceptibility genes. Finally, we systematically analyzed the presence
of association signals in Koreans at established European RA loci, which showed a
significant enrichment of European RA loci among the Korean RA loci.
CONCLUSION: Genetic risk for RA involves both population-specific loci as well as
many shared genetic susceptibility loci in comparisons of Asian and European
populations.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21452313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Mar;7(2):127-8. doi: 10.1586/eci.11.2.

How birds of a feather flock together: genetics in autoimmune diseases.

Broen JC, Radstake TR.

PMID: 21426248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Z Rheumatol. 2011 Apr;70(3):192-4, 196-7. doi: 10.1007/s00393-010-0691-4.

[Genetic analysis in collagen vascular diseases].

[Article in German]

Melchers I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinische Forschergruppe für Rheumatologie, Freiburg, Deutschland.
inga.melchers@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Genetic risk factors are known to exist for all collagen vascular diseases. They 
are most important for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic
scleroderma (SSc), as shown by the systematic analysis of family data. Both
diseases to date share most of the validated risk factors (PTPN22, STAT4, BANK1, 
TNFAIP3, IRF5, BLK) underlining once again their relationship. Moreover, most of 
these factors were also shown to be associated with other autoimmune diseases.
Many additional risk factors exist, but need further analysis. The HLA complex is
of special interest, as many loci within this region, some highly polymorphic,
may contribute to the total genetic risk.

PMID: 21424427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011 Mar-Apr;29(2):269-74. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription and the risk of rheumatoid
arthritis and thyroid autoimmune disorders.

Ben Hamad M(1), Cornelis F, Mbarek H, Chabchoub G, Marzouk S, Bahloul Z, Rebai A,
Fakhfakh F, Ayadi H, Petit-Teixeira E, Maalej A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia.

OBJECTIVES: The signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene
localised on chromosome 2q32.2-q32.3 is known to be essential for mediating
responses to interleukin 12 in lymphocytes and regulating the differentiation of 
T helper cells. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of the STAT4
gene in susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and autoimmune thyroid
diseases (AITDs) in Tunisian case control studies.
METHODS: Genotyping of STAT4 rs7574865 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was
performed in 140 patients affected with RA, 159 patients affected with AITDs and 
200 healthy controls using TaqMan® allelic discrimination assay. Data were
analysed by <U+03C7>2-test, genotype relative risk (GRR) and odds ratio (OR).
RESULTS: Our results revealed that frequencies of the T allele and the T/T
genotype were significantly higher among RA patients compared to controls
(p=0.008; p=0.003, respectively). However, no significant associations with the
risk of autoimmune thyroid diseases were detected. Moreover, the stratification
of RA patients subgroups revealed a significant association of both T allele and 
T/T genotype in patients presented erosion (p=0.003; p=0.004, respectively) as
well as anti-cyclic peptides-negative RA (ACPA-) (p=0.002; p=0.0003,
respectively). Furthermore, genotypic association was found according to the
absence of rheumatoid factor antibody (RF) (p=0.0014). But, no significant
differences in allele and genotype frequencies of STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism
were detected according to the presence of another autoimmune disease, nodules
and in HLA-DRB1*04 and HLA-DRB1*0404 positive subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support involvement of the STAT4 gene in the genetic
susceptibility to RA but not to AITDs in the Tunisian population.

PMID: 21418779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001323. Epub 2011 
Mar 3.

Differential genetic associations for systemic lupus erythematosus based on
anti-dsDNA autoantibody production.

Chung SA(1), Taylor KE, Graham RR, Nititham J, Lee AT, Ortmann WA, Jacob CO,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Tsao BP, Harley JB, Gaffney PM, Moser KL; SLEGEN, Petri M,
Demirci FY, Kamboh MI, Manzi S, Gregersen PK, Langefeld CD, Behrens TW, Criswell 
LA.

Collaborators: Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Criswell LA, Harley JB, Jacob CO, Kimberly
RP, Langefeld CD, Moser KL, Tsao BP, Vyse TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, United States of America.
sharon.chung@ucsf.edu

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a clinically heterogeneous, systemic
autoimmune disease characterized by autoantibody formation. Previously published 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have investigated SLE as a single
phenotype. Therefore, we conducted a GWAS to identify genetic factors associated 
with anti-dsDNA autoantibody production, a SLE-related autoantibody with
diagnostic and clinical importance. Using two independent datasets, over 400,000 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were studied in a total of 1,717 SLE cases
and 4,813 healthy controls. Anti-dsDNA autoantibody positive (anti-dsDNA +,
n<U+200A>=<U+200A>811) and anti-dsDNA autoantibody negative (anti-dsDNA -, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>906) SLE cases
were compared to healthy controls and to each other to identify SNPs associated
specifically with these SLE subtypes. SNPs in the previously identified SLE
susceptibility loci STAT4, IRF5, ITGAM, and the major histocompatibility complex 
were strongly associated with anti-dsDNA + SLE. Far fewer and weaker associations
were observed for anti-dsDNA - SLE. For example, rs7574865 in STAT4 had an OR for
anti-dsDNA + SLE of 1.77 (95% CI 1.57-1.99, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.0E-20) compared to an OR for
anti-dsDNA - SLE of 1.26 (95% CI 1.12-1.41, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.4E-04), with
p(heterogeneity)<0.0005. SNPs in the SLE susceptibility loci BANK1, KIAA1542, and
UBE2L3 showed evidence of association with anti-dsDNA + SLE and were not
associated with anti-dsDNA - SLE. In conclusion, we identified differential
genetic associations with SLE based on anti-dsDNA autoantibody production. Many
previously identified SLE susceptibility loci may confer disease risk through
their role in autoantibody production and be more accurately described as
autoantibody propensity loci. Lack of strong SNP associations may suggest that
other types of genetic variation or non-genetic factors such as environmental
exposures have a greater impact on susceptibility to anti-dsDNA - SLE.

PMCID: PMC3048371
PMID: 21408207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nat Genet. 2011 Mar 13;43(4):329-32. doi: 10.1038/ng.789.

Genome-wide association study identifies 12 new susceptibility loci for primary
biliary cirrhosis.

Mells GF(1), Floyd JA, Morley KI, Cordell HJ, Franklin CS, Shin SY, Heneghan MA, 
Neuberger JM, Donaldson PT, Day DB, Ducker SJ, Muriithi AW, Wheater EF, Hammond
CJ, Dawwas MF; UK PBC Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 3, Jones
DE, Peltonen L, Alexander GJ, Sandford RN, Anderson CA.

Collaborators: Alexander G, Cordell H, Donaldson P, Heneghan M, Jones D, Mells G,
Neuberger J, Thain C, Sandford R, Thornton J, Mann S, Marley R, Ramage J, Harvey 
R, Tibble J, Mells G, Dawwas M, Alexander G, Gooding I, Ede R, Austin A, McIntyre
P, Neal D, Ala A, Levi S, Ngatchu T, Dickinson R, Shidrawi R, Brown A, Khakoo S, 
Williams S, Williams M, Chilton A, Westbrook R, Heneghan M, Rodrigues C,
Richardson P, Sen S, Bird G, Smith-Laing G, MacFaul G, Mengelkoch B, Kennedy H,
Shmueli U, Ryder S, Ninkovic M, Burroughs A, Nasr I, Curtis H, McNair A, Wright
M, Bray G, Lean S, Pitcher M, Preston D, Douds A, Wong VS, Mandal A, Pereira S,
Gordon F, Grant A, Whalley S, Li A, Sawyerr A, Healy C, Kapur K, Shorrock CJ,
Southern P, Jones S, Mitchison H, Macklon T, Grimley C, Saeed A, Ridpath J,
Abouda G, Drake IM, Davies M, Milson C, Evans C, Saha S, Church, Bramley P,
Fraser A, Mills P, Shallcross T, Crofton R, Bathgate A, McDonald C, Metcalf J,
Welfare M, Hoeroldt B, Babu S, Gleeson D, Douglas A, Panter S, Jones D, Higham A,
Turnbull A, Ch'ng CL, Yapp T, Sturgess R, Czajkowski M, MacDougall N, Gorard D,
Palegwala A, Aspinall R, Dolwani S, Prince M, Karmo M, Patel M, Sayer J, Hovell
C, Fisher N, Koss K, Wood G, Brown J, Ransford R, Rees I, Salam I, Yoong K,
Mathew R, Sheen C, Przemioslo R, Mathialahan T, Ramanaden D, Evans R, Gasem,
Davis A, Collier J, Chapman R, Cramp M, Lipscomb G, Williams E, Hussanini H,
Ayres R, Lombard M, Robertson D, Farrant M, Tanner A, Singhal S, Butterworth J,
George K, Shearman J, Butcher G, Mclindon J, Das D, Brookes M, Neuberger J, Brind
A, Watts G, Unitt E, Cox M, Bell A, Gordon H, Singhal A, Gee I, Ang Y, Gotto J,
Blackburn H, Edkins S, Gillman M, Gray E, Hunt SE, Langford C, Potter S, Simpkin 
D, Whittaker P, Anderson CA, Barrett JC, Floyd JA, Franklin CS, McGinnis R,
Soranzo N, Zeggini E, Sambrook J, Stephens J, Ouwehand WH, McArdle WL, Ring SM,
Strachan DP, Alexander G, Barrett JC, Bulik CM, Collier D, Conlon PJ, Dominiczak 
A, Duncanson A, Hill A, Langford C, Lord G, Maxwell AP, Morgan L, Sandford RN,
Sheerin N, Soranzo N, Vannberg FO, Peltonen L.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Nov;43(11):1164. Richardson,Paul [added]; Nasr, Ikram [added];
Aspinall,Richard [added].

In addition to the HLA locus, six genetic risk factors for primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) have been identified in recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS). To identify additional loci, we carried out a GWAS using 1,840 cases from
the UK PBC Consortium and 5,163 UK population controls as part of the Wellcome
Trust Case Control Consortium 3 (WTCCC3). We followed up 28 loci in an additional
UK cohort of 620 PBC cases and 2,514 population controls. We identified 12 new
susceptibility loci (at a genome-wide significance level of P < 5 × 10<U+207B>8) and
replicated all previously associated loci. We identified three further new loci
in a meta-analysis of data from our study and previously published GWAS results. 
New candidate genes include STAT4, DENND1B, CD80, IL7R, CXCR5, TNFRSF1A, CLEC16A 
and NFKB1. This study has considerably expanded our knowledge of the genetic
architecture of PBC.

PMCID: PMC3071550
PMID: 21399635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Jun;70(6):1025-32. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.144634. Epub 2011
Mar 11.

Rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility genes associate with lipid levels in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis.

Toms TE(1), Panoulas VF, Smith JP, Douglas KM, Metsios GS,
Stavropoulos-Kalinoglou A, Kitas GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Dudley Group of Hospitals NHS Trust, Russells Hall
Hospital, Dudley, West Midlands DY1 2HQ, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a systemic inflammatory disease with
complex genetic aetiology, associates with excess cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality. Dyslipidaemia, a major cardiovascular risk factor has been reported to
predate the onset of RA, thus suggesting a potential genetic link between the two
conditions. The authors assessed whether RA susceptibility genes associate with
the presence of dyslipidaemia in RA patients.
METHODS: 400 well-characterised RA patients were included in this cross-sectional
study. Fasting lipid profile (total cholesterol, high-density lipoproteins (HDL),
low-density lipoproteins (LDL), triglycerides, apolipoproteins (ApoA and ApoB)
and lipoprotein (a)) and four RA susceptibility genes (PTPN22, TRAF1/C5, STAT4
and human leucocyte antigen shared epitope (HLA-SE)) were assessed and
associations were sought in both univariate and multivariate analyses.
RESULTS: Following adjustment for age, sex and erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
the G allele of TRAF1/C5 associated with lower total cholesterol (p=0.010), LDL
(p=0.022) and ApoB (p=0.014); one or more copies of the shared epitope associated
with lower ApoA (p=0.035) and higher ApoB:ApoA ratio (p=0.047); while STAT4 TT
homozygotes had higher lipoprotein (a) (p=0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: RA susceptibility genes (TRAF1/C5, STAT4 and HLA-DRB1-SE) may be
involved in the regulation of lipid metabolism in RA patients, thus contributing 
to cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk and adverse outcome. If these findings are
replicated, such genotyping could be used to identify and target for prevention
those RA patients most at risk of CVD. It will also be interesting to study the
association of these genes with lipid levels in the general population and
identify mechanisms to explain the link.

PMID: 21398331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS Genet. 2011 Feb;7(2):e1002004. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002004. Epub 2011 
Feb 24.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in celiac disease and rheumatoid
arthritis identifies fourteen non-HLA shared loci.

Zhernakova A(1), Stahl EA, Trynka G, Raychaudhuri S, Festen EA, Franke L, Westra 
HJ, Fehrmann RS, Kurreeman FA, Thomson B, Gupta N, Romanos J, McManus R, Ryan AW,
Turner G, Brouwer E, Posthumus MD, Remmers EF, Tucci F, Toes R, Grandone E,
Mazzilli MC, Rybak A, Cukrowska B, Coenen MJ, Radstake TR, van Riel PL, Li Y, de 
Bakker PI, Gregersen PK, Worthington J, Siminovitch KA, Klareskog L, Huizinga TW,
Wijmenga C, Plenge RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Epidemiology and candidate gene studies indicate a shared genetic basis for
celiac disease (CD) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but the extent of this sharing
has not been systematically explored. Previous studies demonstrate that 6 of the 
established non-HLA CD and RA risk loci (out of 26 loci for each disease) are
shared between both diseases. We hypothesized that there are additional shared
risk alleles and that combining genome-wide association study (GWAS) data from
each disease would increase power to identify these shared risk alleles. We
performed a meta-analysis of two published GWAS on CD (4,533 cases and 10,750
controls) and RA (5,539 cases and 17,231 controls). After genotyping the top
associated SNPs in 2,169 CD cases and 2,255 controls, and 2,845 RA cases and
4,944 controls, 8 additional SNPs demonstrated P<5 × 10(-8) in a combined
analysis of all 50,266 samples, including four SNPs that have not been previously
confirmed in either disease: rs10892279 near the DDX6 gene (P(combined)<U+200A>=<U+200A> 1.2 × 
10(-12)), rs864537 near CD247 (P(combined)<U+200A>=<U+200A> 2.2 × 10(-11)), rs2298428 near
UBE2L3 (P(combined)<U+200A>=<U+200A> 2.5 × 10(-10)), and rs11203203 near UBASH3A
(P(combined)<U+200A>=<U+200A> 1.1 × 10(-8)). We also confirmed that 4 gene loci previously
established in either CD or RA are associated with the other autoimmune disease
at combined P<5 × 10(-8) (SH2B3, 8q24, STAT4, and TRAF1-C5). From the 14 shared
gene loci, 7 SNPs showed a genome-wide significant effect on expression of one or
more transcripts in the linkage disequilibrium (LD) block around the SNP. These
associations implicate antigen presentation and T-cell activation as a shared
mechanism of disease pathogenesis and underscore the utility of cross-disease
meta-analysis for identification of genetic risk factors with pleiotropic effects
between two clinically distinct diseases.

PMCID: PMC3044685
PMID: 21383967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Jun;63(6):1522-6. doi: 10.1002/art.30315.

Examining the overlap between genome-wide rare variant association signals and
linkage peaks in rheumatoid arthritis.

Eyre S(1), Ke X, Lawrence R, Bowes J, Panoutsopoulou K, Barton A, Thomson W,
Worthington J, Zeggini E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: With the exception of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and
STAT4, no other rheumatoid arthritis (RA) linkage peak has been successfully
fine-mapped to date. This apparent failure to identify association under peaks of
linkage could be ascribed to the examination of common variation, when linkage is
likely to be driven by rare variants. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the overlap between genome-wide rare variant RA association signals
observed in the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) study and 11
replicating RA linkage peaks, defined as regions with evidence for linkage in >1 
study.
METHODS: The WTCCC data set contained 40,482 variants with minor allele frequency
of =0.05 in 1,860 RA patients and 2,938 controls. Genotypes of all rare variants 
within a given gene region were collapsed into a single locus and a global P
value was calculated per gene.
RESULTS: The distribution of rare variant signals (association P=10(-5)) was
found to differ significantly between regions with and without linkage evidence
(P=2×10(-17) by Fisher's exact test). No significant difference was observed
after data from the MHC region were removed or when the effect of the HLA-DRB1
locus was accounted for.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that rare variant association signals are
significantly overrepresented under linkage peaks in RA, but the effect is driven
by the MHC. This is the first study to examine the overlap between linkage peaks 
and rare variant association signals genome-wide in a complex disease.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3428937
PMID: 21370227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):800-9. doi: 10.1002/art.30171.

Inactivation of the transcription factor STAT-4 prevents inflammation-driven
fibrosis in animal models of systemic sclerosis.

Avouac J(1), Fürnrohr BG, Tomcik M, Palumbo K, Zerr P, Horn A, Dees C,
Akhmetshina A, Beyer C, Distler O, Schett G, Allanore Y, Distler JH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. javouac@me.com

Comment in
    Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Jul;7(4):445-8.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor STAT-4 has recently been identified as a
genetic susceptibility factor in systemic sclerosis (SSc) and other autoimmune
diseases. The aim of this study was to investigate the contribution of STAT-4 in 
the development of a fibrotic phenotype in 2 different mouse models of
experimental dermal fibrosis.
METHODS: STAT-4-deficient (stat4(-/-) ) mice and their wild-type littermates
(stat4(+/+) ) were injected with bleomycin or NaCl. Infiltrating leukocytes, T
cells, B cells, and monocytes were quantified in the lesional skin of stat4(-/-) 
and stat4(+/+) mice. Inflammatory and profibrotic cytokines were measured in sera
and lesional skin samples from stat4(-/-) and stat4(+/+) mice. The outcome of
mice lacking STAT-4 was also investigated in the tight skin 1 (TSK-1) mouse
model.
RESULTS: Stat4(-/-) mice were protected against bleomycin-induced dermal
fibrosis, with a reduction in dermal thickening (mean ± SEM 65 ± 3% decrease; P =
0.03), hydroxyproline content (68 ± 5% decrease; P = 0.02), and myofibroblast
counts (71 ± 6% decrease; P = 0.005). Moreover, the number of infiltrating
leukocytes, especially T cells, was significantly decreased in the lesional skin 
of stat4(-/-) mice (mean ± SEM 63 ± 5% reduction in T cell count; P = 0.02).
Stat4(-/-) mice also displayed decreased levels of inflammatory cytokines such as
tumor necrosis factor a, interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-2, and interferon-<U+03B3> in lesional
skin. Consistent with a primary role of STAT-4 in inflammation, STAT-4 deficiency
did not ameliorate fibrosis in TSK-1 mice.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study demonstrate that the transcription factor
STAT-4 exerts potent profibrotic effects by controlling T cell activation and
proliferation and cytokine release. These findings confirm the results of
genetics studies on the role of STAT-4 in the development of SSc.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21360510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Mar;70 Suppl 1:i37-43. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.138057.

The genetics of systemic lupus erythematosus and implications for targeted
therapy.

Sestak AL(1), Fürnrohr BG, Harley JB, Merrill JT, Namjou B.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. Andrea-sestak@ouhsc.edu

Observations of familial aggregation (<U+03BB>s=8-29) and a 40% identical twin
concordance rate prompted recent work towards a comprehensive genetic analysis of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Since 2007, the number of genetic effects
known to be associated with human lupus has increased by fivefold, underscoring
the complexity of inheritance that probably contributes to this disease.
Approximately 35 genes associated with lupus have either been replicated in
multiple samples or are near the threshold for genome-wide significance (p > 5 x 
10<U+207B>8). Some are rare variants that convincingly contribute to lupus only in
specific subgroups. Strong associations have been found with a large haplotype
block in the human leucocyte antigen region, with Fc<U+03B3> receptors, and with genes
coding for complement components, in which a single gene deletion may cause SLE
in rare familial cases and copy number variation is more common in the larger
population of SLE patients. Examples of newly discovered genes include ITGAM,
STAT4 and MECP2/IRAK1. Ongoing studies to build models in which combinations of
associated genes might contribute to specific disease manifestations should
contribute to improved understanding of disease pathology. In addition,
pharmacogenomic components of ongoing clinical trials are likely to provide
insights into fundamental disease pathology as well as contributing to informed
patient selection for targeted treatments and biomarkers to guide dosing and
gauge responsiveness. Besides these potentially valuable new insights into the
pathophysiology of an enigmatic, potentially deadly, and, as yet, unsolved
disease, genetic studies are likely to suggest novel molecular targets for
strategic development of safer and more effective therapeutics.

PMID: 21339217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011 Jan-Feb;29(1):72-9. Epub 2011 Feb 23.

Identification and quantification of selected inflammatory genes modulated by
leflunomide and prednisone treatment in early rheumatoid arthritis patients.

Cutolo M(1), Villaggio B, Brizzolara R, Montagna P, Gallo F, Moretti S, Bonassi
S, Sulli A, Soldano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
mcutolo@unige.it

OBJECTIVES: The present study evaluates the effects of combined leflunomide (LEF)
and low dose of prednisone therapy, on selected inflammatory gene expression in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of early rheumatoid arthritis (ERA)
patients by gene microarray analysis and quantitative real time-polymerase chain 
reaction (qRT-PCR).
METHODS: Ten ERA patients (mean age 53 ± 10 years) were assigned as untreated
(group 1) or pre-treated (group 2) with prednisone (5 mg/day for 3 months) after 
informed consent and ethics committee approval. Five sex- and age-matched healthy
subjects were used as controls (CNT). RNA was extracted by PBMCs, amplified,
labelled and hybridised on inflammation DualChip microarray. The expression ratio
of 282 inflammatory genes between CNT and ERA patients, before (T0) and after 12 
weeks (T1) of combined therapy was detected. qRT-PCR was performed on 7 selected 
inflammatory RA-related genes (STAT4, MAPK9, HIF1A, MIF, STAT6, NFKB1, TNFRSF1B).
RESULTS: At T0, microarray analysis showed 34 altered genes in both ERA groups
when compared to CNT (vs. CNT). Seven RA-related genes, investigated in further
details, were found up-regulated in group 1 and down-regulated or unchanged in
group 2 vs. CNT. At T1, combined therapy induced the down-regulation of these
genes in both groups vs. CNT as also confirmed by qRT-PCR performed on selected
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Untreated ERA patients seem characterised by up-regulation of
specific genes involved both in the resistance/inhibition to apoptosis and in the
stimulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine production by immune inflammatory cells.
Combined LEF and low dose of prednisone therapy seems to play synergistic effects
on down-regulation of these genes.

PMID: 21345295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Endocrinol. 2011 May;209(2):175-84. doi: 10.1530/JOE-11-0033. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

STAT genes display differential evolutionary rates that correlate with their
roles in the endocrine and immune system.

Gorissen M(1), de Vrieze E, Flik G, Huising MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Animal Physiology, Faculty of Science, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.gorissen@science.ru.nl

We identified orthologues of all mammalian Janus kinase (JAK) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) genes in teleostean fishes,
indicating that these protein families were already largely complete before the
teleost tetrapod split, 450 million years ago. In mammals, the STAT repertoire
consists of seven genes (STAT1, -2, -3, -4, -5a, -5b, and -6). Our phylogenetic
analyses show that STAT proteins that are recruited downstream of endocrine
hormones (STAT3 and STAT5a and -5b) show a markedly higher primary sequence
conservation compared with STATs that convey immune signals (STAT1-2, STAT4, and 
STAT6). A similar dichotomy in evolutionary conservation is observed for the JAK 
family of protein kinases, which activate STATs. The ligands to activate the
JAK/STAT-signalling pathway include hormones and cytokines such as GH, prolactin,
interleukin 6 (IL6) and IL12. In this paper, we examine the evolutionary forces
that have acted on JAK/STAT signalling in the endocrine and immune systems and
discuss the reasons why the JAK/STAT cascade that conveys classical immune
signals has diverged much faster compared with endocrine JAK/STAT paralogues.

PMID: 21330334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Gut Microbes. 2010 Sep;1(5):316-324. Epub 2010 May 12.

Enteric pathogens and gut function: Role of cytokines and STATs.

Shea-Donohue T(1), Fasano A, Smith A, Zhao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine; University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD USA.

The gut harbors the largest immune system in the body. The mucosa is considered
to be the initial site of interaction with commensal and pathogenic organisms;
therefore, it is the first line of defense against the pathogens. In response to 
the invasion of various pathogens, naïve CD4(+) cells differentiate into subsets 
of T helper (Th) cells that are characterized by different cytokine profiles.
Cytokines bind to cell surface receptors on both immune and non-immune cells
leading to activation of JAK-STAT signaling pathway and influence gut function by
upregulating the expression of specific target genes. This review considers the
roles of cytokines and receptor-mediated activation of STATs on pathogen-induced 
changes in gut function. The focus on STAT4 and STAT6 is because of their
requirement for the full development of Th1 and Th2 cytokine profiles.

PMCID: PMC3023616
PMID: 21327040  [PubMed]


421. Cell Res. 2011 Jun;21(6):944-56. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.27. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Cisplatin ototoxicity involves cytokines and STAT6 signaling network.

Kim HJ(1), Oh GS, Lee JH, Lyu AR, Ji HM, Lee SH, Song J, Park SJ, You YO, Sul JD,
Park C, Chung SY, Moon SK, Lim DJ, So HS, Park R.

Author information: 
(1)Vestibulocochlear Research Center & Department of Microbiology, Wonkwang
University, Iksan, Jeonbuk 570-749, Korea.

We herein investigated the role of the STAT signaling cascade in the production
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and cisplatin ototoxicity. A significant hearing
impairment caused by cisplatin injection was observed in Balb/c (wild type, WT)
and STAT4(-/-), but not in STAT6(-/-) mice. Moreover, the expression levels of
the protein and mRNA of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-a, IL-1ß, and
IL-6, were markedly increased in the serum and cochlea of WT and STAT4(-/-), but 
not STAT6(-/-) mice. Organotypic culture revealed that the shape of stereocilia
bundles and arrays of sensory hair cell layers in the organ of Corti from
STAT6(-/-) mice were intact after treatment with cisplatin, whereas those from WT
and STAT4(-/-) mice were highly distorted and disarrayed after the treatment.
Cisplatin induced the phosphorylation of STAT6 in HEI-OC1 auditory cells, and the
knockdown of STAT6 by STAT6-specific siRNA significantly protected HEI-OC1
auditory cells from cisplatin-induced cell death and inhibited pro-inflammatory
cytokine production. We further demonstrated that IL-4 and IL-13 induced by
cisplatin modulated the phosphorylation of STAT6 by binding with IL-4 receptor
alpha and IL-13Ra1. These findings suggest that STAT6 signaling plays a pivotal
role in cisplatin-mediated pro-inflammatory cytokine production and ototoxicity.

PMCID: PMC3203698
PMID: 21321603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 15;71(4):1263-71. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2907. Epub
2011 Feb 8.

Clinical impact of different classes of infiltrating T cytotoxic and helper cells
(Th1, th2, treg, th17) in patients with colorectal cancer.

Tosolini M(1), Kirilovsky A, Mlecnik B, Fredriksen T, Mauger S, Bindea G, Berger 
A, Bruneval P, Fridman WH, Pagès F, Galon J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Integrative Cancer Immunology Team, INSERM U872, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4732.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Apr;11(4):232.

The tumor microenvironment includes a complex network of immune T-cell
subpopulations. In this study, we systematically analyzed the balance between
cytotoxic T cells and different subsets of helper T cells in human colorectal
cancers and we correlated their impact on disease-free survival. A panel of
immune related genes were analyzed in 125 frozen colorectal tumor specimens.
Infiltrating cytotoxic T cells, Treg, Th1, and Th17 cells were also quantified in
the center and the invasive margin of the tumors. By hierarchical clustering of a
correlation matrix we identified functional clusters of genes associated with
Th17 (RORC, IL17A), Th2 (IL4, IL5, IL13), Th1 (Tbet, IRF1, IL12Rb2, STAT4), and
cytotoxicity (GNLY, GZMB, PRF1). Patients with high expression of the Th17
cluster had a poor prognosis, whereas patients with high expression of the Th1
cluster had prolonged disease-free survival. In contrast, none of the Th2
clusters were predictive of prognosis. Combined analysis of cytotoxic/Th1 and
Th17 clusters improved the ability to discriminate relapse. In situ analysis of
the density of IL17+ cells and CD8+ cells in tumor tissues confirmed the results.
Our findings argue that functional Th1 and Th17 clusters yield opposite effects
on patient survival in colorectal cancer, and they provide complementary
information that may improve prognosis.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21303976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011 Jul;50(7):1201-5. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keq439.
Epub 2011 Jan 27.

Copy number variations of Interleukin-12B and T-bet are associated with systemic 
lupus erythematosus.

Yu B(1), Shao Y, Yue X, Zhang J, Guan M, Wan J, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Translational Medicine of Dermatology,
Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Department of Dermatology, Shenzhen Hospital
Peking University, Biomedical Research Institute, Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical
Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong.

OBJECTIVES: Th1 cells have been implicated as the causal agents in the
pathogenesis of autoimmunity. SLE represents the classical prototype of systemic 
autoimmune disease. Copy number variations (CNVs) have been discovered to have
phenotypic consequences and associate with various types of diseases. The current
study aims to explore a possible association between CNVs of Th1 cell-related
genes and the risk of SLE.
METHODS: Genomic DNA and RNA from 532 SLE patients and 576 healthy controls were 
extracted. CNVs of Th1 cell-related genes (T-bet, Stat4, IL-12A, IL-12B, IFN-<U+03B3>,
IP-10 and CXCR3) as well as Th2 and Treg cell-related genes (c-Mef, GATA3, Foxp3,
IL-6 and TGF-ß) were examined, and mRNA levels of IL-12B and T-bet were examined.
RESULTS: Frequencies of IL-12B and T-bet CNVs in SLE patients were significantly 
higher than those in healthy controls. CNVs of IL-12B and T-bet had no
synergistic contribution to SLE. The mRNA levels of IL-12B and T-bet in the
samples with more than two copies of DNA were significantly higher than those
with two copies of DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs of IL-12B and T-bet are associated with the risk of SLE.

PMID: 21278068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Jul;31(1):10-21. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.01.015.
Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Activation of cytokine expression occurs through the TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway 
in birnavirus-infected cells.

Wang WL(1), Liu W, Gong HY, Hong JR, Lin CC, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang 115,
Taipei, Taiwan.

The infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) belongs to the Birnaviridae
family of viruses and causes acute contagious diseases in a number of
economically important freshwater and marine fish. In this study, we infected
zebrafish embryonic cells (ZF4) with IPNV and analyzed the gene expression
patterns of normal and infected cells using quantitative real-time PCR. We
identified a number of immune response genes, including ifna, ifng, mx, irf1,
irf2, irf4, tnfa, tnfb, il-1b, il-15, il-26, ccl4 and mmp family genes, that are 
induced after viral infection. Transcriptional regulators, including cebpb, junb,
nfkb and stat1, stat4 and stat5, were also upregulated in IPNV-infected cells. In
addition, we used Pathway Studio software to identify TNFa as having the greatest
downstream influence among these altered genes. Treating virus-infected cells
with an siRNA targeting TNFa inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B expression. To further interrupt the
TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway, the expression levels of cytokines and
metalloproteinases were inhibited in IPNV-infected cells. These data suggest
that, during IPNV infection, the expression of cytokines and metalloproteinases
might be initiated through the TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway. The modulation of
TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-related mechanisms may provide a therapeutic strategy for inhibiting
viral infection in teleosts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21272652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Jan;31(1):73-6.

[Molecular mechanism of interleukin-13-induced mucus hypersecretion in rat
airway].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang DP(1), Kolosov VP, Perelman JM, Zhou XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400010, China. gdp116@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of interleukin-13 (IL-13) on mucus secretion
in vivo and the possible mechanism.
METHODS: The SD rats were randomly divided into control group, IL-13 group and
IL-13 plus SP600125 group. The phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1/2 (JNK1/2) and the level of MUC5AC
in the lung tissues were examined using Western blotting. RT-PCR was performed to
examine the mRNA level of STAT4 and STAT6, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA) was used to detect the DNA-binding activities of Forkhead box a2
(FOXA2) and activator protein-1 (AP-1).
RESULTS: IL-13 caused a significant increase in MUC5AC and p-JNK1/2 expression,
but did not affect the phosphorylation of ERK1/2. The expression of MUC5AC was
attenuated after treatment with SP600125. A significant increase in STAT6 was
observed in IL-13 group compared with that in the control group, whereas the
expression of STAT4 mRNA was not significantly affected. The DNA-binding activity
of FOXA2 was down-regulated after IL-13 exposure, which did not affect the
DNA-binding activity of AP-1.
CONCLUSION: IL-13 down-regulates mucus secretion via STAT6-FOXA2 pathway in
vitro.

PMID: 21269961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Rheumatol Int. 2012 May;32(5):1251-5. doi: 10.1007/s00296-010-1767-9. Epub 2011
Jan 22.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism of the STAT4 gene is associated with systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) in female Chinese population.

Luan H(1), Li P, Cao C, Li C, Hu C, Zhang S, Zeng X, Zhang F, Zeng C, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, and Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a prototypic autoimmune disease with
complex genetic inheritance. Genetic association of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) with SLE susceptibility has been
convincingly established in multiple populations including Asians, whereas
studies of genetic relations between STAT4 polymorphisms and subphenotypes of SLE
were rarely conducted. In this study, we selected Chinese female population and
investigated genetic association between a polymorphism of STAT4 gene (rs7582694)
and SLE. Furthermore, genetic association tests based on different subsets
classified by 11 clinical manifestations were also performed. A total of 675 SLE 
female patients and 678 healthy controls were enrolled into this study, and SNP
genotyping was performed using Sequenom's MassArray system (Sequenom iPLEX
assay). Our study showed strong evidence for genetic predisposition of rs7582694 
to SLE (X ( 2 ) = 23.7, OR = 0.68, 95% CI: 0.58-0.79, P = 1.13 × 10(-6)), while
no association was observed between rs7582694 and any clinical presentations. The
results of our study demonstrated that STAT4 rs7582694 SNP was significantly
associated with SLE, and these results were in accordance with previous studies.

PMID: 21258797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Transpl Immunol. 2011 May;24(4):216-9. doi: 10.1016/j.trim.2011.01.001. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

Polymorphisms in STAT4 increase the risk of acute renal allograft rejection in
the Chinese population.

Yang H(1), Zhou Q, Chen ZM, Chen WQ, Wang MM, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Disease Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, China.

Recently, the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene
have been associated with multiple autoimmune diseases. Taking into consideration
that the different autoimmune diseases may share some common pathogenetic
pathways, the aim of the present study was to evaluate the role of STAT4
rs7574865 polymorphism on acute allograft rejection. The present case-control
study included 453 renal allograft recipients and 378 sex matched healthy
controls. Genotyping was performed using a PCR based discrimination assay for the
rs7574865 STAT4 SNP. No evidence of association was found between health controls
and renal transplant recipients for the G/T or T/T genotype and wild type G/G.
(p=0.431, two-tailed <U+03C7>(2); OR=0.894, 95% CI=0.677-1.181). But among the
transplant recipients, the G/T or T/T genotype was more common in transplant
rejectors (acute allograft rejection) than nonrejectors who had mostly wild-type 
G/G genotype (p=0.003, two-tailed <U+03C7>(2); OR=0.542, 95% CI=0.361-0.815). We also
found a trend that the frequency of G/T or T/T genotype was also relatively more 
in the acute cellular mediated rejection than antibody mediated ones (p=0.049,
two-tailed <U+03C7>(2); OR=0.466, 95% CI=0.216-1.003). Thus, our data suggest that the
rs7574865 STAT4 SNP is a genetic susceptibility variant for acute renal allograft
rejection in the Chinese population.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21237270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Int J Radiat Biol. 2011 May;87(5):534-43. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2011.542540. Epub
2011 Jan 10.

Chronic effects of single and fractionated <U+03B3>-irradiation on an impairment of
Th1-related immune response.

Park HR(1), Jo SK, Eom HS.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Research Division for Biotechnology, Advanced Radiation Technology
Institute, Jeongeup Campus of Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 1266
Sinjeong-dong, Jeonbuk, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: We already reported that levels of interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> have been shown to
be markedly reduced in mice seven weeks after irradiation, resulting in a T
helper (Th) 1/Th2 imbalance. To investigate whether the single or fractionated
<U+03B3>-irradiation induced an immune imbalance, we analysed the Th1-related immune
response profile until six months after the fractionated whole-body irradiation.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Mice were exposed to <U+03B3>-rays at a fractionated 5<U+2009>Gy
cumulative dose for five weeks. At two, four and six months later from the first 
exposure, experiments were performed. Cell populations in the spleen, the
production of IFN-<U+03B3>, interleukin (IL)- 4 and IL-12p70, natural killer (NK) cell
activity and the expression of IL-12 receptors, signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) 4 and suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) 3 were
detected.
RESULTS: The IFN-<U+03B3> was lower in the mice exposed by all irradiation conditions
than in normal control mice, but the IL-4 had increased in all the irradiated
mice. To investigate Th1 profile, NK cell activity, IL-12p70 level and its
receptor expression was confirmed. In all fractionated irradiation groups, the NK
cell activity as well as the absolute numbers of NK cells was much decreased.
Also, all the irradiated mice showed a lower IL-12p70 level. However, the
expression of IL-12 receptor ß2 was lower in the irradiated mice except the
0.2<U+2009>Gy<U+200A>×<U+200A>10 mice group. The phosphoylated STAT4 was lower in all the irradiated
mice. This suppression was associated with an overexpression of SOCS3.
CONCLUSIONS: The fractionated whole-body irradiations of a dose of 5<U+2009>Gy appear to
be the down-regulation of the Th1-like immune response. These changes, in turn,
maintain an immunological imbalance that persists in the long term.

PMID: 21219110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Respir Res. 2011 Jan 4;12:2. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-2.

Attenuated expression of tenascin-C in ovalbumin-challenged STAT4-/- mice.

Meuronen A(1), Karisola P, Leino M, Savinko T, Sirola K, Majuri ML, Piirilä P,
Virtanen I, Mäkelä M, Laitinen A, Laitinen LA, Alenius H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Anatomy, University of Helsinki, Biomedicum,
Helsinki, Finland. anna.meuronen@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Asthma leads to structural changes in the airways, including the
modification of extracellular matrix proteins such as tenascin-C. The role of
tenascin-C is unclear, but it might act as an early initiator of airway wall
remodelling, as its expression is increased in the mouse and human airways during
allergic inflammation. In this study, we examined whether Th1 or Th2 cells are
important regulators of tenascin-C in experimental allergic asthma utilizing mice
with impaired Th1 (STAT4-/-) or Th2 (STAT6-/-) immunity.
METHODS: Balb/c wildtype (WT), STAT4-/- and STAT6-/- mice were sensitized with
intraperitoneally injected ovalbumin (OVA) followed by OVA or PBS airway
challenge. Airway hyperreactivity (AHR) was measured and samples were collected. 
Real time PCR and immunohistochemistry were used to study cytokines and
differences in the expression of tenascin-C. Tenascin-C expression was measured
in human fibroblasts after treatment with TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3> in vitro.
RESULTS: OVA-challenged WT mice showed allergic inflammation and AHR in the
airways along with increased expression of TNF-a, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and tenascin-C in
the lungs. OVA-challenged STAT4-/- mice exhibited elevated AHR and pulmonary
eosinophilia. The mRNA expression of TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3> was low, but the expression 
of IL-4 was significantly elevated in these mice. OVA-challenged STAT6-/- mice
had neither AHR nor pulmonary eosinophilia, but had increased expression of mRNA 
for TNF-a, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4. The expression of tenascin-C in the lungs of
OVA-challenged STAT4-/- mice was weaker than in those of OVA-challenged WT and
STAT6-/- mice suggesting that TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3> may regulate tenascin-C expression 
in vivo. The stimulation of human fibroblasts with TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3> induced the
expression of tenascin-C confirming our in vivo findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of tenascin-C is significantly attenuated in the airways 
of STAT4-/- mice, which may be due to the impaired secretion of TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>
in these mice.

PMCID: PMC3024219
PMID: 21205293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Jun;164(6):1271-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10198.x.
Epub 2011 May 11.

Impaired IFN-a secretion by plasmacytoid dendritic cells induced by TLR9
activation in chronic idiopathic urticaria.

Futata E(1), Azor M, Dos Santos J, Maruta C, Sotto M, Guedes F, Rivitti E, Duarte
A, Sato M.

Author information: 
(1)University of São Paulo, Department of Dermatology, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the early events of the immune response, through the
activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) by Toll-like receptor
(TLR)9-sensing, could contribute to the evaluation of immune dysregulation in
chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU).
OBJECTIVES: We decided to investigate innate immunity in CIU and the mechanisms
implicated in the modulation of interferon (IFN)-a production by pDC upon TLR9
activation.
METHODS: Patients with CIU (n = 31) and healthy control subjects (HC, n = 36)
were enrolled in the study. Leucocytes cultured with the TLR9 ligand, CpG type A,
or with inhibitory-oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) were used to determine IFN-a
secretion by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Enumeration of pDC, intracellular
IFN-a and signal transducers and activators of transcription protein (STAT) (1
and 4) phosphorylation were assessed by flow cytometry. TLR9 and regulatory
factor-7 mRNA transcripts were evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction. 
Evidence of pDC in the skin lesions of patients was analysed with
immunohistochemistry staining.
RESULTS: The findings show a decreased IFN-a secretion induced by CpG A by
leucocytes, due to the diminished IFN-a expression on pDC in CIU. It was mediated
by TLR9-activation since inhibitory-ODN further suppressed TLR9-induced IFN-a
secretion. A normal pDC percentage and degree of activation by the expression of 
costimulatory molecules was observed in CIU, with the rare presence of pDC in the
skin lesion. In addition, an increased constitutive STAT1 phosphorylation on
nonstimulated lymphocytes and a downregulation of TLR9 mRNA transcripts after CpG
A activation were verified in patients with CIU.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings showed an innate immune response in CIU disturbed by
impairment of the pDC response to TLR9 activation.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 21198536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;30(9):922-7.

[Influence of Shengxue mixture on the expression of T-bet/GATA-3, their relevant 
signal transduction molecules, cytokines, and Th1/Th2 balance in patients with
chronic aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YM, Hu MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing.

OBJECTIVE: To study the actions of transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, and
their relevant signal transduction pathways on the immune-related pathogenesis
with chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), and to investigate the immunological
regulation mechanism of Shengxue Mixture (SXM) in regulating levels of Th cell
imbalance, transcriptional factor and relevant signal pathways.
METHODS: All CAA patients selected from Yueyang Hospital of Shanghai University
of traditional Chinese medicine were equally randomized into the treated group
and the control group, 20 patients in each group, and 20 healthy persons were
selected as normal group, the former was treated with SXM according to patients' 
syndrome patterns, namely, SXM-1 was given to patients of Pi-Shen yang-deficiency
pattern, and SXM-2 to those of Pi-Shen yin-deficiency pattern. Patients in the
control group were treated with cyclosporin A (CsA). The mRNA expressions of
T-bet, GATA-3, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) and 6
(STAT6) in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMNC) of patients were determined 
using real-time fluorescent quantitation polymerase chain reaction before and
after treatment, meantime, the Th1/Th2 proportion in peripheral blood, and levels
of IFN-gamma, IL-12 and IL-4 in PBMNC-cultured supernatant were detected by flow 
cytometry and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The mRNA expressions of PBMNC T-bet and STAT4, ratios of T-bet/GATA-3,
Th1 proportion and Th1/Th2 ratio, levels of IFN-gamma and IL-12 in PBMNC-cultured
supernatant were all significantly higher in CAA patients than in healthy
controls (P < 0.01), which were lowered after treatment but didn't reach the
normal range (all P < 0.01), excepting for IL-12 level. Comparisons of the
changes between the two treated groups showed insignificant difference (P >
0.05). While the difference between patients and healthy persons in terms of
GATA-3, STAT6, Th2 proportion, and IL-4 were insignificant (P > 0.05), either
before or after treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal activation of IFN-gamma/T-bet and IL-12/ STAT4 pathways, as
well as Th1/Th2 balance deviating to Th1 excursion play vital roles in the
immunological pathogenesis of CAA. SXM and CsA could lower the aforesaid abnormal
activation and correct Th1 hyper-polarization, so as to alleviate the
over-activated cell-mediated immunity to eliminate hematopoietic depression in
CAA patients.

PMID: 21179729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Apr;19(4):479-84. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.197. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

A candidate gene study of the type I interferon pathway implicates IKBKE and IL8 
as risk loci for SLE.

Sandling JK(1), Garnier S, Sigurdsson S, Wang C, Nordmark G, Gunnarsson I,
Svenungsson E, Padyukov L, Sturfelt G, Jönsen A, Bengtsson AA, Truedsson L,
Eriksson C, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Mälarstig A, Strawbridge RJ, Hamsten A,
Criswell LA, Graham RR, Behrens TW, Eloranta ML, Alm G, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease in which the 
type I interferon pathway has a crucial role. We have previously shown that three
genes in this pathway, IRF5, TYK2 and STAT4, are strongly associated with risk
for SLE. Here, we investigated 78 genes involved in the type I interferon pathway
to identify additional SLE susceptibility loci. First, we genotyped 896
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in these 78 genes and 14 other candidate genes in
482 Swedish SLE patients and 536 controls. Genes with P<0.01 in the initial
screen were then followed up in 344 additional Swedish patients and 1299
controls. SNPs in the IKBKE, TANK, STAT1, IL8 and TRAF6 genes gave nominal
signals of association with SLE in this extended Swedish cohort. To replicate
these findings we extracted data from a genomewide association study on SLE
performed in a US cohort. Combined analysis of the Swedish and US data,
comprising a total of 2136 cases and 9694 controls, implicates IKBKE and IL8 as
SLE susceptibility loci (P(meta)=0.00010 and P(meta)=0.00040, respectively).
STAT1 was also associated with SLE in this cohort (P(meta)=3.3 × 10<U+207B>5), but this 
association signal appears to be dependent of that previously reported for the
neighbouring STAT4 gene. Our study suggests additional genes from the type I
interferon system in SLE, and highlights genes in this pathway for further
functional analysis.

PMCID: PMC3060320
PMID: 21179067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Hum Immunol. 2011 Mar;72(3):249-55. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.12.011. Epub 2010 
Dec 15.

Association of genetic variations in the STAT4 and IRF7/KIAA1542 regions with
systemic lupus erythematosus in a Northern Han Chinese population.

Li P(1), Cao C, Luan H, Li C, Hu C, Zhang S, Zeng X, Zhang F, Zeng C, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.

Erratum in
    Hum Immunol. 2013 Sep;74(9):1237.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a prototypic autoimmune disease with
complex genetic inheritance. Genome-wide association studies have identified SLE 
susceptibility variations at the IRF7/KIAA1542 locus and with STAT4 gene in
European populations. We decided to investigate the association of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IRF7/KIAA1542 region (rs4963128,
rs2246614, and rs702966) and in STAT4 (rs7574865 and rs7582694) with SLE disease 
in a Northern Han Chinese population of 748 patients and 750 healthy controls.
Our study indicated a strong association between rs7574865 (odds ratio = 0.68;
95% confidence interval 0.59-0.79; p = 1.57 × 10(-6)) and SLE and between
rs7574865 and the production of anti-Sm antibodies. Additionally, rs4963128 and
rs2246614 were correlated with a variety of clinical subphenotypes, such as lupus
nephritis, arthritis, and the production of anti-SSA/B autoantibodies, despite a 
lack of significant association between these two SNPs and SLE disease
susceptibility in general.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Nov;123(22):3173-7.

Variation in STAT4 is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in Chinese
Northern Han population.

Su Y(1), Zhao Y, Liu X, Guo JP, Jiang Q, Liu XY, Zhang FC, Zheng Y, Li XX, Song
H, Huang CB, Huang YH, Wang T, Pan SS, Li C, Liu X, Zhu L, Zhang CF, Li ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology & Immunology/Clinical Immunology Center, Peking
University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have identified signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) as a susceptibility gene for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in different populations. In order to examine whether the allele
distribution of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in gene STAT4 rs7574865 
in patients with SLE is different from those of healthy controls in Chinese
Northern Han population, we investigated whether the variants of STAT4 rs7574865 
were associated with any specific clinical features of SLE.
METHODS: We genotyped SNPs in STAT4 rs7574865 in 252 patients with SLE and 497
healthy controls. All subjects were from the Northern part of Chinese Han
population. The genotypes in rs7574865 were determined by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and consequence direct sequencing of PCR products in the DNA
samples.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in distribution of the SNPs in
rs7574865 between the SLE patients and healthy controls. Compared with healthy
controls, there was a significant correlation between TT genotypes in rs7574865
and the risk of SLE when GG genotype was used as a reference genotype after
adjusting for gender and age. The frequency of T allele in the SLE patients was
strongly significantly higher than that of healthy controls. Furthermore, there
was a significant difference in the distribution of SNP in rs7574865 between male
and female SLE patients, when compared with healthy controls. The frequency of T 
allele in rs7574865 in male patients was significantly higher than that of male
healthy controls or female patients. There was no significant correlation between
the frequencies of T allele in STAT4 rs7574865 and the clinical features of SLE.
CONCLUSIONS: The SNP rs7574865 in STAT4 is strongly associated with risk of SLE
in the Chinese Northern Han population. The TT genotype and T allele in STAT4
rs7574869 are susceptibility factors for SLE, especially for male SLE patients.

PMID: 21163111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Apr;70(4):668-74. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.131243. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

NLRP1 influences the systemic sclerosis phenotype: a new clue for the
contribution of innate immunity in systemic sclerosis-related fibrosing
alveolitis pathogenesis.

Dieudé P(1), Guedj M, Wipff J, Ruiz B, Riemekasten G, Airo P, Melchers I,
Hachulla E, Cerinic MM, Diot E, Hunzelmann N, Caramaschi P, Sibilia J, Tiev K,
Mouthon L, Riccieri V, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, Distler J, Amoura Z, Tarner
I, Avouac J, Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, Paris Diderot University, INSERM U699, Hôpital Bichat
Claude Bernard, 46 rue Henri Huchard, 75018 Paris, France.
philippe.dieude@bch.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence has highlighted a potential role of interleukin 1ß
(IL-1ß) in systemic sclerosis (SSc). NLRP1 provides a scaffold for the assembly
of the inflammasome that promotes the processing and maturation of pro-IL-1ß. In 
addition, NLRP1 variants were found to confer susceptibility to autoimmune
disorders.
OBJECTIVE: /st> To study a possible association of the NLRP1 rs6502867, rs2670660
and rs8182352, rs12150220 and rs4790797 with SSc in the European Caucasian
population.
METHODS: NLRP1 single nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in 3227 individuals
comprising a discovery set (870 SSc patients and 962 controls) and a replication 
set including individuals from Germany (532 SSc patients and 324 controls) and
Italy (527 SSc patients and 301 controls), all individuals being of European
Caucasian origin.
RESULTS: Conditional analyses revealed a significant association for the NLRP1
rs8182352 variant with both anti-topoisomerase-positive and SSc-related fibrosing
alveolitis (FA) subsets under an additive model: p=0.0042, OR 1.23 (95% CI 1.07
to 1.41) and p=0.0065 OR 1.19 (95% CI 1.05 to 1.36), respectively. Logistic
regression analysis showed an additive effect of IRF5 rs2004640, STAT4 rs7574865 
and NLRP1 rs8182352 risk alleles on SSc-related FA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results establish NLRP1 as a new genetic susceptibility factor
for SSc-related pulmonary fibrosis and anti-topoisomerase-positive SSc
phenotypes. This provides new insights into the pathogenesis of SSc, underlining 
the potential role of innate immunity in particular in the FA-positive SSc
subphenotype, which represents a severe subset of the disease.

PMID: 21149496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Oct;38(7):4805-11. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0622-0. Epub 2010
Dec 8.

Investigation of the interaction between CREB-binding protein and STAT4/STAT6.

Zhang M(1), Fu Z, Tian D, Liu E, Dai J, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400014, People's Republic of China.

Coactivator CBP (CREB-binding protein) has been implicated in the regulation of
transcription for all signal transducer and activator of transcription factors
(STATs); however, the mechanism remains unclear. Using yeast two-hybrid screening
and immunoprecipitation techniques, we investigated the direct interaction of CBP
with STAT4 and STAT6. The full-length CBP and five fragments of CBP (residues
1-436, 529-1200, 1-697, 967-1574 and 1678-2175) were constructed using pGBKT7
vectors, while STAT4, STAT6 and N-terminal deleted STAT4 were constructed using
pGADT7 vectors. It was found that STAT4, but not STAT6, interacted directly with 
the 1678-2175 fragment of CBP containing the ZZ, TAZ2 and SID domain. The
N-terminal of STAT4 plays an important role in this interaction since N-terminal 
deleted STAT4 failed to bind to any CBP fragment. The results were confirmed by
immunoprecipitation using HA-tagged STAT4 or STAT6 and c-Myc tagged CBP. This
work will contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms of Th cytokine
imbalance.

PMID: 21140220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;18(5):1211-9.

[Impact of cyclosporine A on the expression of T-bet, GATA-3, relevant signal
transduction molecules, cytokine and Th1/Th2 balance in patients with chronic
aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YM, Hu MH, Sun WL, Xue ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Chinese Traditional
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Traditional Medicine, Nanjing 210029,
Jiangsu Province, China.

The study was aimed to explore the effects of T-bet (T-box expressed in T cell), 
GATA-3(GATA binding protein 3) and relevant signal transduction pathways on the
immune-related pathogenesis of chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), and to investigate 
the immunological regulation mechanism in the treatment of CAA by using
cyclosporine A (CsA) at the level of Th cell imbalance, transcriptional factors, 
and relevant signal pathways. The real-time fluorescent quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (real-time FQ-PCR) was used to determine the mRNA expression of
T-bet, GATA-3, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) and
signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 (STAT6) in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell (PBMNC) of CAA patients before and after treatment with CsA; the
flow cytometry (FCM) and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used to
determine the Th1/Th2 proportion in peripheral blood, and levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 
and IL-4 in PBMNC-cultured supernatant. Healthy people were included to test the 
above indexes. The results showed that the mRNA expression of PBMNC T-bet, STAT4,
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion, Th1/Th2 ratio and levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12
in PBMNC-cultured supernatant of CAA patients were significantly higher than
those of healthy people (p < 0.01). After treating with CsA for 6 months of CsA
treatment, expression of T-bet, STAT4, T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion, IFN-<U+03B3> 
and IL-12 levels were lower than before, however, the expression of T-bet, STAT4,
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion and IFN-<U+03B3> had not been reduced to normal
state. Compared to healthy people, no significant difference existed in the mRNA 
expression of GATA-3, STAT6, Th2 proportion, as well as level of IL-4 before and 
after treatment (p>0.05). It is concluded that the abnormal activation of
IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet and IL-12/STAT4 pathways, as well as Th balance deviating to Th1
excursion play vital roles in the immunological pathogenesis of AA. CsA lowers
the abnormal activation of IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet and IL-12/STAT4 pathways to correct Th1
hyperpolarization, which may reduce the abnormally activated cell-mediated
immunity and relax hematopoietic depression of AA patients.

PMID: 21129263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Immunol Lett. 2011 Apr 30;136(1):21-8. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2010.11.007. Epub
2010 Nov 27.

IL-27 induces the differentiation of Tr1-like cells from human naive CD4+ T cells
via the phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT3.

Wang H(1), Meng R, Li Z, Yang B, Liu Y, Huang F, Zhang J, Chen H, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Key Laboratory of
Tropical Disease Control Research of Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, PR China.

IL-27, a member of IL-6/IL-12 cytokine family, is mainly produced by activated
antigen presenting cells (APC). It has been demonstrated that IL-27 has the pro- 
and anti-inflammatory properties during immune responses. However, the signaling 
pathways that contribute to the cytokine generation are still unclear in humans. 
In the present study, we showed that IL-27 induced IL-10 and IFN-<U+03B3>, but had no
effect on IL-2, TNF-a and IL-4 production from human umbilical cord blood
mononuclear cells (CBMCs). For purified naive CD4(+) T cells, IL-27 elicited the 
differentiation of Tr1-like cells with expression of IL-10 and IFN-<U+03B3>.
Importantly, this induction was dependent on the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT) 1 and 3 factors. In addition, all of the phosphorylated
STAT3 positive cells were also positive for phosphorylated STAT1, both of which
could be inhibited by a JAK2/STAT inhibitor, AG490. However, there was no
phosphorylation of STAT4, STAT5 and STAT6 in IL-27-stimulating conditions.
Moreover, the biological function of IL-10 that was induced by IL-27 mainly
enhanced the expression of CD16 without influencing CD14 expression on human
monocytes. These data identify the function of IL-27 on the differentiation of
human naive CD4(+) T cells and demonstrate that the STATs signaling pathways may 
play an important role in mediating immune responses in humans.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21115047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Placenta. 2011 Jan;32(1):33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.10.010. Epub 2010
Nov 13.

Genome-wide expression profile of first trimester villous and extravillous human 
trophoblast cells.

Apps R(1), Sharkey A, Gardner L, Male V, Trotter M, Miller N, North R, Founds S, 
Moffett A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK.

We have examined the transcriptional changes associated with differentiation from
villous to extravillous trophoblast using a whole genome microarray. Villous
trophoblast (VT) is in contact with maternal blood and mediates nutrient exchange
whereas extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invades the decidua and remodels uterine
arteries. Using highly purified first trimester trophoblast we identified over
3000 transcripts that are differentially expressed. Many of these transcripts
represent novel functions and pathways that show co-ordinated up-regulation in VT
or EVT. In addition we identify new players in established functions such as
migration, immune modulation and cytokine or angiogenic factor secretion by EVT. 
The transition from VT to EVT is also characterised by alterations in
transcription factors such as STAT4 and IRF9, which may co-ordinate these
changes. Transcripts encoding several members of the immunoglobulin-superfamily, 
which are normally expressed on leukocytes, were highly transcribed in EVT but
not expressed as protein, indicating specific control of translation in EVT.
Interactions of trophoblast with decidual leukocytes are involved in regulating
EVT invasion. We show that decidual T-cells, macrophages and NK cells express the
inhibitory collagen receptor LAIR-1 and that EVT secrete LAIR-2, which can block 
this interaction. This represents a new mechanism by which EVT can modulate
leukocyte function in the decidua. Since LAIR-2 is detectable in the urine of
pregnant, but not non-pregnant women, trophoblast-derived LAIR-2 may also have
systemic effects during pregnancy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3065343
PMID: 21075446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Dec;6(12):683-92. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.176. Epub
2010 Nov 9.

Genetic susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus in the genomic era.

Deng Y(1), Tsao BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 900 Veteran Avenue, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1670, 
USA.

Our understanding of the genetic basis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) has 
been rapidly advanced using large-scale, case-control, candidate gene studies as 
well as genome-wide association studies during the past 3 years. These techniques
have identified more than 30 robust genetic associations with SLE including
genetic variants of HLA and Fc<U+03B3> receptor genes, IRF5, STAT4, PTPN22, TNFAIP3,
BLK, BANK1, TNFSF4 and ITGAM. Most SLE-associated gene products participate in
key pathogenic pathways, including Toll-like receptor and type I interferon
signaling pathways, immune regulation pathways and those that control the
clearance of immune complexes. Disease-associated loci that have not yet been
demonstrated to have important functions in the immune system might provide new
clues to the underlying molecular mechanisms that contribute to the pathogenesis 
or progression of SLE. Of note, genetic risk factors that are shared between SLE 
and other immune-related diseases highlight common pathways in the
pathophysiology of these diseases, and might provide innovative molecular targets
for therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3135416
PMID: 21060334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Kidney Int. 2011 Feb;79(4):452-63. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.438. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Targeting transcription factor Stat4 uncovers a role for interleukin-18 in the
pathogenesis of severe lupus nephritis in mice.

Menke J(1), Bork T, Kutska B, Byrne KT, Blanfeld M, Relle M, Kelley VR,
Schwarting A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
julia.menke@unimedizin-mainz.de

Polymorphisms in the transcription factor Stat4 gene have been implicated as risk
factors for systemic lupus erythematosus. Although some polymorphisms have a
strong association with autoantibodies and nephritis, their impact on
pathophysiology is still unknown. To explore this further we used signal
transducers and activators of transcription 4 (Stat4) knockout
MRL/MpJ-Fas(lpr)/Fas(lpr) (MRL-Fas(lpr)) mice and found that they did not differ 
in survival or renal function from Stat4-intact MRL-Fas(lpr) mice. Circulating
interleukin (IL)-18 levels, however, were elevated in Stat4-deficient compared to
Stat4-intact mice, suggesting that this interleukin might contribute to the
progression of lupus nephritis independent of Stat4. In a second approach, Stat4 
antisense or missense oligonucleotides or vehicle were given to MRL-Fas(lpr) mice
with advanced nephritis. Each of these treatments temporarily ameliorated
disease, although IL-18 was increased in each setting. Based on these findings,
studies using gene transfer to overexpress IL-18 in MRL-Fas(lpr) and
IL-12p40/IL-23 knockout MRL-Fas(lpr) mice reveal a critical role for IL-18 in
mediating disease. Thus, the Stat4 and IL-12 (an activator of Stat4)-independent 
factor, IL-18, can drive autoimmune lupus nephritis in MRL-Fas(lpr) mice.
Temporarily blocking Stat4 during advanced nephritis ameliorates disease,
suggesting a time-dependent compensatory proinflammatory mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3197226
PMID: 20980973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jan;300(1):E175-87. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00203.2010. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

Evidence for activation of inflammatory lipoxygenase pathways in visceral adipose
tissue of obese Zucker rats.

Chakrabarti SK(1), Wen Y, Dobrian AD, Cole BK, Ma Q, Pei H, Williams MD, Bevard
MH, Vandenhoff GE, Keller SR, Gu J, Nadler JL.

Author information: 
(1)Strelitz Diabetes Center, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA.

Central obesity is associated with low-grade inflammation that promotes type 2
diabetes and cardiovascular disease in obese individuals. The 12- and
5-lipoxygenase (12-LO and 5-LO) enzymes have been linked to inflammatory changes,
leading to the development of atherosclerosis. 12-LO has also been linked
recently to inflammation and insulin resistance in adipocytes. We analyzed the
expression of LO and proinflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue and adipocytes
in obese Zucker rats, a widely studied genetic model of obesity, insulin
resistance, and the metabolic syndrome. mRNA expression of 12-LO, 5-LO, and
5-LO-activating protein (FLAP) was upregulated in adipocytes and adipose tissue
from obese Zucker rats compared with those from lean rats. Concomitant with
increased LO gene expression, the 12-LO product 12-HETE and the 5-LO products
5-HETE and leukotriene B4 (LTB4) were also increased in adipocytes. Furthermore, 
upregulation of key proinflammatory markers interleukin (IL)-6, TNFa, and
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 were observed in adipocytes isolated from
obese Zucker rats. Immunohistochemistry indicated that the positive 12-LO
staining in adipose tissue represents cells in addition to adipocytes. This was
confirmed by Western blotting in stromal vascular fractions. These changes were
in part reversed by the novel anti-inflammatory drug lisofylline (LSF). LSF also 
reduced p-STAT4 in visceral adipose tissue from obese Zucker rats and improved
the metabolic profile, reducing fasting plasma glucose and increasing insulin
sensitivity in obese Zucker rats. In 3T3-L1 adipocytes, LSF abrogated the
inflammatory response induced by LO products. Thus, therapeutic agents reducing
LO or STAT4 activation may provide novel tools to reduce obesity-induced
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3023204
PMID: 20978234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Lupus. 2010 Oct;19(12):1452-9. doi: 10.1177/0961203310370350.

What can we learn from genetic studies of systemic lupus erythematosus?
Implications of genetic heterogeneity among populations in SLE.

Lee HS(1), Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, Seoul, Korea.

Recent progress in genetics has expanded the number of the genes associated with 
SLE to more than 20 in the past 2 years. One might assign these candidate genetic
factors into several pre-existing biological pathways: (i) innate immune response
including TLR/interferon signaling pathways (IRF5, STAT4, TNFAIP3, and TREX1);
(ii) adaptive immune response (HLA-DR, PTPN22, PDCD1, STAT4, LYN, BLK, and BANK1)
including B, T cells, and antigen-presenting cells; and (iii) immune complex
clearance mechanism (FCGRs, CRP, and ITGAM). In addition, there are also several 
genes and loci that could not be assigned into previous known pathways (KIAA1542,
PXK, XKR6, ATG5, etc), providing possible novel mechanisms in SLE. It has also
been evident that there are similarities and differences in SLE susceptibility
loci across ethnic groups. Here we categorize the susceptible genes into four
groups. The first group is the consistently associated genes with similar risk
allele frequency between multiple ethnic populations such as STAT4, TNFAIP3,
BANK1, and IRAK1/MECP2. The second group is the genes that are consistently
associated but show marked difference in risk allele frequency (BLK, IRF5). The
third group is the genes in which different risk variants exist within a gene or 
genetic loci (allelic heterogeneity) such as HLA-DR, FCGRs, and IRF5. The fourth 
group is the genes that show consistently discrepancy between populations such as
PTPN22 and possibly ITGAM, PXK, and LYN (genetic heterogeneity). The possible
explanations for differences of susceptible genetic factors between populations
could be different genetic backgrounds, contribution of gene-gene or
gene-environment interaction, and the relation between marker and causal
variants. Therefore, efforts to identify ethnic-specific genetic factors or
disease causing variants should be necessary for individualized therapy for SLE
in future.

PMID: 20947557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Lupus. 2010 Oct;19(12):1374-83. doi: 10.1177/0961203310376639.

Current advances in lupus genetic and genomic studies in Asia.

Yuan YJ(1), Luo XB, Shen N.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Molecular Rheumatology Laboratory of the Institute of Health Sciences
and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

The genetic components in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have long been
established, however, it has been unclear for many years whether the same genetic
risk factors for SLE are shared across different ethnic groups. Over the past few
years, a number of genetic and genomic studies have been conducted in Asian
populations to address this question. These studies have demonstrated that
genetic heterogeneity does exist in SLE across different ethnic groups. With
these studies, it has been established that a number of genes associated with SLE
in Caucasians are also risk factors in Asians: HLA class II genes, STAT4, BANK1, 
BLK, IRF5, TNFSF4, ITGAM, etc., while there are also novel genetic risk factors
identified by these studies in Asians, for instance, the ETS1 and WDFY4 in
Chinese. For the genomic studies, the interferon signature has been confirmed as 
a major lupus molecular phenotype in Asians the same as in Caucasians; microRNA
expression profiling and its novel role in regulating the interferon pathway has 
been first revealed in Asians. Further understanding of the function of lupus
disease genes and delineating the key molecular pathway(s) will enhance the
development of novel therapeutic targets and biomarkers for individualized
clinical management for lupus patients.

PMID: 20947545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 12;107(41):17680-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1012977107. Epub 2010 Sep 27.

I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> is essential for natural killer cell activation in response to IL-12 and
IL-18.

Miyake T(1), Satoh T, Kato H, Matsushita K, Kumagai Y, Vandenbon A, Tani T, Muta 
T, Akira S, Takeuchi O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, Laboratory of Systems Immunology, WPI Immunology
Frontier Research Center, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6>, encoded by Nfibiz, is a nuclear I<U+03BA>B-like protein harboring ankyrin repeats.
I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> has been shown to regulate IL-6 production in macrophages and Th17
development in T cells. However, the role of I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> in natural killer (NK) cells
has not be understood. In the present study, we found that the expression of I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6>
was rapidly induced in response to IL-18 in NK cells, but not in T cells.
Analysis of Nfkbiz(-/-) mice revealed that I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> was essential for the production 
of IFN-<U+03B3> production and cytotoxic activity in NK cells in response to IL-12
and/or IL-18 stimulation. IL-12/IL-18-mediated gene induction was profoundly
impaired in Nfkbiz(-/-) NK cells. Whereas the phosphorylation of STAT4 was
normally induced by IL-12 stimulation, STAT4 was not recruited to the Ifng gene
regions in Nfkbiz(-/-) NK cells. Acetylation of histone 3 K9 on Ifng regions was 
also abrogated in Nfkbiz(-/-) NK cells. I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> was recruited on the proximal
promoter region of the Ifng gene, and overexpression of I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> together with IL-12 
activated the Ifng promoter. Furthermore, Nfkbiz(-/-) mice were highly
susceptible to mouse MCMV infection. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> is essential for the activation of NK cells and antiviral host defense 
responses.

PMCID: PMC2955119
PMID: 20876105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Autoimmun Rev. 2011 Mar;10(5):282-90. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.09.017. Epub
2010 Sep 21.

Immunogenetics of systemic sclerosis.

Dieudé P(1), Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Bichat Claude
Bernard, APHP, Paris, France.

In the field of genetics of SSc, we are currently reaching a period of rapid data
production. Several themes are already rising from the first wave of results.
First, some genetic variants clearly predispose to multiple autoimmune diseases, 
thus providing evidence for a shared autoimmune genetic background. Second,
multiple genes are involved in the SSc predisposition and as expected the genetic
associations are quite modest. Third, unless for a small number of exceptions,
the causative genetic variations have not been definitively identified yet.
Lastly, to date, the most convincing associations detected relate to genes
playing a pivotal role in both innate and adaptative immunity. Indeed,
additionally to the MHC, candidate gene studies have convincingly and
reproducibly identified PTPN22, IRF5, STAT4, C8orf13-BLK, BANK1 and TNFSF4 as SSc
susceptibility genes. Although these results have substantially advanced our
understanding of the SSc pathogenesis, both gene-gene and gene-environment
studies are now awaited in order to further improve our understanding of this
multifacet disease. Finally, we should keep in mind that SSc is a very severe
that is until now unfortunately free of effective therapy. Therefore, the
identification of new susceptibility genes may offer a rich source of new
hypotheses and experimental directions to follow that we should try to assembly
in a near future to generate innovative therapies to fight this dramatic disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20863905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Genes Immun. 2011 Mar;12(2):100-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.44. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Association of EBF1, FAM167A(C8orf13)-BLK and TNFSF4 gene variants with primary
Sjögren's syndrome.

Nordmark G(1), Kristjansdottir G, Theander E, Appel S, Eriksson P, Vasaitis L,
Kvarnström M, Delaleu N, Lundmark P, Lundmark A, Sjöwall C, Brun JG, Jonsson MV, 
Harboe E, Gøransson LG, Johnsen SJ, Söderkvist P, Eloranta ML, Alm G, Baecklund
E, Wahren-Herlenius M, Omdal R, Rönnblom L, Jonsson R, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. Gunnel.Nordmark@medsci.uu.se

We performed a candidate gene association study in 540 patients with primary
Sjögren's Syndrome (SS) from Sweden (n=344) and Norway (n=196) and 532 controls
(n=319 Swedish, n=213 Norwegian). A total of 1139 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 84 genes were analyzed. In the meta-analysis of the Swedish and
Norwegian cohorts, we found high signals for association between primary SS and
SNPs in three gene loci, not previously associated with primary SS. These are the
early B-cell factor 1 (EBF1) gene, P=9.9 × 10(-5), OR 1.68, the family with
sequence similarity 167 member A-B-lymphoid tyrosine kinase (FAM167A-BLK) locus, 
P=4.7 × 10(-4), OR 1.37 and the tumor necrosis factor superfamily (TNFSF4=Ox40L) 
gene, P=7.4 × 10(-4), OR 1.34. We also confirmed the association between primary 
SS and the IRF5/TNPO3 locus and the STAT4 gene. We found no association between
the SNPs in these five genes and the presence of anti-SSA/anti-SSB antibodies.
EBF1, BLK and TNFSF4 are all involved in B-cell differentiation and activation,
and we conclude that polymorphisms in several susceptibility genes in the immune 
system contribute to the pathogenesis of primary SS.

PMID: 20861858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Dec;62(12):3722-9. doi: 10.1002/art.27753.

Genetically determined Amerindian ancestry correlates with increased frequency of
risk alleles for systemic lupus erythematosus.

Sanchez E(1), Webb RD, Rasmussen A, Kelly JA, Riba L, Kaufman KM, Garcia-de la
Torre I, Moctezuma JF, Maradiaga-Ceceña MA, Cardiel-Rios MH, Acevedo E,
Cucho-Venegas M, Garcia MA, Gamron S, Pons-Estel BA, Vasconcelos C, Martin J,
Tusié-Luna T, Harley JB, Richardson B, Sawalha AH, Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether genetically determined Amerindian ancestry predicts 
increased presence of risk alleles of known susceptibility genes for systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 16 confirmed genetic
susceptibility loci for SLE were genotyped in a set of 804 Mestizo lupus patients
and 667 Mestizo healthy controls. In addition, 347 admixture informative markers 
were genotyped. Individual ancestry proportions were determined using STRUCTURE. 
Association analysis was performed using PLINK, and correlation between ancestry 
and the presence of risk alleles was analyzed using linear regression.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis of the genetic association of the 16 SNPs across
populations showed that TNFSF4, STAT4, ITGAM, and IRF5 were associated with lupus
in a Hispanic Mestizo cohort enriched for European and Amerindian ancestry. In
addition, 2 SNPs within the major histocompatibility complex region, previously
shown to be associated in a genome-wide association study in Europeans, were also
associated in Mestizos. Using linear regression, we predicted an average increase
of 2.34 risk alleles when comparing an SLE patient with 100% Amerindian ancestry 
versus an SLE patient with 0% Amerindian ancestry (P < 0.0001). SLE patients with
43% more Amerindian ancestry were predicted to carry 1 additional risk allele.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that Amerindian ancestry is associated with
an increased number of risk alleles for SLE.

Copyright © 2010 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3078084
PMID: 20848568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2010 Sep-Oct;28(5):695-701. Epub 2010 Oct 22.

Lack of association of PTPN22, STAT4 and TRAF1/C5 gene polymorphisms with
cardiovascular risk in rheumatoid arthritis.

Palomino-Morales R(1), Gonzalez-Juanatey C, Vazquez-Rodriguez TR, Rodriguez L,
Miranda-Filloy JA, Pascual-Salcedo D, Balsa A, Fernandez-Gutierrez B, Llorca J,
Martin J, Gonzalez-Gay MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), Granada, Spain. rpm@ipb.csic.es

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the PTPN22, STAT4 and TRAF1/C5 gene
polymorphisms may be implicated in the development of cardiovascular (CV) events 
and subclinical atherosclerosis manifested by the presence of endothelial
dysfunction or increased carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) in a series of
Spanish patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Six hundred and twelve patients fulfilling the 1987 American College of 
Rheumatology classification criteria for RA, seen at the rheumatology outpatient 
clinics of Hospital Xeral-Calde, Lugo, and Hospital San Carlos, Madrid, were
studied. Patients were genotyped using predesigned TaqMan single nucleotide
polymorphism genotyping assays. Moreover, between March and December 2007, a
subgroup of unselected RA patients with no history of CV events was studied for
the presence of subclinical atherosclerosis by the assessment of the endothelial 
function (n=126) and the carotid artery IMT (n=110) by ultrasonography studies.
RESULTS: No significant differences in the allele or genotype frequencies for the
PTPN22, STAT4 and TRAF1/C5 gene polymorphisms between RA patients with or without
CV events were found. It was also the case when we analysed the potential
influence of the genotypes in the presence of endothelial dysfunction or
increased carotid artery IMT of patients with RA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results do not show that the PTPN22, STAT4 and TRAF1/C5 gene
polymorphisms may confer a direct risk of CV disease in patients with RA.

PMID: 20822712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Discov Med. 2010 Aug;10(51):134-43.

The genetics of systemic sclerosis.

Agarwal SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin, 
MSB 5.270, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Sandeep.K.Agarwal@uth.tmc.edu

Systemic sclerosis (SSc, scleroderma) is an autoimmune disease clinically
characterized by progressive fibrosis in the skin and internal organs. While the 
pathogenesis of SSc is not completely understood, familial studies and genetic
studies suggest that SSc is a complex polygenic disease. In the current review,
we will discuss recent studies investigating genetic susceptibility to SSc.
Candidate gene studies have identified critical immunoregulatory genes and gene
regions including BANK1, FAM167A-BLK, IL23R, IRF5, STAT4, TBX21, and TNFSF4 as
susceptibility genes for the development of SSc. More recently a genome-wide
association study has been performed and identified CD247 (CD3-zeta) as a novel
genetic risk factor for the susceptibility to SSc. Together these genetic
association studies have substantially advanced our understanding of SSc
pathogenesis and form the foundation for future studies seeking to understand the
complexities of SSc.

PMCID: PMC3803145
PMID: 20807474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Nov;62(11):3265-76. doi: 10.1002/art.27688.

The susceptibility loci juvenile idiopathic arthritis shares with other
autoimmune diseases extend to PTPN2, COG6, and ANGPT1.

Thompson SD(1), Sudman M, Ramos PS, Marion MC, Ryan M, Tsoras M, Weiler T, Wagner
M, Keddache M, Haas JP, Mueller C, Prahalad S, Bohnsack J, Wise CA, Punaro M,
Zhang D, Rosé CD, Comeau ME, Divers J, Glass DN, Langefeld CD.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.
susan.thompson@cchmc.org

OBJECTIVE: To test for associations between non-major histocompatibility complex 
susceptibility loci previously reported in autoimmune diseases and juvenile
idiopathic arthritis (JIA).
METHODS: Published autoimmune disease genome-wide association studies were
reviewed, and 519 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected for
association testing. The initial cohort included 809 JIA cases and 3,535 controls
of non-Hispanic, European ancestry. Of the SNPs, 257 were successfully genotyped,
while 168 were imputed with quality. Based on findings in the initial cohort,
replication was sought for 21 SNPs in a second cohort of 1,015 JIA cases and
1,569 controls collected in the US and Germany. For the initial cohort, tests for
association were adjusted for potential confounding effects of population
structure by including principal components derived from a genome-wide
association study as covariates in logistic regression models. Odds ratios (ORs) 
and 95% confidence intervals were calculated.
RESULTS: Testing for association of previously reported autoimmune disease
genetic associations in the initial cohort suggested associations with JIA in 13 
distinct loci. Of these, 7 were validated in the replication cohort.
Meta-analysis results for the replicating loci included PTPN22 (rs6679677 [OR
1.58, P = 1.98 × 10(-12) ], rs2476601 [OR 1.64, P = 1.90 × 10(-13) ], and
rs2488457 [OR 1.32, P = 6.74 × 10(-8) ]), PTPN2 (rs1893217 [OR = 1.33, P = 1.60 ×
10(-9) ] and rs7234029 [OR 1.35, P = 1.86 × 10(-10) ]), ADAD1-IL2-IL21
(rs17388568 [OR 1.24, P = 1.13 × 10(-6) ] and rs13143866 [OR 0.83, P = 1.95 ×
10(-4) ]), STAT4 (rs3821236 [OR = 1.27, P = 2.36 × 10(-6) ] and rs7574865 [OR =
1.31, P = 2.21 × 10(-6) ]), C12orf30 (rs17696736 [OR = 1.19, P = 2.59 × 10(-5)
]), COG6 (rs7993214 [OR = 0.76, P = 1.10 × 10(-5) ]), and ANGPT1 (rs1010824 [OR =
0.79, P = 2.91 × 10(-4) ]). These polymorphisms have been reported in diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes mellitus, Crohn's disease, and
multiple sclerosis.
CONCLUSION: General susceptibility loci for autoimmunity are shared across
diseases, including JIA, suggesting the potential for common therapeutic targets 
and mechanisms.

Copyright © 2010 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC2970764
PMID: 20722033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Sep;19(9):2152-63. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0389. Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Genetic polymorphisms in adaptive immunity genes and childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Chang JS(1), Wiemels JL, Chokkalingam AP, Metayer C, Barcellos LF, Hansen HM,
Aldrich MC, Guha N, Urayama KY, Scélo G, Green J, May SL, Kiley VA, Wiencke JK,
Buffler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. jeffreychang@nhri.org.tw

BACKGROUND: Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has been hypothesized to
have an infection- and immune-related etiology. The lack of immune priming in
early childhood may result in abnormal immune responses to infections later in
life and increase ALL risk.
METHODS: The current analyses examined the association between childhood ALL and 
208 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of 29 adaptive immune function genes
among 377 ALL cases and 448 healthy controls. Single SNPs were analyzed with a
log-additive approach using logistic regression models adjusted for sex, age,
Hispanic ethnicity, and race. Sliding window haplotype analyses were done with
haplotypes consisting of 2 to 6 SNPs.
RESULTS: Of the 208 SNPs, only rs583911 of IL12A, which encodes a critical
modulator of T-cell development, remained significant after accounting for
multiple testing (odds ratio for each copy of the variant G allele, 1.52; 95%
confidence interval, 1.25-1.85; P = 2.9 x 10(-5)). This increased risk was
stronger among firstborn children of all ethnicities and among non-Hispanic
children with less day care attendance, consistent with the hypothesis about the 
role of early immune modulation in the development of childhood ALL. Haplotype
analyses identified additional regions of CD28, FCGR2, GATA3, IL2RA, STAT4, and
STAT6 associated with childhood ALL.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of genes on the adaptive immunity pathway are
associated with childhood ALL risk.
IMPACT: Results of this study support an immune-related etiology of childhood
ALL. Further confirmation is required to detect functional variants in the
significant genomic regions identified in this study, in particular for IL12A.

(c) 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3257312
PMID: 20716621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Cell Immunol. 2010;265(1):74-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2010.07.005. Epub 2010 Jul
21.

Altered signaling through IL-12 receptor in children with very high serum IgE
levels.

Fusco A(1), Vigliano I, Palamaro L, Cirillo E, Aloj G, Piscopo G, Giardino G,
Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, "Federico II" University, Naples, Italy.

An alteration of Th1/Th2 homeostasis may lead to diseases in humans. In this
study, we investigated whether an impaired IL-12R signaling occurred in children 
with elevated serum IgE levels divided on the basis of the IgE levels (group A:
>2000kU/l; group B: <2000kU/l). We evaluated the integrity of the IL-12R
signaling through the analysis of phosphorylation/activation of STAT4, and mRNA
expression and membrane assembly of the receptor chains. At a functional level, a
proliferative defect of lymphocytes from group A patients was observed. In these 
patients, an abnormal IL-12R signaling was documented, and this finding was
associated with abnormal expression of the IL-12Rbeta2 chain. Our data indicate
that in patients with very high IgE levels the generation of Th1 response is
impaired, and that this abnormality associates with abnormal IL-12R signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20696422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3593-601. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000890. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mutation in ubiquitin-specific peptidase 18 causes 
hyperactivation of IFN-aß signaling and suppresses STAT4-induced IFN-<U+03B3>
production, resulting in increased susceptibility to Salmonella typhimurium.

Richer E(1), Prendergast C, Zhang DE, Qureshi ST, Vidal SM, Malo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

To deepen our knowledge of the natural host response to pathogens, our team
undertook an in vivo screen of mutagenized 129S1 mice with Salmonella
Typhimurium. One mutation affecting Salmonella susceptibility was mapped to a
region of 1.3 Mb on chromosome 6 that contains 15 protein-coding genes. A
missense mutation was identified in the Usp18 (ubiquitin-specific peptidase 18)
gene. This mutation results in an increased inflammatory response (IL-6, type 1
IFN) to Salmonella and LPS challenge while paradoxically reducing IFN-gamma
production during bacterial infection. Increased STAT1 phosphorylation correlated
with impaired STAT4 phosphorylation, resulting in overwhelming IL-6 secretion but
reduced IFN-gamma production during infection. The reduced IFN-gamma levels,
along with the increased inflammation, rationalize the S. Typhimurium
susceptibility in terms of increased bacterial load in target organs and
cytokine-induced septic shock and death.

PMCID: PMC3987673
PMID: 20693420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Autoimmun. 2010 Nov;35(3):225-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.06.012. Epub 2010
Jul 31.

Activation of the type I interferon pathway in primary Sjogren's syndrome.

Mavragani CP(1), Crow MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Physiology, School of Medicine, University of
Athens, M. Asias 75, Goudi 11527, Athens, Greece. kmauragan@med.uoa.gr

Sjogren's syndrome (SS), a chronic autoimmune systemic disease affecting middle
aged women, is characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the salivary and
lachrymal glands resulting in dry eyes and dry mouth. Recent advances have
revealed a major role for activation of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway in
the pathogenesis of the syndrome, as evidenced by the increased circulating type 
I IFN activity and an IFN "signature" in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) and minor salivary gland (MSG) biopsies from these patients. Polymorphisms
in genes involved in the IFNa pathway, such as IRF5 and STAT4, have been found to
be associated with disease susceptibility. While the initial triggers of the
innate immune response in SS remain elusive, preliminary evidence supports the
role of inappropriately expressed endogenous LINE-1 (L1) retroelements as
potential triggers of type I IFN activation in SS, possibly through Toll-like
receptor (TLR) dependent or independent pathways. Proteins of the methylation
machinery and the APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases are coordinately
overexpressed, suggesting that those proteins might contribute to regulation of
the inappropriately expressed L1 endogenous retroelements in SS. Given the
apparent central role of IFNa in the pathogenesis of SS, blockade of this
cytokine may be a rational therapeutic approach. In the current review we
summarize the current evidence regarding the potential triggers of type I IFN
activation as well as the data supporting genetic and epigenetic regulation of
the type I IFN system in SS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20674271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Sep;22(5):471-7. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833c36c5.

Pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome and therapeutic consequences.

Mariette X(1), Gottenberg JE.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris-Sud
11, Institut Pour la Santé et la Recherche Médicale U1012, Le Kremlin Bicêtre,
France. xavier.mariette@bct.aphp.fr

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent findings on new pathogenic mechanisms of
interaction between genetic and environmental factors and between innate and
adaptive immunity in primary Sjögren's syndrome and to reconcile pathogenesis and
treatment by focusing on the crucial pathogenic steps that could be targeted by
emerging therapies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Regarding genetic predisposition, the functional relevance of
IRF5 and STAT4 gene polymorphisms in the activation of type I interferon pathways
has been demonstrated. It has also been shown that the isolated stimulation of
innate immunity in mice can result in dryness, which precedes lymphocytic
infiltrates in salivary glands. In animal models, possible environmental triggers
of the disease, such as oestrogen deficiency and/or infection by Epstein-Barr
virus, can lead to innate immune followed by autoimmune epithelitis. The
IFN-BAFF-B lymphocyte pathogenic axis is, therefore, targeted by numerous drugs
currently in evaluation. The development of consensus disease activity scores and
patient-related outcomes might help to initiate new controlled trials. The first 
positive randomized controlled trial with rituximab has been recently published.
SUMMARY: Hopefully, persistent and joint efforts by many teams to improve the
knowledge on the pathogenesis of the disease may allow identification of new
therapeutic targets in Sjögren's syndrome.

PMID: 20671520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4202-11. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-265827. Epub 2010 
Jul 26.

Mechanisms of aberrant GATA3 expression in classical Hodgkin lymphoma and its
consequences for the cytokine profile of Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cells.

Stanelle J(1), Döring C, Hansmann ML, Küppers R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical School, Essen,
Germany.

The transcription factor network in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) represents a unique
composition of proteins found in no other hematopoietic cell. Among these
factors, an aberrant expression of the T-cell transcription factor GATA3 is
observed in B cell-derived Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg (HRS) tumor cells. Herein, 
we elucidate the regulation and function of this factor in HL. We demonstrate
binding of NF<U+03BA>B and Notch-1, 2 factors with deregulated activity in HL to GATA3
promoter elements. Interference with NF<U+03BA>B and Notch-1 activity led to decreased
GATA3 expression, indicating a dependency of deregulated GATA3 expression on
these transcription factors. Down-regulation of GATA3 in HL cell lines
demonstrated its role in the regulation of IL-5, IL-13, STAT4, and other genes. A
correlation between GATA3 and IL-13 expression was confirmed for HRS cells in HL 
tissues. Thus, GATA3 shapes the cytokine expression and signaling that is typical
of HL. Conclusively, aberrant GATA3 expression in HRS cells is stimulated by the 
deregulated constitutive activity of NF<U+03BA>B and Notch-1, indicating a complex
network of deregulated transcription factors in these cells. GATA3 activity
significantly contributes to the typical cytokine secretion of and signaling in
HRS cells, which presumably plays an essential role in HL pathogenesis.

PMID: 20660789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec;18(12):1315-21. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.105. Epub 2010
Jul 21.

Hemizygous deletion of COL3A1, COL5A2, and MSTN causes a complex phenotype with
aortic dissection: a lesson for and from true haploinsufficiency.

Meienberg J(1), Rohrbach M, Neuenschwander S, Spanaus K, Giunta C, Alonso S,
Arnold E, Henggeler C, Regenass S, Patrignani A, Azzarello-Burri S, Steiner B,
Nygren AO, Carrel T, Steinmann B, Mátyás G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of
Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Aortic dilatation/dissection (AD) can occur spontaneously or in association with 
genetic syndromes, such as Marfan syndrome (MFS; caused by FBN1 mutations), MFS
type 2 and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (associated with TGFBR1/TGFBR2 mutations), and
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) vascular type (caused by COL3A1 mutations). Although
mutations in FBN1 and TGFBR1/TGFBR2 account for the majority of AD cases referred
to us for molecular genetic testing, we have obtained negative results for these 
genes in a large cohort of AD patients, suggesting the involvement of additional 
genes or acquired factors. In this study we assessed the effect of COL3A1
deletions/duplications in this cohort. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) analysis of 100 unrelated patients identified one hemizygous
deletion of the entire COL3A1 gene. Subsequent microarray analyses and sequencing
of breakpoints revealed the deletion size of 3,408,306 bp at 2q32.1q32.3. This
deletion affects not only COL3A1 but also 21 other known genes (GULP1, DIRC1,
COL5A2, WDR75, SLC40A1, ASNSD1, ANKAR, OSGEPL1, ORMDL1, LOC100129592, PMS1, MSTN,
C2orf88, HIBCH, INPP1, MFSD6, TMEM194B, NAB1, GLS, STAT1, and STAT4), mutations
in three of which (COL5A2, SLC40A1, and MSTN) have also been associated with an
autosomal dominant disorder (EDS classical type, hemochromatosis type 4, and
muscle hypertrophy). Physical and laboratory examinations revealed that true
haploinsufficiency of COL3A1, COL5A2, and MSTN, but not that of SLC40A1, leads to
a clinical phenotype. Our data not only emphasize the impact/role of COL3A1 in AD
patients but also extend the molecular etiology of several disorders by providing
hitherto unreported evidence for true haploinsufficiency of the underlying gene.

PMCID: PMC3002852
PMID: 20648054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Immunity. 2010 Jul 23;33(1):35-47. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.07.004.

Modular utilization of distal cis-regulatory elements controls Ifng gene
expression in T cells activated by distinct stimuli.

Balasubramani A(1), Shibata Y, Crawford GE, Baldwin AS, Hatton RD, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Distal cis-regulatory elements play essential roles in the T lineage-specific
expression of cytokine genes. We have mapped interactions of three trans-acting
factors-NF-kappaB, STAT4, and T-bet-with cis elements in the Ifng locus. We find 
that RelA is critical for optimal Ifng expression and is differentially recruited
to multiple elements contingent upon T cell receptor (TCR) or interleukin-12
(IL-12) plus IL-18 signaling. RelA recruitment to at least four elements is
dependent on T-bet-dependent remodeling of the Ifng locus and corecruitment of
STAT4. STAT4 and NF-kappaB therefore cooperate at multiple cis elements to enable
NF-kappaB-dependent enhancement of Ifng expression. RelA recruitment to distal
elements was similar in T helper 1 (Th1) and effector CD8(+) T (Tc1) cells,
although T-bet was dispensable in CD8 effectors. These results support a model of
Ifng regulation in which distal cis-regulatory elements differentially recruit
key transcription factors in a modular fashion to initiate gene transcription
induced by distinct activation signals.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2994316
PMID: 20643337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Immunol. 2010 Aug 15;185(4):2089-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000818. Epub 2010
Jul 12.

Tc17 cells are capable of mediating immunity to vaccinia virus by acquisition of 
a cytotoxic phenotype.

Yeh N(1), Glosson NL, Wang N, Guindon L, McKinley C, Hamada H, Li Q, Dutton RW,
Shrikant P, Zhou B, Brutkiewicz RR, Blum JS, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Herman B. Wells Center for
Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

CD8 T cells can acquire cytokine-secreting phenotypes paralleling cytokine
production from Th cells. IL-17-secreting CD8 T cells, termed Tc17 cells, were
shown to promote inflammation and mediate immunity to influenza. However, most
reports observed a lack of cytotoxic activity by Tc17 cells. In this study, we
explored the anti-viral activity of Tc17 cells using a vaccinia virus (VV)
infection model. Tc17 cells expanded during VV infection, and TCR transgenic Tc17
cells were capable of clearing recombinant VV infection. In vivo, adoptively
transferred Tc17 cells lost the IL-17-secreting phenotype, even in the absence of
stimulation, but they did not acquire IFN-gamma-secreting potential unless
stimulated with a virus-encoded Ag. However, examination of cells following
infection demonstrated that these cells acquired cytotoxic potential in vivo,
even in the absence of IFN-gamma. Cytotoxic potential correlated with Fasl
expression, and the cytotoxic activity of postinfection Tc17 cells was partially 
blocked by the addition of anti-FasL. Thus, Tc17 cells mediate VV clearance
through expression of specific molecules associated with cytotoxicity but
independent of an acquired Tc1 phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2916954
PMID: 20624947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Immunity. 2010 Jun 25;32(6):840-51. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.06.003.

Discrete roles of STAT4 and STAT6 transcription factors in tuning epigenetic
modifications and transcription during T helper cell differentiation.

Wei L(1), Vahedi G, Sun HW, Watford WT, Takatori H, Ramos HL, Takahashi H, Liang 
J, Gutierrez-Cruz G, Zang C, Peng W, O'Shea JJ, Kanno Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, NIAMS, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda MD 20892, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and STAT6 are key
factors in the specification of helper T cells; however, their direct roles in
driving differentiation are not well understood. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation and massive parallel sequencing, we quantitated the full
complement of STAT-bound genes, concurrently assessing global STAT-dependent
epigenetic modifications and gene transcription by using cells from cognate
STAT-deficient mice. STAT4 and STAT6 each bound over 4000 genes with distinct
binding motifs. Both played critical roles in maintaining chromatin configuration
and transcription of a core subset of genes through the combination of different 
epigenetic patterns. Globally, STAT4 had a more dominant role in promoting active
epigenetic marks, whereas STAT6 had a more prominent role in antagonizing
repressive marks. Clusters of genes negatively regulated by STATs were also
identified, highlighting previously unappreciated repressive roles of STATs.
Therefore, STAT4 and STAT6 play wide regulatory roles in T helper cell
specification.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2904651
PMID: 20620946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Feb;1812(2):246-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.05.012.
Epub 2010 Jun 18.

Th1 versus Th17: are T cell cytokines relevant in multiple sclerosis?

Lovett-Racke AE(1), Yang Y, Racke MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, Ohio State 
University Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Amy.Lovett-Racke@osumc.edu

Our understanding of the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis (MS) has evolved
significantly over the past two decades as the fields of immunology and
neurobiology provide new avenues of exploration into the cause and mechanism of
the disease. It has been known for decades that T cells have different cytokine
phenotypes, yet the cytokine phenotype of pathogenic T cells in MS is still an
area of debate. In EAE, it appears that IFN<U+03B3> and IL-17, produced by Th1 and Th17 
cells respectively, are not the critical factor that determines T cell
encephalitogenicity. However, there are molecules such as IL-23, T-bet and STAT4,
that appear to be critical, yet it is unclear whether all these molecules
contribute to a common, yet undefined pathway, or act in a synergistic manner
which culminates in encephalitogenicity has still to be determined. Therefore,
the focus of research on effector T cells in MS should focus on pathways upstream
of the cytokines that define Th1 and Th17 cells, since downstream products, such 
as IFN<U+03B3> and IL-17, probably are not critical determinants of whether an effector 
T cells is capable of trafficking to the CNS and inducing inflammatory
demyelination.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3004998
PMID: 20600875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 25;5(6):e11311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011311.

Defective NKT cell activation by CD1d+ TRAMP prostate tumor cells is corrected by
interleukin-12 with a-galactosylceramide.

Nowak M(1), Arredouani MS, Tun-Kyi A, Schmidt-Wolf I, Sanda MG, Balk SP, Exley
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. michael.nowak@ukb.uni-bonn.de

Numerical and functional defects of invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT) have 
been documented in human and mouse cancers, resulting in a defect in IFN
production in several malignancies. iNKT cells recognize glycolipids presented on
CD1d molecules by dendritic and related cells, leading to their activation and
thereby regulating immune reactions. Activated iNKT cells cytokine secretion and 
cytotoxicity can inhibit existing and spontaneous tumor growth, progression, and 
metastasis. We have identified functional iNKT cell defects in the murine TRAMP
prostate cancer model. We found that iNKT cells show the ability to migrate into 
TRAMP prostate tumors. This infiltration was mediated through CCL2: CCR5
chemokine: receptor interaction. Prostate tumor cells expressing CD1d partially
activated iNKT cells, as appreciated by up-regulation of CD25, PD-1 and the
IL-12R. However, despite inducing up-regulation of these activation markers and, 
hence, delivering positive signals, prostate tumor cells inhibited the
IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation in a cell-cell contact dependent but
CD1d-independent manner. Consequently, tumor cells did not induce secretion of
IFNgamma by iNKT cells. Blocking the inhibitory Ly49 receptor on iNKT cells in
the presence of alpha-GalCer restored their IFNgamma production in vivo and in
vitro. However, Ly49 blockade alone was not sufficient. Importantly, this defect 
could be also be reversed into vigorous secretion of IFNgamma by the addition of 
both IL-12 and the exogenous CD1d ligand alpha-galactosylceramide, but not by
IL-12 alone, both in vivo and in vitro. These data underscore the potential to
optimize iNKT-based therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2892484
PMID: 20593019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Aug 31;42(8):533-46.

IL-12-STAT4-IFN-gamma axis is a key downstream pathway in the development of
IL-13-mediated asthma phenotypes in a Th2 type asthma model.

Kim YS(1), Choi SJ, Choi JP, Jeon SG, Oh S-, Lee BJ, Gho YS, Lee CG, Zhu Z, Elias
JA, Kim YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang
University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Korea.

IL-4 and IL-13 are closely related cytokines that are produced by Th2 cells.
However, IL-4 and IL-13 have different effects on the development of asthma
phenotypes. Here, we evaluated downstream molecular mechanisms involved in the
development of Th2 type asthma phenotypes. A murine model of Th2 asthma was used 
that involved intraperitoneal sensitization with an allergen (ovalbumin) plus
alum and then challenge with ovalbumin alone. Asthma phenotypes, including
airway-hyperresponsiveness (AHR), lung inflammation, and immunologic parameters
were evaluated after allergen challenge in mice deficient in candidate genes. The
present study showed that methacholine AHR and lung inflammation developed in
allergen-challenged IL-4-deficient mice but not in allergen-challenged
IL-13-deficient mice. In addition, the production of OVA-specific IgG2a and
IFN-gamma-inducible protein (IP)-10 was also impaired in the absence of IL-13,
but not of IL-4. Lung-targeted IFN-gamma over-expression in the airways enhanced 
methacholine AHR and non-eosinophilic inflammation; in addition, these asthma
phenotypes were impaired in allergen-challenged IFN-gamma-deficient mice.
Moreover, AHR, non-eosinophilic inflammation, and IFN-gamma expression were
impaired in allergen-challenged IL-12Rbeta2- and STAT4-deficient mice; however,
AHR and non-eosinophilic inflammation were not impaired in allergen-challenged
IL-4Ralpha-deficient mice, and these phenomena were accompanied by the enhanced
expression of IL-12 and IFN-gamma. The present data suggest that IL-13-mediated
asthma phenotypes, such as AHR and non-eosinophilic inflammation, in the Th2 type
asthma are dependent on the IL-12-STAT4-IFN-gamma axis, and that these asthma
phenotypes are independent of IL-4Ralpha-mediated signaling.

PMCID: PMC2928926
PMID: 20592486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2010 Jun;30(6):1349-53.

[Association of HLA-DR4, PAD4, and STAT4 expression in the peripheral blood with 
disease activity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis].

[Article in Chinese]

Lü Z(1), Li J, Feng ZT, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Rheumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China. zhuozhuotu@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the association of the expressions of human leukocyte
antigen (HLA)-DR4, peptidyl arginine deiminase type4(PAD4), and signal transducer
and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) in the peripheral blood with the disease
activity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Twenty-four RA patients in active stage (DAS28 score>or=2.6) and 14 RA
patients in remission stage (DAS28 score<2.6) were enrolled in this study, with
12 healthy volunteers as the control. The QuantiGene Plex method was used to
measure the expression level of HLA-DR4, PAD4, and STAT4 mRNA, and the
relationship between the expressions of these genes and the DAS28 score, levels
of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP antibody) and rheumatoid 
factor (RF) was analyzed.
RESULTS: The expressions of HLA-DR4, PAD4, and STAT4 were significantly higher in
RA patients than in the healthy controls (P<0.05). The level of HLA-DR4 mRNA in
the two RA groups showed no significant difference, but was significantly higher 
than that in the healthy controls. HLA-DR4 expression was not found to correlated
to DAS28 score, anti-CCP antibody level or RF in the RA patients. The expressions
of PAD4 and STAT4 were significantly different between the two RA groups
(P<0.05). In the RA patients, PAD4 mRNA expression was positively correlated to
DAS28 and anti-CCP antibody level (P<0.05), and STAT4 expression showed positive 
correlations to DAS28 and RF levels (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: HLA-DR4, PAD4 and STAT4 are overexpressed in RA patients and may be
involved in the pathogenesis of RA. The expressions of PAD4 and STAT4, but not
HLA-DR4, are closely related to the disease activity of RA. Detection of
peripheral blood PAD4 and STAT4 expressions can be helpful for evaluating the
disease activity of RA.

PMID: 20584675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 May;44(5):639-47. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0355OC. 
Epub 2010 Jun 25.

Intradermal cytosine-phosphate-guanosine treatment reduces lung inflammation but 
induces IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated airway hyperreactivity in a murine model of natural rubber
latex allergy.

Haapakoski R(1), Karisola P, Fyhrquist N, Savinko T, Wolff H, Turjanmaa K,
Palosuo T, Reunala T, Lauerma A, Alenius H.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Excellence for Immunotoxicology, Finnish Institute of Occupational
Health, Helsinki, Finland.

Asthma and other allergic diseases are continuously increasing, causing
considerable economic and sociologic burden to society. The hygiene hypothesis
proposes that lack of microbial T helper (Th) 1-like stimulation during early
childhood leads to increased Th2-driven allergic disorders later in life.
Immunostimulatory cytosine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG)-oligodeoxynucleotide motifs 
are candidate molecules for immunotherapeutic studies, as they have been shown to
shift the Th2 response toward the Th1 direction and reduce allergic symptoms.
Using natural rubber latex (NRL)-induced murine model of asthma, we demonstrated 
that intradermal CpG administration with allergen reduced pulmonary eosinophilia,
mucus production, and Th2-type cytokines, but unexpectedly induced airway
hyperreactivity (AHR) to inhaled methacholine, one of the hallmarks of asthma. We
found that induction in AHR was dependent on STAT4, but independent of STAT6
signaling. CpG treatment increased production of IFN-<U+03B3> in the airways and shifted
the ratio of CD4(+):CD8(+) T cells toward CD8(+) dominance. By blocking soluble
IFN-<U+03B3> with neutralizing antibody, AHR diminished and the CD4(+):CD8(+) ratio
returned to CD4(+) dominance. These results indicate that increased production of
IFN-<U+03B3> in the lungs may lead to severe side effects, such as enhancement of
bronchial hyperreactivity to inhaled allergen. This finding should be taken into 
consideration when planning prophylaxis treatment of asthma with intradermal CpG 
injections.

PMID: 20581096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Hepatol. 2010 Sep;53(3):424-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.03.018. Epub 2010 May 
25.

Altered interferon-alpha-signaling in natural killer cells from patients with
chronic hepatitis C virus infection.

Miyagi T(1), Takehara T, Nishio K, Shimizu S, Kohga K, Li W, Tatsumi T, Hiramatsu
N, Kanto T, Hayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Natural killer (NK) cells play an important role in the immune
response against virus infection. Interferon (IFN)-alpha, an essential component 
in therapy against hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, regulates NK cell function.
However, it remains obscure how chronic HCV infection (CHC) modifies
intracellular IFN-alpha signaling in NK cells. We investigated IFN-alpha
signaling in NK cells in patients with CHC.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were obtained from patients with CHC 
and healthy subjects (HS) as controls.
RESULTS: The expression level of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) 1, a key molecule of IFN-alpha signaling, was clearly higher in NK cells
from the CHC patients than in those from HS. The phosphorylation level of STAT1
with IFN-alpha stimulation was significantly greater in NK cells from the CHC
patients than in those from the HS, while that of STAT4 was significantly less.
These phosphorylation levels of STAT1 and STAT4 positively and negatively
correlated with the STAT1 level in NK cells, respectively. The IFN-alpha induced 
messenger RNA level of the suppressor of cytokine signaling 1, which is a
downstream gene of phosphorylated-STAT1, was clearly greater in NK cells from the
CHC patients than in those from the HS, while that of IFN-gamma, which is a
downstream gene of phosphorylated-STAT4, was clearly lower.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate altered IFN-alpha signaling in NK cells in
CHC patients, suggesting that this alteration is associated with the persistence 
of HCV infection and resistance to IFN-alpha therapy.

Copyright 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20554341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 1;247(2):105-15. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.06.003. Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Impact of developmental lead exposure on splenic factors.

Kasten-Jolly J(1), Heo Y, Lawrence DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology and Immunology,
Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY 12201-0509, USA.

Lead (Pb) is known to alter the functions of numerous organ systems, including
the hematopoietic and immune systems. Pb can induce anemia and can lower host
resistance to bacterial and viral infections. The anemia is due to Pb's
inhibition of hemoglobin synthesis and Pb's induction of membrane changes,
leading to early erythrocyte senescence. Pb also increases B-cell
activation/proliferation and skews T-cell help (Th) toward Th2 subset generation.
The specific mechanisms for many of the Pb effects are, as yet, not completely
understood. Therefore, we performed gene expression analysis, via microarray, on 
RNA from the spleens of developmentally Pb-exposed mice, in order to gain further
insight into these Pb effects. Splenic RNA microarray analysis indicated strong
up-regulation of genes coding for proteolytic enzymes, lipases, amylase, and
RNaseA. The data also showed that Pb affected the expression of many genes
associated with innate immunity. Analysis of the microarray results via
GeneSifter software indicated that Pb increased apoptosis, B-cell
differentiation, and Th2 development. Direct up-regulation by Pb of expression of
the gene encoding the heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI) suggested that Pb can
decrease erythropoiesis by blocking globin mRNA translation. Pb's high elevation 
of digestive/catabolizing enzymes could generate immunogenic self peptides. With 
Pb's potential to induce new self-peptides and to enhance the expression of
caspases, cytokines, and other immunomodulators, further evaluation of Pb's
involvement in autoimmune phenomena, especially Th2-mediated autoantibody
production, and alteration of organ system activities is warranted.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3219921
PMID: 20542052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Genes Immun. 2010 Jul;11(5):432-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.29. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

STAT4 is a confirmed genetic risk factor for Sjögren's syndrome and could be
involved in type 1 interferon pathway signaling.

Gestermann N(1), Mekinian A, Comets E, Loiseau P, Puechal X, Hachulla E,
Gottenberg JE, Mariette X, Miceli-Richard C.

Author information: 
(1)Rhumatologie, Institut Pour la Santé et la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U802,
Université Paris-Sud 11, Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris
(AP-HP), Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

Erratum in
    Genes Immun. 2010 Jul;11(5):446.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) is a transcription
factor mainly activated by interleukin 12, which promotes the secretion of type 2
interferon (IFN) by T-helper 1 cells. We assessed the association of STAT4 gene
polymorphism and primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) and its functional relevance.
We analyzed STAT4 rs7582694 polymorphism in an exploratory cohort of 186 pSS
patients and 152 controls, and in a replication cohort of 192 pSS patients and
483 controls, all Caucasian. mRNA levels of STAT4alpha, STAT4beta, STAT1, and the
type 1 IFN-induced genes PKR, MX1 and IFITM1 were assessed in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 30 pSS patients. STAT4 rs7582694 C allele was
associated with pSS in both cohorts (odds ratio (OR) 1.57, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 1.27-1.93, P=2.3 x 10(-5)). The association was increased for
homozygous subjects, which suggests a recessive effect of the STAT4 at-risk
allele. STAT4alpha, STAT4beta and STAT1 mRNA levels in PBMCs were not
significantly associated with rs7582694 genotypes, however the mRNA levels of
STAT4alpha and type 1 IFN-induced genes were strongly correlated: PKR (P=4 x
10(-3), r=0.51), MX1 (P=2 x 10(-4), r=0.63) and IFITM1 (P=8 x 10(-3), r=0.47),
suggesting that STAT4 might be involved in not only type 2 IFN production but
also in type 1 IFN-mediated effects.

PMID: 20535138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Aug;69(8):1548-53. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.121020. Epub 2010
May 24.

Investigation of potential non-HLA rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci in a 
European cohort increases the evidence for nine markers.

Plant D(1), Flynn E, Mbarek H, Dieudé P, Cornelis F, Arlestig L, Dahlqvist SR,
Goulielmos G, Boumpas DT, Sidiropoulos P, Johansen JS, Ørnbjerg LM, Hetland ML,
Klareskog L, Filer A, Buckley CD, Raza K, Witte T, Schmidt RE, Worthington J.

Author information: 
(1)arc-Epidemiology Unit, Stopford Building, The University of Manchester,
Manchester M13 9PT, UK. darren.plant@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors have a substantial role in determining development of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and are likely to account for 50-60% of disease
susceptibility. Genome-wide association studies have identified non-human
leucocyte antigen RA susceptibility loci which associate with RA with
low-to-moderate risk.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate recently identified RA susceptibility markers using
cohorts from six European countries, and perform a meta-analysis including
previously published results.
METHODS: 3311 DNA samples were collected from patients from six countries (UK,
Germany, France, Greece, Sweden and Denmark). Genotype data or DNA samples for
3709 controls were collected from four countries (not Sweden or Denmark).
Eighteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped using Sequenom
MassArray technology. Samples with a >95% success rate and only those SNPs with a
genotype success rate of >95% were included in the analysis. Scandinavian patient
data were pooled and previously published Swedish control data were accessed as a
comparison group. Meta-analysis was used to combine results from this study with 
all previously published data.
RESULTS: After quality control, 3209 patients and 3692 controls were included in 
the study. Eight markers (ie, rs1160542 (AFF3), rs1678542 (KIF5A), rs2476601
(PTPN22), rs3087243 (CTLA4), rs4810485 (CD40), rs5029937 (6q23), rs10760130
(TRAF1/C5) and rs7574865 (STAT4)) were significantly associated with RA by
meta-analysis. All 18 markers were associated with RA when previously published
studies were incorporated in the analysis. Data from this study increased the
significance for association with RA and nine markers.
CONCLUSIONS: In a large European RA cohort further evidence for the association
of 18 markers with RA development has been obtained.

PMCID: PMC2938898
PMID: 20498205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2010 Mar-Apr;28(2):208-14. Epub 2010 May 13.

T cell signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 and 6 are
affected by adalimumab therapy in rheumatoid arthritis.

Aerts NE(1), Ebo DG, Bridts CH, Stevens WJ, De Clerck LS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Immunology, Allergology, Rheumatology,
University of Antwerp, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: TNF-alpha inhibition therapy affects the systemic immune response in 
rheumatoid arthritis by influencing T cell subtypes (Th1, Th2, Treg), but its
effect on the intracellular signal transduction in T cells remains largely
unexplored. Here we studied the activation of Th1-associated signalling molecule 
STAT4 and Th2-associated STAT6 in CD4+ T cells.
METHODS: Eight rheumatoid arthritis patients were studied before and after 12
weeks of adalimumab therapy and compared to 8 healthy individuals. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were analysed flow cytometrically either directly 
after isolation or after 24 hours of anti-CD3/anti-CD28 stimulation, to determine
spontaneous and IL-4/IL-12-induced STAT4 and STAT6 phosphorylation in CD4+ T
cells. Cytokine production by stimulated PBMC was measured in the supernatant
using a cytometric bead array. Non-parametric statistical tests were applied.
RESULTS: After adalimumab therapy, phospho-STAT6 increased, both in freshly
isolated and anti-CD3/anti-CD28-stimulated CD4+ T cells. The STAT6 response to
brief IL-4 stimulation did not change. In healthy individuals and
adalimumab-treated patients, anti-CD3/anti-CD28 induced the phosphorylation of
STAT4, but not in untreated patients. IFN-gamma production in untreated patients 
was significantly lower than in healthy individuals or adalimumab-treated
patients. In contrast, the production of IL-4, IL-6 and IL-12 was not influenced.
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab therapy increases Th2-associated STAT6 phosphorylation
and restores the activation-induced STAT4 phosphorylation to the levels in
healthy individuals. This advocates against a pro-inflammatory effect of
Th1-associated STAT4 and might provide an explanation for the influence of TNF
inhibition therapy on the systemic T cell response in rheumatoid arthritis.

PMID: 20483042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. PLoS One. 2010 May 10;5(5):e10559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010559.

Genetic risk factors in lupus nephritis and IgA nephropathy--no support of an
overlap.

Vuong MT(1), Gunnarsson I, Lundberg S, Svenungsson E, Wramner L, Fernström A,
Syvänen AC, Do LT, Jacobson SH, Padyukov L.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. maituyetvuong@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: IgA nephropathy (IgAN) and nephritis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
(SLE) are two common forms of glomerulonephritis in which genetic findings are of
importance for disease development. We have recently reported an association of
IgAN with variants of TGFB1. In several autoimmune diseases, particularly in SLE,
IRF5, STAT4 genes and TRAF1-C5 locus have been shown to be important candidate
genes. The aim of this study was to compare genetic variants from the TGFB1,
IRF5, STAT4 genes and TRAF1-C5 locus with susceptibility to IgAN and lupus
nephritis in two Swedish cohorts.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
four genetic loci in 1252 DNA samples from patients with biopsy proven IgAN or
with SLE (with and without nephritis) and healthy age- and sex-matched controls
from the same population in Sweden.
RESULTS: Genotype and allelic frequencies for SNPs from selected genes did not
differ significantly between lupus nephritis patients and SLE patients without
nephritis. In addition, haplotype analysis for seven selected SNPs did not reveal
a difference for the SLE patient groups with and without nephritis. Moreover,
none of these SPNs showed a significant difference between IgAN patients and
healthy controls. IRF5 and STAT4 variants remained significantly different
between SLE cases and healthy controls. In addition, the data did not show an
association of TRAF1-C5 polymorphism with susceptibility to SLE in this Swedish
population.
CONCLUSION: Our data do not support an overlap in genetic susceptibility between 
patients with IgAN or SLE and reveal no specific importance of SLE associated
SNPs for the presence of lupus nephritis.

PMCID: PMC2866667
PMID: 20479942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;89(1):100-10. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.69. Epub 2010 May
18.

Inferring relevant control mechanisms for interleukin-12 signaling in naïve CD4+ 
T cells.

Finley SD(1), Gupta D, Cheng N, Klinke DJ 2nd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a key cytokine involved in shaping the cell-mediated
immunity to intracellular pathogens. IL-12 initiates a cellular response through 
the IL-12 signaling pathway, a member of the Janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) family of signaling networks. The JAK/STAT 
pathway includes several regulatory elements; however, the dynamics of these
mechanisms are not fully understood. Therefore, the objective of this study was
to infer the relative importance of regulatory mechanisms that modulate the
activation of STAT4 in naïve CD4(+) T cells. Dynamic changes in protein
expression and activity were measured using flow cytometry and these data were
used to calibrate a mathematical model of IL-12 signaling. An empirical Bayesian 
approach was used to infer the relative strengths of the different regulatory
mechanisms in the system. The model predicted that IL-12 receptor expression is
regulated by a dynamic, autonomous program that was independent of STAT4
activation. In summary, a mathematical model of the canonical IL-12 signaling
pathway used in conjunction with a Bayesian framework provided high-confidence
predictions of the system-specific control mechanisms from the available
experimental observations.

PMCID: PMC3004982
PMID: 20479776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Immunity. 2010 May 28;32(5):616-27. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.04.016. Epub 2010 
May 13.

Epigenetic instability of cytokine and transcription factor gene loci underlies
plasticity of the T helper 17 cell lineage.

Mukasa R(1), Balasubramani A, Lee YK, Whitley SK, Weaver BT, Shibata Y, Crawford 
GE, Hatton RD, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 May 28;32(5):581-3.

Phenotypic plasticity of T helper 17 (Th17) cells suggests instability of
chromatin structure of key genes of this lineage. We identified epigenetic
modifications across the clustered Il17a and Il17f and the Ifng loci before and
after differential IL-12 or TGF-beta cytokine signaling, which induce divergent
fates of Th17 cell precursors. We found that Th17 cell precursors had substantial
remodeling of the Ifng locus, but underwent critical additional modifications to 
enable high expression when stimulated by IL-12. Permissive modifications across 
the Il17a-Il17f locus were amplified by TGF-beta signaling in Th17 cells, but
were rapidly reversed downstream of IL-12-induced silencing of the Rorc gene by
the transcription factors STAT4 and T-bet. These findings reveal substantial
chromatin instability of key transcription factor and cytokine genes of Th17
cells and support a model of Th17 cell lineage plasticity in which cell-extrinsic
factors modulate Th17 cell fates through differential effects on the epigenetic
status of Th17 cell lineage factors.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3129685
PMID: 20471290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Aug;40(8):2236-47. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939759.

A novel immunoregulatory function for IL-23: Inhibition of IL-12-dependent IFN-<U+03B3> 
production.

Sieve AN(1), Meeks KD, Lee S, Berg RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, The University of North Texas 
Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.

Most studies investigating the function of IL-23 have concluded that it promotes 
IL-17-secreting T cells. Although some reports have also characterized IL-23 as
having redundant pro-inflammatory effects with IL-12, we have instead found that 
IL-23 antagonizes IL-12-induced secretion of IFN-<U+03B3>. When splenocytes or purified 
populations of T cells were cultured with IL-23, IFN-<U+03B3> secretion in response to
IL-12 was dramatically reduced. The impact of IL-23 was most prominent in CD8(+) 
T cells, but was also observed in NK and CD4(+) T cells. Mechanistically, the
IL-23 receptor was not required for this phenomenon, and IL-23 inhibited
signaling through the IL-12 receptor by reducing IL-12-induced signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) phosphorylation. IL-23 was also able to 
reduce IFN-<U+03B3> secretion by antagonizing endogenously produced IL-12 from Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM)-infected macrophages. In vivo, LM infection induced higher
serum IFN-<U+03B3> levels and a greater percentage of IFN-<U+03B3>(+)CD8(+) T cells in
IL-23p19-deficient mice as compared with WT mice. This increase in IFN-<U+03B3>
production coincided with increased LM clearance at days 2 and 3 post-infection. 
Our data suggest that IL-23 may be a key factor in determining the responsiveness
of lymphocytes to IL-12 and their subsequent secretion of IFN-<U+03B3>.

PMCID: PMC3039303
PMID: 20458705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 29;5(4):e10373. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010373.

Evidence for STAT4 as a common autoimmune gene: rs7574865 is associated with
colonic Crohn's disease and early disease onset.

Glas J(1), Seiderer J, Nagy M, Fries C, Beigel F, Weidinger M, Pfennig S, Klein
W, Epplen JT, Lohse P, Folwaczny M, Göke B, Ochsenkühn T, Diegelmann J,
Müller-Myhsok B, Roeske D, Brand S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II-Grosshadern, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies demonstrated an association of STAT4 variants with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), indicating that
multiple autoimmune diseases share common susceptibility genes. We therefore
investigated the influence of STAT4 variants on the susceptibility and phenotype 
of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) in a large patient and control cohort.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genomic DNA from 2704 individuals of Caucasian
origin including 857 patients with Crohn's disease (CD), 464 patients with
ulcerative colitis (UC), and 1383 healthy, unrelated controls was analyzed for
seven SNPs in the STAT4 gene (rs11889341, rs7574865, rs7568275, rs8179673,
rs10181656, rs7582694, rs10174238). In addition, a detailed genotype-phenotype
analysis was performed. Our analysis revealed an association of the STAT4 SNP
rs7574865 with overall decreased susceptibility to CD (p = 0.047, OR 0.86 [95% CI
0.74-0.99]). However, compared to CD patients carrying the wild type genotype,
the STAT4 SNP rs7574865 was significantly associated with early CD onset (p =
0.021) and colonic CD (p = 0.008; OR = 4.60, 95% CI 1.63-12.96). For two other
STAT4 variants, there was a trend towards protection against CD susceptibility
(rs7568275, p = 0.058, OR 0.86 [95% CI 0.74-1.00]; rs10174238, p = 0.057, OR 0.86
[95% CI 0.75-1.00]). In contrast, we did not observe any association with UC
susceptibility. Evidence for weak gene-gene interaction of STAT4 with the IL23R
SNP rs11209026 was lost after Bonferroni correction.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results identified the STAT4 SNP rs7574865 as a
disease-modifying gene variant in colonic CD. However, in contrast to SLE and RA,
the effect of rs7574865 on CD susceptibility is only weak.

PMCID: PMC2861592
PMID: 20454450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2010;33(2):57-65.

Association of IRF5, STAT4 and BLK with systemic lupus erythematosus and other
rheumatic diseases.

Tsuchiya N(1), Ito I, Kawasaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Life System
Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of 
Tsukuba.

Recent large-scale studies in the Caucasian populations identified many new
susceptibility genes to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this review, we
discuss our findings on some of such genes, interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5), signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and B lymphoid
tyrosine kinase (BLK), in the Japanese population. All of these genes were
associated with SLE also in Japanese; however, there are notable differences. In 
IRF5, the risk haplotype in Caucasians was not present in Japanese. Instead, a
SNP that does not exist in Caucasians defined a protective haplotype in Japanese.
In STAT4 and especially in BLK, the risk allele frequency was substantially
larger in the Japanese population than in Caucasians; as a result, the genetic
contribution of these genes in the population is considered to be greater in the 
Japanese. Presence of susceptibility genes shared by the Caucasian and Asian
populations as well as population-specific susceptibility genes was supported by 
the first genome-wide association study in the Asians published from China in
2009. We and other investigators also found that IRF5, STAT4 and BLK are
associated not only with SLE, but also rheumatoid arthritis and systemic
sclerosis. Thus, a substantial proportion of susceptibility genes are shared by
multiple autoimmune rheumatic diseases.

PMID: 20453440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Sep;69(9):1694-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.123828. Epub 2010 May
3.

Genetic variants in the prediction of rheumatoid arthritis.

van der Helm-van Mil AH(1), Toes RE, Huizinga TW.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Rheumatology, Leiden, The
Netherlands. avdHelm@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the currently known genetic risk factors for
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) improve the prediction of the development of RA
compared to prediction using clinical risk factors alone in patients with
undifferentiated arthritis (UA).
METHODS: Five hundred and seventy early UA-patients included in the Leiden Early 
Arthritis Clinic cohort, previously used to derive a clinical prediction rule,
were used to explore the additional value of genetic variants. The following
genetic variants were assessed HLA-DRB1 shared epitope (SE) alleles, rs2476601
(PTPN22), rs108184088 (TRAF1-C5), rs7574865 (STAT4), rs3087243 (CTLA4), rs4810485
(CD40), rs1678542 (KIF5A-PIP4K2C), rs2812378 (CCL21), rs42041 (CDK6), rs4750316
(PRKCQ), rs6684865 (MMEL1-TNFRSF14), rs2004640 (IRF5), rs6920220 and rs10499194
(TNFAIP3-OLIG3), interactions between HLA-SE alleles and rs2476601 (PTPN22) and
between HLA-SE alleles and smoking. The area under the receiver operator curve
(AUC) was used as measure of the discriminative ability of the models.
RESULTS: The AUC of a model consisting of genetic variants only was low, 0.536
(95% CI 0.48 to 0.59). The AUC of the model including genetic and clinical risk
factors was not superior over the AUC of the clinical prediction rule (0.889, 95%
CI 0.86 to 0.95 and 0.884, 95% CI 0.86 to 0.92).
CONCLUSION: In a population at risk, information on currently known genetic risk 
factors for RA does not improve prediction of risk for RA compared to a
prediction rule based on common clinical risk factors alone.

PMID: 20439292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Hum Immunol. 2010 Jul;71(7):723-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.04.007. Epub 2010
May 14.

STAT4 polymorphism in a Chinese Han population with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
and Behçet's disease.

Hu K(1), Yang P, Jiang Z, Hou S, Du L, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
China.

This study investigated the association of rs7574865 polymorphism in STAT4 with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome and Behçet's disease (BD) in a Chinese Han
population. Genotyping of rs7574865 polymorphism in the STAT4 gene was performed 
using polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphisms in 379 
VKH patients, 366 BD patients, and 414 controls. Of the samples, 20% were
sequenced to validate polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length
polymorphism results. A binary logistic regression analysis was used to assess
the influence of the gender on the association of STAT4 polymorphism with BD. A
significantly increased frequency of TT genotype of the STAT4 rs7574865 was
observed in VKH patients (p = 0.013). GT genotypic frequency was significantly
lower in BD patients than in controls (p = 0.003) However the significance of
rs7574865 was lost in all tested BD patients when adjusted for gender (p =
0.775). A significantly lower frequency of GT genotype and a significantly higher
frequency of GG genotype was found in male BD patients compared with male
controls (p = 0.000458 and p = 0.009, respectively). Stratification analysis
according to tinnitus, alopecia, poliosis, headache, and vitiligo for VKH
syndrome and oral ulceration, genital ulceration, skin lesions and arthritis for 
BD failed to find any association between the tested single nucleotide
polymorphism and any of the extraocular findings. Our results suggest that TT
genotype of rs7574865 may be a susceptible factor for VKH syndrome in a Chinese
Han population, and that GG genotype of this SNP may confer susceptibility in
male BD patients.

Crown Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20438790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Neuroimmunol. 2010 Jun;223(1-2):55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.04.002.

Immune modulation by chondroitin sulfate and its degraded disaccharide product in
the development of an experimental model of multiple sclerosis.

Zhou J(1), Nagarkatti P, Zhong Y, Nagarkatti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29209, USA.

Clinical symptoms in MOG-induced EAE mice significantly exacerbated following
chondroitin sulfate A (CS-A) injection, whereas administration of a degraded
product, CSPG-DS, caused dramatic inhibition of EAE development. Also,
administration of CSPG-DS but not CS-A, after the onset of clinical symptoms of
EAE, was able to suppress the disease. Further studies demonstrated that CS-A
up-regulated STAT4 expression and thus, induced IFN-gamma production and Th1 CD4 
T cell differentiation. CS-A also up-regulated STAT3 and IL-23 expression and
thus increased IL-17 producing T cells. CSPG-DS treatment both in vivo and in
vitro decreased TNFalpha production from splenocytes. In vitro and in vivo
studies indicated that CSPG-DS treatment in EAE mice significantly blocked
migration of lymphocytes, whereas CS-A treatment increased lymphocyte
infiltration in the brain.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4138964
PMID: 20434781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2010 Apr;12(2):87-93. doi: 10.1007/s11926-010-0087-0.

The genetics of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: what is new in 2010?

Angeles-Han S(1), Prahalad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, 2015 Uppergate 
Drive NE, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), the most common cause of chronic arthritis
in children, is believed to be influenced by genetic factors. Recent studies on
the genetics of JIA have not only validated proposed genetic associations but
have also led to the recognition of novel genetic associations. Studies of
specific genes have been modeled on the premise of shared autoimmunity, wherein
genetic variants that predispose to other autoimmune phenotypes may also confer
susceptibility to JIA. The advent of genome-wide association studies has
accelerated the detection of non-HLA susceptibility loci in other autoimmune
phenotypes and is likely to uncover novel JIA-associated variants as well. This
review highlights recent genetic investigations of JIA.

PMID: 20425016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Mar;71(3):134-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02361.x.

IL-23 in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis.

Paradowska-Gorycka A(1), Grzybowska-Kowalczyk A, Wojtecka-Lukasik E, Maslinski S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Rheumatology, Warsaw, Poland.
paradowska_aga@interia.pl

Interleukin-23 (IL-23) is a heterodimeric cytokine belonging to the IL-6/IL-12
family that plays a key role in several of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders.
This family contains the 34 type I cytokine receptor chains and 27 ligands, which
share structural and functional similarities, but on the other hand they display 
distinct roles in shaping Th cells responses. IL-12 family cytokines have not
only proinflammatory effects but they also promote inflammatory responses. IL-23 
is composed of the p40 subunit in common with IL-12, and with a unique p19
subunit. IL-23 binding to an IL-23 receptor expressed on dendritic cells,
macrophages and monocytes triggers the activation of Jak2 and Tyk2, which in turn
phosphorylates STAT1, STAT3, STAT4 and STAT5 as well as induce formation of
STAT3-STAT4 heterodimers. IL-23 is one of the essential factors required for the 
survival and/or expansion of Th17 cells, which produce IL-17, IL-17F, IL-6 and
TNF-alpha. Th17 cells stimulated by the IL-23 promote osteoclastogenesis through 
production of IL-17, which induce receptor activator of NF-kappa B ligand on
mesenchymal cells. The IL-23-IL-17 axis includes Th17 cells and plays a key role 
in the development of autoimmune arthritis.

PMID: 20415779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Autophagy. 2010 May;6(4):523-41. doi: 10.4161/auto.6.4.11811. Epub 2010 May 16.

Rapamycin generates anti-apoptotic human Th1/Tc1 cells via autophagy for
induction of xenogeneic GVHD.

Amarnath S(1), Flomerfelt FA, Costanzo CM, Foley JE, Mariotti J, Konecki DM,
Gangopadhyay A, Eckhaus M, Wong S, Levine BL, June CH, Fowler DH.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. samarnath@mail.nih.gov

Murine T cells exposed to rapamycin maintain flexibility towards Th1/Tc1
differentiation, thereby indicating that rapamycin promotion of regulatory T
cells (Tregs) is conditional. The degree to which rapamycin might inhibit human
Th1/Tc1 differentiation has not been evaluated. In the presence of rapamycin, T
cell costimulation and polarization with IL-12 or IFN-a permitted human CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cell differentiation towards a Th1/Tc1 phenotype; activation of STAT1 and 
STAT4 pathways essential for Th1/Tc1 polarity was preserved during mTOR blockade 
but instead abrogated by PI3 kinase inhibition. Such rapamycin-resistant human
Th1/Tc1 cells: (1) were generated through autophagy (increased LC3BII expression;
phenotype reversion by autophagy inhibition via 3-MA or siRNA for Beclin1); (2)
expressed anti-apoptotic bcl-2 family members (reduced Bax, Bak; increased
phospho-Bad); (3) maintained mitochondrial membrane potentials; and (4) displayed
reduced apoptosis. In vivo, type I polarized and rapamycin-resistant human T
cells caused increased xenogeneic graft-versus-host disease (x-GVHD). Murine
recipients of rapamycin-resistant human Th1/Tc1 cells had: (1) persistent T cell 
engraftment; (2) increased T cell cytokine and cytolytic effector function; and
(3) T cell infiltration of skin, gut, and liver. Rapamycin therefore does not
impair human T cell capacity for type I differentiation. Rather, rapamycin yields
an anti-apoptotic Th1/Tc1 effector phenotype by promoting autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3707503
PMID: 20404486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2010 Feb;235(2):230-6. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2009.008357.

Regulation of interferon-gamma, interleukin-4 and interleukin-2 by Schizonepeta
tenuifolia through differential effects on nuclear factor-kappaB, NFATc2 and
STAT4/6.

Kang H(1), Moon JY, Sohn NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oriental Medical Science, Graduate School of East-West Medicine,
Kyunghee University, Yongin, South Korea.

Contact with antigen on T-cells is made via the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex plus 
CD28, resulting in the production of cytokines including interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4
and interferon (IFN)-gamma. In particular, dysregulation of IFN-gamma and IL-4
accounts in part for organ-specific autoimmune diseases, allergic inflammation
and other chronic inflammatory disorders. The dried above-ground parts of
Schizonepeta tenuifolia Briq are used for the treatment of common cold and skin
rashes observed in allergic dermatitis, psoriasis and other dermatological
disorders in oriental medicine. In the present study, we investigated whether S. 
tenuifolia water extract (STE) may modulate systemic levels of IFN-gamma, IL-4
and IL-2 in anti-CD3-stimulated mice and the production of those cytokines in
anti-CD3-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In addition, the 
effects of STE on anti-CD3-induced activation of several transcription factors
were examined. Oral administration of STE significantly reduced the serum levels 
of IFN-gamma and IL-4 from anti-CD3-treated mice but enhanced those of IL-2.
Similar patterns were demonstrated in anti-CD3-stimulated splenocytes and PBMCs
in vitro. Further analysis showed that STE enhanced the nuclear translocation of 
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)c2 but reduced that of the nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB. The downregulation of IFN-gamma and IL-4 was not mediated by 
its effects on signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)4 and STAT6
activation. These results suggest that the differential regulation of STE on
IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IL-2 may be due to its suppression of NF-kappaB, concomitant 
with its enhancement of NFATc2. Further mechanistic work is required to
investigate the role of STE on its modulation of anti-CD3-induced cytokines.

PMID: 20404039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):507-17. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.04.004. Epub 2010 
Apr 15.

The transcription factor GATA3 actively represses RUNX3 protein-regulated
production of interferon-gamma.

Yagi R(1), Junttila IS, Wei G, Urban JF Jr, Zhao K, Paul WE, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):500-1.

The transcription factor GATA3 is crucial for the differentiation of naive CD4(+)
T cells into T helper 2 (Th2) cells. Here, we show that deletion of Gata3 allowed
the appearance of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-producing cells in the absence of 
interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IFN-gamma. Such IFN-gamma production was transcription
factor T-bet independent. Another T-box-containing transcription factor Eomes,
but not T-bet, was induced both in GATA3-deficient CD4(+) T cells differentiated 
under Th2 cell conditions and in Th2 cells with enforced Runx3 expression,
contributing to IFN-gamma production. GATA3 overexpression blocked Runx3-mediated
Eomes induction and IFN-gamma production, and GATA3 protein physically interacted
with Runx3 protein. Furthermore, we found that Runx3 directly bound to multiple
regulatory elements of the Ifng gene and that blocking Runx3 function in either
Th1 or GATA3-deficient "Th2" cells results in diminished IFN-gamma production by 
these cells. Thus, the Runx3-mediated pathway, actively suppressed by GATA3,
induces IFN-gamma production in a STAT4- and T-bet-independent manner.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2867662
PMID: 20399120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Apr;1193:10-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05288.x.

Genetics in neuroendocrine immunology: implications for rheumatoid arthritis and 
osteoarthritis.

Stark K(1), Straub RH, Blazicková S, Hengstenberg C, Rovenský J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

Both genetic and environmental factors contribute to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as
well as osteoarthritis (OA). For RA, most of the known genetic markers are linked
with genes from immunological pathways. Recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) on RA identified known and novel susceptibility genes like HLA-DRB1,
PTPN22, STAT4, TRAF1/C5, OLIG3/TNFAIP3, CD40, CCL21, MMEL1-TNFRSF14, CDK6, PRKCQ,
IL2RB, and KIF5A-PIP4K2C. These association signals explain more than 50% of the 
genetic influence on RA. In contrast, less GWAS data for OA exist. Most OA
susceptibility genes arose from classical candidate gene analyses and were not
replicated in all study samples. Neuroendocrine factors are hypothesized to play 
an important role both in RA and OA etiology. Here, we discuss these findings and
present an outlook for genetic association studies after GWAS.

PMID: 20398001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12 Suppl 1:S3. doi: 10.1186/ar2884. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Potential role of IFNa in adult lupus.

Rönnblom L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala University Hospital, Entrance 40, Uppsala, Sweden.
Lars.Ronnblom@medsci.uu.se

Patients with lupus have a continuous production of IFNa and display an increased
expression of IFNa-regulated genes. The reason for the ongoing IFNa synthesis in 
these patients seems to be an activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
by immune complexes (ICs), consisting of autoantibodies in combination with
DNA-containing or RNA-containing autoantigens. The mechanisms behind the
activation of pDCs by such ICs have to some extent been elucidated during the
last years. Thus, interferogenic ICs are internalized via the Fc<U+03B3>RIIa expressed
on pDCs, reach the endosomes and stimulate Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 or 9, which
subsequently leads to IFNa gene transcription. Variants of genes involved in both
the IFNa synthesis and response have been linked to an increased risk to develop 
lupus. Among these genes are interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), which is
involved in TLR signaling, and the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) that interacts with the type I interferon receptor.
Produced IFNa may at least partially be responsible for several of the observed
alterations in the immune system of lupus patients and contribute to the
autoimmune disease process, which will be discussed in the present review. How
produced IFNa can contribute to some clinical manifestations will briefly be
described, as well as the possible consequences of this knowledge in clinical
practice for disease monitoring and therapy.

PMCID: PMC2991776
PMID: 20392290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Nat Genet. 2010 May;42(5):426-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.565. Epub 2010 Apr 11.

Genome-wide association study of systemic sclerosis identifies CD247 as a new
susceptibility locus.

Radstake TR(1), Gorlova O, Rueda B, Martin JE, Alizadeh BZ, Palomino-Morales R,
Coenen MJ, Vonk MC, Voskuyl AE, Schuerwegh AJ, Broen JC, van Riel PL, van 't Slot
R, Italiaander A, Ophoff RA, Riemekasten G, Hunzelmann N, Simeon CP,
Ortego-Centeno N, González-Gay MA, González-Escribano MF; Spanish Scleroderma
Group, Airo P, van Laar J, Herrick A, Worthington J, Hesselstrand R, Smith V, de 
Keyser F, Houssiau F, Chee MM, Madhok R, Shiels P, Westhovens R, Kreuter A,
Kiener H, de Baere E, Witte T, Padykov L, Klareskog L, Beretta L, Scorza R, Lie
BA, Hoffmann-Vold AM, Carreira P, Varga J, Hinchcliff M, Gregersen PK, Lee AT,
Ying J, Han Y, Weng SF, Amos CI, Wigley FM, Hummers L, Nelson JL, Agarwal SK,
Assassi S, Gourh P, Tan FK, Koeleman BP, Arnett FC, Martin J, Mayes MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. tradstake73@gmail.com

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by fibrosis of
the skin and internal organs that leads to profound disability and premature
death. To identify new SSc susceptibility loci, we conducted the first
genome-wide association study in a population of European ancestry including a
total of 2,296 individuals with SSc and 5,171 controls. Analysis of 279,621
autosomal SNPs followed by replication testing in an independent case-control set
of European ancestry (2,753 individuals with SSc (cases) and 4,569 controls)
identified a new susceptibility locus for systemic sclerosis at CD247 (1q22-23,
rs2056626, P = 2.09 x 10(-7) in the discovery samples, P = 3.39 x 10(-9) in the
combined analysis). Additionally, we confirm and firmly establish the role of the
MHC (P = 2.31 x 10(-18)), IRF5 (P = 1.86 x 10(-13)) and STAT4 (P = 3.37 x 10(-9))
gene regions as SSc genetic risk factors.

PMCID: PMC2861917
PMID: 20383147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Rheumatol. 2010 May;37(5):1016-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.091007. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Influence of STAT4 polymorphism in primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Palomino-Morales RJ(1), Diaz-Gallo LM, Witte T, Anaya JM, Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Granada, Spain. rpm@ipb.csic.es

OBJECTIVE: To examine the influence of STAT4 rs7574865 gene polymorphism on
patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS).
METHODS: Two different cohorts were studied: 69 patients with primary SS and 296 
controls from Colombia and 108 patients with primary SS and 227 controls from
Germany. Samples were genotyped for the STAT4 rs7574865 single-nucleotide
polymorphism with a predesigned TaqMan single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping 
assay. We carried out a metaanalysis of our results combined with data published 
to date.
RESULTS: Although no significant differences were observed in the allele
frequencies of STAT4 rs7574865 gene polymorphism between patients and controls in
Colombians (p = 0.28, OR 1.24, 95% CI 0.82-1.87) and Germans (p = 0.08, OR 1.40, 
95% CI 0.96-2.02), the metaanalysis disclosed a significant effect of the T
allele on disease (p = 4.7 x 10(-6), OR 1.40, 95% CI 1.21-1.62).
CONCLUSION: These data reinforce the influence of STAT4 gene on primary SS and as
a general autoimmune gene.

PMID: 20360187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(2):R57. doi: 10.1186/ar2969. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

Evaluation of the rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci HLA-DRB1, PTPN22,
OLIG3/TNFAIP3, STAT4 and TRAF1/C5 in an inception cohort.

Morgan AW(1), Robinson JI, Conaghan PG, Martin SG, Hensor EM, Morgan MD, Steiner 
L, Erlich HA, Gooi HC, Barton A, Worthington J, Emery P; UKRAG Consortium; YEAR
Consortium.

Collaborators: Eyre S, Hinks A, Gibbons LJ, Bowes J, Flynn E, Martin P, Thomson
W, Barton A, Worthington J, Martin S, Robinson JI, Morgan AW, Emery P, Wilson AG,
Steer S, Hocking L, Reid DM, Harrison P, Wordsworth P, Emery P, Conaghan P,
Morgan A, Keenan AM, Hensor E, Kitcheman J, Huston G, Martin M, Pease C, Cox S,
Green M, Isdale A, Gough A, Green M, Reece R, Hordon L, Helliwell P, Melsom R,
Doherty S, Adebajo A, Harvey A, Jarrett S, Karim Z, McGonagle D, Bejarano V, Nam 
J, Brown C, Thomas C, Pickles D, Hammond A, Rhys-Evans B, Padwell B, Smith S,
King H, Gill A, Green J, Neville B, Fairclough A, Nunns C, Firth J, Sigsworth L, 
Heard J, Madden J, Taylor L, Corscadden D, Henshaw K, Rashid LH, Martin SG,
Robinson JI.

Author information: 
(1)NIHR - Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Chapeltown
Road, Leeds LS7 4SA, UK. a.w.morgan@leeds.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: This study investigated five confirmed rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
susceptibility genes/loci (HLA-DRB1, PTPN22, STAT4, OLIG3/TNFAIP3 and TRAF1/C5)
for association with susceptibility and severity in an inception cohort.
METHODS: The magnitude of association for each genotype was assessed in 1,046 RA 
subjects from the Yorkshire Early RA cohort and in 5,968 healthy UK controls.
Additional exploratory subanalyses were undertaken in subgroups defined by
autoantibody status (rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide) or 
disease severity (baseline articular erosions, Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ) score and swollen joint count (SJC)).
RESULTS: In the total RA inception cohort, the HLA-DRB1 shared epitope
(per-allele odds ratio (OR) = 2.1, trend P < 0.0001), PTPN22 (per-allele OR =
1.5, trend P < 0.0001), OLIG3/TNFAIP3 locus (per-allele OR = 1.2, trend P =
0.009) and TRAF1/C5 locus (per-allele OR = 1.1, trend P = 0.04) were associated
with RA. The magnitude of association for these loci was increased in those
patients who were autoantibody-positive. PTPN22 was associated with
autoantibody-negative RA (per-allele OR = 1.3, trend P = 0.04). There was no
evidence of association between these five genetic loci and baseline erosions or 
SJC in the total RA cohort, after adjustment for symptom duration. TRAF1/C5 was
significantly associated with baseline HAQ, however, following adjustment for
symptom duration (P trend = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the mounting evidence that different genetic 
loci are associated with autoantibody-positive and autoantibody-negative RA,
possibly suggesting that many of the genes identified to date are associated with
autoantibody production. Additional studies with a specific focus on
autoantibody-negative RA will be needed to identify the genes predisposing to
this RA subgroup. The TRAF1/C5 locus in particular warrants further investigation
in RA as a potential disease severity locus.

PMCID: PMC2888207
PMID: 20353580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;42(6):1052-9. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.03.017. Epub 2010 Mar 27.

Activation of STAT3 by specific Galpha subunits and multiple Gbetagamma dimers.

Yuen JW(1), Poon LS, Chan AS, Yu FW, Lo RK, Wong YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Molecular Neuroscience Center, and The
Biotechnology Research Institute, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

The hematopoietic-specific G(q) subfamily members, Galpha(16) and Galpha(14)
proteins have recently been shown to be capable of stimulating the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) as well as STAT1. In the
present study we examined whether this activation was STAT-member specific as
well as determining the possible involvement of Gbetagamma dimers. Despite clear 
stimulation of STAT3, the constitutively active mutants of Galpha(16)
(Galpha(16)QL) and Galpha(14) (Galpha(14)QL) failed to induce the phosphorylation
of several STAT family members, including STAT2, STAT4 and STAT5 in human
embryonic kidney 293 cells. On the other hand, transient expression of specific
combinations of Gbetagamma complexes induced STAT3 phosphorylation. Among the 48 
combinations tested, 13 permutations of Gbetagamma stimulated STAT3
phosphorylation and all of them contain the neuronal-specific Ggamma(2),
Ggamma(4), Ggamma(7) and Ggamma(9). These results suggested that the activation
of STAT family members by Galpha(16) or Galpha(14) was selective and that
distinct combinations of Gbetagamma complexes can also regulate the STAT
signaling pathway.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20348012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Apr;69(4):625-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.113183.

Genetic variants of STAT4 associated with rheumatoid arthritis in persons of
Asian and European ancestry do not replicate in African Americans.

Kelley JM, Hughes LB, Malik A, Danila MI, Edberg Y, Alarcón GS, Conn DL, Jonas
BL, Callahan LF, Smith EA, Brasington RD, Edberg JC, Kimberly RP, Moreland LW,
Bridges SL.

PMCID: PMC3133745
PMID: 20237121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;26(2):125-8.

[Construction and identification of yeast expression plasmids containing mouse
signal transducers and activators of transcription-4/6].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang MX(1), Fu Z, Tian DY, Wang LJ, Liu EM, Luo ZX, Dai JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China. zhangmingxiang27@163.com

AIM: To construct yeast expression plasmids containing mouse STAT4/6 gene for
further study of their interaction with other proteins in yeast two-hybrid
system.
METHODS: Mouse STAT4/6 genes were amplified by PCR and T-A was cloned with
pMD19-T simple vector and then was cloned into yeast expression vector pGADT7 cut
with incision enzymes and treated with CIAP. The yeast expression vector pGADT7
was identified by enzyme cutting and sequencing. The yeast expression plasmids
pGADT7-STAT4/6 were transformed into AH109 yeast cells and the expression of the 
STAT4/6 fusion proteins was detected by Western blot. Their toxicity and
self-activation were also detected.
RESULTS: Mouse STAT4/6 genes were successfully amplified and cloned into pMD19-T 
simple vector and pGADT7. Sequencing analysis revealed that both plasmids met the
design of the study. The yeast expression plasmids pGADT7-STAT4/6 were
successfully transformed into AH109 yeast cells, without toxicity or
self-activation. The expression of STAT4/6 fusion proteins was confirmed by
Western blot.
CONCLUSION: The yeast expression plasmids pGADT7-STAT4/6 are successfully
constructed and can be applied in the detection of their interaction with other
proteins.

PMID: 20230670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Jun 15;79(12):1797-804. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.02.008.
Epub 2010 Feb 21.

The intestinal antiinflammatory agent glycomacropeptide has immunomodulatory
actions on rat splenocytes.

Requena P(1), González R, López-Posadas R, Abadía-Molina A, Suárez MD, Zarzuelo
A, de Medina FS, Martínez-Augustin O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), University of
Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain.

Bovine glycomacropeptide (GMP) is an immunologically active milk peptide that is 
a part of the normal human diet. GMP has therapeutic value in preclinical models 
of intestinal inflammation, and its mechanism may be related to effects on
lymphocytes. This study focuses on the actions of GMP on rat splenocytes in vitro
and in vivo. Bovine serum albumin and lactoferrin were used for comparative
purposes. GMP (0.01-0.1mgmL(-1)) enhanced Concanavalin A (ConA) evoked but not
basal splenocyte proliferation. At 1mgmL(-1) GMP lost this effect but augmented
basal TNF-alpha secretion and also iNOS and COX2 expression. IFN-gamma, IL-2 and 
IL-17 were not affected by GMP in quiescent splenocytes, but IL-10 was augmented 
at all concentrations tested. On the other hand, GMP produced a marked inhibitory
effect (70%) on IFN-gamma secretion and to a lower extent (50%) also on
TNF-alpha. GMP was shown to block STAT4 but not IkappaB-alpha phosphorylation.
The Treg marker Foxp3 was markedly upregulated by GMP. Bovine serum albumin had
some effects on splenocyte function which were of lower magnitude and not
entirely coincidental, while lactoferrin had a strong antiproliferative effect,
as expected, indicating a specific effect of GMP. When administered for 3 days to
normal Wistar rats, GMP reproduced the Foxp3 induction effect observed previously
in vitro. This was observed in splenocytes but not in thymocytes, and only when
administered by the oral rather than the intraperitoneal route. Thus our results 
support the hypothesis that GMP may limit intestinal inflammation acting at least
in part on lymphocytes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20178776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Life Sci. 2010 Apr 24;86(17-18):661-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.02.016. Epub 2010 
Feb 20.

Association of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 genetic
variants with extra-intestinal manifestations in inflammatory bowel disease.

Moon CM(1), Cheon JH, Kim SW, Shin DJ, Kim ES, Shin ES, Kang Y, Park JJ, Hong SP,
Nam SY, Kim TI, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

AIMS: The STAT4 gene encodes a transcription factor which plays an important role
in the development of inflammation of many immune-mediated diseases. We
investigated the relationship between STAT4 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and susceptibility to ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) and
disease phenotypes in the Korean population.
MAIN METHODS: We performed a case-control association study in individuals with
UC (N=246), CD (N=182), and healthy controls (N=229).
KEY FINDINGS: We genotyped 8 STAT4 SNPs (rs11889341, rs7574865, rs8179673,
rs6752770, rs925847, rs10168266, rs10181656, and rs11685878) in the STAT4 gene in
patients and controls. SNP rs925847 in the STAT4 gene was significantly
associated with susceptibility to UC (P=0.025; OR=0.63) in dominant genotype
analysis, though none of these SNPs were associated with CD susceptibility.
Moreover, a significant association was identified between SNP rs11889341 and
joint involvement (P=0.040; OR=3.79), and between SNP rs925847 and eye
involvement (P=0.030; OR=2.42) in UC patients. For CD, rs925847 genetic variant
was associated with joint (P=0.029; OR=3.93) and perianal lesions (P=0.033;
OR=2.27).
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data demonstrated that the STAT4 genetic variants could
predispose an individual to IBD and its extra-intestinal ailments in Koreans,
suggesting the common pathogenesis of IBD (especially, extra-intestinal
manifestations) and other autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 20176035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Transl Res. 2010 Mar;155(3):109-17. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2009.08.012. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Genetic regulation of serum cytokines in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Kariuki SN(1), Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Genetic association studies in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have been
extremely successful in recent years, identifying several loci associated with
disease susceptibility. Much work remains to integrate these loci into the
functional pathogenic pathways that characterize the disease. Our working
hypothesis is that many genetic variations linked to SLE and autoimmunity mediate
the risk of disease by altering cytokine profiles or responses to cytokine
signaling. Genetic polymorphisms that affect cytokine signaling could alter
thresholds for immune responses, resulting in proinflammatory presentation of
self-antigens and the subsequent misdirection of adaptive immunity against self, 
which is observed in autoimmune disease. SLE is clinically heterogeneous and
genetically complex, and we expect that individual genes and cytokine patterns
will be more or less important to different disease manifestations and subgroups 
of patients. Defining these genotype-cytokine-phenotype relationships will
increase our understanding of both initial disease pathogenesis as well as
subsequent response/nonresponse to various therapies. In this review, we
summarize some recent work in the area of SLE cytokine genetics and describe the 
implications for SLE, autoimmunity, and immune system homeostasis, which are
revealed by these investigations.

Copyright 2010 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2827336
PMID: 20171594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mod Rheumatol. 2010 Jun;20(3):257-62. doi: 10.1007/s10165-010-0275-9. Epub 2010
Feb 19.

A meta-analysis of the association of STAT4 polymorphism with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Yuan H(1), Feng JB, Pan HF, Qiu LX, Li LH, Zhang N, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei 230032, Anhui, People's Republic of
China.

STAT4 has been newly identified as a susceptibility gene for systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in recent reports. To more precisely estimate the association
between STAT4 polymorphism and SLE risk, a meta-analysis was performed. Studies
on the association of STAT4 rs7574865 or rs7601754 with SLE were fully considered
and carefully selected using three electronic databases (PubMed, Embase, and Web 
of Science). A total of 17 comparisons from 8 relevant studies involving 7,381
patients and 11,431 controls were included to analyze the association between
STAT4 rs7574865 and SLE risk. The pooled OR for the minor T allele of STAT4
rs7574865 was 1.65 (95% CI 1.56-1.75, P < 0.001) in SLE. In a subgroup analysis
by ethnicity, the degree of risk of STAT4 rs7574865 with SLE susceptibility was
similar in populations of European or Asian origin, although significant
differences in the minor T allele frequencies were observed in the two population
controls. As for rs7601754, there were five comparisons from four relevant
studies involving 2,498 patients and 4,825 controls in this meta-analysis. The
pooled OR for the minor C allele of STAT4 rs7601754 was 0.67 (95% CI 0.59-0.75, P
< 0.001) in SLE. Conversely, the major T allele of STAT4 rs7601754 might be a
risk factor for SLE risk. In conclusion, our results do support STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism as a susceptibility factor for SLE in populations of European and
Asian origin. Our results also suggest that STAT4 rs7601754 polymorphism might be
associated with SLE risk.

PMID: 20169389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS Genet. 2010 Feb 12;6(2):e1000841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000841.

Genome-wide association study in Asian populations identifies variants in ETS1
and WDFY4 associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Yang W(1), Shen N, Ye DQ, Liu Q, Zhang Y, Qian XX, Hirankarn N, Ying D, Pan HF,
Mok CC, Chan TM, Wong RW, Lee KW, Mok MY, Wong SN, Leung AM, Li XP, Avihingsanon 
Y, Wong CM, Lee TL, Ho MH, Lee PP, Chang YK, Li PH, Li RJ, Zhang L, Wong WH, Ng
IO, Lau CS, Sham PC, Lau YL; Asian Lupus Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Lau YL, Shen N, Ye DQ, Hirankarn N, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a complex and potentially fatal autoimmune
disease, characterized by autoantibody production and multi-organ damage. By a
genome-wide association study (320 patients and 1,500 controls) and subsequent
replication altogether involving a total of 3,300 Asian SLE patients from Hong
Kong, Mainland China, and Thailand, as well as 4,200 ethnically and
geographically matched controls, genetic variants in ETS1 and WDFY4 were found to
be associated with SLE (ETS1: rs1128334, P = 2.33x10(-11), OR = 1.29; WDFY4:
rs7097397, P = 8.15x10(-12), OR = 1.30). ETS1 encodes for a transcription factor 
known to be involved in a wide range of immune functions, including Th17 cell
development and terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes. SNP rs1128334 is
located in the 3'-UTR of ETS1, and allelic expression analysis from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells showed significantly lower expression level from the risk
allele. WDFY4 is a conserved protein with unknown function, but is predominantly 
expressed in primary and secondary immune tissues, and rs7097397 in WDFY4 changes
an arginine residue to glutamine (R1816Q) in this protein. Our study also
confirmed association of the HLA locus, STAT4, TNFSF4, BLK, BANK1, IRF5, and
TNFAIP3 with SLE in Asians. These new genetic findings may help us to gain a
better understanding of the disease and the functions of the genes involved.

PMCID: PMC2820522
PMID: 20169177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochimie. 2010 May;92(5):425-44. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.02.009. Epub 2010
Feb 13.

STAT1 and pathogens, not a friendly relationship.

Najjar I(1), Fagard R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 978, SMBH, 74 rue Marcel Cachin, Bobigny-cedex 93017, France.
imen.najjar@inserm.fr

STAT1 belongs to the STAT family of transcription factors, which comprises seven 
factors: STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6. STAT1 is a 91 kDa 
protein originally identified as the mediator of the cellular response to
interferon (IFN) alpha, and thereafter found to be a major component of the
cellular response to IFNgamma. STAT1 is, in fact, involved in the response to
several cytokines and to growth factors. It is activated by cytokine receptors
via kinases of the JAK family. STAT1 becomes phosphorylated and forms a dimer
which enters the nucleus and triggers the transcription of its targets. Although 
not lethal at birth, selective gene deletion of STAT1 in mice leads to rapid
death from severe infections, demonstrating its major role in the response to
pathogens. Similarly, in humans who do not express STAT1, there is a lack of
resistance to pathogens leading to premature death. This indicates a key,
non-redundant function of STAT1 in the defence against pathogens. Thus, to
successfully infect organisms, bacterial, viral or parasitic pathogens must
overcome the activity of STAT1, and almost all the steps of this pathway can be
blocked or inhibited by proteins produced in infected cells. Interestingly, some 
pathogens, like the oncogenic Epstein-Barr virus, have evolved a strategy which
uses STAT1 activation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20159032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Hum Immunol. 2010 May;71(5):515-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.02.005. Epub 2010
Mar 7.

STAT4 gene influences genetic predisposition to ulcerative colitis but not
Crohn's disease in the Spanish population: a replication study.

Diaz-Gallo LM(1), Palomino-Morales RJ, Gómez-García M, Cardeña C, Rodrigo L,
Nieto A, Alcain G, Cueto I, López-Nevot MA, Martin J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain.

Recently, the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) gene has
been associated with multiple autoimmune diseases. Interestingly, a recent work
showed that the T allele of the rs7574865 STAT4 SNP was associated with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in a Spanish population. The aim of the present 
study was to reevaluate the role of the STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism on IBD. The 
present case-control study included 498 Crohn's disease (CD) patients, 402
ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, and 1296 healthy matched controls. Genotyping
was performed using a PCR system with a pre-developed TaqMan allelic
discrimination assay for the rs7574865 STAT4 SNP. Moreover, a meta-analysis was
performed with the previous work in a Spanish population and the current study,
including a final sample size of 1574 IBD patients (820 with CD and 754 with UC) 
and 2012 healthy controls. No evidence of association was found for the current
case-control study (CD: p = 0.23, OR = 0.9, 95% CI = 0.75-1.1; UC: p = 0.17, OR =
1.14, 95% CI = 0.95-1.38). However, the meta-analysis showed that the STAT4
rs7574865 T allele was significantly associated with susceptibility to UC (p =
0.012 pooled; OR = 1.20, 95% CI = 1.04-1.39) but not CD (p = 0.71 pooled; OR =
0.93, 95% CI = 0.65-1.34). Our data suggest that the rs7574865 STAT4 SNP is a
genetic susceptibility variant for UC but not CD in the Spanish population.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Allergy. 2010 Oct;65(10):1282-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2010.02328.x. Epub 2010
Feb 6.

Lifestyle and parental allergen sensitization are reflected in the intrauterine
environment at gene expression level.

Joerink M(1), Oortveld MA, Stenius F, Rindsjö E, Alm J, Scheynius A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine Solna, Clinical Allergy Research Unit, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Maaike.Joerink@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Environmental factors, including the intrauterine environment, can
influence the risk of allergy development. In the present study, we investigated 
whether lifestyle and parental allergen sensitization status are reflected at
gene expression level in the intrauterine environment.
METHODS:   mRNA expression of 17 genes was determined by means of quantitative
real-time PCR in term placenta of 36 families participating in the ALADDIN study 
(Assessment of Lifestyle and Allergic Disease During Infancy). Data were analysed
using a linear regression model to estimate the influence of lifestyle and
parental allergen sensitization on the relative mRNA expression levels.
Immunohistochemistry on placenta biopsies was used to verify protein expression.
RESULTS: Significant differences in mRNA expression levels were detected at the
foetal side of the placenta, where CD14 was expressed at higher levels in
placentas from families living on a farm compared to not living on a farm, and
IL-12(p40) was expressed at lower levels when the father was sensitized compared 
to nonsensitized. At the maternal side of the placenta, higher expression of
STAT4 and lower expression of GATA3 were detected in families with sensitized
compared to nonsensitized mothers, and IL-12(p40) was lower expressed when the
families were living on a farm compared to not living on a farm.
Immunohistochemistry performed for STAT4 and GATA3 showed that protein and mRNA
levels correlated well.
CONCLUSION: Living on a farm and parental allergen sensitization are reflected in
the intrauterine environment at the gene expression level.

PMID: 20146730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):1201-2. doi: 10.1002/art.27345.

IRF5 is associated with primary antiphospholipid syndrome, but is not a major
risk factor.

Fredi M, Tincani A, Yin H, Delgado-Vega AM, Borghi MO, Meroni PL,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug;60(8):2468-71.

PMID: 20131273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Mar;62(3):890-5. doi: 10.1002/art.27303.

Association of the FAM167A-BLK region with systemic sclerosis.

Ito I(1), Kawaguchi Y, Kawasaki A, Hasegawa M, Ohashi J, Kawamoto M, Fujimoto M, 
Takehara K, Sato S, Hara M, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: An association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
FAM167A (previously referred to as C8orf13)-BLK region with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) has been demonstrated in Caucasians and in Asians. Recent
studies have shown that many genes, including IRF5, STAT4, and PTPN22, are shared
susceptibility genes in multiple autoimmune diseases. We undertook the current
study to examine whether the FAM167A-BLK region is also associated with
susceptibility to systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: Japanese patients with SSc (n = 309) and healthy controls (n = 769) were
enrolled in a 2-tiered case-control association study. In tier 1, 124 patients
and 412 controls were tested to determine association of 16 tag SNPs encompassing
the FAM167A-BLK region with SSc. In tier 2, an additional 185 patients and 357
controls were analyzed for SNP rs13277113.
RESULTS: Two haplotype blocks that correspond approximately to FAM167A and BLK
were observed. In tier 1 of the study, the rs13277113A allele in the BLK block
exhibited the most significant association with SSc after correction for multiple
testing (permutated P = 0.024). Two SNP haplotypes formed by rs13277113 and the
most significant SNP in the FAM167A block did not exhibit stronger association.
When samples from tier 1 and tier 2 were combined, the rs13277113A allele was
significantly associated with SSc (odds ratio 1.45 [95% confidence interval
1.17-1.79], P = 6.1 x 10(-4)). Association or a tendency toward association of
rs13277113A with SSc was observed regardless of a patient's autoantibody profile 
or whether a patient had diffuse cutaneous or limited cutaneous SSc.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the rs13277113A allele is associated not
only with SLE but also with SSc and that the FAM167A-BLK region is a common
genetic risk factor for both SLE and SSc.

PMID: 20131239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Placenta. 2010 Apr;31(4):251-8. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.01.005. Epub 2010
Jan 29.

Altered global gene expressions of human placentae subjected to assisted
reproductive technology treatments.

Zhang Y(1), Cui Y, Zhou Z, Sha J, Li Y, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Clinical Reproductive Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Researchers are more and more concerning the safety of fetus or
offspring derived from assisted reproductive technology (ART) treatment. As the
placenta is a critical organ that sustains and protects the fetus, we hypothesize
that altered global gene expression of the placenta subjected to ART manipulation
may reflect changes associated with ART procedures and subsequently causal
related to offspring health.
METHODS: Three term placenta samples were obtained from patients undergone in
vitro fertilization and embryo transfer due to oviductal factors only. Other
three control placentae were from those underwent normal pregnancy. A GeneChip
Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 Array was utilized to analyze the genes. Using
qRT-PCR we certified microarray data from 10 dysregulated genes. Five genes were 
localized precisely in the placenta as per immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Twenty-six differentially expressed genes were identified in the
ART-treated placentae: 17 up-regulated; 9 down-regulated. Eighteen of these were 
classified into six groups according to critical placental function: immune
response; transmembrane transport; metabolism; oxidative stress; cell
differentiation; and other functions. Genes involved in immune response, such as 
ERAP2 and STAT4, and those regulating cell differentiations, such as MUC1, were
discerned to be differentially expressed. These gene products were expressed in
the placental villus tissues, either in the cytoplasm or in the membrane of
syncytiotrophoblastic cells.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first study in comparing differentially
expressed genes in placentae from patients undergone ART treatment vs. those
underwent normal pregnancy. Abnormal profiles of critical placental functioning
genes, such as ERAP2, STAT4 and MUC1, may be valuable biomarkers to understand
how the placenta affects fetal development and ART-derived offspring's health
problems.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20116094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Feb;62(2):574-9. doi: 10.1002/art.27190.

The association of a nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism in TNFAIP3 with
systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis in the Japanese population.

Shimane K(1), Kochi Y, Horita T, Ikari K, Amano H, Hirakata M, Okamoto A, Yamada 
R, Myouzen K, Suzuki A, Kubo M, Atsumi T, Koike T, Takasaki Y, Momohara S,
Yamanaka H, Nakamura Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association (GWA) studies in systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Caucasian populations have independently
identified risk variants in and near the tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha)-induced protein 3 gene (TNFAIP3), which is crucial for the regulation 
of TNF-mediated signaling and Toll-like receptor signaling. The aim of this study
was to assess the role of TNFAIP3 in the development of SLE and RA in Japanese
subjects.
METHODS: We selected 2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from previous GWA
studies. Rs2230926 is a nonsynonymous SNP in TNFAIP3 and is associated with SLE, 
while rs10499194 is an intergenic SNP associated with RA. We then performed 2
independent sets of SLE case-control comparisons (717 patients and 1,362 control 
subjects) and 3 sets of RA case-control comparisons (3,446 patients and 2,344
control subjects) using Japanese subjects. We genotyped SNPs using TaqMan assays.
RESULTS: We observed a significant association between rs2230926 and an increased
risk of SLE and RA in the Japanese population (for SLE, odds ratio [OR] 1.92, 95%
confidence interval [95% CI] 1.53-2.41, P = 1.9 x 10(-8); for RA, OR 1.35, 95% CI
1.18-1.56, P = 2.6 x 10(-5)). The intergenic SNP rs10499194 was also associated
with SLE and RA, while the risk allele for RA in Caucasians was protective
against the diseases in our population.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated a significant association between the nonsynonymous
variant in TNFAIP3 and the risk for SLE and RA in the Japanese population.
TNFAIP3, similar to STAT4 and IRF5, may be a common genetic risk factor for SLE
and RA that is shared between the Caucasian and Japanese populations.

PMID: 20112363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Vis. 2010 Jan 26;16:98-104.

Involvement of STAT4 in IgG subtype switching and ocular HSV-1 replication in
mice.

Allen SJ(1), Mott KR, Ghiasi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, CSMC Burns & Allen Research Institute, Center for
Neurobiology and Vaccine Development, Ophthalmology Research Laboratories, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

PURPOSE: To assess the relative impact of elevated T-helper 2 (T(H)2)- and
reduced T-Helper 1 (T(H)1)-dependent immune responses on ocular herpes simplex
virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection.
METHODS: Signal transducer and activator of transcription protein 4 knockout mice
(BALB/c-STAT4(-/-)) and wild-type BALB/c control mice were immunized with
avirulent HSV-1 strain KOS or were mock-immunized. Three weeks after the third
immunization, neutralizing antibody titers were determined by plaque reduction
assays. Following ocular infection with virulent HSV-1 strain McKrae, viral
replication in the eye, blepharitis, corneal scarring (CS), survival, and
immunoglobulin (Ig) isotypes in sera were determined.
RESULTS: Vaccinated STAT4(-/-) and BALB/c mice contained significant and similar 
neutralizing antibody titers and were completely protected against HSV-1-induced 
death and CS. In contrast to vaccinated STAT4(-/-) mice, mock-vaccinated
STAT4(-/-) mice had higher ocular HSV-1 titers than mock-vaccinated BALB/c mice
on days 2-3 post-ocular infection. There were also significant differences in the
levels of IgG2a, IgG2b, and IgG3 in the sera of STAT4(-/-) mice when compared to 
the control BALB/c mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the absence of T(H)1 cytokine responses
did alter protection against viral replication and IgG isotypes but not eye
disease or survival.

PMCID: PMC2810873
PMID: 20104254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2010 Jun;5(2):240-51. doi: 10.1007/s11481-009-9187-x.
Epub 2010 Jan 21.

S-nitrosoglutathione a physiologic nitric oxide carrier attenuates experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Nath N(1), Morinaga O, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Darby Children's Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 173
Ashley Avenue CRI # 505, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) is a physiological nitric oxide molecule which
regulates biological activities of target proteins via s-nitrosylation leading to
attenuation of chronic inflammation. In this study we evaluated the therapeutic
efficacy of GSNO in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal
model of multiple sclerosis. Oral administration of GSNO (0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg)
reduced disease progression in chronic models (SJL and C57BL/6) of EAE induced
with PLP((139-151)) or MOG((35-55)) peptides, respectively. GSNO attenuated EAE
disease by reducing the production of IL17 (from Th(i) or Th17 cells) and the
infiltration of CD4 T cells into the central nervous system without affecting the
levels of Th1 (IFN gamma) and Th2 (IL4) immune responses. Inhibition of IL17 was 
observed in T cells under normal as well as Th17 skewed conditions. In vitro
studies showed that the phosphorylation of STAT3 and expression of ROR gamma, key
regulators of IL17 signaling, were reduced while phosphorylation of STAT4 or
STAT6 and expression of T-bet or GATA3 remained unaffected, suggesting that GSNO 
preferentially targets Th17 cells. Collectively, GSNO attenuated EAE via
modulation of Th17 cells and its effects are independent of Th1 or Th2 cells
functions, indicating that it may have therapeutic potential for Th17-mediated
autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC2965418
PMID: 20091246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;22(2):133-8. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283367c17.

The genetics of scleroderma (systemic sclerosis).

Agarwal SK(1), Reveille JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. Sandeep.K.Agarwal@uth.tmc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To determine the advances made in the genetics of scleroderma 
in candidate gene association studies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Over the past 18 months, a number of candidate gene studies
using large case-control series in scleroderma have been reported. The studies
have identified multiple genes involved in immune regulation including BANK1,
C8orf13-BLK, IL-23R, IRF5, STAT4, TBX21, and TNFSF4 as susceptibility genes for
the development of SSc. Furthermore, gene-gene interaction studies suggest that
IRF5, STAT4, and BANK1 as well as TBX21 and STAT4 interact with regard to
scleroderma susceptibility. Many of the genetic variants associated with SSc
susceptibility are shared among other autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus.
SUMMARY: Candidate gene association studies have substantially advanced our
understanding of the pathogenesis of SSc and demonstrate that SSc is a polygenic,
autoimmune disease.

PMID: 20090527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Sci Signal. 2010 Jan 19;3(105):ra4. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2000567.

Distinct signal codes generate dendritic cell functional plasticity.

Arima K(1), Watanabe N, Hanabuchi S, Chang M, Sun SC, Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Cancer Immunology Research, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 7455 Fannin, Unit 901, Houston,
TX 77030, USA.

Our adaptive immune system induces distinct responses to different pathogens
because of the functional plasticity of dendritic cells (DCs); however, how DCs
program unique responses remains unclear. Here, we found that the cytokine thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) potently transduced a unique T helper type 2
(T(H)2)-inducing compound signal in DCs. Whereas activation of nuclear factor
kappaB (predominantly p50) drove DCs to produce OX40L to induce T(H)2
differentiation, the activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 6 (STAT6) triggered DCs to secrete chemokines necessary for the
recruitment of T(H)2 cells. In addition, TSLP signaling limited the activation of
STAT4 and interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF-8), which are essential factors for
the production of the T(H)1-polarizing cytokine interleukin-12 (IL-12). By
contrast, Toll-like receptor ligands and CD40 ligand did not activate STAT6 in
myeloid DCs, but instead increased the abundance of STAT4 and IRF-8 to induce
T(H)1 responses through the production of IL-12. Therefore, we propose that the
functional plasticity of DCs relies on elaborate signal codes that are generated 
by different stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3325779
PMID: 20086239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Parasite Immunol. 2010 Feb;32(2):153-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2009.01167.x.

Type I IFNs promote the early IFN-gamma response and the IL-10 response in
Leishmania mexicana infection.

Buxbaum LU(1).

Author information: 
(1)VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6073, USA.
buxbaum@mail.med.upenn.edu

The protozoan parasite Leishmania mexicana causes chronic cutaneous disease in
humans and most mouse strains. We previously showed that STAT4-deficient mice,
but not IL-12p40-deficient mice, have more parasites and progressively growing
lesions unlike those of wild-type mice, the lesions and parasite burdens of which
plateau by 10-12 weeks post-infection. This demonstrates a STAT4-dependent,
IL-12/IL-23-independent pathway of parasite control. Type I IFNs are important in
viral and other infections and can activate STAT4. We found that
IFN-alpha/betaR-deficient mice have a nonpersistent, early IFN-gamma defect, and 
a persistent, early IL-10 defect, without changes in serum IL-12 or LN-derived
nitric oxide. We found less IL-10 per cell in CD25+CD4+ T cells and possibly
fewer IL-10-producing cells in the draining LN of IFN-alpha/betaR-deficient vs.
wild-type mice. IFN-alpha/betaR-deficient mice have chronic, nonprogressive
disease, like wild-type mice, suggesting that IL-10 and IFN-gamma defects may
balance each other. Our data indicate that although type I IFNs help promote
early Th1 responses, they are not the missing activators of STAT4 responsible for
partial control of L. mexicana. Also, the lack of lesion resolution in
IFN-alpha/betaR-deficient mice despite lower IL-10 levels indicates that other
pathways independent of T cell IL-10 help prevent an IL-12-driven clearance of
parasites.

PMID: 20070829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):67-78. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.10.010. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

The mTOR kinase determines effector versus memory CD8+ T cell fate by regulating 
the expression of transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin.

Rao RR(1), Li Q, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA.

The mechanisms underpinning integration of instructions that program naive CD8+ T
cells for effector and/or memory differentiation are not well understood. Herein,
we demonstrate that interleukin-12 (IL-12) enhanced and sustained antigen and
costimulatory molecule (B7.1)-induced mTOR kinase activity in naive CD8+ (OT-I) T
cells via phosphoinositide 3-kinase and STAT4 transcription factor pathways.
Blocking mTOR activity by rapamycin reversed IL-12-induced effector functions
because of loss of persistent expression of the transcription factor T-bet.
Rapamycin treatment of IL-12-conditioned OT-I cells promoted persistent
Eomesodermin expression and produced memory cell precursors that demonstrated
enhanced sustenance and antigen-recall responses upon adoptive transfer. The
memory cell precursors showed greater tumor efficacy than IL-12-conditioned
effector OT-I cells. These results identify mTOR as the central regulator of
transcriptional programs that determine effector and/or memory cell fates in CD8+
T cells. Targeting mTOR activity offers new opportunities to regulate CD8+ T
cell-mediated immunity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20060330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Mar;40(3):859-66. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939842.

T-bet, a Th1 transcription factor regulates the expression of Tim-3.

Anderson AC(1), Lord GM, Dardalhon V, Lee DH, Sabatos-Peyton CA, Glimcher LH,
Kuchroo VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

T-cell immunoglobulin, mucin domain-3 (Tim-3) is a membrane protein expressed at 
late stages of IFN-gamma secreting CD4(+) Th1 cell differentiation and
constitutively on DC. Ligation of Tim-3 on Th1 cells terminates Th1 immune
responses. In addition, Tim-3 plays a role in tolerance induction, although the
mechanism by which this is accomplished has yet to be elucidated. While it is
clear that Tim-3 plays an important role in the immune system, little is known
regarding the molecular pathways that regulate Tim-3 expression. In the current
study, we examine the role of Th1-associated transcription factors in regulating 
Tim-3 expression. Our experiments reveal that Tim-3 expression is regulated by
the Th1-specific transcription factor T-bet. This introduces a novel paradigm
into the generation of a Th1 response, whereby a transcription factor responsible
for effector Th1 cell differentiation also increases the expression of a specific
counter-regulatory molecule to ensure appropriate termination of pro-inflammatory
Th1 immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2837127
PMID: 20049876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Apr;88(4):413-21. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0580-y. Epub
2010 Jan 5.

A functionally relevant IRF5 haplotype is associated with reduced risk to
Wegener's granulomatosis.

Wieczorek S(1), Holle JU, Müller S, Fricke H, Gross WL, Epplen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University, MA5/39, 44780, Bochum, Germany.
stefan.wieczorek@rub.de

Wegener's granulomatosis (WG), characterized by systemic vasculitis and
granulomatous inflammation, is a rare chronic rheumatic condition potentially
sharing some etiopathological principles with other autoimmune disorders, e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Several large
association studies have identified genetic risk factors for RA and SLE. Thereof,
we have evaluated the relevance of the most promising ones in WG. 22 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within or in the vicinity of CCL21, CD40, CDK6,
IL21, IL2RB, IRF5, KIF5A, KLF12, MMEL1, PRKCQ, STAT4, TNFAIP3, and TRAF1/C5 have 
been genotyped in >600 German WG cases and >800 matched controls. While most
polymorphisms did not show suspicious effects on WG susceptibility, SNPs
representing TNFAIP3 (rs6922466, p = 0.032, odds ratio (OR) 0.83, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 0.7--0.98) and CDK6 (rs42041, p = 0.0201, OR 1.21, 95% CI
1.03-1.43) revealed nominally significant differences in allele distribution. The
strongest association was detected for a functionally relevant four SNP haplotype
of IRF5, which comprised a protective effect (p = 0.0000897, p (corrected) =
0.0012, OR 0.73, 95% CI 0.62-0.85) similar to those previously seen in RA and
SLE. Thus, we suggest that WG, SLE, and RA share some, but not many, genetic risk
factors, which supports models of partly overlapping etiopathological mechanisms 
in these disorders.

PMID: 20049410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2009 Dec;32(6):484-91.

[Is rheumatoid arthritis without anti-citrullinated peptide antibody a
genetically distinct subset?].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohmura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of rheumatology and clinical immunology, Graduate school of
medicine, Kyoto University.

These days, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is reported to be subclassified into two
subsets by anti-citrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) positivity. Clinically,
ACPA positive RA tends to develop more severe arthritis than ACPA negative RA. In
addition, a lot of reported susceptibility genes to RA (ie. HLA-DRB1(*)04,
PTPN22, TRAF1/C5, CTLA4) are found to be associated only with ACPA positive RA
but not with ACPA negative RA. It is getting clear that HLA-DRB1(*)04, which was 
believed to be primarily associated with RA, is not a primary risk factor but
ACPA is. Then, a hypothesis for the disease mechanism of ACPA positive RA is set 
as follows; citrullination possibly due to smoking, etc, provokes ACPA production
in individuals who have susceptibility alleles of genes including HLA, followed
by joint inflammation in autoantibody-dependent manner. The search for
susceptibility genes for ACPA negative RA is slowly progressing, but only a few
genes are so far reported: HLA-DRB1(*)03 for Caucasian, HLA-DRB1(*)09 for
Japanese, IRF5 and STAT4. When we investigate the disease mechanisms of RA, we
should manage independently the two disease subsets : ACPA positive and ACPA
negative RA.

PMID: 20046016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cytokine. 2010 Apr;50(1):69-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2009.12.004. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Polymorphisms of signal transducers and activators of transcription 1 and 4
(STAT1 and STAT4) contribute to progression of childhood IgA nephropathy.

Hahn WH(1), Suh JS, Cho SH, Cho BS, Kim SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, East West Kidney Diseases Research Institute, Kyung 
Hee University, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Several experimental studies have suggested that signal transducers
and activators of transcription 1 and 4 (STAT1 and STAT4) play important roles in
the regulation of mesangial proliferation and renal fibrosis, and in the
development of inflammation in several types of glomerulonephritis.
METHODS: The present study was conducted to investigate the association between
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the STAT1 and STAT4 genes and childhood
IgA nephropathy (IgAN).
RESULTS: Genotyping of 170 childhood IgAN patients and 442 controls showed no
significant differences in allele frequency. However, patient subgroup analysis
revealed that development of proteinuria ( and >4mg/m(2)/h) was associated with
STAT1 rs10199181 (dominant model, P=0.035) and high serum level of IgA with STAT1
rs6718902 (dominant model, P=0.035) and STAT1 rs2280232 (codominant model,
P=0.014; dominant model, P=0.022). Furthermore, some SNP frequencies were
significantly different between patients with pathologically mild and advanced
disease; STAT1 rs6718902 (overdominant model, P=0.030), STAT1 rs10199181
(codominant model, P=0.023; dominant model, P=0.012; overdominant model,
P=0.018), and STAT4 rs7561832 (dominant model, P=0.026; overdominant model,
P=0.029).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that polymorphisms of STAT1 and STAT4 are
associated with increased susceptibility, pathological advancement, and
development of proteinuria in childhood IgAN.

2009. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20045654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2010;3:15-31. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

Pharmacogenetics of rheumatoid arthritis: Potential targets from susceptibility
genes and present therapies.

O'Rielly DD(1), Rahman P.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
Newfoundland, Canada.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic heterogeneous autoimmune disorder of
unknown etiology resulting in inflammation in the synovium, cartilage, and bone. 
Genetic factors play an important role in susceptibility to RA as the
heritability of RA is between 50% and 60%, with the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
locus accounting for at least 30% of overall genetic risk. Outside the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region, six additional risk loci have been
identified and validated including PTPN22, STAT4, PADI4, CTLA4, TNFAIP3-OLIG3,
and TRAF1/C5. Genetic factors are also important in RA pharmacotherapy due to the
gene-dependent activity of enzymes involved in the pharmacokinetics and/or
pharmacodynamics of RA medications. Indeed, there is great variability in drug
efficacy as well as adverse events associated with any anti-rheumatic therapy and
genetics is thought to contribute significantly to this inter-individual
variability in response. This review will summarize the genetic factors that have
been implicated in the pathogenesis of RA, and how these determinants may factor 
into the potential pharmacogenetics of this disease. We will also review the
therapeutic agents that are currently being utilized or presently being evaluated
in the treatment of RA, along with potential pharmacogenetic markers that have
been proposed for such medications.

PMCID: PMC3513198
PMID: 23226040  [PubMed]


17. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Feb;14(1):107-11. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2009.0130.

The protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 R620W polymorphism does
not confer susceptibility to psoriasis in the genetic homogeneous population of
Crete.

Zervou MI(1), Castro-Giner F, Sidiropoulos P, Boumpas DT, Tosca AD,
Krueger-Krasagakis S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Greece.

Recent whole-genome and candidate-gene association studies in patients with
psoriasis (PS) have identified a number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
that predispose to disease with moderate risk. Predisposition to PS is known to
be affected by genetic variation in human leukocyte antigen-C as well as other
non-human leukocyte antigen genes. We recently reported for the first time as a
PS-associated SNP the signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 (STAT4) 
rs7574865 polymorphism, which is also associated with several autoimmune
diseases. The aim of this study was to assess whether the functional R620W
polymorphism of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) gene 
encoding the lymphoid-specific tyrosine phosphatase, which is known to be
associated with various autoimmune diseases, also confers increased risk for PS
in the genetic homogeneous population of Crete. A case-control study was
performed with 173 PS patients consecutively recruited and 348 healthy controls, 
all of them from the island of Crete. We found that the mutated T allele of the
PTPN22 1858T SNP was more common in control individuals than in patients with PS 
(odds ratio = 0.39, 95% confidence interval = 0.11-1.04, p = 0.09). No
considerable difference was observed in terms of sex, age of onset, or clinical
presentation of psoriatic arthritis. Our results provide evidence that the PTPN22
1858T allele is not a susceptibility factor for PS in the Cretan population.

PMID: 20039785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;22(2):119-25. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283361943.

Genetics research in systemic lupus erythematosus for clinicians: methodology,
progress, and controversies.

Kaiser R(1), Criswell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, UCSF Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell
Medical Research Center for Arthritis, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Clinical journals are reporting genetic associations with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with increasing frequency. Interpreting these 
studies is difficult for clinicians without rigorous training in epidemiology,
statistics, and genetics. In this review, we discuss basic issues important to
understanding and contextualizing new genetic association studies. We, therefore,
highlight literature related to methodology as well as recent genetic discoveries
in SLE.
RECENT FINDINGS: Functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and/or
haplotypes have now been identified for ITGAM, PTPN22, and IRF5, and several
additional loci have been highlighted in recent genome-wide association studies
in SLE. Recent work also indicates that several regions within the extended major
histocompatibility complex contribute independently to SLE risk. Evidence of
additive statistical interaction has been found between IRF5 and TYK2, IRF5, and 
STAT4, and between NAT2 and exposure to tobacco smoke.
SUMMARY: Many new genes have been associated with SLE susceptibility, revealing
insight into SLE pathophysiology. Current research is focusing on further
refining the initial genetic association results and extending this work to
non-European populations. Research is also expanding beyond SNP associations to
investigate the contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) and DNA methylation
to SLE risk.

PMID: 20035223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;612:159-75. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-362-6_11.

Intracellular staining for analysis of the expression and phosphorylation of
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) in NK cells.

Miyagi T(1), Lee SH, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Biology and
Medicine, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

Cytokines stimulate biological responses by activating intracellular signaling
pathways. We have been adapting flow cytometric techniques to measure the levels 
of expression and activation of signaling molecules within mixed populations
containing NK cells and to characterize their differences within NK cell
subpopulations. Approaches for evaluating the total levels of the signal
transducers and activators of transcription STAT1 and STAT4, of STAT1 in cells
expressing IFNgamma, and of the type 1 interferon (type 1 IFN) activation by
phosphorylation, i.e., induction of pSTAT1 and pSTAT4, have been developed. The
results of experiments using these techniques have demonstrated that an unusual
feature of NK cells is high basal expression of STAT4 but reduced STAT1 levels.
The condition predisposes for pSTAT4 activation by type 1 IFNs. The work has also
shown, however, that total STAT1 levels are induced during viral infections as a 
result of IFN exposure, and that this change acts to promote the activation of
STAT1 but limit both the activation of STAT4 and IFNgamma expression. The
intracellular staining approaches used for the studies described here have
utility in characterizing other mechanisms regulating cytokine-mediated
signaling, and defining additional pathways shaping cellular responses to
cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3855304
PMID: 20033640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Pediatr Int. 2010 Aug;52(4):584-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2009.03019.x.

Increased mucosal expression of GATA-3 and STAT-4 in pediatric ulcerative
colitis.

Ohtani K(1), Ohtsuka Y, Ikuse T, Baba Y, Yamakawa Y, Aoyagi Y, Fujii T, Kudo T,
Nagata S, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo University School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Serum pro-inflammatory cytokine levels are frequently elevated in the
acute phase of pediatric inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Because the role of
pro-inflammatory cytokine in the acute phase of pediatric IBD has not been well
investigated, the serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the expression
of Th1 and Th2 signaling molecules in mucosa from the acute phase of pediatric
IBD were examined.
METHODS: Twenty children with ulcerative colitis (UC; mean age, 9.95 ± 4.10
years) and 12 with Crohn's disease (CD; mean age, 10.0 ± 4.90 years) were
enrolled for the serum cytokine (interleukin [IL]-4, IL-5, IL-6, tumor necrosis
factor-a, tumor growth factor-ß1, and interferon-<U+03B3>) assay. Expression of T-helper
cell 1 (Th1) (T-box expressed in T cells: T-bet and signal transducer and
activator of transcription-4: STAT-4) and Th2 (GATA-3 and STAT-6) signaling
molecules was examined on real-time polymerase chain reaction using mucosal
samples from eight children in the acute phase of UC, eight with CD and eight
controls.
RESULTS: Significant elevation of serum IL-4 and IL-6 levels was detected at the 
acute phase of pediatric UC and CD compared with levels at remission (P < 0.05 in
each). The mucosal expression of GATA-3 and STAT-4 was significantly enhanced in 
the acute phase of pediatric UC compared with normal mucosa. No significant
difference was observed in the expression of all examined molecules in the acute 
phase of pediatric CD.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-4 and its signaling molecule GATA-3, as well as the Th1 signaling
molecule STAT-4, are involved in the pathogenesis of acute phase of pediatric UC.

© 2010 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 20030749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 21;4(12):e8172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008172.

Allergen challenge induces Ifng dependent GTPases in the lungs as part of a Th1
transcriptome response in a murine model of allergic asthma.

Dharajiya N(1), Vaidya S, Sinha M, Luxon B, Boldogh I, Sur S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, USA.

According to the current paradigm, allergic airway inflammation is mediated by
Th2 cytokines and pro-inflammatory chemokines. Since allergic inflammation is
self-limited, we hypothesized that allergen challenge simultaneously induces
anti-inflammatory genes to counter-balance the effects of Th2 cytokines and
chemokines. To identify these putative anti-inflammatory genes, we compared the
gene expression profile in the lungs of ragweed-sensitized mice four hours after 
challenge with either PBS or ragweed extract (RWE) using a micro-array platform. 
Consistent with our hypothesis, RWE challenge concurrently upregulated
Th1-associated early target genes of the Il12/Stat4 pathway, such as p47 and p65 
GTPases (Iigp, Tgtp and Gbp1), Socs1, Cxcl9, Cxcl10 and Gadd45g with the Th2
genes Il4, Il5, Ccl2 and Ccl7. These Th1-associated genes remain upregulated
longer than the Th2 genes. Augmentation of the local Th1 milieu by administration
of Il12 or CpG prior to RWE challenge further upregulated these Th1 genes.
Abolition of the Th1 response by disrupting the Ifng gene increased allergic
airway inflammation and abrogated RWE challenge-induced upregulation of GTPases, 
Cxcl9, Cxcl10 and Socs1, but not Gadd45g. Our data demonstrate that allergen
challenge induces two sets of Th1-associated genes in the lungs: 1)
Ifng-dependent genes such as p47 and p65 GTPases, Socs1, Cxcl9 and Cxcl10 and 2) 
Ifng-independent Th1-inducing genes like Gadd45g. We propose that
allergen-induced airway inflammation is regulated by simultaneous upregulation of
Th1 and Th2 genes, and that persistent unopposed upregulation of Th1 genes
resolves allergic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2791840
PMID: 20027288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Proc. 2009 Dec 15;3 Suppl 7:S81.

Incorporating biological knowledge in the search for gene x gene interaction in
genome-wide association studies.

Manning AK(1), Ngwa JS, Hendricks AE, Liu CT, Johnson AD, Dupuis J, Cupples LA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Boston University, 715 Albany Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA. amanning@bu.edu.

We sought to find significant gene x gene interaction in a genome-wide
association analysis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by performing pair-wise tests
of interaction among collections of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
obtained by one of two methods. The first method involved screening the results
of the genome-wide association analysis for main effects p-values < 1 x 10-4. The
second method used biological databases such as the Gene Ontology and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes to define gene collections that each contained 
one of four genes with known associations with RA: PTPN22, STAT4, TRAF1, and C5. 
We used a permutation approach to determine whether any of these SNP sets had
empirical enrichment of significant interaction effects. We found that the SNP
set obtained by the first method was significantly enriched with significant
interaction effects (empirical p = 0.003). Additionally, we found that the
"protein complex assembly" collection of genes from the Gene Ontology collection 
containing the TRAF1 gene was significantly enriched with interaction effects
with p-values < 1 x 10-8 (empirical p = 0.012).

PMCID: PMC2795984
PMID: 20018077  [PubMed]


23. BMC Proc. 2009 Dec 15;3 Suppl 7:S43.

A combinatorial approach for detecting gene-gene interaction using multiple
traits of Genetic Analysis Workshop 16 rheumatoid arthritis data.

Cui X(1), Sha Q, Zhang S, Chen HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Michigan Technological University, 1400
Townsend Drive, Houghton, Michigan 49931, USA. xcui@mtu.edu.

Rheumatoid arthritis is inherited in a complex manner. So far several single
susceptibility genes, such as PTPN22, STAT4, and TRAF1-C5, have been identified. 
However, it is presumed that some genes may interact to have a significant effect
on the disease, while each of them only plays a modest role. We propose a new
combinatorial association test to detect the gene-gene interaction in the
rheumatoid arthritis data using multiple traits: disease status, anti-cyclic
citrullinated peptide, and immunoglobulin M. Existing gene-gene interaction tests
only use the information on a single trait at a time. In this article, we propose
a new multivariate combinatorial searching method that utilizes multiple traits
at the same time. Multivariate combinatorial searching method is conducted by
incorporating the multiple traits with various techniques of feature selection to
search for a set of disease-susceptibility genes that may interact. By analyzing 
three panels of markers, we have identified a significant gene-gene interaction
between PTPN22 and TRAF1-C5.

PMCID: PMC2795942
PMID: 20018035  [PubMed]


24. Z Rheumatol. 2010 Feb;69(1):50-6. doi: 10.1007/s00393-009-0519-2.

[Pathogenesis and diagnosis of Sjögren's syndrome].

[Article in German]

Witte T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Immunologie und Rheumatologie, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover.
witte.torsten@mh-hannover.de

Sjögren's syndrome is a common autoimmune disorder. Several genetic risk factors 
such as STAT-4, ILT6 and the haplotype HLA-B8/DR3 have been identified. In
addition, there are environmental risk factors, possibly chronic viral
infections. In the pathophysiology of Sjögren's syndrome T and B cells infiltrate
the salivary and lacrimal glands. As a consequence of the destruction of
glandular cells by cytotoxic T cells, production of cytokines and autoantibodies 
inhibiting glandular function, the production of saliva and tears is decreased.
The feeling of dry eyes and mouth is frequently not noticed by the patients.
Therefore, Sjögren's syndrome should also be considered when extraglandular
manifestations such as vasculitis, polyneuropathy or arthritis occur, even when
the patients do not complain of dry eyes and mouth. Establishing the diagnosis of
Sjögren's syndrome requires verification of reduced glandular function, for
example using Schirmer's test and the Saxon test. The confirmation of Sjögren's
syndrome as a cause of sicca syndrome is subsequently performed by the detection 
of autoantibodies against Ro (SS-A) and La (SS-B) and/or by a salivary gland
biopsy.

PMID: 20012975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Dec;60(12):3794-806. doi: 10.1002/art.24958.

Polymorphisms in TBX21 and STAT4 increase the risk of systemic sclerosis:
evidence of possible gene-gene interaction and alterations in Th1/Th2 cytokines.

Gourh P(1), Agarwal SK, Divecha D, Assassi S, Paz G, Arora-Singh RK, Reveille JD,
Shete S, Mayes MD, Arnett FC, Tan FK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
pravitt.gourh@uth.tmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by
fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. Dysregulation of the immune system,
including the Th1/Th2 cytokine balance, is central to the pathogenesis of SSc.
This study was undertaken to investigate the hypothesis that single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in TBX21 and STAT4, both of which are critical transcription
factors that regulate the Th1/Th2 balance, are associated with SSc
susceptibility.
METHODS: We tested SNPs in TBX21 and STAT4 for association with SSc in 2
independent cohorts, the SSc Registry cohort (880 SSc cases and 507 controls) and
the University of Texas SSc cohort (522 cases and 531 controls). Additional white
control genotypes were obtained from public repositories. We also investigated
for gene-gene interactions. Plasma cytokines and whole blood gene expression
profiles were examined to determine functional effects of these SNPs.
RESULTS: Multiple SNPs in TBX21 and STAT4 were found to be associated with SSc.
In a combined analysis of 902 SSc patients and 4,745 controls, TT genotyping of
the TBX21 rs11650354 variant revealed a recessive pattern for disease
susceptibility (Pcorr=1.4x10(-15), odds ratio 3.37, 95% confidence interval
2.4-4.6). In an analysis of 1,039 SSc patients and 3,322 controls, the A allele
of the STAT4 variant rs11889341 was associated with increased SSc susceptibility 
in a dominant pattern (Pcorr=2.4x10(-5), odds ratio 1.29, 95% confidence interval
1.2-1.5). Furthermore, we identified gene-gene interaction among the TBX21 and
STAT4 variants, such that the STAT4 genotype increased the risk of SSc only in
the TBX21 CC genotype group. SSc patients carrying the TBX21 CC genotype had
higher interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha levels, and those
with the TT genotype had elevated IL-2, IL-5, IL-4, and IL-13 (Th2) levels,
compared with controls. Whole blood expression profiles revealed dysregulation of
type I interferon pathways in the CC group and T cell pathways in the TT group of
the TBX21 SNP.
CONCLUSION: The present results, from studies of 2 independent cohorts, indicate 
that SNPs in TBX21 and STAT4 contribute uniquely and interactively to SSc
susceptibility, leading to altered cytokine balance and immune dysregulation.

PMCID: PMC2998060
PMID: 19950257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 15;183(12):7743-51. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803812.

Integration of distinct intracellular signaling pathways at distal regulatory
elements directs T-bet expression in human CD4+ T cells.

Placek K(1), Gasparian S, Coffre M, Maiella S, Sechet E, Bianchi E, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Immunoregulation Unit and Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique Unité de Recherche Associée 1961, Department of Immunology, Paris,
France.

T-bet is a key regulator controlling Th1 cell development. This factor is not
expressed in naive CD4(+) T cells, and the mechanisms controlling expression of
T-bet are incompletely understood. In this study, we defined regulatory elements 
at the human T-bet locus and determined how signals originating at the TCR and at
cytokine receptors are integrated to induce chromatin modifications and
expression of this gene during human Th1 cell differentiation. We found that T
cell activation induced two strong DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HS) and rapid
histone acetylation at these elements in CD4(+) T cells. Histone acetylation and 
T-bet expression were strongly inhibited by cyclosporine A, and we detected
binding of NF-AT to a HS in vivo. IL-12 and IFN-gamma signaling alone were not
sufficient to induce T-bet expression in naive CD4(+) T cells, but enhanced T-bet
expression in TCR/CD28-stimulated cells. We detected a third HS 12 kb upstream of
the mRNA start site only in developing Th1 cells, which was bound by
IL-12-induced STAT4. Our data suggest that T-bet locus remodeling and gene
expression are initiated by TCR-induced NF-AT recruitment and amplified by
IL-12-mediated STAT4 binding to distinct distal regulatory elements during human 
Th1 cell differentiation.

PMID: 19923468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2010 Feb;49(2):203-10. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kep368.
Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Genetic background of systemic sclerosis: autoimmune genes take centre stage.

Allanore Y(1), Dieude P, Boileau C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Service de Rhumatologie A, Hôpital Cochin, 27 rue 
du faubourg St Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. yannick.allanore@cch.aphp.fr

SSc is a complex multiorgan disease. The key steps in its pathogenesis include
early endothelial damage, dysregulation of the immune system with abnormal
autoantibody production and fibroblast activation resulting in hyperproduction of
extracellular matrix. The disease is caused by an interaction between
susceptibility genes and environmental triggers since epidemiological data,
including family and twin studies, reveal a genetic component in the pathogenesis
of SSc. The candidate gene approach has mainly been employed to identify SSc
susceptibility genes. We will focus on data obtained through large samples of
well-phenotyped patients and replicated in independent cohorts. These
case-control association studies have enabled the identification of several genes
that are shared with other connective tissue disorders, and for some of these,
putative autoimmune susceptibility genes have been identified. Indeed, we will
mainly focus on IRF5 (rs2004640), STAT4 (rs7574865), PTPN22 (rs2476601) and BANK1
(rs3733197 and rs10516487) data. Some of these genes/loci are common to several
autoimmune diseases, indicating a shared genetic background also contributing to 
SSc. Among connective tissue disorders, similarities for genetic markers with SLE
are noteworthy. Most likely, these immune-modifying genes could interact and
influence both disease phenotype and severity. Less evidence is available yet
with regard to genetic markers relating to the vascular and fibrotic aspects of
the disease.

PMID: 19923204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009 Oct;13(5):337-41. doi:
10.4196/kjpp.2009.13.5.337. Epub 2009 Oct 31.

Increase of NADPH-diaphorase expression in hypothalamus of stat4 knockout mice.

Hong MS(1), Song JY, Yun DH, Cho JJ, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Kohwang Medical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701,
Korea.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), a STAT family member,
mediates interleukin 12 (IL12) signal transduction. IL12 is known to be related
to calorie-restricted status. In the central nervous system, IL12 also enhances
the production of nitric oxide (NO), which regulates food intake. In this study, 
the expression of neuronal NO synthase (Nos1), which is also related to food
intake, was investigated in the hypothalamic areas of Stat4 knockout (KO) mice
using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-diaphorase (NADPH-d)
histochemistry, a marker for neurons expressing Nos1 enzyme. Western blots were
also performed to evaluate Nos1 and Fos expression. Wild-type Balb/c (WT group,
n=10 male) and Stat4 KO mice (Stat4 KO group, n=8 male) were used. The body
weight and daily food intake in the WT group were 22.4+/-0.3 and 4.4 g per day,
while those in the Stat4 KO group were 18.7+/-0.4 and 1.8 g per day,
respectively. Stat4 mice had lower body weight and food intake than Balb/c mice. 
Optical intensities of NADPH-d-positive neurons in the paraventricular nucleus
(PVN) and lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) of the Stat4 KO group were
significantly higher than those of the WT group. Western blotting analysis
revealed that the hypothalamic Nos1 and Fos expression of the Stat4 KO group was 
up-regulated, compared to that in the WT group. These results suggest that Stat4 
may be related to the regulation of food intake and expression of Nos1 in the
hypothalamus.

PMCID: PMC2776892
PMID: 19915694  [PubMed]


29. Blood. 2010 Jan 14;115(2):274-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-215491. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

CD94 surface density identifies a functional intermediary between the CD56bright 
and CD56dim human NK-cell subsets.

Yu J(1), Mao HC, Wei M, Hughes T, Zhang J, Park IK, Liu S, McClory S, Marcucci G,
Trotta R, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Human CD56(bright) natural killer (NK) cells possess little or no killer
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs), high interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
production, but little cytotoxicity. CD56(dim) NK cells have high KIR expression,
produce little IFN-gamma, yet display high cytotoxicity. We hypothesized that, if
human NK maturation progresses from a CD56(bright) to a CD56(dim) phenotype, an
intermediary NK cell must exist, which demonstrates more functional overlap than 
these 2 subsets, and we used CD94 expression to test our hypothesis.
CD94(high)CD56(dim) NK cells express CD62L, CD2, and KIR at levels between
CD56(bright) and CD94(low)CD56(dim) NK cells. CD94(high)CD56(dim) NK cells
produce less monokine-induced IFN-gamma than CD56(bright) NK cells but much more 
than CD94(low)CD56(dim) NK cells because of differential interleukin-12-mediated 
STAT4 phosphorylation. CD94(high)CD56(dim) NK cells possess a higher level of
granzyme B and perforin expression and CD94-mediated redirected killing than
CD56(bright) NK cells but lower than CD94(low)CD56(dim) NK cells. Collectively,
our data suggest that the density of CD94 surface expression on CD56(dim) NK
cells identifies a functional and likely developmental intermediary between
CD56(bright) and CD94(low)CD56(dim) NK cells. This supports the notion that, in
vivo, human CD56(bright) NK cells progress through a continuum of differentiation
that ends with a CD94(low)CD56(dim) phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2808153
PMID: 19897577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Nov;60(11):3447-54. doi: 10.1002/art.24885.

BANK1 is a genetic risk factor for diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis and has
additive effects with IRF5 and STAT4.

Dieudé P(1), Wipff J, Guedj M, Ruiz B, Melchers I, Hachulla E, Riemekasten G,
Diot E, Hunzelmann N, Sibilia J, Tiev K, Mouthon L, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, 
Distler J, Amoura Z, Tarner I, Avouac J, Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the functional BANK1 variants rs3733197 and
rs10516487 are associated with systemic sclerosis (SSc) in 2 European Caucasian
populations and to investigate the putative gene-gene interactions between BANK1 
and IRF5 as well as STAT4.
METHODS: BANK1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in a total
population of 2,432 individuals. The French cohort consisted of 874 SSc patients 
and 955 controls (previously genotyped for both IRF5 rs2004640 and STAT4
rs7574865). The German cohort consisted of 421 SSc patients and 182 controls.
RESULTS: The BANK1 variants were found to be associated with diffuse cutaneous
SSc (dcSSc) in both cohorts, providing an odds ratio (OR) of 0.77 for the
rs10516487 T rare allele in the combined populations of dcSSc patients as
compared with the combined populations of controls (95% confidence interval [95% 
CI] 0.64-0.93) and an OR of 0.73 (95% CI 0.61-0.87) for the rs3733197 A rare
allele. BANK1 haplotype analysis found the A-T haplotype to be protective in
dcSSc patients (OR 0.70 [95% CI 0.57-0.86], P = 3.39 x 10(-4)) and the G-C
haplotype to be a risk factor (OR 1.25 [95% CI 1.06-1.47], P = 0.008).
Significant differences were also observed when the limited cutaneous subset of
SSc was compared with the dcSSc subset, both for the rare alleles and for the
haplotypes. The BANK1, IRF5, and STAT4 risk alleles displayed a multiplicatively 
increased risk of dcSSc of 1.43-fold.
CONCLUSION: Our results establish BANK1 as a new SSc genetic susceptibility
factor and show that BANK1, IRF5, and STAT4 act with additive effects.

PMID: 19877059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2009 Aug;27(158):157-60.

[Influence of genetic factors on development and severity of rheumatoid
arthritis--part I].

[Article in Polish]

Trefler J(1), Paradowska-Gorycka A, Matyska-Piekarska E, Rell-Bakalarska M,
Wojciechowska B, Lacki JK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology in Warsaw, Department of Systemic Connective Tissue 
Diseases, Poland. jtrefler@gmail.com

Both genetic and environmental factors affect susceptibility, severity and
probably drugs' efficacy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). After
initial completion of the Human Genome Project on the 16th February 2001,
significant progress has been made in identifying other than HLA genome regions
linked to the increased RA susceptibility. As an effect several new genes have
been recognized as an HLA-independent genetic risk factors of RA. PTPN22 gene
polymorphism, C5/TRAF1 genes region polymorphism and TNFAIP3-OLIG3 genes region
polymorphism(s) are among newly identified and already confirmed genetic risk
factors, whereas STAT 4, CTLA4, PADI4 and IRF5 genes polymorphisms are listed
among probable RA development genetic risk factors.

PMID: 19856886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Genet. 2009 Nov;41(11):1234-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.472. Epub 2009 Oct 18.

Genome-wide association study in a Chinese Han population identifies nine new
susceptibility loci for systemic lupus erythematosus.

Han JW, Zheng HF, Cui Y, Sun LD, Ye DQ, Hu Z, Xu JH, Cai ZM, Huang W, Zhao GP,
Xie HF, Fang H, Lu QJ, Xu JH, Li XP, Pan YF, Deng DQ, Zeng FQ, Ye ZZ, Zhang XY,
Wang QW, Hao F, Ma L, Zuo XB, Zhou FS, Du WH, Cheng YL, Yang JQ, Shen SK, Li J,
Sheng YJ, Zuo XX, Zhu WF, Gao F, Zhang PL, Guo Q, Li B, Gao M, Xiao FL, Quan C,
Zhang C, Zhang Z, Zhu KJ, Li Y, Hu DY, Lu WS, Huang JL, Liu SX, Li H, Ren YQ,
Wang ZX, Yang CJ, Wang PG, Zhou WM, Lv YM, Zhang AP, Zhang SQ, Lin D, Li Y, Low
HQ, Shen M, Zhai ZF, Wang Y, Zhang FY, Yang S, Liu JJ, Zhang XJ.

We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in a Chinese Han population by genotyping 1,047 cases and
1,205 controls using Illumina Human610-Quad BeadChips and replicating 78 SNPs in 
two additional cohorts (3,152 cases and 7,050 controls). We identified nine new
susceptibility loci (ETS1, IKZF1, RASGRP3, SLC15A4, TNIP1, 7q11.23, 10q11.22,
11q23.3 and 16p11.2; 1.77 x 10(-25) < or = P(combined) < or = 2.77 x 10(-8)) and 
confirmed seven previously reported loci (BLK, IRF5, STAT4, TNFAIP3, TNFSF4, 6q21
and 22q11.21; 5.17 x 10(-42) < or = P(combined) < or = 5.18 x 10(-12)).
Comparison with previous GWAS findings highlighted the genetic heterogeneity of
SLE susceptibility between Chinese Han and European populations. This study not
only advances our understanding of the genetic basis of SLE but also highlights
the value of performing GWAS in diverse ancestral populations.

PMID: 19838193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Exp Med. 2009 Oct 26;206(11):2407-16. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082286. Epub 2009 Sep 
28.

Transforming growth factor beta is dispensable for the molecular orchestration of
Th17 cell differentiation.

Das J(1), Ren G, Zhang L, Roberts AI, Zhao X, Bothwell AL, Van Kaer L, Shi Y, Das
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Microbiology, and Immunology, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School-University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2009 Dec 21;206(13):3157.

Interleukin (IL)-17-producing T helper (Th17) cells play a critical role in the
pathophysiology of several autoimmune disorders. The differentiation of Th17
cells requires the simultaneous presence of an unusual combination of cytokines: 
IL-6, a proinflammatory cytokine, and transforming growth factor (TGF) beta, an
antiinflammatory cytokine. However, the molecular mechanisms by which TGF-beta
exerts its effects on Th17 cell differentiation remain elusive. We report that
TGF-beta does not directly promote Th17 cell differentiation but instead acts
indirectly by blocking expression of the transcription factors signal transducer 
and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 and GATA-3, thus preventing Th1 and Th2
cell differentiation. In contrast, TGF-beta had no effect on the expression of
retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor gammat, a Th17-specific
transcription factor. Interestingly, in Stat-6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice, which are
unable to generate Th1 and Th2 cells, IL-6 alone was sufficient to induce robust 
differentiation of Th17 cells, whereas TGF-beta had no effect, suggesting that
TGF-beta is dispensable for Th17 cell development. Consequently, BALB/c
Stat-6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice, but not wild-type BALB/c mice, were highly
susceptible to the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis,
which could be blocked by anti-IL-17 antibodies but not by anti-TGF-beta
antibodies. Collectively, these data provide evidence that TGF-beta is not
directly required for the molecular orchestration of Th17 cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2768861
PMID: 19808254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Autoimmun. 2010 Mar;34(2):155-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2009.08.014. Epub 2009
Sep 30.

Association of the C8orf13-BLK region with systemic sclerosis in North-American
and European populations.

Gourh P(1), Agarwal SK, Martin E, Divecha D, Rueda B, Bunting H, Assassi S, Paz
G, Shete S, McNearney T, Draeger H, Reveille JD, Radstake TR, Simeon CP,
Rodriguez L, Vicente E, Gonzalez-Gay MA, Mayes MD, Tan FK, Martin J, Arnett FC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHSC-H),
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic studies in the systemic sclerosis (SSc), an autoimmune disease
that clinically manifests with dermal and internal organ fibrosis and small
vessel vasculopathy, have identified multiple susceptibility genes including
HLA-class II, PTPN22, IRF5, and STAT4 which have also been associated with other 
autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). These data
suggest that there are common autoimmune disease susceptibility genes. The
current report sought to determine if polymorphisms in the C8orf13-BLK region
(chromosome 8p23.1-B lymphoid tyrosine kinase), which is associated with SLE, are
associated also with SSc.
METHODS: Two variants in the C8orf13-BLK region (rs13277113 & rs2736340) were
tested for association with 1050 SSc cases and 694 controls of North Americans of
European descent and replicated in a second series 589 SSc cases and 722 controls
from Spain.
RESULTS: The "T" allele at rs2736340 variant was associated with SSc in both the 
U.S. and Spanish case-control series (P = 6.8 x 10(-5), OR 1.27, 95% CI 1.1-1.4).
The "A" allele at rs13277113 variant was associated with SSc in the U.S. series
only (P = 3.6 x 10(-4), OR 1.32, 95% CI 1.1-1.6) and was significant in the
combined analyses of the two series (P = 2.0 x 10(-3); OR 1.20, 95% CI 1.1-1.3). 
Both variants demonstrated an association with the anti-centromere antibody (P = 
2.2 x 10(-6) and P = 5.5 x 10(-4), respectively) and limited SSc (P = 3.3 x
10(-5) and P = 2.9 x 10(-3), respectively) in the combined analysis. Peripheral
blood gene expression profiles suggest that B-cell receptor and NFkappaB
signaling are dysregulated based on the risk haplotype of these variants.
CONCLUSION: We identify and replicate the association of the C8orf13-BLK region
as a novel susceptibility factor for SSc, placing it in the category of common
autoimmune disease susceptibility genes.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2821978
PMID: 19796918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Sep;1175:80-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04970.x.

Therapeutic applications and mechanisms underlying the activity of
immunosuppressive oligonucleotides.

Klinman DM(1), Tross D, Klaschik S, Shirota H, Sato T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Inflammation Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702, USA. klinmand@mail.nih.gov

Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) capable of "neutralizing" or "inhibiting"
immune responses have been described. This review will focus on the properties of
phosphorothioate ODN that mimic the immunosuppressive activity of the repetitive 
TTAGGG motifs present in mammalian telomeres. These TTAGGG multimers block the
production of pro-inflammatory and T helper type 1 cytokines elicited when immune
cells are activated by a wide variety of Toll-like receptor ligands, polyclonal
activators, and antigens. Several mechanisms contribute to the suppressive
activity of such ODN. Ongoing microarray studies indicate that suppressive ODN
interfere with the phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT4, thereby blocking the inflammation mediated by 
STAT-associated signaling cascades. In animal models, suppressive ODN can be used
to prevent or treat diseases characterized by persistent immune activation,
including collagen-induced arthritis, inflammatory arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, silicosis, and toxic shock. These findings suggest that TTAGGG
multimers may find broad use in the treatment of diseases characterized by
over-exuberant/persistent immune activation.

PMID: 19796080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Immunology. 2009 Sep;128(1 Suppl):e679-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03061.x.
Epub 2009 Feb 9.

Interleukin-12 is sufficient to promote antigen-independent interferon-gamma
production by CD8 T cells in old mice.

Rottinghaus EK(1), Vesosky B, Turner J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Interface Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH 43210, USA. erin.rottinghaus@osumc.edu

Numerous functional defects have been identified in naive T cells from aged mice,
including deficiencies in proliferation, cytokine production and signal
transduction. It is well documented that the ratio of naïve to memory T cells
significantly decreases with age resulting in the majority of T cells from aged
hosts expressing activated/memory T-cell markers (CD44(hi)), yet it is unclear
whether T cells with a CD44(hi) phenotype in aged hosts are functionally
equivalent to T cells with a similar phenotype in young hosts. We have identified
a population of CD44(hi) CD8 T cells in old mice that are capable of secreting
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in response to interleukin-12 (IL-12) stimulation.
This occurred in the absence of T-cell receptor engagement, a function that was
not observed in CD8 T cells from young mice. This phenotype was associated with
increased IL-12 receptor beta2 gene expression and IL-12 induced signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT-4) activation, even when CD8
T-cell numbers from young and old mice were normalized for CD44(hi) expression.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that IL-12-induced STAT-4 activation was required for
T helper type 1 (Th1) cytokine-induced IFN-gamma production in CD8 T cells. These
data illustrate that old mice possess a specialized subset of CD44(hi) CD8 T
cells with an enhanced responsiveness to IL-12, enabling these cells to produce
substantial amounts of IFN-gamma in response to Th1 cytokine stimulation. We have
therefore identified a functional difference in the populations of CD44(hi) CD8 T
cells from young and old mice, and believe that understanding age-associated
immunological changes is essential for helping the elderly combat deadly
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2753923
PMID: 19740329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 May;69(5):834-40. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.115535. Epub 2009 Sep
17.

A STAT4 risk allele is associated with ischaemic cerebrovascular events and
anti-phospholipid antibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Svenungsson E(1), Gustafsson J, Leonard D, Sandling J, Gunnarsson I, Nordmark G, 
Jönsen A, Bengtsson AA, Sturfelt G, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Elvin K, Sundin U,
Garnier S, Simard JF, Sigurdsson S, Padyukov L, Syvänen AC, Rönnblom L.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital,
Solna, SE-17176 Stockholm, Sweden. elisabet.svenungsson@ki.se

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the risk allele for systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in the signal transducer and activator of transcription
factor 4 (STAT4) gene, defined by the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs10181656(G), is associated with vascular events and/or presence of
prothrombotic anti-phospholipid antibodies (aPL) in patients with SLE.
METHODS: Two independent groups of unrelated patients with SLE of Swedish
ethnicity (n=424 and 154) were genotyped, and occurrence of previous
manifestations of ischaemic heart disease (IHD), ischaemic cerebrovascular
disease (ICVD) and venous thromboembolic events (VTE) was tabulated. aPL values
were measured by ELISA. Matched controls (n=492 and 194) were genotyped.
RESULTS: The STAT4 risk allele was more frequent in patients with SLE with
previous arterial events (combined OR (OR(c))=1.5, 95% CI 1.1 to 2.0) compared to
patients without such events. The association was mainly attributable to an
accumulation of the risk allele among patients with ICVD (OR(c)=2.3, CI 1.6 to
3.3). There was no association with IHD or VTE. The presence of two or more aPLs 
was associated with the risk allele (OR(c)=1.6, 95% CI 1.2 to 2.0). In
multivariable-adjusted logistic regression analyses treatment for hypertension,
at least one STAT4 risk allele, older age, IgG anti-cardiolipin antibodies and
longer SLE duration remained independently associated with previous ICVD
(p<or=0.02 for all).
CONCLUSION: Patients with SLE with the STAT4 risk allele had a strikingly
increased risk of ICVD, comparable in magnitude to that of hypertension. The
results imply that a genetic predisposition is an important and previously
unrecognised risk factor for ICVD in SLE, and that aPLs may be one underlying
mechanism.

PMID: 19762360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2010 Mar;59(3):453-63. doi: 10.1007/s00262-009-0764-x.
Epub 2009 Sep 16.

Natural killer cell is a major producer of interferon gamma that is critical for 
the IL-12-induced anti-tumor effect in mice.

Uemura A(1), Takehara T, Miyagi T, Suzuki T, Tatsumi T, Ohkawa K, Kanto T,
Hiramatsu N, Hayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yamada-oka, Suita, Japan. akioue@gh.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Although the anti-tumor effect of IL-12 is mediated mostly by IFNgamma, which
cell types most efficiently produce IFNgamma and therefore initiate or promote
the anti-tumor effect of IL-12 has not been clearly determined. In the present
study, we demonstrated hydrodynamic injection of the IL-12 gene led to prolonged 
IFNgamma production, NK-cell activation and complete inhibition of liver
metastasis of CT-26 colon cancer cells in wild-type mice, but not in IFNgamma
knockout mice. NK cells expressed higher levels of STAT4 and upon IL-12
administration displayed stronger STAT4 phosphorylation and IFNgamma production
than non-NK cells. Adoptive transfer of wild-type NK cells into IFNgamma knockout
mice restored IL-12-induced IFNgamma production, NK-cell activation and
anti-tumor effect, whereas transfer of the same number of wild-type non-NK cells 
did not. In conclusion, NK cells are predominant producers of IFNgamma that is
critical for IL-12 anti-tumor therapy.

PMID: 19756594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009 Nov;48(11):1369-74. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kep272.
Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Investigating the viability of genetic screening/testing for RA susceptibility
using combinations of five confirmed risk loci.

McClure A(1), Lunt M, Eyre S, Ke X, Thomson W, Hinks A, Bowes J, Gibbons L, Plant
D, Wilson AG, Marinou I, Morgan AW, Emery P; BIRAC consortium, Steer S, Hocking
LJ, Reid DM, Wordsworth P, Harrison P, Worthington J, Barton A.

Collaborators: Badcock LJ, Deighton CM, O'Reilly SC, Regan MR, Snaith, Summers
GD, Williams RA, Delamere J, Douglas K, Erb N, Kitas GD, Klocke R, Pace A,
Whallett A, Porter D, Hunter J, Gordon MM, Gupta M, Capell H, Sturrock R, McInnes
I, Madhok R, Field M, Cooper R, Herrick A, O'Neil T, Jones A, Benitha R, Barton
A, Knight S, Symmons D, Bernstein RM, Bruce IN, Hyrich K, Silman A, Gaffney K,
Macgregor AJ, Marshall T, Merry P, Scott DG, Thompson PW, Richards SC, Hull RG,
Ledingham JM, Mccrae F, Shaban MR, Thomas AL, Min SY, Abernethy VE, Dawson JK,
Lynch M, Carpenter EH, Dawes PT, Dowson C, Hassell A, Hay EM, Kamath S, Packham
J, Roddy E, Shadforth MF.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Epidemiology Unit, Stopford Building, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.

Erratum in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011 Jun;50(6):1178.

OBJECTIVE: Five loci-the shared epitope (SE) of HLA--DRB1, the PTPN22 gene, a
locus on 6q23, the STAT4 gene and a locus mapping to the TRAF1/C5 genetic
region--have now been unequivocally confirmed as conferring susceptibility to RA.
The largest single effect is conferred by SE. We hypothesized that combinations
of susceptibility alleles may increase risk over and above that of any individual
locus alone.
METHODS: We analysed data from 4238 RA cases and 1811 controls, for which
genotypes were available at all five loci.
RESULTS: Statistical analysis identified eight high-risk combinations conferring 
an odds ratio >6 compared with carriage of no susceptibility variants and,
interestingly, 10% population controls carried a combination conferring high
risk. All high-risk combinations included SE, and all but one contained PTPN22.
Statistical modelling showed that a model containing only these two loci could
achieve comparable sensitivity and specificity to a model including all five.
Furthermore, replacing SE (which requires full subtyping at the HLA-DRB1 gene)
with DRB1*1/4/10 carriage resulted in little further loss of information
(correlation coefficient between models = 0.93).
CONCLUSIONS: This represents the first exploration of the viability of population
screening for RA and identifies several high-risk genetic combinations. However, 
given the population incidence of RA, genetic screening based on these loci alone
is neither sufficiently sensitive nor specific at the current time.

PMCID: PMC2762544
PMID: 19741008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009 Nov;48(11):1363-8. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kep207. 
Epub 2009 Sep 8.

A haplotype in STAT4 gene associated with rheumatoid arthritis in Caucasians is
not associated in the Han Chinese population, but with the presence of rheumatoid
factor.

Li H(1), Zou Q, Xie Z, Liu Y, Zhong B, Yang S, Zheng P, Yang F, Fang Y, Wu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology of PLA, College of Basic Medical Sciences in the Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, 400038, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Several studies have shown that a haplotype (rs11889341, rs7574865,
rs8179673 and rs10181656) in STAT4 is associated with the development of RA in
Caucasian, Korean and Japanese populations. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effect of STAT4 on susceptibility to RA in the Han Chinese
population.
METHODS: Unrelated 750 RA patients and individually matched 750 healthy controls 
were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs11889341, in STAT4,
which tags the susceptibility haplotype. Association analyses were performed on
the whole data set and on sex subsets. Significant relationships were determined 
between clinical variables and rs11889341 for each disease subtype in the studied
groups.
RESULTS: There was no evidence of a significant association between rs11889341
and RA. The heterozygous CT genotype was associated with RA in female group [P = 
0.027; odds ratio (OR) 1.31; 95% CI 1.03, 1.65]. No association was found in male
group and in any subsets of RA based on sex, RF and anti-cyclic citrullinated
peptide (anti-CCP) antibody. However, in the Han Chinese population with RA
disease, we observed a significantly decreased frequency of the minor T allele
and TT genotype in the RF-positive subgroup compared with RF-negative subgroup (T
allele: P = 0.024; OR 0.73; 95% CI 0.56, 0.95; TT genotype P = 0.013; OR 0.49;
95% CI 0.28, 0.86).
CONCLUSION: The STAT4 RA-susceptibility haplotype identified in other previously 
reported populations has not been replicated in the Han Chinese population with
individually matched case-control study design. It is associated only with the
presence of RF in the Han Chinese population with RA disease.

PMID: 19737838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Oct;39(10):2877-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838610.

PolyI:C plus IL-2 or IL-12 induce IFN-gamma production by human NK cells via
autocrine IFN-beta.

Duluc D(1), Tan F, Scotet M, Blanchard S, Frémaux I, Garo E, Horvat B, Eid P,
Delneste Y, Jeannin P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm), Unité 892,
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, Angers, France.

NK lymphocytes and type I IFN (IFN-alpha/beta) are major actors of the innate
anti-viral response that also influence adaptive immune responses. We evaluated
type I IFN production by human NK cells in response to polyI:C, a potent type I
IFN-inducing TLR3 agonist. PolyI:C plus IL-2/IL-12 induced IFN-beta (but not
IFN-alpha) mRNA expression and protein production by highly pure human NK cells
and by the human NK cell line NK92. Neutralizing anti-IFNAR1 or anti-IFN-beta Ab 
prevented the production of IFN-gamma induced by polyI:C plus IL-2/IL-12.
Similarly, IFN-gamma production induced by polyI:C plus IL-12 was reduced in NK
cells isolated from IFNAR1(-/-) compared with WT mice. The ability of polyI:C
plus IL-12 to induce IFN-gamma production was related to an increase of TLR3,
Mda5 and IFNAR expression and by an increase of STAT1 and STAT4 phosphorylation. 
Collectively, these data demonstrate that NK cells, in response to polyI:C plus
IL-2/IL-12, produce IFN-beta that induce, in an autocrine manner, the production 
of IFN-gamma and thereby highlight that NK cells may control the outcome of
protective or injurious immune responses through type I IFN secretion.

PMID: 19728309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 May;69(5):883-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.112284. Epub 2009 Aug 
27.

Variation in STAT4 is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in a Finnish
family cohort.

Hellquist A(1), Sandling JK, Zucchelli M, Koskenmies S, Julkunen H, D'Amato M,
Garnier S, Syvänen AC, Kere J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Hälsovägen
7-9, S-14157 Huddinge, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 
haplotypes in the STAT4 gene, previously associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in a Swedish case-control cohort, are also associated with
SLE risk in a Finnish SLE family cohort.
METHOD: Genotyping was performed in 192 Finnish families, with 237 affected
subjects and their healthy relatives, using the SNPstream genotyping system.
RESULTS: Transmission disequilibrium test analysis provided the strongest signal 
of association for two linked SNPs: rs7582694 (p=0.002, OR=2.57) and rs10181656
(p=0.001, OR=2.53). Haplotype association analysis using a sliding window
approach was also performed and showed that the strongest association signal
originates from SNPs in intron 3 of STAT4.
CONCLUSION: The main association signal for STAT4 with SLE previously reported in
Caucasians is the same in the Finnish population. This is the first study that
confirms the association of STAT4 with SLE in a family cohort.

PMID: 19717398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Sep;60(9):2558-64. doi: 10.1002/art.24748.

Rheumatoid arthritis does not share most of the newly identified systemic lupus
erythematosus genetic factors.

Suarez-Gestal M(1), Calaza M, Dieguez-Gonzalez R, Perez-Pampin E, Pablos JL,
Navarro F, Narvaez J, Marenco JL, Herrero-Beaumont G, Fernandez-Gutierrez B,
Lamas JR, de la Serna AR, Ortiz AM, Carreño L, Cañete JD, Caliz R, Blanco FJ,
Balsa A, Gomez-Reino JJ, Gonzalez A.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Travesia de Choupana s/n, Santiago
de Compostela, Spain.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Sep;60(9):2547-9.

OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) share
some genetic factors such as HLA, PTPN22, STAT4, and 6q23. The aim of this study 
was to determine whether 9 other SLE genetic factors are also implicated in RA
susceptibility.
METHODS: A characteristic single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in each of 9
genetic factors, ITGAM (rs1143679), C8orf13-BLK (rs13277113), TYK2 (rs2304256),
1q25.1 (rs10798269), PXK (rs6445975), KIAA1542 (rs4963128), MECP2 (rs17435),
BANK1 (rs17266594), and LY9 (rs509749), was studied in 1,635 patients with RA and
1,906 control subjects from Spain. The rs7574865 SNP in STAT4 was also included. 
Analyses were conducted globally and after stratification by sex and clinical
features (anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide and rheumatoid factor, shared
epitope, rheumatoid nodules, radiographic changes, sicca syndrome, and
pneumonitis).
RESULTS: No association was observed between RA and any of the 9 newly identified
SLE genetic factors. A meta-analysis using previous data was consistent with
these results. In addition, there were no significant differences between
individuals with and those without each of the clinical features analyzed, except
the frequency of the minor allele in the C8orf13-BLK locus that was decreased in 
patients with sicca syndrome (14.6% versus 22.4% in controls; P = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: None of the 9 recently identified SLE risk factors showed association
with RA. Therefore, common genetic factors affecting the pathogenesis of these 2 
disorders seem to be limited, revealing that the genetic component contributes to
the different expression of these diseases.

PMID: 19714582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 15;183(6):3839-47. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901411. Epub 2009
Aug 26.

Temporal induction pattern of STAT4 target genes defines potential for Th1
lineage-specific programming.

Good SR(1), Thieu VT, Mathur AN, Yu Q, Stritesky GL, Yeh N, O'Malley JT, Perumal 
NB, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

STAT4 is a critical component in the development of inflammatory adaptive immune 
responses. It has been extensively characterized as a lineage-determining factor 
in Th1 development. However, the genetic program activated by STAT4 that results 
in an inflammatory cell type is not well defined. In this report, we use DNA
isolated from STAT4-chromatin immunoprecipitation to perform chromatin
immunoprecipitation-on-chip analysis of over 28,000 mouse gene promoters to
identify STAT4 targets. We demonstrate that STAT4 binds multiple gene-sets that
program distinct components of the Th1 lineage. Although many STAT4 target genes 
display STAT4-dependent IL-12-inducible expression, other genes displayed
IL-12-induced histone modifications but lack induction, possibly due to high
relative basal expression. In the subset of genes that STAT4 programs for
expression in Th1 cells, IL-12-induced mRNA levels remain increased for a longer 
time than mRNA from genes that are not programmed. This suggests that STAT4
binding to target genes, while critical, is not the only determinant for
STAT4-dependent gene programming during Th1 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2748807
PMID: 19710469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Rheumatol. 2009 Oct;36(10):2195-203. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090181. Epub 2009 Aug 
14.

Cigarette smoking, STAT4 and TNFRSF1B polymorphisms, and systemic lupus
erythematosus in a Japanese population.

Kiyohara C(1), Washio M, Horiuchi T, Tada Y, Asami T, Ide S, Atsumi T, Kobashi G,
Takahashi H; Kyushu Sapporo SLE (KYSS) Study Group.

Collaborators: Ide S, Kodama H, Washio M, Akashi K, Harada M, Horiuchi T,
Kiyohara C, Tsukamoto H, Asami T, Hotokebuchi T, Nagasawa K, Tada Y, Ushiyama O, 
Mori M, Oura A, Sinomura Y, Suzuki H, Takahashi H, Yamamoto M, Kobashi G, Atsumi 
T, Horita T, Koike T, Abe T, Tanaka H, Nogami N, Okamoto K, Sakamoto N, Sasaki S,
Miyake Y, Yokoyama T, Hirota Y, Inaba Y, Nagai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
chikako@phealth.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Recent studies have identified signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) as a susceptibility gene for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in different populations. Similarly, tumor necrosis factor receptor
superfamily, member 1B (TNFRSF1B) has been reported to be associated with SLE
risk in Japanese populations. Along with environmental factors such as smoking,
both polymorphisms may modulate an individual's susceptibility to SLE. We
investigated these relationships in a case-control study to evaluate risk factors
for SLE among Japanese women.
METHODS: We investigated the relationship of the STAT4 rs7574865 and TNFRSF1B
rs1061622 polymorphisms to SLE risk with special reference to their combination
and interaction with cigarette smoking among 152 SLE cases and 427 controls.
RESULTS: The TT genotype of STAT4 rs7574865 was significantly associated with
increased risk of SLE (OR 2.21, 95% CI 1.10-4.68). Subjects with at least one G
allele of TNFRSF1B rs1061622 had an increased risk of SLE (OR 1.56, 95% CI
0.99-2.47). The attributable proportion due to the interaction between the
TNFRSF1B rs1061622 genotypes and smoking was estimated to be 0.49 (95% CI
0.07-0.92), indicating that 49% of the excess risk for SLE in smokers with at
least one G allele was due to an additive interaction. A lack of significant
associations of STAT4 with smoking was observed. No significant gene-gene
interactions were found among polymorphisms of STAT4 and TNFRSF1B.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the association between cigarette smoking
and SLE could be differentiated by the TNFRSF1B rs1061622 T allele among female
Japanese subjects. This preliminary exploratory result should be confirmed in a
larger study.

PMID: 19684152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Jun;69(6):1049-53. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.110650. Epub 2009
Aug 11.

Overlap of disease susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile
idiopathic arthritis.

Hinks A(1), Eyre S, Ke X, Barton A, Martin P, Flynn E, Packham J; Childhood
Arthritis Prospective Study (CAPS); UKRAG Consortium; BSPAR Study Group,
Worthington J, Thomson W.

Author information: 
(1)Stopford Building, Oxford Road, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13
9PT, UK. Anne.Hinks@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been extremely successful
in the search for susceptibility risk factors for complex genetic autoimmune
diseases. As more studies are published, evidence is emerging of considerable
overlap of loci between these diseases. In juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA),
another complex genetic autoimmune disease, the strategy of using information
from autoimmune disease GWAS or candidate gene studies to help in the search for 
novel JIA susceptibility loci has been successful, with confirmed association
with two genes, PTPN22 and IL2RA. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune
disease that shares similar clinical and pathological features with JIA and,
therefore, recently identified confirmed RA susceptibility loci are also
excellent JIA candidate loci.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the overlap of disease susceptibility loci for RA and
JIA.
METHODS: /st> Fifteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at nine
RA-associated loci were genotyped in Caucasian patients with JIA (n=1054) and
controls (n=3531) and tested for association with JIA. Allele and genotype
frequencies were compared between cases and controls using the genetic analysis
software, PLINK.
RESULTS: Two JIA susceptibility loci were identified, one of which was a novel
JIA association (STAT4) and the second confirmed previously published
associations of the TRAF1/C5 locus with JIA. Weak evidence of association of JIA 
with three additional loci (Chr6q23, KIF5A and PRKCQ) was also obtained, which
warrants further investigation.
CONCLUSION: All these loci are good candidates in view of the known pathogenesis 
of JIA, as genes within these regions (TRAF1, STAT4, TNFAIP3, PRKCQ) are known to
be involved in T-cell receptor signalling or activation pathways.

PMCID: PMC2935325
PMID: 19674979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13463-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906988106. Epub 2009 Jul 29.

IL-1 family members and STAT activators induce cytokine production by Th2, Th17, 
and Th1 cells.

Guo L(1), Wei G, Zhu J, Liao W, Leonard WJ, Zhao K, Paul W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Expression of T1ST2, the IL-33R, by Th2 cells requires GATA3. Resting Th2 cells
express little GATA3, which is increased by IL-33 and a STAT5 activator, in turn 
increasing T1ST2 from its low-level expression on resting Th2 cells. Th2 cells
that have upregulated T1ST2 produce IL-13, but not IL-4, in response to IL-33
plus a STAT5 activator in an antigen-independent, NF-kappaB-dependent,
cyclosporin A (CsA)-resistant manner. Similarly, Th17 cells produce IL-17A in
response to IL-1beta and a STAT3 activator and Th1 cells produce IFNgamma in
response to IL-18 and a STAT4 inducer. Thus, each effector Th cell produces
cytokines without antigenic stimulation in response to an IL-1 family member and 
a specific STAT activator, implying an innate mechanism through which memory CD4 
T cells are recruited by an induced cytokine environment.

PMCID: PMC2726336
PMID: 19666510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Neurosurg. 2010 Feb;112(2):386-93. doi: 10.3171/2009.7.JNS09187.

The role of T helper cell differentiation in promoting nerve allograft survival
with costimulation blockade.

Ray WZ(1), Kasukurthi R, Papp EM, Moore AM, Yee A, Hunter DA, Solowski NL,
Mohanakumar T, Mackinnon SE, Tung TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

OBJECT: Peripheral nerve allografts provide a temporary scaffold for host nerve
regeneration and allow for the repair of significant segmental nerve injuries.
Despite this potential, nerve allograft transplantation requires temporary
systemic immunosuppression. Characterization of the immunological mechanisms
involved in the induction of immune hyporesponsiveness to prevent nerve allograft
rejection will help provide a basis for optimizing immunomodulation regimens or
manipulating donor nerve allografts to minimize or eliminate the need for global 
immunosuppression.
METHODS: The authors used C57Bl/6 mice and STAT4 and STAT6 gene BALB/c knockout
mice. A nonvascularized nerve allograft was used to reconstruct a 1-cm sciatic
nerve gap in the murine model. A triple costimulatory blockade of the CD40,
CD28/B7, and inducible costimulatory (ICOS) pathways was used. Quantitative
assessment was performed at 3 weeks with nerve histomorphometry, walking track
analysis, and the enzyme-linked immunospot assay.
RESULTS: The STAT6 -/- mice received 3 doses of costimulation-blocking antibodies
and had axonal regeneration equivalent to nerve isografts, while treated STAT4
-/- mice demonstrated moderate axonal regeneration but inferior to the T helper
cell Type 2-deficient animals. Enzyme-linked immunospot assay analysis
demonstrated a minimal immune response in both STAT4 -/- and STAT6 -/- mice
treated with a costimulatory blockade.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' findings suggest that Type 1 T helper cells may play a 
more significant role in costimulatory blockade-induced immune hyporesponsiveness
in the nerve allograft model, and that Type 2 T helper differentation may
represent a potential target for directed immunosuppression.

PMCID: PMC2956431
PMID: 19663546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):28420-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.012674. Epub 2009 
Aug 6.

Berberine differentially modulates the activities of ERK, p38 MAPK, and JNK to
suppress Th17 and Th1 T cell differentiation in type 1 diabetic mice.

Cui G(1), Qin X, Zhang Y, Gong Z, Ge B, Zang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 319 Yue Yang Road,
Shanghai 200031, China.

Berberine, an alkaloid derivative from Berberis vulgaris L., has been used
extensively in traditional Chinese medicine to treat diarrhea and diabetes, but
the underlying mechanisms for treating diabetes are not fully understood. Recent 
studies suggested that berberine has many beneficial biological effects,
including anti-inflammation. Because type 1 diabetes is caused by T cell-mediated
destruction of beta cells and severe islet inflammation, we hypothesized that
berberine could ameliorate type 1 diabetes through its immune regulation
properties. Here we reported that 2 weeks of oral administration of berberine
prevented the progression of type 1 diabetes in half of the NOD mice and
decreased Th17 and Th1 cytokine secretion. Berberine suppressed Th17 and Th1
differentiation by reducing the expression of lineage markers. We found that
berberine inhibited Th17 differentiation by activating ERK1/2 and inhibited Th1
differentiation by inhibiting p38 MAPK and JNK activation. Berberine
down-regulated the activity of STAT1 and STAT4 through the suppression of p38
MAPK and JNK activation, and it controlled the stability of STAT4 through the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Our findings indicate that berberine targets MAPK
to suppress Th17 and Th1 differentiation in type 1 diabetic NOD mice. This study 
revealed a novel role of ERK in Th17 differentiation through down-regulation of
STAT3 phosphorylation and RORgamma t expression.

PMCID: PMC2788891
PMID: 19661066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Immunity. 2009 Aug 21;31(2):209-19. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.05.012. Epub 2009 
Jul 30.

Interleukin-10 production by Th1 cells requires interleukin-12-induced STAT4
transcription factor and ERK MAP kinase activation by high antigen dose.

Saraiva M(1), Christensen JR, Veldhoen M, Murphy TL, Murphy KM, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunoregulation, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

CD4(+) T cells producing interleukin-10 (IL-10) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) 
are reported in chronic infections. However, the signals that direct the
development of IL-10-producing T helper 1 (Th1) cells are undefined. We showed
that development of IL-10-producing Th1 cells required high T cell receptor (TCR)
ligation, sustained ERK1 and ERK2 MAP kinases phosphorylation, and IL-12-induced 
STAT4 transcription factor activation. Repeated TCR triggering led to enhanced
IL-10 production by Th1 cells, and continued IL-12 action and high-dose TCR
signaling were required for the development and maintenance of IL-10-producing
Th1 cells. Although Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells require the activation of distinct
STATs for their differentiation, activation of ERK1 and ERK2 was a common
requirement for production of IL-10 by all Th cell subsets. IL-10 expression also
correlated with c-maf expression. Despite having distinct functions in protection
against pathogens, all Th cells share the important task of controlling
overexuberant immune responses by means of IL-10 production.

PMCID: PMC2791889
PMID: 19646904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug;60(8):2472-9. doi: 10.1002/art.24688.

STAT4 is a genetic risk factor for systemic sclerosis having additive effects
with IRF5 on disease susceptibility and related pulmonary fibrosis.

Dieudé P(1), Guedj M, Wipff J, Ruiz B, Hachulla E, Diot E, Granel B, Sibilia J,
Tiev K, Mouthon L, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, Amoura Z, Fajardy I, Avouac J,
Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 7 and Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. philippe.dieude@bch.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) belongs to the group of connective tissue
disorders (CTDs), among which are several disorders characterized by a type I
interferon (IFN) signature. The recent identification of an association between
IRF5 and SSc further highlights a key role for IFN. STAT4, which encodes STAT-4, 
contributes to IFN signaling, and its genetic variants were found to be
associated with CTDs. The aim of this study was to determine whether the STAT4
rs7574865 single-nucleotide polymorphism is associated with SSc, and whether it
interacts with IRF5.
METHODS: Both the STAT4 rs7574865 and IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphisms were genotyped
in 1,855 individuals of French Caucasian origin comprising a discovery set of 440
patients with SSc and 485 control subjects and a replication set of 445 patients 
with SSc and an additional 485 control subjects.
RESULTS: STAT4 rs7574865 was shown to be associated with SSc (P=0.001, odds ratio
[OR] 1.29, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.11-1.51). This association was not 
restricted to a particular phenotype. An additive effect of the STAT4 rs7574865 T
allele and the IRF5 rs2004640 T allele was observed, resulting in a multiple
increased 1.28-fold risk of SSc. The OR for SSc was 2.72 (95% CI 1.86-3.99) for
combinations of genotypes with >or=3 risk alleles. An additive effect was also
detected for fibrosing alveolitis: carriage of at least 3 risk alleles appeared
to be an independent risk factor (P=2.2x10(-4), OR 1.97, 95% CI 1.28-3.04).
CONCLUSION: Our results establish STAT4 rs7574865 as a new SSc genetic
susceptibility factor. STAT4 and IRF5 act with additive effects in terms of
susceptibility to both SSc and SSc-related fibrosing alveolitis.

PMID: 19644887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug;60(8):2468-71. doi: 10.1002/art.24701.

Association of STAT4 and BLK, but not BANK1 or IRF5, with primary
antiphospholipid syndrome.

Yin H(1), Borghi MO, Delgado-Vega AM, Tincani A, Meroni PL, Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):1201-2.

OBJECTIVE: Primary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is formally classified by the 
presence of antiphospholipid antibodies, recurrent thrombosis, and/or pregnancy
morbidity in the absence of any underlying full-blown systemic autoimmune
disease. However, systemic manifestations in patients with primary APS have been 
recently reported, as has the presence of serologic markers in common with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In spite of similarities between the 2
diseases, only a minority of cases of primary APS evolve into full-blown SLE,
even after a long followup period. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether the analysis of SLE susceptibility genes may provide at least a partial
explanation for such a discrepancy.
METHODS: One hundred thirty-three patients with primary APS classified according 
to the Sydney criteria and 468 healthy control subjects from the same geographic 
area were recruited. We genotyped 3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
IRF5 (rs2004640, rs2070197, and rs10954213), 4 SNPs in STAT4 (rs1467199,
rs3821236, rs3024866, and rs7574865), 2 SNPs in BANK1 (rs10516487 and rs3733197),
and 1 SNP in BLK (rs2736340).
RESULTS: STAT4 and BLK displayed a strong genetic association with primary APS
(for rs7574865, odds ratio [OR] 2.19, P=5.17x10(-7); for rs2736340, OR 2.06,
P=1.78x10(-6)), while a weak association with IRF5 and no association with BANK1 
were observed.
CONCLUSION: The presence of a strong genetic association with only a few SLE
susceptibility genes and the absence of a more complex gene association may
contribute to the lack of cases of full-blown SLE developing in patients with
primary APS, in spite of the clinical and serologic similarities between SLE and 
primary APS.

PMID: 19644876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Aug;68(8):1375-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.111310.

Association of STAT4 polymorphism with systemic sclerosis in a Japanese
population.

Tsuchiya N, Kawasaki A, Hasegawa M, Fujimoto M, Takehara K, Kawaguchi Y, Kawamoto
M, Hara M, Sato S.

PMID: 19605749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Aug;68(8):1366-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.094367.

STAT4 single nucleotide polymorphism, rs7574865 G/T, as a risk for
antiphospholipid syndrome.

Horita T, Atsumi T, Yoshida N, Nakagawa H, Kataoka H, Yasuda S, Koike T.

PMID: 19605742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Immunology. 2009 Aug;127(4):587-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.03037.x.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 limits the development of
adaptive regulatory T cells.

O'Malley JT(1), Sehra S, Thieu VT, Yu Q, Chang HC, Stritesky GL, Nguyen ET,
Mathur AN, Levy DE, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

T-cell responses to a cytokine milieu instruct the development of multiple
effector phenotypes. While transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1))
inhibits the development of T helper type 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells, we demonstrate
that like interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-4, IL-12 can inhibit the development of
TGF-beta(1)-induced Foxp3-expressing adaptive T regulatory (aTreg) cells. Signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) is critical for the response 
to IL-12, although there is a parallel pathway involving T box expressed in T
cells (T-bet), and cells from mice double-deficient in STAT4 and T-bet are
refractory to the inhibition of aTreg-cell development by IL-12. While the
ability of these cytokines to promote Th differentiation may contribute to this
effect, we observe that culture with IL-12, or other instructive cytokines,
results in an increase in repressive chromatin modifications at the Foxp3 locus
that limit STAT5 binding to Foxp3, without observed effects on IL-2 signalling
pathways. In a model of allergic lung inflammation there are increased
percentages of Treg cells in the lungs of Stat4(-/-) mice, compared with
wild-type mice, and increases in Treg cells correlate with decreased allergic
inflammation. Overall, these results suggest an important role for STAT4 in
regulating Treg-cell development.

PMCID: PMC2729536
PMID: 19604309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 May 5;89(17):1197-202.

[Experimental investigation of roles of STAT4 and SOCS3 in differentiation and
cytokine secretion of T helper cells by RNA interference].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun L(1), Wei XL, Wang QS, Zheng HL, Xiang R, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin
300071, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the roles of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) in
differentiation and cytokine secretion of T helper (Th) cells by separate
silencing.
METHODS: Th0 cells were induced to differentiate to Th1 or Th2 cells by
interleukin 12 (IL-12) or interleukin 4 (IL-4). The mRNAs of STAT4 and SOCS3 were
silenced separately by small interfering RNA (siRNA) in Th0, Th1 and Th2 cells
and then the lymphocytes cultured in Th1 or Th2 medium with IL-12 or IL-4 for
another 48 h before cells and supernatants were collected for the detection of
Th1 and Th2 type cytokines by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). By comparing different
amounts of cytokines between before and after silencing the target mRNAs, the
roles of STAT4 and SOCS3 in the differentiation and cytokine secretion in T
helper cells were evaluated.
RESULTS: Th1 type cytokine significantly decreased and Th2 type cytokine
increased after silencing STAT4 in Th0 and Th1 cells; minimal changes were
detected in both Th1 and Th2 type cytokines after silencing SOCS3.
CONCLUSION: STAT4 mediates the IL-12-induced differentiation of T cells to Th1
subset and maintains the cytokine secretion of Th1 cells; STAT4 directly inhibits
the development and cytokine secretion of Th2 cells; STAT4 deficiency results in 
impaired development and cytokines secretion of Th1 cells and the enhanced
development and cytokines secretion of Th2 cells. SOCS3 has minimal effects on
IL-12 or IL-4 induced differentiation and cytokine secretion of T helper cells.

PMID: 19595086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2009 Sep;21(5):448-53. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832f0861.

Genetics of systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren's syndrome.

Scofield RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. hal-scofield@omrf.ouhsc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To determine the advances made in the genetics of systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) or Sjögren's syndrome as the era of genome-wide
association and high-throughput single nucleotide typing begins.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several genome-wide association studies have been performed in
SLE but there are no such studies published or in progress for Sjögren's
syndrome. Genetics and the functional significance of risk alleles in the
interferon pathway are being worked out in detail. This is especially true for
STAT4 and IRF5. Gene copy number variation, a major source of genetic
variability, is important for several genes that impart risk for SLE. An X
chromosome copy number dose effect has recently been identified. Genetic
evaluation of Sjögren's syndrome is limited to small studies that have
concentrated on genes already shown to be risk factors in SLE.
SUMMARY: Knowledge of the genetics of SLE is advancing rapidly, whereas that of
Sjögren's syndrome lags behind considerably.

PMID: 19593143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Immunity. 2009 Jul 17;31(1):158-69. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.04.016.

Human dendritic cells induce the differentiation of interleukin-21-producing T
follicular helper-like cells through interleukin-12.

Schmitt N(1), Morita R, Bourdery L, Bentebibel SE, Zurawski SM, Banchereau J,
Ueno H.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX 75204, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 Jul 17;31(1):12-4.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells help development of antibody responses via
interleukin-21 (IL-21). Here we show that activated human dendritic cells (DCs)
induced naive CD4(+) T cells to become IL-21-producing Tfh-like cells through
IL-12. CD4(+) T cells primed with IL-12 induced B cells to produce
immunoglobulins in a fashion dependent on IL-21 and inducible costimulator
(ICOS), thus sharing fundamental characteristics with Tfh cells. The induction of
Tfh-like cells by activated DCs was inhibited by neutralizing IL-12. IL-12
induced two different IL-21-producers: IL-21(+)IFN-gamma(+)T-bet(+) Th1 cells and
IL-21(+)IFN-gamma(-)T-bet(-) non-Th1 cells, in a manner dependent on signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). IL-12 also regulated IL-21
secretion by memory CD4(+) T cells. Thus, IL-12 produced by activated DCs
regulates antibody responses via developing IL-21-producing Tfh-like cells and
inducing IL-21 secretion from memory CD4(+) T cells. These data suggest that the 
developmental pathway of Tfh cells differs between mice and humans, which have
considerable implications for vaccine development.

PMCID: PMC2731623
PMID: 19592276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Rheumatol Int. 2010 Mar;30(5):661-6. doi: 10.1007/s00296-009-1051-z. Epub 2009
Jul 9.

Association between the rs7574865 polymorphism of STAT4 and rheumatoid arthritis:
a meta-analysis.

Lee YH(1), Woo JH, Choi SJ, Ji JD, Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
Anam Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine, 126-1 5-ga, Anam-dong,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, Korea. lyhcgh@korea.ac.kr

The aim of this study was to determine whether the rs7574865 polymorphism of
STAT4 (signal transducers and activators of transcription 4) confers
susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in populations with different
ethnicities. A meta-analysis was conducted on the T allele of the STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism in 15 studies containing 16,088 RA patients and 16,509 normal
control subjects. Meta-analysis revealed an association between RA and the STAT4 
rs7574865 T allele in all subjects (OR = 1.271, 95% CI = 1.197-1.350, P < 0.001).
Furthermore, the STAT4 rs7574865 T allele was found to be significantly
associated with RA in Europeans and Asians (OR = 1.300, 95% CI = 1.195-1.414, P <
0.001; OR = 1.216, 95% CI = 1.135-1.303, P < 0.001). Stratification of RA
patients according to the presence of anti-CCP antibody revealed a statistically 
significant association between the T allele and RA in both anti-CCP-positive and
-negative RA patients versus controls. Europeans had the lowest (21.4%) and
Asians had the highest (32.0%) prevalence of the T allele among the populations
studied. In conclusion, this meta-analysis confirms that the STAT4 rs7574865
polymorphism is associated with RA susceptibility in different ethnic groups, and
that its prevalence is ethnicity dependent.

PMID: 19588142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jul;60(7):2124-30. doi: 10.1002/art.24618.

Variants in TNFAIP3, STAT4, and C12orf30 loci associated with multiple autoimmune
diseases are also associated with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Prahalad S(1), Hansen S, Whiting A, Guthery SL, Clifford B, McNally B, Zeft AS,
Bohnsack JF, Jorde LB.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.
sprahal@emory.edu

OBJECTIVE: Subtypes of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) share phenotypic
features with other autoimmune disorders. We investigated several genetic
variants associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other autoimmune disorders
for association with JIA to test the hypothesis that clinically distinct
phenotypes share common genetic susceptibility factors.
METHODS: Cases were 445 children with JIA, and controls were 643 healthy adults. 
Using the TaqMan assay, subjects were genotyped for 8 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in 7 loci including rs10499194 and rs6920220 in the TNFAIP3 locus, 
rs6679677 in the RSBN1 locus, rs17696736 in the C12orf30 locus, rs3761847 in the 
TRAF1/C5 locus, rs2104286 in the IL2RA locus, rs7574865 in the STAT4 locus, and
rs2542151 in the PTPN2 locus. Alleles and genotypes were analyzed for association
with JIA and JIA subtypes. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95%
CIs) were calculated.
RESULTS: The strongest associations with JIA risk or protection were observed for
TNFAIP3 variants rs10499194 (OR 0.74 [95% CI 0.61-0.91], P < 0.004) and rs6920220
(OR 1.30 [95% CI 1.05-1.61], P = 0.015). We also observed associations between
JIA and both STAT4 (OR 1.24 [95% CI 1.02-1.51], P = 0.029) and C12orf30 (OR 1.20 
[95% CI 1.01-1.43], P = 0.041) variants. The PTPN2 variant rs2542151 deviated
from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and was excluded from analyses. Variants in
IL2RA, TRAF1/C5, and RSBN1 were not associated with JIA. After stratification by 
JIA subtype, the TNFAIP3 and C12orf30 variants were associated with
oligoarticular JIA, while the STAT4 variant was associated primarily with
polyarticular JIA.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated associations between JIA and variants in the
TNFAIP3, STAT4, and C12orf30 regions that have previously shown associations with
other autoimmune diseases, including RA and systemic lupus erythematosus. Our
results suggest that clinically distinct autoimmune phenotypes share common
genetic susceptibility factors.

PMCID: PMC3104295
PMID: 19565500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Immunol. 2009 Sep;70(9):738-41. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2009.05.008. Epub 2009 
Jun 17.

STAT4 gene polymorphism is associated with psoriasis in the genetically
homogeneous population of Crete, Greece.

Zervou MI(1), Goulielmos GN, Castro-Giner F, Tosca AD, Krueger-Krasagakis S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of many complex diseases have
successfully identified novel susceptibility loci, with many of them being
associated with more than one condition. Taking into consideration that different
autoimmune diseases may share some common pathogenetic pathways, we hypothesized 
that STAT4, a susceptibility gene found to be associated with increased risk for 
systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes, Sjögren's
syndrome, Wegener's granulomatosis, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis may
also have a role in psoriasis. Psoriasis is an autoimmune, chronic inflammatory
skin disease. Here we performed a case-control study in the population of island 
of Crete and demonstrated for the first time the association of a STAT4 single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with susceptibility to psoriasis, thus suggesting a
putative key role of STAT4 in multiple autoimmune diseases. We found that mutated
allele T of the STAT4 rs7574865 SNP, which previously was implicated in the
predisposition to many autoimmune diseases, were more common in individuals with 
psoriasis than in controls (p = 0.045, odds ratio = 1.42, 95% confidence interval
1.01-2.00), thus concluding that the polymorphism examined is associated with the
development of psoriasis in our population.

PMID: 19500629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Immunology. 2009 Jun;127(2):206-15.

Interleukin 21 up-regulates perforin-mediated cytotoxic activity of human
intra-epithelial lymphocytes.

Ebert EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
ebertec@umdnj.edu

Human intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IELs) are predominantly T-cell
receptor-alphabeta(+) (TCR-alphabeta(+)) CD8(+) CD45RO(+) memory T cells located 
between intestinal epithelial cells. They respond to a greater extent to
stimulation with interleukin (IL)-15 than to CD3/TCR triggering, suggesting that 
they react to the cytokine milieu in their local environment rather than to
cognate antigen. A newly described member of the gammac cytokine family, IL-21,
has potent antitumor effects. As IELs resemble lymphocytes infiltrating
neoplastic lesions, their response to IL-21 may be relevant in vivo. Here, IL-21 
was shown to increase perforin-mediated cytotoxicity and serine esterase release 
by IELs. This IL-21-mediated up-regulation occurred without changes in IEL
survival or cell division. Interestingly, the effects of IL-21 occurred without
increased phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), or
p38. IL-21 had no effect on Fas ligand (FL)- or tumour necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha)-mediated cytotoxicity, but it down-regulated IL-15-stimulated
expression of CD25 and CD94, indicating that it has both positive and negative
actions. This functional profile is unique to human IELs, emphasizing that they
are a distinct compartment of lymphocytes and that IL-21 may promote their role
in tumour immunosurveillance.

PMCID: PMC2691786
PMID: 19489126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jan;37(1):141-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9553-z. Epub 2009 May
29.

Association of STAT4 polymorphism with rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus: a meta-analysis.

Ji JD(1), Lee WJ, Kong KA, Woo JH, Choi SJ, Lee YH, Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, South 
Korea. jjdjmesy@korea.ac.kr

STAT4 is a transcription factor that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Recently,
several reports has documented that a STAT4 haplotype is associated with RA, SLE 
and Sjogren's syndrome. To summarize and review these findings, we conducted a
meta-analysis of all relevant reports published before September 2008. Studies on
STAT4 rs7574865 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of RA and SLE were
identified using PubMed. Meta-analyses were performed for 15,609 patients with RA
and 15,793 controls from 14 published studies and for 2,478 patients with SLE and
5,058 controls from 8 published studies. Meta-odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) based on random effects models were calculated for all
available studies. The overall ORs for the minor T allele of STAT4 rs7574865 SNP 
were 1.27 (95% CI 1.20-1.34) in RA and 1.57 (95% CI 1.44-1.71) in SLE. Asian
controls have significantly higher allele frequency (32%) for the minor T allele 
of STAT4 rs7574865 SNP than population of European origin (22%), however, there
was no significant difference of ORs for RA and SLE by ethnicity. No apparent
effect of anti-CCP positivity was found in stratified analysis. The risk of STAT4
genotype for SLE was significantly higher than for RA in populations of European 
origin and Asian. The results of our meta-analysis demonstrated that STAT4
rs7574865 SNP is significantly associated with RA and SLE. In addition to
specific alleles of HLA-DRB1, the minor T allele of STAT4 rs7574865 SNP is a
common RA risk factor in populations of European origin and Asian.

PMID: 19479340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 11;360(24):2544-55. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810440. Epub 2009 
May 20.

Primary biliary cirrhosis associated with HLA, IL12A, and IL12RB2 variants.

Hirschfield GM(1), Liu X, Xu C, Lu Y, Xie G, Lu Y, Gu X, Walker EJ, Jing K, Juran
BD, Mason AL, Myers RP, Peltekian KM, Ghent CN, Coltescu C, Atkinson EJ,
Heathcote EJ, Lazaridis KN, Amos CI, Siminovitch KA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto and Liver Center, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 25;360(26):2797-8.

BACKGROUND: Primary biliary cirrhosis is a chronic granulomatous cholangitis,
characteristically associated with antimitochondrial antibodies. Twin and family 
aggregation data suggest that there is a significant genetic predisposition to
primary biliary cirrhosis, but the susceptibility loci are unknown.
METHODS: To identify genetic loci conferring a risk for primary biliary
cirrhosis, we carried out a genomewide association analysis in which DNA samples 
from 2072 Canadian and U.S. subjects (536 patients with primary biliary cirrhosis
and 1536 controls) were genotyped for more than 300,000 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). Sixteen of the SNPs most strongly associated with primary
biliary cirrhosis were genotyped in two independent replication sets. We carried 
out fine-mapping studies across three loci associated with primary biliary
cirrhosis.
RESULTS: We found significant associations between primary biliary cirrhosis and 
13 loci across the HLA class II region; the HLA-DQB1 locus (encoding the major
histocompatibility complex class II, DQ beta chain 1) had the strongest
association (P=1.78x10(-19); odds ratio for patients vs. controls, 1.75). Primary
biliary cirrhosis was also significantly and reproducibly associated with two
SNPs at the IL12A locus (encoding interleukin-12alpha), rs6441286
(P=2.42x10(-14); odds ratio, 1.54) and rs574808 (P=1.88x10(-13); odds ratio,
1.54), and one SNP at the IL12RB2 locus (encoding interleukin-12 receptor beta2),
rs3790567 (P=2.76x10(-11); odds ratio, 1.51). Fine-mapping analysis showed that a
five-allele haplotype in the 3' flank of IL12A was significantly associated with 
primary biliary cirrhosis (P=1.15x10(-34)). We found a modest genomewide
association (P<5.0x10(-5)) with the risk of disease for SNPs at the STAT4 locus
(encoding signal transducer and activator of transcription 4) and the CTLA4 locus
(encoding cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4) and 10 other loci.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show significant associations between primary biliary
cirrhosis and common genetic variants at the HLA class II, IL12A, and IL12RB2
loci and suggest that the interleukin-12 immunoregulatory signaling axis is
relevant to the pathophysiology of primary biliary cirrhosis. (ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT00242125.)

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMCID: PMC2857316
PMID: 19458352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2009 Jul;29(7):399-406. doi: 10.1089/jir.2008.0093.

Signaling pathways that lead to the silencing of the interleukin-4-producing
potential in Th1 cells.

Zhuang Y(1), Huang Z, Nishida J, Zhang L, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, National 
Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

In order to develop the most effective Th1 immunity, naïve CD4(+) T cells must
acquire the capacity to induce the expression of IFN-gamma and to silence Th2
cytokine-producing potential. Although the IFN-gamma-STAT1 and the IL-12-STAT4
pathways have been demonstrated to be important in inducing the
IFN-gamma-producing capacity in Th1 cells, their respective roles in silencing
the IL-4-producing potential in Th1 cells remain unclear. In this study, we
investigated the role of the IFN-gamma and the IL-12 pathways in silencing the
IL-4-producing potential in Th1 cells. We found that IFN-gamma was essential to
silence the IL-4-producing potential in Th1 cells, while IL-12 only partially
suppressed the IL-4-producing potential. IFN-gamma depended on STAT1 and IL-12
depended on STAT4 to suppress the IL-4-producing potential. We showed that the
IL-12-STAT4 pathway and the IFN-gamma-STAT1 pathway converge at the point of
T-bet. Our study demonstrates that the IFN-gamma-STAT1-T-bet signaling pathway is
the major pathway that leads to silencing the IL-4-producing potential of Th1
cells.

PMCID: PMC2956644
PMID: 19450151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Semin Immunol. 2009 Dec;21(6):318-27. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.04.002. Epub 2009 
May 14.

Unraveling the genetics of complex diseases: susceptibility genes for rheumatoid 
arthritis and psoriasis.

Li Y(1), Begovich AB.

Author information: 
(1)Celera, 1401 Harbor Bay Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

Talk of numerous genetic risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriasis
has been percolating for years, but with the exception of the human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) region, none have been definitively identified. Recently the
results of multiple, well powered, genetic case-control studies have begun to
appear providing convincing statistical evidence for at least ten non-HLA related
risk genes or loci (C5/TRAF1, CD40, CTLA4, KIF5A/PIP4K2C, MMEL1/TNFRSF14, PADI4, 
PRKCQ, PTPN22, STAT4, and TNFAIP3/OLIG3) for RA and six (IL12B, IL13, IL23R,
STAT2/IL23A, TNFAIP3, and TNIP1) for psoriasis. These initial, novel findings are
beginning to shed light on the molecular pathways pertinent to the individual
diseases and highlight the pleiotropic effects of several risk factors as well as
the allelic heterogeneity underlying susceptibility to these and other autoimmune
diseases.

PMID: 19446472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Arthritis Res Ther. 2009;11(3):R70. doi: 10.1186/ar2699. Epub 2009 May 15.

Association of common polymorphisms in known susceptibility genes with rheumatoid
arthritis in a Slovak population using osteoarthritis patients as controls.

Stark K(1), Rovenský J, Blazicková S, Grosse-Wilde H, Ferencik S, Hengstenberg C,
Straub RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93042 Regensburg, Germany.
klaus.stark@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

INTRODUCTION: Both genetic and environmental factors contribute to rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), a common and complex autoimmune disease. As well as the major
susceptibility gene HLA-DRB1, recent genome-wide and candidate-gene studies
reported additional evidence for association of single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) markers in the PTPN22, STAT4, OLIG3/TNFAIP3 and TRAF1/C5 loci with RA. This
study was initiated to investigate the association between defined genetic
markers and RA in a Slovak population. In contrast to recent studies, we included
intensively-characterized osteoarthritis (OA) patients as controls.
METHODS: We used material of 520 RA and 303 OA samples in a case-control setting.
Six SNPs were genotyped using TaqMan assays. HLA-DRB1 alleles were determined by 
employing site-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification.
RESULTS: No statistically significant association of TRAF1/C5 SNPs rs3761847 and 
rs10818488 with RA was detected. However, we were able to replicate the
association signals between RA and HLA-DRB1 alleles, STAT4 (rs7574865), PTPN22
(rs2476601) and OLIG3/TNFAIP3 (rs10499194 and rs6920220). The strongest signal
was detected for HLA-DRB1*04 with an allelic P = 1.2*10-13 (OR = 2.92, 95%
confidence interval (CI) = 2.18 - 3.91). Additionally, SNPs rs7574865STAT4 (P =
9.2*10-6; OR = 1.71, 95% CI = 1.35 - 2.18) and rs2476601PTPN22 (P = 9.5*10-4; OR 
= 1.67, 95% CI = 1.23 - 2.26) were associated with susceptibility to RA, whereas 
after permutation testing OLIG3/TNFAIP3 SNPs rs10499194 and rs6920220 missed our 
criteria for significance (Pcorr = 0.114 and Pcorr = 0.180, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In our Slovak population, HLA-DRB1 alleles as well as SNPs in STAT4 
and PTPN22 genes showed a strong association with RA.

PMCID: PMC2714116
PMID: 19445664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Arthritis Res Ther. 2009;11(3):R69. doi: 10.1186/ar2698. Epub 2009 May 14.

Replication of recently identified systemic lupus erythematosus genetic
associations: a case-control study.

Suarez-Gestal M(1), Calaza M, Endreffy E, Pullmann R, Ordi-Ros J, Sebastiani GD, 
Ruzickova S, Jose Santos M, Papasteriades C, Marchini M, Skopouli FN, Suarez A,
Blanco FJ, D'Alfonso S, Bijl M, Carreira P, Witte T, Migliaresi S, Gomez-Reino
JJ, Gonzalez A; European Consortium of SLE DNA Collections.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Investigacion 10 and Rheumatology Unit, Hospital Clinico
Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela 15706, Spain.
mariansg82@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2009;11(4):119.

INTRODUCTION: We aimed to replicate association of newly identified systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) loci.
METHODS: We selected the most associated SNP in 10 SLE loci. These 10 SNPs were
analysed in 1,579 patients with SLE and 1,726 controls of European origin by
single-base extension. Comparison of allele frequencies between cases and
controls was done with the Mantel-Haenszel approach to account for heterogeneity 
between sample collections.
RESULTS: A previously controversial association with a SNP in the TYK2 gene was
replicated (odds ratio (OR) = 0.79, P = 2.5 x 10-5), as well as association with 
the X chromosome MECP2 gene (OR = 1.26, P = 0.00085 in women), which had only
been reported in a single study, and association with four other loci, 1q25.1 (OR
= 0.81, P = 0.0001), PXK (OR = 1.19, P = 0.0038), BANK1 (OR = 0.83, P = 0.006)
and KIAA1542 (OR = 0.84, P = 0.001), which have been identified in a genome-wide 
association study, but not found in any other study. All these replications
showed the same disease-associated allele as originally reported. No association 
was found with the LY9 SNP, which had been reported in a single study.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm nine SLE loci. For six of them, TYK2, MECP2,
1q25.1, PXK, BANK1 and KIAA1542, this replication is important. The other three
loci, ITGAM, STAT4 and C8orf13-BLK, were already clearly confirmed. Our results
also suggest that MECP2 association has no influence in the sex bias of SLE,
contrary to what has been proposed. In addition, none of the other associations
seems important in this respect.

PMCID: PMC2714115
PMID: 19442287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Immun. 2009 Jul;10(5):373-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.39. Epub 2009 May 14.

Recent insights into the genetic basis of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Moser KL(1), Kelly JA, Lessard CJ, Harley JB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. moserk@omrf.org

Genetic variation was first shown to be important in systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE or lupus) in the 1970s with associations in the human leukocyte antigen
region. Almost four decades later, and with the help of increasingly powerful
genetic approaches, more than 25 genes are now known to contribute to the
mechanisms that predispose individuals to lupus. Over half of these loci have
been discovered in the past 2 years, underscoring the extraordinary success of
genome-wide association approaches in SLE. Well-established risk factors include 
alleles in the major histocompatibility complex region (multiple genes), IRF5,
ITGAM, STAT4, BLK, BANK1, PDCD1, PTPN22, TNFSF4, TNFAIP3, SPP1, some of the
Fcgamma receptors, and deficiencies in several complement components, including
C1q, C4 and C2. As reviewed here, many susceptibility genes fall into key
pathways that are consistent with previous studies implicating immune complexes, 
host immune signal transduction and interferon pathways in the pathogenesis of
SLE. Other loci have no known function or apparent immunological role and have
the potential to reveal novel disease mechanisms. Certainly, as our understanding
of the genetic etiology of SLE continues to mature, important new opportunities
will emerge for developing more effective diagnostic and clinical management
tools for this complex autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3144759
PMID: 19440199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 May 4;123(1):6-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.02.045. Epub
2009 Mar 9.

Upregulation of interferon-gamma and interleukin-4, Th cell-derived cytokines by 
So-Shi-Ho-Tang (Sho-Saiko-To) occurs at the level of antigen presenting cells,
but not CD4 T cells.

Kang H(1), Choi TW, Ahn KS, Lee JY, Ham IH, Choi HY, Shim ES, Sohn NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oriental Medical Science, Graduate School of East-West Medical
Science, Kyunghee University, 1 Seochungdong, Yongin, South Korea.
shehee@khu.ac.kr

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: So-Shi-Ho-Tang (SSHT) or known as Sho-Saiko-To in
Japanese and Xiao-Chai-Hu-Tang in Chinese has been used to treat chronic liver
disease and other infections, and its hepatoprotective effects have been widely
studied.
AIM OF THE STUDY: We tried to investigate the immunomodulatory effect of SSHT on 
interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin (IL)-4 and their Th1/Th2 transcription
factors in vivo and in vitro since these two cytokines are important in
determining the type of cell-mediated inflammatory and humoral responses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: SSHT was orally given to BALB/c mice for 7 days and then
injected with anti-CD3 mAb intravenously. IFN-gamma, IL-4, IL-2 and
Th1/Th2-specific transcription factors as well as splenocyte subsets were
measured. Splenocytes and CD4 T cells were cultured with anti-CD3 or
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 in the presence of SSHT, its constituent herbs and baicalin,
and the levels of cytokines and transcription factors were measured by ELISA and 
western blotting.
RESULTS: Oral administration of SSHT to mice in response to i.v. anti-CD3
injection enhanced the expression of IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IL-2 in the serum and
spleen at the secreted protein and mRNA level. This was accompanied by the
upregulation of CD69 and CD4 T cell populations by flow cytometry. The
upregulation of IFN-gamma and IL-4 by SSHT did not occur in anti-CD3/anti-CD28
stimulated CD4 T cells in vitro. However, SSHT was capable of producing the
cytokines in anti-CD3 stimulated splenocytes even in the absence of CD28,
suggesting a role for some soluble factors produced by antigen presenting cells
(APC). In support of this, we found that SSHT increased IL-12 and IL-6 in the
same cells. STAT4, but not T-bet, was involved in the upregulation of IFN-gamma
by SSHT while the increased IL-4 expression was accompanied by a parallel
increase in c-Maf but independent of STAT6 and GATA-3.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that the upregulation of IFN-gamma and IL-4 by
SSHT must occur through some interactions between APC and CD4 T cells. Taken
together, the present data provide additional information on some of the
immunological mechanisms of SSHT for treatment of liver diseases and infections.

PMID: 19429332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Immunity. 2009 May;30(5):673-83. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.03.013. Epub 2009 Apr
30.

Sequential polarization and imprinting of type 1 T helper lymphocytes by
interferon-gamma and interleukin-12.

Schulz EG(1), Mariani L, Radbruch A, Höfer T.

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical Biophysics, Institute of Biology, Humboldt Universität,
Invalidenstrasse 42, 10115 Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 May;30(5):666-8.

Differentiation of naive T lymphocytes into type I T helper (Th1) cells requires 
interferon-gamma and interleukin-12. It is puzzling that interferon-gamma induces
the Th1 transcription factor T-bet, whereas interleukin-12 mediates Th1 cell
lineage differentiation. We use mathematical modeling to analyze the expression
kinetics of T-bet, interferon-gamma, and the IL-12 receptor beta2 chain
(IL-12Rbeta2) during Th1 cell differentiation, in the presence or absence of
interleukin-12 or interferon-gamma signaling. We show that interferon-gamma
induced initial T-bet expression, whereas IL-12Rbeta2 was repressed by T cell
receptor (TCR) signaling. The termination of TCR signaling permitted upregulation
of IL-12Rbeta2 by T-bet and interleukin-12 signaling that maintained T-bet
expression. This late expression of T-bet, accompanied by the upregulation of the
transcription factors Runx3 and Hlx, was required to imprint the Th cell for
interferon-gamma re-expression. Thus initial polarization and subsequent
imprinting of Th1 cells are mediated by interlinked, sequentially acting positive
feedback loops of TCR-interferon-gamma-Stat1-T-bet and interleukin-12-Stat4-T-bet
signaling.

PMID: 19409816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 May;60(5):1255-60. doi: 10.1002/art.24503.

Confirmation of STAT4, IL2/IL21, and CTLA4 polymorphisms in rheumatoid arthritis.

Daha NA(1), Kurreeman FA, Marques RB, Stoeken-Rijsbergen G, Verduijn W, Huizinga 
TW, Toes RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Recent advances have led to novel identification of genetic
polymorphisms that are associated with susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis
(RA). Currently, 5 loci (HLA, PTPN22, TRAF1/C5, TNFAIP3, and STAT4) have been
consistently reported, whereas others have been observed less systematically. The
aim of the present study was to independently replicate 3 recently described RA
susceptibility loci, STAT4, IL2/IL21, and CTLA4, in a large Dutch case-control
cohort, and to perform a meta-analysis of all published studies to date and
investigate the relevance of the findings in clinically well-defined subgroups of
RA patients with or without autoantibodies.
METHODS: The STAT4, IL2/IL21, and CTLA4 gene polymorphisms (rs7574865, rs6822844,
and rs3087243, respectively) were genotyped in 877 RA patients and 866 healthy
individuals. A meta-analysis of all published studies of disease association with
these polymorphisms was performed using the Mantel-Haenszel fixed-effects method.
RESULTS: An association of STAT4, IL2/IL21, and CTLA4 with RA was detected in
Dutch patients (odds ratio [OR] 1.19 [P=0.031], OR 0.84 [P=0.051], and OR 0.87
[P=0.041], respectively). Results from the meta-analysis confirmed an association
of all 3 polymorphisms with RA in Caucasians (OR 1.24 [P=1.66x10(-11)], OR 0.78
[P=5.6x10(-5)], and OR 0.91 [P=1.8x10(-3)], respectively). The meta-analysis also
revealed that STAT4 predisposed to disease development equally in patients with
autoantibodies and those without autoantibodies, and that CTLA4 enhanced the
development of anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA)-positive RA as compared
with ACPA-negative RA.
CONCLUSION: Our results replicate and firmly establish the association of STAT4
and CTLA4 with RA and provide highly suggestive evidence for IL2/IL21 loci as a
risk factor for RA. Given the strong statistical power of our meta-analysis to
confirm a true-positive association, these findings provide considerable support 
for the involvement of CTLA4 in distinct subsets of RA patients.

PMID: 19404967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Immunol. 2009 May 1;182(9):5296-305. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900036.

IL-23 drives pathogenic IL-17-producing CD8+ T cells.

Ciric B(1), El-behi M, Cabrera R, Zhang GX, Rostami A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, 
USA. bxc170@jefferson.edu

IL-17-producing CD8(+) T cells (Tc17) appear to play a role in a range of
conditions, such as autoimmunity and cancer. Thus far, Tc17 cells have been only 
marginally studied, resulting in a paucity of data on their biology and function.
We demonstrate that Tc17 and Th17 cells share similar developmental
characteristics, including the previously unknown promoting effect of IL-21 on
Tc17 cell differentiation and IL-23-dependent expression of IL-22. Both STAT1 and
STAT4 are required for optimal development of Tc17 cells and maximal secretion of
cytokines. Tc17 cells are cytotoxic, and they can be either pathogenic or
nonpathogenic upon adoptive transfer in the model of autoimmune diabetes. Tc17
cells treated with TGF-beta1 plus IL-6 are not diabetogenic, whereas
IL-23-treated cells potently induce the disease. IL-17A and IL-17F are necessary 
but not sufficient for diabetes induction by Tc17 cells. Tc17 cells treated with 
TGF-beta1 plus IL-6 or IL-23 likely differ in pathogenicity due to their
disparate capacity to attract other immune cells and initiate inflammation.

PMID: 19380776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Apr;13(2):281-4. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2008.0128.

STAT4 is not associated with type 2 diabetes in the genetically homogeneous
population of Crete.

Kofteridis D(1), Krasoudaki E, Kavousanaki M, Zervou MI, Panierakis C, Boumpas
DT, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Molecular Medicine and Human
Genetics, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.

Current classifications of diabetes distinguish between type 1 diabetes (T1D) and
type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, recent evidence highlights overlap between T1D
and T2D. In a recent study, we have suggested for the first time that STAT4 gene 
polymorphism is associated with increased risk for the development of T1D in the 
island of Crete, a well-defined area with genetically homogeneous population. The
objective of this study was to investigate the putative association of STAT4
polymorphism with T2D. STAT4 encodes a transcription factor that transmits
signals induced by several key cytokines, including interleukin-12 (IL-12) and
interferon-gamma, a key indicator of T-cell differentiation into type 1 helper T 
(Th1) cells. Mutated allele T was more common in controls than in individuals
with T2D (odds ratio [OR] = 1.59, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.022-2.470, p =
0.039). Mutated genotype G/T was more common in nondiabetic individuals than in
T2D patients (OR = 1.735, 95% CI = 1.077-2.793, p = 0.024). Our results indicate 
that whilst allele T of the STAT4 rs7574865 gene polymorphism is associated with 
susceptibility to T1D, it is not associated with increased risk for and T2D, and 
thus does not represent a common genetic factor for diabetes.

PMID: 19371230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Srp Arh Celok Lek. 2009 Jan-Feb;137(1-2):98-105.

[STAT proteins in cancerogenesis and therapy of malignancies].

[Article in Serbian]

Konjevic G.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins are a 7-member
family of cytoplasmic transcription factors that participate in signal
transduction by cytokines, hormones, and growth factors. STAT proteins control
the most important cellular processes, including survival, proliferation and
differentiation. A great number of cytokines and other factors in different cell 
types activate STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5 and in this manner regulate processes such 
as cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival. STATs such as STAT4 and 
STAT6 have a more specific effect and are engaged in the differentiation of T
helper cell populations. Given the critical roles of STAT proteins it has been
established in many studies that STAT3 and STAT5 are oncogenes that can
contribute to cellular transformation by increasing proliferation and
slowing-down apoptosis. On the other hand, STAT1 is a tumour suppressor gene and 
its inactivation contributes to malignant transformation. Initially STAT proteins
were extensively studied in leukaemias, but later their role in the development
of different solid tumours has been also shown. Aside from their role in the
development of tumours, STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5 can be considered as molecular
markers for early detection of certain types of tumours, as well as prognostic
factors in the determination of tumour aggressiveness and predictors of response 
to various types of therapy. Evidence of the deregulation of STAT signalling
pathway can serve as a basis for designing novel targeted molecular therapeutic
strategies that carry a great potential in the therapy of solid tumours and
leukaemias.

PMID: 19370975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5887-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-09-179820. Epub 2009
Apr 9.

Impaired development of human Th1 cells in patients with deficient expression of 
STAT4.

Chang HC(1), Han L, Goswami R, Nguyen ET, Pelloso D, Robertson MJ, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. huchang@iupui.edu

IL-12 activates STAT4, which is a critical regulator of inflammation and T helper
type I (Th1) lineage development in murine systems. The requirement for STAT4 in 
the generation of human Th1 cells has not been examined thoroughly. Compared with
control Th1 cultures, expression of the Th1 genes IFNgamma, IL-12Rbeta2, and
TNFalpha is greatly reduced in Th1 cultures of CD4 T cells isolated from lymphoma
patients after autologous stem cell transplantation who have acquired STAT4
deficiency. Moreover, IL-4 and IL-5 production is increased in patient Th1
cultures though there are no defects in the development of Th2 cells.
Reconstitution of STAT4 in patient T cells allowed recovery of IFNgamma and
IL-12Rbeta2 expression, whereas ectopic expression of IL-12Rbeta2 did not rescue 
STAT4 expression, and increased IFNgamma production only to levels intermediate
between control and patient samples. These results demonstrate that, as in murine
systems, STAT4 is required for optimal human Th1 lineage development.

PMCID: PMC2700324
PMID: 19359411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genes Immun. 2009 Jul;10(5):421-32. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.24. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

Genetic studies of systemic lupus erythematosus in Asia: where are we now?

Kim I(1), Kim YJ, Kim K, Kang C, Choi CB, Sung YK, Lee HS, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Hanyang
University, Seoul 133-792, Korea.

There have been many genetic studies of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in
Asia, but the status of SLE in Asia remains unclear. Genes that have been
associated with SLE in Caucasians have shown both consistent and inconsistent
results in Asians. This prompted us to review studies of SLE-associated genes and
compare the degree of consistency according to ethnicity in Asia. We searched
PubMed and the national databases in Korea and Japan for SLE genetic studies. A
total of 755 articles were found and after applying various exclusion criteria,
442 studies including 17 linkage studies, 2 genome-wide association studies and
423 candidate-gene analyses were reviewed. Nine linkage loci were confirmed to be
associated with SLE susceptibility in non-Asians, but the risk locus (16q12) has 
been identified in only one Asian study. A total of 156 candidate genes were
analyzed, of which 92 were studied in Asians. Although there were allelic
(HLA-DRB1 and IRF5) or genetic heterogeneity (FCGR gene family), HLA-DRB1, the
FCGR gene family, IRF5, STAT4 and MECP2 showed consistent associations with SLE
susceptibility across ethnicities. In conclusion, genetic associations often vary
with ethnicity, requiring validation in different ethnic groups, and hence future
SLE genetic studies will require strong worldwide collaborations.

PMID: 19357696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Clin Immunol. 2009 Jul;29(4):434-43. doi: 10.1007/s10875-009-9290-z. Epub 2009 
Apr 8.

Oral tolerization with cardiac myosin peptide (614-629) ameliorates experimental 
autoimmune myocarditis: role of STAT 6 genes in BALB/CJ mice.

Gonnella PA(1), Del Nido PJ, McGowan FX.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
pgonnell@bidmc.harvard.edu

INTRODUCTION: Experimental autoimmune myocarditis (EAM) is mediated by myocardial
infiltration by myosin-specific T cells secreting inflammatory cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To clarify the role of cytokines in EAM, we compared STAT 
6-deficient ((-/-)) with STAT 4(-/-) and wild-type (BALB/CJ) mice following
immunization with cardiac myosin peptide (614-629).
RESULTS: Wild-type mice developed severe disease with a small increase in
severity in STAT 6(-/-) mice, while STAT 4(-/-) mice were resistant to EAM. STAT 
6(-/-) mice had increased splenocyte proliferation and INF-gamma production
versus wild type, while STAT 4(-/-) mice had decreased proliferation and
INF-gamma. Following oral administration of myosin (614-629), tolerization was
induced in wild-type mice evidenced by amelioration of myocarditis and
up-regulation of IL-4. Adoptive transfer of splenocytes from orally tolerized
mice resulted in inhibition of disease in STAT 6(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that oral tolerization ameliorates EAM in
BALB/CJ mice and indicate a down-regulatory role for STAT 6 genes.

PMID: 19353248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Eur J Immunol. 2009 May;39(5):1252-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839152.

CD4+ T-cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity can be uncoupled from autoimmunity via
the STAT4/STAT6 signaling axis.

Zhang S(1), Bernard D, Khan WI, Kaplan MH, Bramson JL, Wan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Ontario, 
Canada.

Previous reports have suggested that autoimmune sequelae may be an unavoidable
consequence of successful immunization against tumor-associated antigens, which
are typically non-mutated self-antigens. Using a melanoma model, we demonstrated 
that CD4(+) T-cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity and autoimmunity could be
separated by modulating the STAT4/STAT6 signaling axis. Our results have revealed
an unexpected dichotomy in the effector phase following cancer vaccination where 
anti-tumor immunity is mediated via a STAT6 and IL-4-dependent pathway, whereas
autoimmune pathology is mediated via STAT4 through a mechanism that relies
partially on IFN-gamma. Our results offer a possibility to elicit specific
anti-tumor responses without triggering unwanted tissue autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 19338001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Apr;60(4):1085-95. doi: 10.1002/art.24387.

High-density genotyping of STAT4 reveals multiple haplotypic associations with
systemic lupus erythematosus in different racial groups.

Namjou B(1), Sestak AL, Armstrong DL, Zidovetzki R, Kelly JA, Jacob N, Ciobanu V,
Kaufman KM, Ojwang JO, Ziegler J, Quismorio FP Jr, Reiff A, Myones BL, Guthridge 
JM, Nath SK, Bruner GR, Mehrian-Shai R, Silverman E, Klein-Gitelman M, McCurdy D,
Wagner-Weiner L, Nocton JJ, Putterman C, Bae SC, Kim YJ, Petri M, Reveille JD,
Vyse TJ, Gilkeson GS, Kamen DL, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Gaffney PM, Moser KL,
Merrill JT, Scofield RH, James JA, Langefeld CD, Harley JB, Jacob CO.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the prototypical systemic
autoimmune disorder, with complex etiology and a strong genetic component.
Recently, gene products involved in the interferon pathway have been under
intense investigation in terms of the pathogenesis of SLE. STAT-1 and STAT-4 are 
transcription factors that play key roles in the interferon and Th1 signaling
pathways, making them attractive candidates for involvement in SLE
susceptibility.
METHODS: Fifty-six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across STAT1 and STAT4 
on chromosome 2 were genotyped using the Illumina platform, as part of an
extensive association study in a large collection of 9,923 lupus patients and
control subjects from different racial groups. DNA samples were obtained from the
peripheral blood of patients with SLE and control subjects. Principal components 
analyses and population-based case-control association analyses were performed,
and the P values, false discovery rate q values, and odds ratios with 95%
confidence intervals were calculated.
RESULTS: We observed strong genetic associations with SLE and multiple SNPs
located within STAT4 in different ethnic groups (Fisher's combined P = 7.02 x
10(-25)). In addition to strongly confirming the previously reported association 
in the third intronic region of this gene, we identified additional haplotypic
association across STAT4 and, in particular, a common risk haplotype that is
found in multiple racial groups. In contrast, only a relatively weak suggestive
association was observed with STAT1, probably due to its proximity to STAT4.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that STAT4 is likely to be a crucial component 
in SLE pathogenesis in multiple racial groups. Knowledge of the functional
effects of this association, when they are revealed, might improve our
understanding of the disease and provide new therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2776081
PMID: 19333953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Rheumatol. 2009 May;36(5):1021-5. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081060. Epub 2009 Mar 30.

Lack of association between STAT4 gene polymorphism and biopsy-proven giant cell 
arteritis.

Palomino-Morales R(1), Vazquez-Rodriguez TR, Morado IC, Castañeda S,
Ortego-Centeno N, Miranda-Filloy JA, Lamas JR, Martin J, Gonzalez-Gay MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientificas, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential implication of the STAT4 gene
polymorphism rs7574865 in the predisposition to or the clinical expression of
giant cell arteritis (GCA).
METHODS: A total of 212 patients diagnosed with biopsy-proven GCA were studied.
DNA from patients and controls matched by age, sex, and ethnicity was obtained
from peripheral blood. Samples were genotyped for STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences in the allele frequencies for
the STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism were observed between patients and controls.
Although we observed an increased frequency of the T/T genotype in GCA patients
(6.0%) compared to healthy controls (3.9%), this difference did not achieve
statistical significance (OR 1.57, 95% CI 0.72-3.41). No statistically
significant differences in allele or genotype frequencies were observed when
patients were stratified according to the presence of typical disease features
such as polymyalgia rheumatica, severe ischemic manifestations, and visual
ischemic complications in the setting of this vasculitis.
CONCLUSION: Our results do not support a major role of the STAT4 rs7574865 gene
polymorphism in susceptibility to or clinical manifestations of GCA.

PMID: 19332627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 15;382(4):751-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.101. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

STAT6 inhibits T-bet-independent Th1 cell differentiation.

Tamachi T(1), Takatori H, Fujiwara M, Hirose K, Maezawa Y, Kagami S, Suto A,
Watanabe N, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University, Chiba City,
Chiba, Japan.

STAT6 plays critical roles in Th2 cell differentiation, whereas STAT4 and T-bet
are important for Th1 cell differentiation. However, it is still largely unknown 
about the cross talk of these transcription factors during Th1/Th2 cell
differentiation. To further address the regulatory mechanisms underlying Th1/Th2 
cell differentiation, we generated the mice lacking both STAT6 and T-bet
(STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice). Importantly, although Th2 cell differentiation was
severely and similarly decreased in STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice and STAT6(-/-)
mice, Th1 cell differentiation was rescued in part in STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice
as compared with that in T-bet(-/-) mice. While no significant difference was
observed in the expression of IL-12Rbeta2 and STAT4 between STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) 
CD4(+) T cells and T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells, IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation
was increased in STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells as compared with that in
T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. These results indicate that STAT6 inhibits
T-bet-independent Th1 cell differentiation by suppressing IL-12-STAT4 signaling.

PMID: 19324016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Clin Immunol. 2009 Jun;131(3):385-94. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2009.02.009.

T-bet expression is regulated by EGR1-mediated signaling in activated T cells.

Shin HJ(1), Lee JB, Park SH, Chang J, Lee CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon,
Gyeonggi, Republic of Korea.

T-bet is a Th1-specific transcription factor that is directly involved in three
important pathways for Th1 cell differentiation, namely TCR signaling, and the
IFN-gamma-STAT1 and IL-12-STAT4 pathways. A recent study also showed that T-bet
plays a vital role in innate immunity. However, the molecular mechanism
responsible for transcriptional activation of T-bet during T cell development is 
not yet known. Here, we characterize the essential human T-bet promoter elements 
and show that binding of EGR1 to this promoter induces T-bet transcription.
Notably, overexpression of EGR1 transactivates and, synergistically in concert
with TCR signaling, induces T-bet expression in activated T cells. In contrast,
depletion of EGR1 significantly decreases T-bet induction. Finally, we report a
positive correlation between EGR1 and T-bet expression during T helper cell
differentiation. Collectively, these findings provide molecular insight into
T-bet transcription and suggest that EGR1 is an upstream regulator of T-bet
induction.

PMID: 19307156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Radiat Biol. 2009 Mar;85(3):250-61. doi: 10.1080/09553000902748609.

Low-dose, low-dose-rate proton radiation modulates CD4(+) T cell gene expression.

Gridley DS(1), Pecaut MJ, Rizvi A, Coutrakon GB, Luo-Owen X, Makinde AY, Slater
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiation Research Laboratories, Loma Linda 
University, CA 92354, USA. dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

PURPOSE: To evaluate cluster of differentiation 4(+) (CD4(+)) T cell gene
expression and related parameters after whole-body exposure to proton radiation
as it occurs in the spaceflight environment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were irradiated to total doses of 0, 0.01,
0.05, and 0.1 gray (Gy) at 0.1 cGy/h. On day 0 spleens were harvested from a
subset in the 0, 0.01 and 0.1 Gy groups; (CD4(+)) T cells were isolated; and
expression of 84 genes relevant to T helper (Th) cell function was determined
using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Remaining mice
were euthanized on days 0, 4, and 21 for additional analyses.
RESULTS: Genes with >2-fold difference and p < 0.05 compared to 0 Gy were noted. 
After 0.01 Gy, five genes were up-regulated (Ccr5, Cd40, Cebpb, Igsf6, Tnfsf4)
and three were down-regulated (Il4ra, Mapk8, Nfkb1). After 0.1 Gy there were nine
up-regulated genes (Ccr4, Cd40, Cebpb, Cxcr3, Socs5, Stat4, Tbx21, Tnfrsf4,
Tnfsf4); none were down-regulated. On day 0 after 0.01 Gy, CD4(+) T cell counts
and CD4:CD8 ratio were low in the spleen (p < 0.05). Spontaneous DNA synthesis in
both spleen and blood was lowest in the 0.01 Gy group on day 0; on days 4 and 21 
all p values were >0.1.
CONCLUSION: The data show that the pattern of gene expression in CD4(+) T cells
after protracted low-dose proton irradiation was significantly modified and
highly dependent upon total dose. The findings also suggest that low-dose
radiation, especially 0.01 Gy, may enhance CD4(+) T cell responsiveness.

PMID: 19296339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jun 1;18(11):2071-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp119. Epub 2009 Mar
13.

The STAT4 gene influences the genetic predisposition to systemic sclerosis
phenotype.

Rueda B(1), Broen J, Simeon C, Hesselstrand R, Diaz B, Suárez H, Ortego-Centeno
N, Riemekasten G, Fonollosa V, Vonk MC, van den Hoogen FH, Sanchez-Román J,
Aguirre-Zamorano MA, García-Portales R, Pros A, Camps MT, Gonzalez-Gay MA, Coenen
MJ, Airo P, Beretta L, Scorza R, van Laar J, Gonzalez-Escribano MF, Nelson JL,
Radstake TR, Martin J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez-Neyra (CSIC), Granada, Spain.

The aim of this study was to investigate the possible role of STAT4 gene in the
genetic predisposition to systemic sclerosis (SSc) susceptibility or clinical
phenotype. A total of 1317 SSc patients [896 with limited cutaneous SSc (lcSSc)
and 421 with diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc)] and 3113 healthy controls, from an
initial case-control set of Spanish Caucasian ancestry and five independent
cohorts of European ancestry (The Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, Italy and USA),
were included in the study. The rs7574865 polymorphism was selected as STAT4
genetic marker. We observed that the rs7574865 T allele was significantly
associated with susceptibility to lcSSc in the Spanish population [P = 1.9 x
10(-5) odds ratio (OR) 1.61 95% confidence intervals (CI) 1.29-1.99], but not
with dcSSc (P = 0.41 OR 0.84 95% CI 0.59-1.21). Additionally, a dosage effect was
observed showing individuals with rs7574865 TT genotype higher risk for lcSSc (OR
3.34, P = 1.02 x 10(-7) 95% CI 2.11-5.31). The association of the rs7574865 T
allele with lcSSc was confirmed in all the replication cohorts with different
effect sizes (OR ranging between 1.15 and 1.86), as well as the lack of
association of STAT4 with dcSSc. A meta-analysis to test the overall effect of
the rs7574865 polymorphism showed a strong risk effect of the T allele for lcSSc 
susceptibility (pooled OR 1.54 95% CI 1.36-1.74; P < 0.0001). Our data show a
strong and reproducible association of the STAT4 gene with the genetic
predisposition to lcSSc suggesting that this gene seems to be one of the genetic 
markers influencing SSc phenotype.

PMID: 19286670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Kidney Dis. 2009 May;53(5):845-55. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2008.12.025. Epub
2009 Mar 12.

Association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in JAK3, STAT4, and STAT6 with new
cardiovascular events in incident dialysis patients.

Sperati CJ(1), Parekh RS, Berthier-Schaad Y, Jaar BG, Plantinga L, Fink N, Powe
NR, Smith MW, Coresh J, Kao WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. jsperati@jhmi.edu

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence supports a role for cell-mediated immunity in the
pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
JAK3, STAT4, and STAT6 of the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Jak-Stat) signal transduction pathway were examined for
association with time to new cardiovascular events in incident dialysis patients 
from the Choices for Healthy Outcomes in Caring for End-Stage Renal Disease
Study.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: 764 white (n = 518) and black (n = 246) participants from
79 dialysis centers.
PREDICTOR: SNPs in JAK3, STAT4, and STAT6 selected using a pairwise approach to
identify a maximally informative set of tag SNPs for populations of European and 
African descent.
OUTCOMES & MEASUREMENTS: Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate
unadjusted and multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) for incident
cardiovascular disease events after dialysis therapy initiation associated with
each race-specific SNP.
RESULTS: 2 European tag SNPs (rs3212780 and rs3213409) in JAK3 were associated
with new cardiovascular disease events in white patients with unadjusted HRs of
1.92 (P < 0.001) and 1.82 (P = 0.07), respectively. One dual-tag SNP (rs3212752) 
in JAK3 was associated with new cardiovascular events in white patients with an
unadjusted HR of 2.09 (P < 0.001) and in black patients with an HR of 2.07 (P =
0.007). SNP rs3213409 codes for a valine to isoleucine change at amino acid 722, 
a potentially functional mutation. SNPs in STAT4 and STAT6 were not associated
with cardiovascular events after the initiation of dialysis therapy.
LIMITATIONS: This study does not provide direct evidence for the mechanism of
increased risk. Replication in independent cohorts is necessary.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic polymorphisms in the Jak-Stat signaling pathway are
associated with an increased risk of new cardiovascular events in incident
dialysis patients.

PMCID: PMC2744364
PMID: 19282076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):4548-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-196220. Epub 2009
Mar 3.

Antisense-mediated exon skipping to correct IL-12Rbeta1 deficiency in T cells.

van de Vosse E(1), Verhard EM, de Paus RA, Platenburg GJ, van Deutekom JC,
Aartsma-Rus A, van Dissel JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. E.van_de_Vosse@LUMC.nl.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2009 Nov 12;114(20):4607.

Patients with Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease have severe,
recurrent life-threatening infections with otherwise poorly pathogenic
mycobacteria and salmonellae. The extreme susceptibility is the result of genetic
defects in the interleukin-12/interferon-gamma (IL-12/IFN-gamma) pathway. The
infections are difficult to treat, and therapeutic options are limited. We
explored the feasibility of antisense-mediated exon skipping as therapy for
Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease with cells from a complete
IL-12Rbeta1(-/-) patient. Expression constructs were first studied to determine
whether IL12RB1 lacking exon 2 encodes a functional protein. The IL-12Rbeta1
expression construct lacking exon 2 was expressed on T cells. On IL-12 or IL-23
stimulation, this construct phosphorylated similar amounts of STAT1, STAT3, and
STAT4 and induced similar amounts of IFN-gamma compared with a normal IL-12Rbeta1
construct. Antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) directed at exon 2 resulted in
transcripts lacking exon 2 in both controls' and patients' T cells. In
IL-12Rbeta1(-/-) cells, skipping of exon 2 led to expression of IL-12Rbeta1 on
the cell surface and responsiveness to IL-12. We showed that IL12RB1 lacking exon
2 encodes a functional IL-12Rbeta1. We demonstrated that T cells can be highly
efficiently transduced with AONs and are amenable to antisense-mediated exon
skipping. Furthermore, we showed that exon skipping (partly) corrects the
IL-12Rbeta1 deficiency in patients' cells.

PMID: 19258592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Genes Immun. 2009 Apr;10(3):219-26. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.1. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Population differences in SLE susceptibility genes: STAT4 and BLK, but not PXK,
are associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in Hong Kong Chinese.

Yang W(1), Ng P, Zhao M, Hirankarn N, Lau CS, Mok CC, Chan TM, Wong RW, Lee KW,
Mok MY, Wong SN, Avihingsanon Y, Lee TL, Ho MH, Lee PP, Wong WH, Lau YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka 
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

In this study, we compared the association of several newly discovered
susceptibility genes for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) between populations
of European origin and two Asian populations. Using 910 SLE patients and 1440
healthy controls from Chinese living in Hong Kong, and 278 SLE patients and 383
controls in Thailand, we studied association of STAT4, BLK and PXK with the
disease. Our data confirmed association of STAT4 (rs7574865, odds ratio (OR)
=1.71, P=3.55 x 10(-23)) and BLK (rs13277113, OR=0.77, P=1.34 x 10(-5)) with SLE.
It was showed that rs7574865 of STAT4 is also linked to hematologic disorders and
potentially some other subphenotypes of the disease. More than one genetic
variant in STAT4 were found to be associated with the disease independently in
our populations (rs7601754, OR=0.59, P=1.39 x 10(-9), and P=0.00034 when
controlling the effect of rs7574865). With the same set of samples, however, our 
study did not detect any significant disease association for PXK, a risk factor
for populations of European origin (rs6445975, joint P=0.36, OR=1.06, 95%
confidence interval: 0.93-1.21). Our study indicates that some of the
susceptibility genes for this disease may be population specific.

PMID: 19225526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Mar;39(3):789-99. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838427.

MOG(35-55) i.v suppresses experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis partially
through modulation of Th17 and JAK/STAT pathways.

Jiang Z(1), Li H, Fitzgerald DC, Zhang GX, Rostami A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, 
USA.

Intravenous (i.v.) administration of encephalitogenic peptide can effectively
prevent experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of
multiple sclerosis; however, the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms are
not fully understood. In this study, we induced i.v. tolerance to EAE by
administration of MOG(35-55) peptide and determined the effect of this approach
on intracellular signaling pathways of the IL-23/IL-17 system, which is essential
for the pathogenesis of MS/EAE. In tolerized mice, phosphorylation of JAK/STAT-1,
-4, ERK1/2 and NF-kappaBp65 were significantly reduced in splenocytes and the
central nervous system. MOG i.v. treatment led to significantly lower production 
of IL-17, and administration of exogenous IL-17 slightly broke immune tolerance, 
which was associated with reduced activation of STAT4 and NF-kappaB. Suppressed
phosphorylation of these pathway molecules was primarily evident in CD11b(+) and 
small numbers of CD4(+), CD8(+) and CD11c(+) cells. More importantly, adoptive
transfer of CD11b(+) splenocytes of tolerized mice effectively delayed onset and 
reduced clinical severity of actively induced EAE. This study correlates MOG i.v.
tolerance with modulation of Jak/STAT signaling pathways and investigates novel
therapeutic avenues for the treatment of EAE/MS.

PMCID: PMC3487476
PMID: 19224632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Immunology. 2009 Mar;126(3):299-305. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.03026.x. Epub 
2008 Dec 18.

Epigenetics and T helper 1 differentiation.

Aune TM(1), Collins PL, Chang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232-2068, USA. tom.aune@vanderbilt.edu

Naïve T helper cells differentiate into two subsets, T helper 1 and 2, which
either transcribe the Ifng gene and silence the Il4 gene or transcribe the Il4
gene and silence the Ifng gene, respectively. This process is an essential
feature of the adaptive immune response to a pathogen and the development of
long-lasting immunity. The 'histone code' hypothesis proposes that formation of
stable epigenetic histone marks at a gene locus that activate or repress
transcription is essential for cell fate determinations, such as T helper 1/T
helper 2 cell fate decisions. Activation and silencing of the Ifng gene are
achieved through the creation of stable epigenetic histone marks spanning a
region of genomic DNA over 20 times greater than the gene itself. Key
transcription factors that drive the T helper 1 lineage decision, signal
transducer and activator 4 (STAT4) and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), play
direct roles in the formation of activating histone marks at the Ifng locus.
Conversely, STAT6 and GATA binding protein 3, transcription factors essential for
the T helper 2 cell lineage decision, establish repressive histone marks at the
Ifng locus. Functional studies demonstrate that multiple genomic elements up to
50 kilobases from Ifng play critical roles in its proper transcriptional
regulation. Studies of three-dimensional chromatin conformation indicate that
these distal regulatory elements may loop towards Ifng to regulate its
transcription. We speculate that these complex mechanisms have evolved to tightly
control levels of interferon-gamma production, given that too little or too much 
production would be very deleterious to the host.

PMCID: PMC2669810
PMID: 19178593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):999-1010.

Critical role for the transcription regulator CCCTC-binding factor in the control
of Th2 cytokine expression.

Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Heath H, Krpic S, Dingjan GM, van Hamburg JP, Bergen I, 
van de Nobelen S, Sleutels F, Grosveld F, Galjart N, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Differentiation of naive CD4+ cells into Th2 cells is accompanied by chromatin
remodeling at the Th2 cytokine locus allowing the expression of the IL-4, IL-5,
and IL-13 genes. In this report, we investigated the role in Th2 differentiation 
of the transcription regulator CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed multiple CTCF binding sites in the Th2
cytokine locus. Conditional deletion of the Ctcf gene in double-positive
thymocytes allowed development of peripheral T cells, but their activation and
proliferation upon anti-CD3/anti-CD28 stimulation in vitro was severely impaired.
Nevertheless, when TCR signaling was circumvented with phorbol ester and
ionomycin, we observed proliferation of CTCF-deficient T cells, enabling the
analysis of Th2 differentiation in vitro. We found that in CTCF-deficient Th2
polarization cultures, transcription of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 was strongly
reduced. By contrast, CTCF deficiency had a moderate effect on IFN-gamma
production in Th1 cultures and IL-17 production in Th17 cultures was unaffected. 
Consistent with a Th2 cytokine defect, CTCF-deficient mice had very low levels of
IgG1 and IgE in their serum, but IgG2c was close to normal. In CTCF-deficient Th2
cultures, cells were polarized toward the Th2 lineage, as substantiated by
induction of the key transcriptional regulators GATA3 and special AT-rich binding
protein 1 (SATB1) and down-regulation of T-bet. Also, STAT4 expression was low,
indicating that in the absence of CTCF, GATA3 still operated as a negative
regulator of STAT4. Taken together, these findings show that CTCF is essential
for GATA3- and SATB1-dependent regulation of Th2 cytokine gene expression.

PMID: 19124743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008 Dec;1150:93-8. doi: 10.1196/annals.1447.013.

STAT4 polymorphism is associated with early-onset type 1 diabetes, but not with
late-onset type 1 diabetes.

Lee HS(1), Park H, Yang S, Kim D, Park Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Bioengineering, Hanyang University College
of Medicine and Engineering, Seoul, Korea.

In an effort to discover non-HLA genes affecting susceptibility to type 1
diabetes (T1D), we have investigated the association of polymorphisms in STAT4,
an important signaling molecule of IL-12, gammaIFN, and IL-23, in a sample of 389
T1D patients and 152 nondiabetic controls in Korea. Four SNPs on chromosome 2q,
which were recently found to be associated with rheumatoid arthritis, were
examined for association and linkage disequilibrium. We found that neither
alleles or genotypes among all four SNPs nor reconstructed haplotypes of the
three SNPs within the same LD block (rs7574865, rs8179673, and rs10181656) were
associated with susceptibility to T1D. When we stratified T1D patients into
early-onset and late-onset subgroups on the basis of fewer or more than 7.8 years
of age at diagnosis, however, the minor alleles of three SNPs (rs7574865,
rs8179673, and rs10181656) showed a significant association with susceptibility
to T1D in the early-onset subgroup (i.e., rs7574865, OR = 1.44 [1.03-2.01], P <
0.05), but not in the late-onset subgroup, suggesting that STAT4 is related to
earlier development of T1D. The analysis of genotypes and haplotypes of the same 
SNPs (rs7574865, rs8179673, and rs10181656) showed very comparable degrees of
risk for T1D. The age at diagnosis is lowest in the patients carrying the
homozygotes of a minor allele, middle in the heterozygotes, and highest in the
homozygotes of a major allele, suggesting the dosage effects of risk alleles on
the age of onset of disease. Recognizing that only the early-onset cases might
represent the true autoimmune T1D in Asian populations, we see that STAT4 alleles
and haplotype might influence cytokine signaling and, therefore, development of
T1D.

PMID: 19120275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Immunity. 2009 Jan 16;30(1):92-107. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.005.

Late developmental plasticity in the T helper 17 lineage.

Lee YK(1), Turner H, Maynard CL, Oliver JR, Chen D, Elson CO, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 Jan 16;30(1):7-9.

Development of T helper (Th) 17 cells requires transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta and interleukin (IL)-6 and is independent of the Th1 pathway. Although
T cells that produce interferon (IFN)-gamma are a recognized feature of Th17 cell
responses, mice deficient for STAT4 and T-bet-two prototypical Th1 transcription 
factors-are protected from autoimmunity associated with Th17 pathogenesis. To
examine the fate and pathogenic potential of Th17 cells and origin of
IFN-gamma-producing T cells that emerge during Th17 immunity, we developed IL-17F
reporter mice that identify cells committed to expression of IL-17F and IL-17A.
Th17 cells required TGF-beta for sustained expression of IL-17F and IL-17A. In
the absence of TGF-beta, both IL-23 and IL-12 acted to suppress IL-17 and enhance
IFN-gamma production in a STAT4- and T-bet-dependent manner, albeit with distinct
efficiencies. These results support a model of late Th17 developmental plasticity
with implications for autoimmunity and host defense.

PMCID: PMC3607320
PMID: 19119024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genes Immun. 2009 Mar;10(2):188-91. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.99. Epub 2008 Dec 25.

Analysis of 17 autoimmune disease-associated variants in type 1 diabetes
identifies 6q23/TNFAIP3 as a susceptibility locus.

Fung EY(1), Smyth DJ, Howson JM, Cooper JD, Walker NM, Stevens H, Wicker LS, Todd
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

As a result of genome-wide association studies in larger sample sets, there has
been an increase in identifying genes that influence susceptibility to individual
immune-mediated diseases, as well as evidence that some genes are associated with
more than one disease. In this study, we tested 17 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) from 16 gene regions that have been reported in several
autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), multiple sclerosis (MS), ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and
Crohn's disease (CD) to determine whether the variants are also associated with
type 1 diabetes (T1D). In up to 8010 cases and 9733 controls we found some
evidence for an association with T1D in the regions containing genes: 2q32/STAT4,
17q21/STAT3, 5p15/ERAP1 (ARTS1), 6q23/TNFAIP3 and 12q13/KIF5A/PIP4K2C with
allelic P-values ranging from 3.70 x 10(-3) to 3.20 x 10(-5). These findings
extend our knowledge of susceptibility locus sharing across different autoimmune 
diseases, and provide convincing evidence that the RA/SLE locus 6q23/TNFAIP3 is a
newly identified T1D locus.

PMID: 19110536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):34-8.

Cutting edge: autoimmune disease risk variant of STAT4 confers increased
sensitivity to IFN-alpha in lupus patients in vivo.

Kariuki SN(1), Kirou KA, MacDermott EJ, Barillas-Arias L, Crow MK, Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Increased IFN-alpha signaling is a primary pathogenic factor in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). STAT4 is a transcription factor that is activated by
IFN-alpha signaling, and genetic variation of STAT4 has been associated with risk
of SLE and rheumatoid arthritis. We measured serum IFN-alpha activity and
simultaneous IFN-alpha-induced gene expression in PBMC in a large SLE cohort. The
risk variant of STAT4 (T allele; rs7574865) was simultaneously associated with
both lower serum IFN-alpha activity and greater IFN-alpha-induced gene expression
in PBMC in SLE patients in vivo. Regression analyses confirmed that the risk
allele of STAT4 was associated with increased sensitivity to IFN-alpha signaling.
The IFN regulatory factor 5 SLE risk genotype was associated with higher serum
IFN-alpha activity; however, STAT4 showed dominant influence on the sensitivity
of PBMC to serum IFN-alpha. These data provide biologic relevance for the risk
variant of STAT4 in the IFN-alpha pathway in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2716754
PMID: 19109131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Exp Eye Res. 2009 Mar;88(3):398-409. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2008.10.006. Epub 2008
Oct 18.

Differential gene expressions in the lacrimal gland during development and onset 
of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in Sjögren's syndrome (SJS)-like disease of the
C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse.

Nguyen CQ(1), Sharma A, She JX, McIndoe RA, Peck AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. Nguyen@pathology.ufl.edu

Recently, we reported development of the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse carrying two 
genetic intervals derived from the NOD mouse. These two genetic regions confer
Sjögren's syndrome (SjS)-like disease in SjS-non-susceptible C57BL/6 mice. In an 
attempt to define the molecular bases underlying onset of dacryoadenitis and
subsequently keratoconjunctivitis sicca (or xerophthalmia) in the
C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse model, we have carried out a study utilizing
microarray technology. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, gene expression
profiles of lacrimal glands at 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20weeks of age were generated for
C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 male mice. Analyses using Linear Models for Microarray
Analysis package and B-statistics, 552 genes were identified as being
differentially expressed (adjusted p-value <0.01 and B <1.5) during the
development of SjS-like disease. These 552 genes could be arranged into four
clusters, with each cluster defining a unique pattern of temporal expression,
while the individual genes within each cluster could be grouped according to
related function. Using a pair-wise analysis, temporal changes in gene
expressions provided profiles indicating that individual genes were
differentially expressed at specific time points during development of SjS. In
addition, multiple genes that have been reported to show, either in humans or
mouse models, an association with autoimmunity and/or SjS, e.g., ApoE, Baff, Clu,
Ctla4, Fas/Fasl, Irf5, Lyzs, Nfkb, Socs3, Stat4, Tap2, Tgfbeta1, Tnfa, and Vcam1 
were also found to exhibit differential expressions, both quantitatively and
temporally. Selecting a few families of genes, e.g., cystatins, cathepsins,
metalloproteinases, lipocalins, complement, kallikreins, carbonic anhydrases and 
tumor necrosis factors, it was noted that only a limited number of family members
showed differential expressions, suggesting a restricted glandular expression.
Utilizing these genes, pathways of inter-reactive genes have been constructed for
apoptosis and fatty acid homeostasis, leading to modeling of possible underlying 
events inducing disease. Thus, these different approaches to analyze microarray
data permit identification of multiple sets of genes of interest whose
expressions and expression profiles may correlate with molecular mechanisms,
signaling pathways and/or immunological processes involved in the development and
onset of SjS in this mouse model, thereby providing new insight into the
underlying cause or regulation of this disease.

PMCID: PMC2699904
PMID: 19103199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Genes Immun. 2009 Jan;10(1):68-76. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.94. Epub 2008 Dec 18.

Additive effects of the major risk alleles of IRF5 and STAT4 in primary Sjögren's
syndrome.

Nordmark G(1), Kristjansdottir G, Theander E, Eriksson P, Brun JG, Wang C,
Padyukov L, Truedsson L, Alm G, Eloranta ML, Jonsson R, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Gunnel.Nordmark@medsci.uu.se

Primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS) shares many features with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Here we investigated the association of the three major
polymorphisms in IRF5 and STAT4 found to be associated with SLE, in patients from
Sweden and Norway with primary SS. These polymorphisms are a 5-bp CGGGG indel in 
the promoter of IRF5, the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs10488631
downstream of IRF5 and the STAT4 SNP rs7582694, which tags the major risk
haplotype of STAT4. We observed strong signals for association between all three 
polymorphisms and primary SS, with odds ratios (ORs) >1.4 and P-values <0.01. We 
also found a strong additive effect of the three risk alleles of IRF5 and STAT4
with an overall significance between the number of risk alleles and primary SS of
P=2.5 x 10(-9). The OR for primary SS increased in an additive manner, with an
average increase in OR of 1.78. For carriers of two risk alleles, the OR for
primary SS is 1.43, whereas carriers of five risk alleles have an OR of 6.78.
IRF5 and STAT4 are components of the type I IFN system, and our findings
emphasize the importance of this system in the etiopathogenesis of primary SS.

PMID: 19092842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Exp Med. 2008 Dec 22;205(13):3133-44. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081937. Epub 2008 Dec 
1.

A novel role of CD4 Th17 cells in mediating cardiac allograft rejection and
vasculopathy.

Yuan X(1), Paez-Cortez J, Schmitt-Knosalla I, D'Addio F, Mfarrej B, Donnarumma M,
Habicht A, Clarkson MR, Iacomini J, Glimcher LH, Sayegh MH, Ansari MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Research Center, Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T-bet plays a crucial role in Th1 development. We investigated the role of T-bet 
in the development of allograft rejection in an established MHC class
II-mismatched (bm12 into B6) model of chronic allograft vasculopathy (CAV).
Intriguingly, and in contrast to IFN-gamma(-/-) mice that are protected from CAV,
T-bet(-/-) recipients develop markedly accelerated allograft rejection
accompanied by early severe vascular inflammation and vasculopathy, and
infiltration by predominantly IL-17-producing CD4 T cells. Concurrently,
T-bet(-/-) mice exhibit a T helper type 1 (Th1)-deficient environment
characterized by profound IFN-gamma deficiency, a Th2 switch characterized by
increased production of interleukin (IL) 4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 cytokines, as 
well as increased production of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-12p40, and
IL-17. Neutralization of IL-17 inhibits accelerated allograft rejection and
vasculopathy in T-bet(-/-) mice. Interestingly, CD4 but not CD8 T cell deficiency
in T-bet(-/-) mice affords dramatic protection from vasculopathy and facilitates 
long-term graft acceptance. This is the first study establishing that in the
absence of Th1-mediated alloimmune responses, CD4 Th17 cells mediate an
aggressive proinflammatory response culminating in severe accelerated allograft
rejection and vasculopathy. These results have important implications for the
development of novel therapies to target this intractable problem in clinical
solid organ transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2605226
PMID: 19047438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Cycle. 2008 Dec;7(23):3680-94. Epub 2008 Dec 6.

Disease phenocode analysis identifies SNP-guided microRNA maps (MirMaps)
associated with human "master" disease genes.

Glinsky GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Albany Medical College,
Ordway Cancer Center, Albany, New York 12208, USA. gglinsky@ordwayresearch.org

Recently we reported the results of a genome-wide disease phenocode analysis
interrogating the relationships between structural features and gene expression
patterns of disease-linked SNPs, microRNAs and mRNAs of protein-coding genes in
association to phenotypes of 15 common human disorders (Cell Cycle
2008;7:2570-83; 3564-76). One of the main implications of this analysis is that
transcriptionally co-regulated SNP sequence-bearing RNAs are more likely to exert
a cumulative effect in trans on phenotypes. In this work, we test the validity of
a disease phenocode concept within a genomic context of distinct continuously
spaced sets of disease-linked SNPs and mRNAs of relevant proteincoding genes. We 
report a sequence homology profiling of two sets of disease-linked SNPs which are
located within continuous genomic regions associated with individual
protein-coding genetic loci (NLRP1 and STAT4) and are likely to exhibit common
profiles of transcriptional activity. Most of microRNAs (15 of 19; 79%)
homologous to the NLPRP1-associated disease-linked SNPs have potential
protein-coding mRNA targets among the principal components of the nuclear import 
pathway (NIP) and/or inflammasome pathways, including KPNA1, NLRP1 and NLRP3
genes. We demonstrate that estimates of cumulative targeting effects of microRNAs
on mRNAs within distinct allelic contexts of disease-linked SNPs are in agreement
with microarray analysis-defined gene expression phenotypes associated with human
genotypes of Crohn's disease (CD) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) populations.
Microarray experiments and disease phenocode analysis identify ten-gene
expression signatures which seem to reflect the activated status of
disease-linked SNPs/microRNAs/mRNAs axis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) of 66% CD patients and 80% RA patients. Comparisons of ten-gene signature 
expression profiles and NLRP3/NLRP1 mRNA expression ratios in PBMC of individual 
CD and RA patients and control subjects indicate that measurements of these
markers may be useful for diagnostic applications. Our findings demonstrate that 
NLPRP1- and STAT4-associated disease-linked SNPs have common sequence-defined
features which are recapitulating the essential phenotype-affecting features of
genome-wide disease-linked SNPs, suggesting that NLRP1 (NALP1) and STAT4 genetic 
loci may constitute "master" disease genes. We conclude that both genome-wide SNP
variations and SNP polymorphisms associated with "master" disease genes may cause
similar genetically-defined malfunctions of the NIP and inflammasome/innate
immunity pathways which are likely to contribute to pathogenesis of multiple
common human disorders.

PMID: 19029827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2426-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-04-154682. Epub 2008 
Nov 19.

Interleukin-6/STAT3 signaling regulates the ability of naive T cells to acquire
B-cell help capacities.

Eddahri F(1), Denanglaire S, Bureau F, Spolski R, Leonard WJ, Leo O, Andris F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Animale, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium.

The conditions leading to the activation/differentiation of T-helper (Th) cells
dedicated for B-cell antibody production are still poorly characterized. We now
demonstrate that interleukin-6 (IL-6) promotes the differentiation of naive T
lymphocytes into helper cells able to promote B-cell activation and antibody
secretion. IL-6-driven acquisition of B-cell help capacity requires expression of
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), but not STAT4 or 
STAT6 transcription factors, suggesting that the ability to provide help to B
cells is not restricted to a well-defined Th1 or Th2 effector population. T
cell-specific STAT3-deficient mice displayed reduced humoral responses in vivo
that could not be related to an altered expansion of CXCR5-expressing helper T
cells. IL-6 was shown to promote IL-21 secretion, a cytokine that was similarly
found to promote the differentiation of naive T cells into potent B-cell helper
cells. Collectively, these data indicate that the ability to provide B-cell help 
is regulated by IL-6/IL-21 through STAT3 activation, independently of Th1, Th2,
Th17, or follicular helper T cell (T(FH)) differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2656270
PMID: 19020307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Nov;68(11):1746-53. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.097642. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

STAT4 associates with systemic lupus erythematosus through two independent
effects that correlate with gene expression and act additively with IRF5 to
increase risk.

Abelson AK(1), Delgado-Vega AM, Kozyrev SV, Sánchez E, Velázquez-Cruz R, Eriksson
N, Wojcik J, Linga Reddy MV, Lima G, D'Alfonso S, Migliaresi S, Baca V, Orozco L,
Witte T, Ortego-Centeno N; AADEA group, Abderrahim H, Pons-Estel BA, Gutiérrez C,
Suárez A, González-Escribano MF, Martin J, Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Collaborators: Callejas-Rubio JL, Jiménez-Alonso J, Sabio M, Sánchez-Román J,
García-Hernández FJ, De-Ramon E, Camps M, García-Portales R, López-Nevot MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, University of
Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: To confirm and define the genetic association of STAT4 and systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), investigate the possibility of correlations with
differential splicing and/or expression levels, and genetic interaction with
IRF5.
METHODS: 30 tag SNPs were genotyped in an independent set of Spanish cases and
controls. SNPs surviving correction for multiple tests were genotyped in five new
sets of cases and controls for replication. STAT4 cDNA was analysed by 5'-RACE
PCR and sequencing. Expression levels were measured by quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: In the fine mapping, four SNPs were significant after correction for
multiple testing, with rs3821236 and rs3024866 as the strongest signals, followed
by the previously associated rs7574865, and by rs1467199. Association was
replicated in all cohorts. After conditional regression analyses, two major
independent signals, represented by SNPs rs3821236 and rs7574865, remained
significant across the sets. These SNPs belong to separate haplotype blocks. High
levels of STAT4 expression correlated with SNPs rs3821236, rs3024866 (both in the
same haplotype block) and rs7574865 but not with other SNPs. Transcription of
alternative tissue-specific exons 1, indicating the presence of tissue-specific
promoters of potential importance in the expression of STAT4, was also detected. 
No interaction with associated SNPs of IRF5 was observed using regression
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These data confirm STAT4 as a susceptibility gene for SLE and
suggest the presence of at least two functional variants affecting levels of
STAT4. The results also indicate that the genes STAT4 and IRF5 act additively to 
increase the risk for SLE.

PMCID: PMC3878433
PMID: 19019891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Immunol Res. 2008;42(1-3):197-209. doi: 10.1007/s12026-008-8074-5.

A detrimental role for IgG and FcgammaR in Leishmania mexicana infection.

Buxbaum LU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
buxbaum@mail.med.upenn.edu

The intracellular protozoan parasite Leishmania causes leishmaniasis, which is
the second biggest killer worldwide among parasitic diseases, after malaria. As
drug therapy for leishmaniasis is toxic and resistance is growing, a vaccine is
an important weapon against this disease. Unfortunately, no effective vaccine
exists for any human parasitic infection. Worse yet, nearly all effective
vaccines whose mechanisms are known work through the induction of protective
antibodies. Leishmania mexicana causes primarily chronic cutaneous disease. Not
only are antibodies not effective at killing Leishmania, as it hides inside the
parasitophorous vacuole of the host cell, but new research indicates that IgG
antibodies may be crucial in suppressing the host immune response by generating
an immunosuppressive interleukin-10 response. IL-10 is able to decrease the
needed Th1-generated IFN-gamma and downregulates production of nitric oxide, a
required effector mechanism of parasite killing. We have been studying the
pathways that the host uses to partially control L. mexicana infection, which
include STAT4, IFN-gamma, and inducible nitric oxide synthase, but found that the
IL-12 pathway is suppressed by IL-10. We are now studying the mechanisms by which
IgG, bound to parasites, can induce IL-10 through FcgammaR ligation and how this 
suppresses a healing immune response. We are examining which IgG isotypes bind to
which FcgammaRs and whether macrophages are the necessary source of IL-10 for
chronic disease. Elucidation of these mechanisms may help us to design vaccines
that will not induce antibody-mediated immunosuppressive IL-10 responses.

PMID: 19002608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Exp Med. 2008 Nov 24;205(12):2803-12. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081461. Epub 2008 Nov 
10.

Tpl2 kinase regulates T cell interferon-gamma production and host resistance to
Toxoplasma gondii.

Watford WT(1), Hissong BD, Durant LR, Yamane H, Muul LM, Kanno Y, Tato CM, Ramos 
HL, Berger AE, Mielke L, Pesu M, Solomon B, Frucht DM, Paul WE, Sher A, Jankovic 
D, Tsichlis PN, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. watfordw@mail.nih.gov

Tpl2 (Tumor progression locus 2), also known as Cot/MAP3K8, is a
hematopoietically expressed serine-threonine kinase. Tpl2 is known to have
critical functions in innate immunity in regulating tumor necrosis factor-alpha, 
Toll-like receptor, and G protein-coupled receptor signaling; however, our
understanding of its physiological role in T cells is limited. We investigated
the potential roles of Tpl2 in T cells and found that it was induced by
interleukin-12 in human and mouse T cells in a Stat4-dependent manner. Deficiency
of Tpl2 was associated with impaired interferon (IFN)-gamma production.
Accordingly, Tpl2(-/-) mice had impaired host defense against Toxoplasma gondii
with reduced parasite clearance and decreased IFN-gamma production. Furthermore, 
reconstitution of Rag2(-/-) mice with Tpl2-deficient T cells followed by T.
gondii infection recapitulated the IFN-gamma defect seen in the Tpl2-deficient
mice, confirming a T cell-intrinsic defect. CD4(+) T cells isolated from
Tpl2(-/-) mice showed poor induction of T-bet and failure to up-regulate Stat4
protein, which is associated with impaired TCR-dependent extracellular
signal-regulated kinase activation. These data underscore the role of Tpl2 as a
regulator of T helper cell lineage decisions and demonstrate that Tpl2 has an
important functional role in the regulation of Th1 responses.

PMCID: PMC2585846
PMID: 19001140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Immunity. 2008 Nov 14;29(5):679-90. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.08.017.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 is required for the
transcription factor T-bet to promote T helper 1 cell-fate determination.

Thieu VT(1), Yu Q, Chang HC, Yeh N, Nguyen ET, Sehra S, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Transcriptional regulatory networks direct the development of specialized cell
types. The transcription factors signal tranducer and activator of transcription 
4 (Stat4) and T-bet are required for the interleukin-12 (IL-12)-stimulated
development of T helper 1 (Th1) cells, although the hierarchy of activity by
these factors has not been clearly defined. In this report, we show that these
factors did not function in a linear pathway and that each factor played a unique
role in programming chromatin architecture for Th1 gene expression, with subsets 
of genes depending on Stat4, T-bet, or both for expression in Th1 cells. T-bet
was not able to transactivate expression of Stat4-dependent genes in the absence 
of endogenous Stat4 expression. Thus, T-bet requires Stat4 to achieve complete
IL-12-dependent Th1 cell-fate determination. These data provide a basis for
understanding how transiently activated and lineage-specific transcription
factors cooperate in promoting cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2768040
PMID: 18993086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Endocrinology. 2009 Mar;150(3):1310-20. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0832. Epub 2008 Nov 
6.

Signal transducer and activation of transcription (STAT) 4beta, a shorter isoform
of interleukin-12-induced STAT4, is preferentially activated by estrogen.

Karpuzoglu E(1), Phillips RA, Dai R, Graniello C, Gogal RM Jr, Ahmed SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Molecular Medicine and
Infectious Diseases, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine,
Virginia Tech, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg,
Virginia 24061, USA.

Estrogen, a natural immunomodulatory compound, has been shown to promote the
induction of a prototype T helper 1 cytokine, interferon (IFN)-gamma, as well as 
to up-regulate IFNgamma-mediated proinflammatory molecules (nitric oxide,
cyclooxygenase 2, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1). Because IL-12 is a major
IFNgamma-inducing cytokine, in this study we investigated whether estrogen
treatment of wild-type C57BL/6 mice alters IL-12-mediated signaling pathways. A
recent study has shown that IL-12 activates two isoforms of signal transducer and
activation of transcription (STAT) 4, a normal-sized (full-length STAT4alpha) and
a truncated form (STAT4beta). Interestingly, we found that estrogen treatment
preferentially up-regulates the phosphorylation of STAT4beta in splenic lymphoid 
cells. Time kinetic data showed the differential activation of STAT4beta in
splenic lymphoid cells from estrogen-treated mice, but not in cells from placebo 
controls. The activation of STAT4beta was mediated by IL-12 and not IFNgamma
because deliberate addition or neutralization of IL-12, but not IFNgamma,
affected the activation of STAT4beta. In contrast to IL-12-induced activation of 
STAT4beta in cells from estrogen-treated mice, STAT4alpha was not increased,
rather it tended to be decreased. In this context, STAT4alpha-induced p27(kip1)
protein was decreased in concanavalin A + IL-12-activated lymphocytes from
estrogen-treated mice only. By using the in vitro DNA binding assay, we confirmed
the ability of pSTAT4beta to bind to the IFNgamma-activated sites (IFNgamma
activation sequences)/STAT4-binding sites in estrogen-treated mice. Our data are 
the first to show that estrogen apparently has selective effects on
IL-12-mediated signaling by preferentially activating STAT4beta. These novel
findings are likely to provide new knowledge with regard to estrogen regulation
of inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2654738
PMID: 18988675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Diabetes. 2009 Jan;58(1):146-55. doi: 10.2337/db08-1154. Epub 2008 Nov 4.

All-trans retinoic acid inhibits type 1 diabetes by T regulatory (Treg)-dependent
suppression of interferon-gamma-producing T-cells without affecting Th17 cells.

Van YH(1), Lee WH, Ortiz S, Lee MH, Qin HJ, Liu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte,
California, USA.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2009 Jan;58(1):24-5.

OBJECTIVE: All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), a potent derivative of vitamin A, can 
regulate immune responses. However, its role in inducing immune tolerance
associated with the prevention of islet inflammation and inhibition of type 1
diabetes remains unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated the mechanisms underlying the
potential immunoregulatory effect of ATRA on type 1 diabetes using an adoptive
transfer animal model of the disease.
RESULTS: Our data demonstrated that ATRA treatment inhibited diabetes in NOD mice
with established insulitis. In addition, it suppressed interferon
(IFN)-gamma-producing CD4(+) and CD8(+) T effector (Teff) cells and expanded T
regulatory (Treg) cells in recipient mice transferred with diabetic NOD
splenocytes, without affecting either interleukin (IL)-17--or IL-4-producing
cells. Consistent with these results, ATRA reduced T-bet and STAT4 expression in 
T-cells and decreased islet-infiltrating CD8(+) T-cells, suppressing their
activation and IFN-gamma/granzyme B expression. Depletion of CD4(+)CD25(+) Treg
cells impaired the inhibitory effect of ATRA on islet-infiltrating T-cells and
blocked its protective effect on diabetes. Therefore, ATRA treatment induced Treg
cell-dependent immune tolerance by suppressing both CD4(+) and CD8(+) Teff cells 
while promoting Treg cell expansion.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that ATRA treatment promoted in vivo
expansion of Treg cells and induced Treg cell-dependent immune tolerance by
suppressing IFN-gamma-producing T-cells, without affecting Th17 cells. Our study 
also provides novel insights into how ATRA induces immune tolerance in vivo via
its effects on Teff and Treg cells.

PMCID: PMC2606864
PMID: 18984738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Hum Immunol. 2009 Jan;70(1):6-15. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.09.004. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Neem leaf glycoprotein directs T-bet-associated type 1 immune commitment.

Bose A(1), Chakraborty K, Sarkar K, Goswami S, Haque E, Chakraborty T, Ghosh D,
Roy S, Laskar S, Baral R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation and Immunodiagnostics, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute Kolkata, India.

Neem leaf glycoprotein (NLGP)-mediated immune activation and associated immune
polarization was studied. NLGP-induced activation is reflected in upregulation of
early activation marker CD69 on lymphocytes, monocytes, and dendritic cells.
Activation is also denoted by CD45RO enhancement, with a decrease in CD45RA
phenotype and CD62L (L-selectin). NLGP-activated T cells secrete greater amount
of signature T-helper (Th)1 cytokines interferon-gamma and a lower amount of the 
Th2 cytokine interleukin (IL)-4. Similar type 1 directiveness is also observed in
antigen-presenting monocytes and dendritic cells by upregulation of IL-12, tumor 
necrosis factor -alpha and downregulation of IL-10. Creation of the type 1
microenvironment is also assisted by NLGP-induced downregulation of FoxP3(+)
T-Reg cells. A type 1-specific transcription factor, T-bet, is upregulated in
circulating immune cells after their stimulation with NLGP. In the creation of
type 1 immune network, increased phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT4 with
decreased phosphorylation of STAT3 might have significance. We conclude that NLGP
may be effective in maintaining normal immune homeostasis by upregulating type 1 
response in immunosuppressed hosts, which may have significant role in the
induction of host protective antitumor functions.

PMID: 18983881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 15;181(10):6692-6.

Cutting edge: Eosinophils do not contribute to respiratory syncytial virus
vaccine-enhanced disease.

Castilow EM(1), Legge KL, Varga SM.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection of BALB/c mice previously immunized
with a recombinant vaccinia virus (vacv) expressing the attachment (G) protein of
RSV (vacvG) results in pulmonary eosinophilia, which mimics the response of
formalin-inactivated RSV-vaccinated children, as well as increased weight loss,
clinical illness, and enhanced pause (Penh). We show that RSV infection of
eosinophil-deficient mice previously immunized with vacvG results in the
development of increased weight loss, clinical illness, and Penh similar to that 
in wild-type controls. These measures of RSV vaccine-enhanced disease are
dependent upon STAT4. Interestingly, neither IL-12 nor IL-23, the two most common
STAT4-activating cytokines, proved necessary for the development of disease. We
demonstrate that IFN-gamma, which is produced following STAT4 activation,
contributes to clinical illness and increased Penh, but not weight loss. Our
results have important implications for future RSV vaccine design, suggesting
that enhancing a Th1 response may exacerbate disease.

PMCID: PMC2596668
PMID: 18981084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Mol Immunol. 2008 Oct;5(5):357-64. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2008.44.

17beta-estradiol suppresses cytotoxicity and proliferative capacity of murine
splenic NK1.1+ cells.

Hao S(1), Li P, Zhao J, Hu Y, Hou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Reproductive Biology Lab of Medical School & State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093,
China.

In order to clarify the effects of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on natural killer (NK)
cells and the possibly regulatory mechanisms, we obtained highly purified and
viable NK cells from C57BL/6J mouse spleen by a magnetic cell sorter (MACS).
These cells were treated with E2 and then their cytotoxicity and proliferative
capacity were examined. To further investigate the mechanisms on the effect of E2
on NK cells, expressions of activation-associated markers (CD69, CD122) and
inhibitory receptors (CD94, Ly49), and intracellular cytokine production were
analyzed. At last, we performed the cDNA microarray to explore the possible
involved genes. We found that E2 could suppress NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity in vitro. E2 reduced NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity, which may be through influencing the phenotypes and
cytokine expression of NK cells, mainly involving CD94 and IFN-gamma.
Furthermore, regulation of Stat4, Fyn, Sh2d1a, Eat2, Cd244, Irf1, Runx1, Irf7,
Irf5, Esrra and Nr5a1 genes may be related to the cytotoxicity, proliferation and
cytokine production of E2-mediated purified NK cells.

PMCID: PMC4073696
PMID: 18954559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Annu Rev Pathol. 2009;4:417-34. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pathol.4.110807.092254.

The immunopathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis.

Imboden JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, and Division of
Rheumatology, San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA.
jimboden@medsfgh.ucsf.edu

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory polyarthritis whose etiology
remains uncertain. Recently we have learned that autoimmunity to citrullinated
protein antigens has specificity for rheumatoid arthritis and defines a
clinically and genetically distinct form of the disease. Multiple genes
contribute to disease susceptibility, with the HLA locus accounting for 30% to
50% of overall genetic risk. Five risk loci have been identified and validated:
HLA-DRB1, PTPN22, STAT4, a region in 6q23, and the TRAF1/C5 locus. Also, there is
renewed interest in the contribution of T cells to ongoing inflammation in
rheumatoid arthritis. Autoantibodies to citrullinated protein epitopes are
specific for rheumatoid arthritis, are associated with a more aggressive disease 
course, and are pathogenic in an animal model of autoimmune arthritis. There is a
strong association between shared-epitope-expressing HLA-DRB1 alleles and the
development of rheumatoid arthritis associated with autoimmunity to citrullinated
protein antigens.

PMID: 18954286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 2008;66(3):176-83.

The genetic contribution to systemic lupus erythematosus.

Criswell LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
lindsey.criswell@ucsf.edu

We are currently witnessing an explosion of information about the genetic
contribution to complex human diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). These genetic discoveries have profound implications for efforts to more
fully characterize etiologic pathways and mechanisms. Further, these etiologic
insights should lead to improved diagnostic and prognostic tools and inform the
development of more specific therapies for SLE and related conditions. The
article summarizes the evidence supporting a role for genetic factors in SLE,
highlights the clinical and genetic complexity of the disease, reviews the genes 
that have established contributions to the risk of SLE and specific disease
manifestations, and discusses the recent data emerging from genomewide
association studies of SLE.

PMID: 18937628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 15;181(8):5681-90.

Stat4 isoforms differentially regulate inflammation and demyelination in
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.

Mo C(1), Chearwae W, O'Malley JT, Adams SM, Kanakasabai S, Walline CC, Stritesky 
GL, Good SR, Perumal NB, Kaplan MH, Bright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Laboratory, Methodist Research Institute, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA.

Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a T cell-mediated autoimmune
disease model of multiple sclerosis. Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (Stat4) is a transcription factor activated by IL-12 and IL-23,
two cytokines known to play important roles in the pathogenesis of EAE by
inducing T cells to secrete IFN-gamma and IL-17, respectively. We and others have
previously shown that therapeutic intervention or targeted disruption of Stat4
was effective in ameliorating EAE. Recently, a splice variant of Stat4 termed
Stat4beta has been characterized that lacks 44 amino acids at the C terminus of
the full-length Stat4alpha. In this study we examined whether T cells expressing 
either isoform could affect the pathogenesis of EAE. We found that transgenic
mice expressing Stat4beta on a Stat4-deficient background develop an exacerbated 
EAE compared with wild-type mice following immunization with myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide 35-55, while Stat4alpha transgenic mice have
greatly attenuated disease. The differential development of EAE in transgenic
mice correlates with increased IFN-gamma and IL-17 in Stat4beta-expressing cells 
in situ, contrasting increased IL-10 production by Stat4alpha-expressing cells.
This study demonstrates that Stat4 isoforms differentially regulate inflammatory 
cytokines in association with distinct effects on the onset and severity of EAE.

PMCID: PMC2581484
PMID: 18832727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Neuroimmunol. 2008 Nov 15;204(1-2):58-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.07.018.

Downregulation of IL-17 and IL-6 in the central nervous system by glatiramer
acetate in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Begum-Haque S(1), Sharma A, Kasper IR, Foureau DM, Mielcarz DW, Haque A, Kasper
LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
Sakhina.Haque-Begum@Dartmouth.EDU

T helper 17 (Th17) cells are pivotal in the immune pathogenesis of EAE.
Glatiramer acetate (GA) can enhance Treg FOXp3 expression. We demonstrate that GA
downregulates the expression of both IL-17 and IL-6 in two different EAE models. 
Increased mRNA expression in CNS for ROR gamma t, IL-17, IL-12/IL-23, IL-6,
TNF-alpha, STAT4 and Th1 cytokines were significantly reduced by GA with a
concomitant rise in SMAD3. The increased expression of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-17
in CNS of CD25+ depleted animals was suppressed by GA treatment. This study
demonstrates that both Th1 polarization and Th17 expression are modulated by GA.

PMID: 18804287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Arthritis Res Ther. 2008;10(5):R113. doi: 10.1186/ar2516. Epub 2008 Sep 19.

Role of STAT4 polymorphisms in systemic lupus erythematosus in a Japanese
population: a case-control association study of the STAT1-STAT4 region.

Kawasaki A(1), Ito I, Hikami K, Ohashi J, Hayashi T, Goto D, Matsumoto I, Ito S, 
Tsutsumi A, Koga M, Arinami T, Graham RR, Hom G, Takasaki Y, Hashimoto H, Behrens
TW, Sumida T, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Life System
Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of 
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan. a-kawasaki@umin.net

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies identified STAT4 (signal transducers and activators 
of transcription-4) as a susceptibility gene for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). STAT1 is encoded adjacently to STAT4 on 2q32.2-q32.3, upregulated in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from SLE patients, and functionally relevant
to SLE. This study was conducted to test whether STAT4 is associated with SLE in 
a Japanese population also, to identify the risk haplotype, and to examine the
potential genetic contribution of STAT1. To accomplish these aims, we carried out
a comprehensive association analysis of 52 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) encompassing the STAT1-STAT4 region.
METHODS: In the first screening, 52 tag SNPs were selected based on HapMap Phase 
II JPT (Japanese in Tokyo, Japan) data, and case-control association analysis was
carried out on 105 Japanese female patients with SLE and 102 female controls. For
associated SNPs, additional cases and controls were genotyped and association was
analyzed using 308 SLE patients and 306 controls. Estimation of haplotype
frequencies and an association study using the permutation test were performed
with Haploview version 4.0 software. Population attributable risk percentage was 
estimated to compare the epidemiological significance of the risk genotype among 
populations.
RESULTS: In the first screening, rs7574865, rs11889341, and rs10168266 in STAT4
were most significantly associated (P < 0.01). Significant association was not
observed for STAT1. Subsequent association studies of the three SNPs using 308
SLE patients and 306 controls confirmed a strong association of the rs7574865T
allele (SLE patients: 46.3%, controls: 33.5%, P = 4.9 x 10(-6), odds ratio 1.71) 
as well as TTT haplotype (rs10168266/rs11889341/rs7574865) (P = 1.5 x 10(-6)).
The association was stronger in subgroups of SLE with nephritis and
anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies. Population attributable risk percentage was 
estimated to be higher in the Japanese population (40.2%) than in Americans of
European descent (19.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: The same STAT4 risk allele is associated with SLE in Caucasian and
Japanese populations. Evidence for a role of STAT1 in genetic susceptibility to
SLE was not detected. The contribution of STAT4 for the genetic background of SLE
may be greater in the Japanese population than in Americans of European descent.

PMCID: PMC2592800
PMID: 18803832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):5062-70.

STAT4 isoforms differentially regulate Th1 cytokine production and the severity
of inflammatory bowel disease.

O'Malley JT(1), Eri RD, Stritesky GL, Mathur AN, Chang HC, Hogenesch H,
Srinivasan M, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, HB Wells Center for Pediatric Research and
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

STAT4, a critical regulator of inflammation in vivo, can be expressed as two
alternative splice forms, a full-length STAT4alpha, and a STAT4beta isoform
lacking a C-terminal transactivation domain. Each isoform is sufficient to
program Th1 development through both common and distinct subsets of target genes.
However, the ability of these isoforms to mediate inflammation in vivo has not
been examined. Using a model of colitis that develops following transfer of
CD4(+) CD45RB(high) T cells expressing either the STAT4alpha or STAT4beta isoform
into SCID mice, we determined that although both isoforms mediate inflammation
and weight loss, STAT4beta promotes greater colonic inflammation and tissue
destruction. This correlates with STAT4 isoform-dependent expression of TNF-alpha
and GM-CSF in vitro and in vivo, but not Th1 expression of IFN-gamma or Th17
expression of IL-17, which were similar in STAT4alpha- and STAT4beta-expressing T
cells. Thus, higher expression of a subset of inflammatory cytokines from
STAT4beta-expressing T cells correlates with the ability of STAT4beta-expressing 
T cells to mediate more severe inflammatory disease.

PMCID: PMC2596939
PMID: 18802110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2573-86. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737840.

Enforced expression of GATA3 allows differentiation of IL-17-producing cells, but
constrains Th17-mediated pathology.

van Hamburg JP(1), de Bruijn MJ, Ribeiro de Almeida C, van Zwam M, van Meurs M,
de Haas E, Boon L, Samsom JN, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GATA3 serves as a master regulator of
T-helper-2 (Th2) differentiation by inducing expression of the Th2 cytokines
IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 and by suppressing Th1 development. Here, we investigated
how GATA3 affects Th17 differentiation, using transgenic mice with enforced GATA3
expression. We activated naïve primary T cells in vitro in the presence of
transforming growth factor-beta and IL-6, and found that enforced GATA3
expression induced co-expression of Th2 cytokines in IL-17-producing T cells.
Although the presence of IL-4 hampered Th17 differentiation, transforming growth 
factor-beta/IL-6 cultures from GATA3 transgenic mice contained substantial
numbers of IL-17(+) cells, partially because GATA3 supported Th17 differentiation
by limiting IL-2 and IFN-gamma production. GATA3 additionally constrained Th17
differentiation in vitro through IL-4-independent mechanisms, involving
downregulating transcription of STAT3, STAT4, NFATc2 and the nuclear factor
RORgammat, which is crucial for Th17 differentiation. Remarkably, upon myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein immunization in vivo, GATA3 transgenic mice
contained similar numbers of IL-17-producing T cells in their lymph nodes as
wild-type mice, but were not susceptible to autoimmune encephalomyelitis,
possibly due to concomitant production of IL-4 and IL-10 induction. We therefore 
conclude that although GATA3 allows Th17 differentiation, it acts as an inhibitor
of Th17-mediated pathology, through IL-4-dependent and IL-4-independent pathways.

PMID: 18792410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 15;181(6):3784-92.

TGF-beta utilizes SMAD3 to inhibit CD16-mediated IFN-gamma production and
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in human NK cells.

Trotta R(1), Dal Col J, Yu J, Ciarlariello D, Thomas B, Zhang X, Allard J 2nd,
Wei M, Mao H, Byrd JC, Perrotti D, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

TGF-beta can be a potent suppressor of lymphocyte effector cell functions and can
mediate these effects via distinct molecular pathways. The role of TGF-beta in
regulating CD16-mediated NK cell IFN-gamma production and antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) is unclear, as are the signaling pathways that may
be utilized. Treatment of primary human NK cells with TGF-beta inhibited
IFN-gamma production induced by CD16 activation with or without IL-12 or IL-2,
and it did so without affecting the phosphorylation/activation of MAP kinases ERK
and p38, as well as STAT4. TGF-beta treatment induced SMAD3 phosphorylation, and 
ectopic overexpression of SMAD3 resulted in a significant decrease in IFN-gamma
gene expression following CD16 activation with or without IL-12 or IL-2.
Likewise, NK cells obtained from smad3(-/-) mice produced more IFN-gamma in
response to CD16 activation plus IL-12 when compared with NK cells obtained from 
wild-type mice. Coactivation of human NK cells via CD16 and IL-12 induced
expression of T-BET, the positive regulator of IFN-gamma, and T-BET was
suppressed by TGF-beta and by SMAD3 overexpression. An extended treatment of
primary NK cells with TGF-beta was required to inhibit ADCC, and it did so by
inhibiting granzyme A and granzyme B expression. This effect was accentuated in
cells overexpressing SMAD3. Collectively, our results indicate that TGF-beta
inhibits CD16-mediated human NK cell IFN-gamma production and ADCC, and these
effects are mediated via SMAD3.

PMCID: PMC2924753
PMID: 18768831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Sep;58(9):2598-602. doi: 10.1002/art.23792.

Association of the STAT4 gene with increased susceptibility for some
immune-mediated diseases.

Martínez A(1), Varadé J, Márquez A, Cénit MC, Espino L, Perdigones N, Santiago
JL, Fernández-Arquero M, de la Calle H, Arroyo R, Mendoza JL, Fernández-Gutiérrez
B, de la Concha EG, Urcelay E.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The STAT4 gene encodes a transcription factor involved in the
signaling pathways of several cytokines, including interleukin-12 (IL-12), the
type I interferons, and IL-23. Recently, the association of a STAT4 haplotype
marked by rs7574865 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus
erythematosus was reported. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of 
this STAT4 tagging polymorphism in other immune-mediated diseases.
METHODS: The study group comprised 2,776 consecutively recruited Spanish
individuals: 575 with RA, 440 with multiple sclerosis, 700 with inflammatory
bowel disease, 311 with type 1 diabetes, and 723 ethnically matched healthy
control subjects. The STAT4 polymorphism rs7574865 was genotyped using a
predesigned TaqMan assay. Allele and genotype frequencies in patients and control
subjects were compared by chi-square test.
RESULTS: The association of STAT4 polymorphism rs7574865 with RA was validated in
patients of Spanish origin (for T versus G, P = 1.2 x 10(-6), odds ratio [OR]
1.59, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.31-1.92), and the association was
described for the first time in both clinical forms of inflammatory bowel
disease, Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis (for T versus G, P = 0.006, OR
1.29, 95% CI 1.07-1.55), and in type 1 diabetes mellitus (for T versus G, P =
0.008, OR 1.36, 95% CI 1.07-1.71). In contrast, the genotypic distribution of
this polymorphism showed no difference between patients with multiple sclerosis
and healthy control subjects (for T versus G, P = 0.83, OR 1.02, 95% CI
0.82-1.28).
CONCLUSION: The STAT4 gene is emerging as a novel common risk factor for diverse 
complex diseases.

PMID: 18759272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2008 Aug;19(4):401-6. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2008.07.021.
Epub 2008 Aug 5.

The Stat family of transcription factors have diverse roles in mammary gland
development.

Watson CJ(1), Neoh K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Pathology, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, United Kingdom. cjw53@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

The Stat family of transcription factors have diverse roles in mammary gland
development. Genetic studies in mice have revealed an essential requirement for
Stat5a in development of secretory alveolar cells during pregnancy while Stat6,
which is normally associated with differentiation of T helper cells, is important
in the commitment of luminal cells to this alveolar lineage. In contrast, Stat3
is specifically activated at the initiation of post-lactational regression when
it has an essential function in the regulation of cell death and tissue
remodelling. Stat1 and Stat4 have been shown to be regulated during a mammary
developmental cycle although whether they have specific, non-redundant roles is
not clear. Thus, the adult mammary gland is somewhat unusual in that it is a
tissue where different Stats are sequentially activated to orchestrate the
processes of functional differentiation, cell death and tissue remodelling.

PMID: 18723104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3346-52.

Transcription factor-dependent chromatin remodeling of Il18r1 during Th1 and Th2 
differentiation.

Yu Q(1), Chang HC, Ahyi AN, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The IL-18Ralpha-chain is expressed on Th1 but not Th2 cells. We have recently
shown that Stat4 is an important component of programming the Il18r1 locus
(encoding IL-18Ralpha) for maximal expression in Th1 cells. Il18r1 is
reciprocally repressed during Th2 development. In this report, we demonstrate the
establishment of DH patterns that are distinct among undifferentiated CD4 T, Th1,
and Th2 cells. Stat6 is required for the repression of Il18r1 expression and in
Stat6-deficient Th2 cultures, mRNA levels, histone acetylation, and H3K4
methylation levels are intermediate between levels observed in Th1 and Th2 cells.
Despite the repressive effects of IL-4 during Th2 differentiation, we observed
only modest binding of Stat6 to the Il18r1 locus. In contrast, we observed robust
GATA-3 binding to a central region of the locus where DNase hypersensitivity
sites overlapped with conserved non-coding sequences in Il18r1 introns. Ectopic
expression of GATA-3 in differentiated Th1 cells repressed Il18r1 mRNA and
surface expression of IL-18Ralpha. These data provide further mechanistic insight
into transcription factor-dependent establishment of Th subset-specific patterns 
of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2625301
PMID: 18714006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2008 Sep;12(9):1071-6.

Decreased phosphorylation of STAT-1, STAT-4 and cytokine release in MDR-TB
patients with primary resistance.

Kim HJ(1), Chung DH, Kim MJ, Jang JH, Kim YW, Han SK, Shim YS, Yim JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine and Lung Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

SETTING: We recently showed that treatment failure rate was higher among
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) patients without a previous history of 
tuberculosis (TB) treatment, or so-called 'primary resistance'.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the phosphorylation levels of signal transducers and
activators of transcription-1 (STAT-1) and STAT-4 and the subsequent cytokine
release as a possible cause of a poor prognosis in MDR-TB patients with primary
resistance.
DESIGN: Ten patients with successfully treated pulmonary TB without resistance,
12 MDR-TB patients with acquired resistance and 10 MDR-TB patients with primary
resistance were enrolled. After 24 h stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMC) with interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-12 (IL-12), purified 
protein derivative (PPD), or lysate of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, flow
cytometric analysis of intracellular pSTAT-1 and pSTAT-4 were performed and
secretion of IFN-gamma, IL-12p40 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) was
measured in culture supernatant.
RESULTS: The mean fluorescent intensities of pSTAT-1 and pSTAT-4 in PBMC of
MDR-TB patients with primary resistance decreased on stimulation of IFN-gamma,
PPD or lysate of M. tuberculosis when compared with patients with acquired
resistance. In addition, secretion of IFN-gamma, IL-12p40 and TNF-alpha in these 
patients decreased on various stimuli.
CONCLUSION: Decreased phosphorylation of STAT-1, STAT-4, and of subsequent
cytokine release, might be associated with a poor prognosis in MDR-TB patients
with primary resistance.

PMID: 18713507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Hum Immunol. 2008 Oct;69(10):647-50. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.07.004. Epub 2008
Aug 12.

STAT4: a risk factor for type 1 diabetes?

Zervou MI(1), Mamoulakis D, Panierakis C, Boumpas DT, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.

Genes and mechanisms involved in autoimmune diseases, affecting approximately 5% 
of human population, remain still obscure but there is accumulating evidence that
common genetic factors might predispose to multiple autoimmune disorders. STAT4, 
a transcription factor transmitting signals induced by several key cytokines, has
recently been identified as a genetic risk factor for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and Sjögren's disease (SD), thus indicating
that multiple autoimmune diseases may share common biochemical pathways that lead
to immune deregulation. Here we demonstrate for the first time, in a genetically 
homogeneous population, the association of the STAT4 rs7574865 G/T polymorphism, 
which has been shown to be associated with these autoimmune diseases, with
susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (T1D). The susceptibility is associated with a 
significant increase of the frequency of the T allele (p = 0.0012, two-tailed
chi(2), OR = 1.94, 95% CI = 1.29-2.91) in this single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP). We also present an indication for association with Wegener's
granulomatosis. These findings suggest that this variant form of STAT4 may have a
putative key role in the development of a variety of autoimmune diseases,
probably because of signaling defects that it causes in the IL-12 pathway.

PMID: 18703106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2009 Jan;8(1):32-44. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800139-MCP200. Epub
2008 Aug 12.

Quantitative proteomics reveals GIMAP family proteins 1 and 4 to be
differentially regulated during human T helper cell differentiation.

Filén JJ(1), Filén S, Moulder R, Tuomela S, Ahlfors H, West A, Kouvonen P,
Kantola S, Björkman M, Katajamaa M, Rasool O, Nyman TA, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Tykistökatu 6B, FI-20520 Turku, Finland.

T helper (Th) cells differentiate into functionally distinct effector cell
subsets of which Th1 and Th2 cells are best characterized. Besides T cell
receptor signaling, IL-12-induced STAT4 and T-bet- and IL-4-induced STAT6 and
GATA3 signaling pathways are the major players regulating the Th1 and Th2
differentiation process, respectively. However, there are likely to be other yet 
unknown factors or pathways involved. In this study we used quantitative
proteomics exploiting cleavable ICAT labeling and LC-MS/MS to identify
IL-4-regulated proteins from the microsomal fractions of CD4(+) cells extracted
from umbilical cord blood. We were able to identify 557 proteins of which 304
were also quantified. This study resulted in the identification of the
down-regulation of small GTPases GIMAP1 and GIMAP4 by IL-4 during Th2
differentiation. We also showed that both GIMAP1 and GIMAP4 genes are
up-regulated by IL-12 and other Th1 differentiation-inducing cytokines in cells
induced to differentiate toward Th1 lineage and down-regulated by IL-4 in cells
induced to Th2. Our results indicate that the GIMAP (GTPase of the
immunity-associated protein) family of proteins is differentially regulated
during Th cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2621005
PMID: 18701445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 15;181(4):2382-91.

Functional characterization and gene expression analysis of CD4+ CD25+ regulatory
T cells generated in mice treated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Marshall NB(1), Vorachek WR, Steppan LB, Mourich DV, Kerkvliet NI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

Although the effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) are mediated
through binding and activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the
subsequent biochemical and molecular changes that confer immune suppression are
not well understood. Mice exposed to TCDD during an acute B6-into-B6D2F1
graft-vs-host response do not develop disease, and recently this has been shown
to correlate with the generation of CD4(+) T cells that express CD25 and
demonstrate in vitro suppressive function. The purpose of this study was to
further characterize these CD4(+) cells (TCDD-CD4(+) cells) by comparing and
contrasting them with both natural regulatory CD4(+) T cells (T-regs) and
vehicle-treated cells. Cellular anergy, suppressive functions, and cytokine
production were examined. We found that TCDD-CD4(+) cells actively proliferate in
response to various stimuli but suppress IL-2 production and the proliferation of
effector T cells. Like natural T-regs, TCDD-CD4(+) cells do not produce IL-2 and 
their suppressive function is contact dependent but abrogated by costimulation
through glucocorticoid-induced TNFR (GITR). TCDD-CD4(+) cells also secrete
significant amounts of IL-10 in response to both polyclonal and alloantigen
stimuli. Several genes were significantly up-regulated in TCDD-CD4(+) cells
including TGF-beta3, Blimp-1, and granzyme B, as well as genes associated with
the IL12-Rb2 signaling pathway. TCDD-CD4(+) cells demonstrated an increased
responsiveness to IL-12 as indicated by the phosphorylation levels of STAT4. Only
2% of TCDD-CD4(+) cells express Foxp3, suggesting that the AhR does not rely on
Foxp3 for suppressive activity. The generation of CD4(+) cells with regulatory
function mediated through activation of the AhR by TCDD may represent a novel
pathway for the induction of T-regs.

PMCID: PMC4118493
PMID: 18684927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2008 Sep;8(5):398-403.

STAT4: genetics, mechanisms, and implications for autoimmunity.

Korman BD(1), Kastner DL, Gregersen PK, Remmers EF.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal, and Skin Diseases, 9
Memorial Drive, NIH Building 9, Room 1W108, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Recent advances in genetics and technology have led to breakthroughs in
understanding the genes that predispose individuals to autoimmune diseases. A
common haplotype of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) gene has been shown to be associated with susceptibility to rheumatoid
arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and primary Sjögren's syndrome. STAT4 is
a transcription factor that transduces interleukin-12, interleukin-23, and type 1
interferon cytokine signals in T cells and monocytes, leading to T-helper type 1 
and T-helper type 17 differentiation, monocyte activation, and interferon-gamma
production. Although the evidence for this association is very strong and well
replicated, the exact mechanism by which polymorphisms in this gene lead to
disease remains unknown. In concert with the identification of other
disease-associated loci, elucidating how the variant form of STAT4 modulates
immune function should lead to an improved understanding of the pathophysiology
of autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2562257
PMID: 18682104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Nov;84(5):1353-60. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0107040. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Regulation of STAT pathways and IRF1 during human dendritic cell maturation by
TNF-alpha and PGE2.

Hu Y(1), Park-Min KH, Yarilina A, Ivashkiv LB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, New York, USA.

Maturation of dendritic cells (DCs) by TLR ligands induces expression of IFN-beta
and autocrine activation of IFN-inducible Stat1-dependent genes important for DC 
function. In this study, we analyzed the regulation of STAT signaling during
maturation of human DCs by TNF-alpha and PGE2, which induced maturation of human 
DCs comparably with LPS but did not induce detectable IFN-beta production or
Stat1 tyrosine phosphorylation. Consistent with these results, TNF-alpha and PGE2
did not induce Stat1 DNA binding to a standard Stat1-binding oligonucleotide.
Instead, TNF-alpha and PGE2 increased Stat1 serine phosphorylation and Stat4
tyrosine phosphorylation and activated expression of the NF-kappaB and Stat1
target gene IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), which contributes to IFN responses.
TNF-alpha and PGE2 induced a complex that bound an oligonucleotide derived from
the IRF1 promoter that contains a STAT-binding sequence embedded in a larger
palindromic sequence, and this complex was recognized by Stat1 antibodies. These 
results suggest that TNF-alpha and PGE2 activate STAT-mediated components of
human DC maturation by alternative pathways to the IFN-beta-mediated autocrine
loop used by TLRs.

PMCID: PMC2567899
PMID: 18678606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Immunol. 2008 Sep;45(15):3889-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.06.029.

IL-23 and IL-12 responses in activated human T cells retrovirally transduced with
IL-23 receptor variants.

de Paus RA(1), van de Wetering D, van Dissel JT, van de Vosse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Interleukin-23 (IL-23) is a regulator of cellular immune responses involved in
controlling infections and autoimmune diseases. Effects of IL-23 on T cells are
mediated via a receptor complex consisting of an IL-12Rbeta1 and a specific
IL-23R chain. The R381Q and P310L variants of the IL-23R were recently reported
to be associated with autoimmune diseases, suggesting they have an effect on
IL-23R function. To investigate this matter, these variants and a newly
identified variant, Y173H, were retrovirally transduced into human T cell blasts 
and functionally characterized by measuring the IL-23-induced signal transduction
pathway (i.e., STAT1, STAT3 and STAT4 phosphorylation), and IFN-gamma and IL-10
production. No differences were detected between the genetic variants and
wild-type in the function of the IL-23R-chain. Furthermore, while comparing
IFN-gamma and IL-10 production in response to IL-23 and IL-12, we found IL-23 to 
be a more potent IL-10 inducer, and IL-12 a more potent IFN-gamma inducer. In
addition, IL-23 also exerted a minor IL-12-like effect by inducing
IL-23R-independent, IL-12Rbeta1-dependent STAT4 phosphorylation and IFN-gamma
production. In conclusion, the reported association between R381Q and P310L
variants of the IL-23R and autoimmune diseases does not depend on differences in 
functional activity between wild-type and R381Q and P310L variants of the IL-23R.

PMID: 18675459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Arch Med Res. 2008 Aug;39(6):582-9. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2008.06.001.

Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference targeting STAT4 inhibits the proliferation
of vascular smooth muscle cells.

Lv L(1), Zhang J, Huang X, Zhao Y, Zhou Z, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: STAT4 is a key transcription factor regulating Th1 development.
However, its presence and role in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) has not
been well studied. In the current study, we have utilized lentivirus-mediated
shRNA for functional gene knockdown in human umbilical artery smooth muscle cells
in order to access the potential role of STAT4 in VSMC growth.
METHODS: Cells were isolated from the umbilical arteries of newborns and used at 
passage 3-5. Recombinant lentivirus producing STAT4 siRNA was prepared. Protein
and mRNA expression of STAT4 and relevant genes were examined by Western blot,
ELISA, and quantitative RT-PCR analysis, and the effects of the lentivirus on
cell growth and apoptosis were determined using MTT assay and flow cytometry,
respectively.
RESULTS: Lentivirus-mediated RNAi effectively reduced endogenous STAT4 expression
and downregulation of STAT4 in VSMCs and significantly reduced VSMC growth rate
in vitro. We found that STAT4 knockdown led to impaired pSTAT4 protein
expression. SOCS-3 as well as MCP-1 production were also markedly decreased,
consistent with the suppression of STAT4 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from our study suggest that STAT4 may play a role in VSMC
proliferation, and thus is a novel therapeutic target for neointima formation
following vascular injury, e.g., post-angioplasty restenosis.

PMID: 18662589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Immunol Res. 2009;45(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s12026-008-8024-2.

Molecular signatures distinguishing active from latent tuberculosis in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, after in vitro antigenic stimulation with purified
protein derivative of tuberculin (PPD) or Candida: a preliminary report.

Stern JN(1), Keskin DB, Romero V, Zuniga J, Encinales L, Li C, Awad C, Yunis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. jstern@fas.harvard.edu

Purified protein derivative (PPD) or tuberculin skin testing is used to identify 
infected individuals with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) and to assess
cell-mediated immunity to Mtb. In the present study, we compared PBMC cultures in
the presence of tuberculin or Candida antigens using cytokine bead arrays and RNA
microarrays. Measurements of different cytokines and chemokines in supernatants
of PMBC cultures in the presence of PPD showed increased levels of interferon
(IFN)-gamma in active tuberculosis infection (ATBI) and latent TB infected (LTBI)
compared to controls, and increased levels of TNF-alpha in ATBI compared with
LTBI. Also, we found increase of IL-6 in cultures of PPD positive and controls
but not in the cultures with Candida. We also report the molecular signature of
tuberculosis infection, in ATBI patients, the following genes were found to be
up-regulated and absent in LTBI individuals: two kinases (JAK3 and p38MAPK), four
interleukins (IL-7, IL-2, IL-6, and IFNbeta1), a chemokine (HCC-4) a chemokine
receptor (CxCR5), two interleukin receptors (IL-1R2 and IL-18R1), and three
additional ones (TRAF5, Smad2, CIITA, and NOS2A). By contrast, IL-17 and IGFBP3
were significantly up-regulated in LTBI. And, STAT4, GATA3, Fra-1, and ICOS were 
down-regulated in ATBI but absent in LTBI. Conversely, TLR-10, IL-15, DORA, and
IKK-beta were down-regulated in LTBI but not in ATBI. Interestingly, the majority
of the up-regulated genes found in ATBI were found in cultures stimulated with
tuberculin (PPD) or Candida antigens, suggesting that these pathogens stimulate
similar immunological pathways. We believe that the molecular signature
distinguishing active from latent tuberculosis infection may require using
cytokine bead arrays along with RNA microarrays testing cell cultures at
different times following in vitro proliferation assays using several bacterial
antigens and PPD.

PMID: 18648750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Hum Immunol. 2008 Sep;69(9):567-71. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.06.006. Epub 2008 
Jul 14.

Association of a TRAF1 and a STAT4 gene polymorphism with increased risk for
rheumatoid arthritis in a genetically homogeneous population.

Zervou MI(1), Sidiropoulos P, Petraki E, Vazgiourakis V, Krasoudaki E,
Raptopoulou A, Kritikos H, Choustoulaki E, Boumpas DT, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Crete, and Department of Rheumatology,
Clinical Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion,
Greece.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multifactorial disease that is increasing in
incidence worldwide. It is associated with a complex mode of inheritance, with
many genes being involved in the development and progression of the disease.
Genome-wide association studies in different populations have recently revealed a
significant association between a TRAF1/C5 and a STAT4 polymorphism and the
development of RA. In the present study we performed a case-control study in the 
population of the island of Crete, Greece, aiming to replicate the former
findings in a genetically homogeneous cohort of patients. We found that mutated
allele A or genotypes A/A and G/A of the TRAF1/C5 rs10818488 SNP were more common
in individuals with RA than in control individuals (odds ratio [OR]=1.7, 95%
confidence interval [CI]=1.35-2.15, and OR=2.22, 95% CI=1.61-3.05, respectively).
Similarly, mutated allele T or genotypes T/T and G/T of the STAT4 rs7574865 SNP
were also associated with susceptibility to RA (OR=1.9, 95% CI=1.46-2.50, and
OR=2.37, 95% CI 1.73-2.25, respectively). Thus, we conclude that mutant alleles
or genotypes of both polymorphisms examined are associated with the development
of RA in our population.

PMID: 18625278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Hum Immunol. 2008 Aug;69(8):490-500. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.06.004. Epub 2008
Jul 9.

Interleukin-12 improves cytotoxicity of natural killer cells via upregulated
expression of NKG2D.

Zhang C(1), Zhang J, Niu J, Zhou Z, Zhang J, Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunopharmacology & Immunotherapy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Shandong University, 44 Wenhua West Road, Jinan 250012, China.
caizhangsd@yahoo.com.cn

Natural killer (NK) cells are crucial components of the innate immune system,
providing the first line of defense against infectious pathogens and tumors.
Interleukin (IL)-12 is an interleukin produced primarily by antigen-presenting
cells that play an essential role in the interaction between the innate and
adaptive arms of immunity acting upon T and NK cells to generate cytotoxic
lymphocytes. In the present study, we explored the effect of IL-12 upregulation
on the NK receptor NKG2D and on the promotion of NK cell function. IL-12 enhanced
the cytotoxicity of NK cells to different solid and hematological tumor cell
lines and promoted interferon-gamma secretion by NK cells. The IL-12-induced
cytolytic effect was dependent on the interaction of NKG2D with its ligand, MICA,
because blockade of either protein attenuated the effect of IL-12 on NK
cytolysis. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analyses indicated that IL-12 treatment
increased NKG2D transcripts and surface expression in NK cells. Also, IL-12
augmented the expression of cytotoxic effector molecules, TRAIL and perforin, and
the phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT4, and ERK1/2, which may also contribute to
lysis by NK cells. These results are encouraging for the potential use of IL-12
as part of immunotherapy.

PMID: 18619507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 15;181(2):1491-8.

Novel immunomodulatory properties of berbamine through selective down-regulation 
of STAT4 and action of IFN-gamma in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Ren Y(1), Lu L, Guo TB, Qiu J, Yang Y, Liu A, Zhang JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.

Berbamine (BM) is an herbal compound derived from Berberis vulgaris L commonly
used in traditional Chinese medicine. In this study, we show that BM has potent
anti-inflammatory properties through novel regulatory mechanisms, leading to
reduced encephalitogenic T cell responses and amelioration of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). The treatment effect of BM was attributable
to its selective inhibitory effect on the production and action of IFN-gamma in
CD4(+) T cells, which was mediated through altered STAT4 expression in T cells.
BM was found to up-regulate SLIM, a ubiquitin E3 ligase for STAT4, and promote
STAT4 degradation, resulting in markedly decreased IFN-gamma production in CD4(+)
T cells in EAE mice. Regulation of IFN-gamma by BM had profound anti-inflammatory
actions through its effect on both CD4(+) T cells and APCs. BM-treated APCs
exhibited reduced stimulatory function as a result of altered expression of
PD-L1, CD80, and CD86 in treated mice. The treatment effect of BM in EAE was
directly related to its action on IFN-gamma, and was abolished in IFN-gamma
knockout mice. The study also confirmed that BM was able to inhibit NFAT
translocation through effecting calcium mobilization in lymphocytes. However,
this effect was not directly responsible for the treatment efficacy of BM in EAE.
The study has important implications in our approaches to evaluating the utility 
of natural compounds in drug discovery and to probing the role of cytokine
network in the development of autoimmune conditions.

PMID: 18606704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 8;105(27):9238-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0802130105. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates the partitioning of STAT1 between different
dimer conformations.

Wenta N(1), Strauss H, Meyer S, Vinkemeier U.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Nottingham University Medical School,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, United Kingdom.

The activation/inactivation cycle of STAT transcription factors entails their
transition between different dimer conformations. Unphosphorylated STATs can
dimerize in an antiparallel conformation via extended interfaces of the globular 
N-domains, whereas STAT activation triggers a parallel dimer conformation with
mutual phosphortyrosine:SH2 domain interactions, resulting in DNA-binding and
nuclear retention. However, despite the crucial role of STAT tyrosine
phosphorylation in cytokine signaling, it has not been determined how this
modification affects the stability and the conformational flexibility of STAT
dimers. Here, we use analytical ultracentrifugation and electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay (EMSA) to study the association of STAT1 in solution before and after
tyrosine phosphorylation. It is revealed that STAT1 formed high-affinity dimers
(K(d) of approximately 50 nM) with estimated half-lives of 20-40 min irrespective
of the phosphorylation status. Our results demonstrate that parallel and
antiparallel conformations of STAT1 were present simultaneously, supported by
mutually exclusive interfaces; and the transition between conformations occurred 
through affinity-driven dissociation/association reactions. Therefore, tyrosine
phosphorylation was dispensable for DNA binding, but the phosphorylation enforced
preformed SH2 domain-mediated dimers, thus enhancing the DNA-binding activity of 
STAT1 >200-fold. Moreover, upon STAT1 activation the N-domains adopted an open
conformation and engaged in interdimer interactions, as demonstrated by their
participation in tetramerization instead of dimerization. Yet, homotypic N-domain
interactions are not conserved in the STAT family, because the N-domain
dissociation constants of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4 differed by more than three
orders of magnitude. In conclusion, STAT1 constantly oscillated between different
dimer conformations, whereby the abundance of the dimerization interfaces was
determined by tyrosine phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC2453697
PMID: 18591661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Sep 15;17(18):2868-76. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn184. Epub 2008 Jun
25.

A risk haplotype of STAT4 for systemic lupus erythematosus is over-expressed,
correlates with anti-dsDNA and shows additive effects with two risk alleles of
IRF5.

Sigurdsson S(1), Nordmark G, Garnier S, Grundberg E, Kwan T, Nilsson O, Eloranta 
ML, Gunnarsson I, Svenungsson E, Sturfelt G, Bengtsson AA, Jönsen A, Truedsson L,
Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Eriksson C, Alm G, Göring HH, Pastinen T, Syvänen AC,
Rönnblom L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the prototype autoimmune disease where
genes regulated by type I interferon (IFN) are over-expressed and contribute to
the disease pathogenesis. Because signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) plays a key role in the type I IFN receptor signaling, we
performed a candidate gene study of a comprehensive set of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNPs) in STAT4 in Swedish patients with SLE. We found that 10 out
of 53 analyzed SNPs in STAT4 were associated with SLE, with the strongest signal 
of association (P = 7.1 x 10(-8)) for two perfectly linked SNPs rs10181656 and
rs7582694. The risk alleles of these 10 SNPs form a common risk haplotype for SLE
(P = 1.7 x 10(-5)). According to conditional logistic regression analysis the SNP
rs10181656 or rs7582694 accounts for all of the observed association signal. By
quantitative analysis of the allelic expression of STAT4 we found that the risk
allele of STAT4 was over-expressed in primary human cells of mesenchymal origin, 
but not in B-cells, and that the risk allele of STAT4 was over-expressed (P = 8.4
x 10(-5)) in cells carrying the risk haplotype for SLE compared with cells with a
non-risk haplotype. The risk allele of the SNP rs7582694 in STAT4 correlated to
production of anti-dsDNA (double-stranded DNA) antibodies and displayed a
multiplicatively increased, 1.82-fold risk of SLE with two independent risk
alleles of the IRF5 (interferon regulatory factor 5) gene.

PMCID: PMC2525501
PMID: 18579578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Jul;58(7):1974-80. doi: 10.1002/art.23549.

Association of STAT4 with rheumatoid arthritis: a replication study in three
European populations.

Orozco G(1), Alizadeh BZ, Delgado-Vega AM, González-Gay MA, Balsa A,
Pascual-Salcedo D, Fernández-Gutierrez B, González-Escribano MF, Petersson IF,
van Riel PL, Barrera P, Coenen MJ, Radstake TR, van Leeuwen MA, Wijmenga C,
Koeleman BP, Alarcón-Riquelme M, Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain.
gisela@ipb.csic.es

OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to investigate the previously reported
association of the STAT4 polymorphism rs7574865 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in
3 different European populations from Spain, Sweden, and The Netherlands,
comprising a total of 2,072 patients and 2,474 controls.
METHODS: Three different cohorts were included in the study: 923 RA patients and 
1,296 healthy controls from Spain, 273 RA patients and 285 healthy controls from 
Sweden, and 876 RA patients and 893 healthy controls from The Netherlands. DNA
from patients and controls was obtained from peripheral blood. Samples were
genotyped for the STAT4 single-nucleotide polymorphism rs7574865 using a TaqMan
5'-allele discrimination assay. The chi-square test was performed to compare
allele and genotype distributions. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
(95% CIs) were calculated.
RESULTS: We observed a significantly increased frequency of the minor T allele in
RA patients compared with healthy controls in the Spanish population (24.8%
versus 20.8%; P = 0.001, OR 1.26 [95% CI 1.09-1.45]). This association was
confirmed in both the Swedish population (P = 0.03, OR 1.35 [95% CI 1.03-1.77])
and the Dutch population (P = 0.03, OR 1.45 [95% CI 1.21-1.73]). The overall P
value for all 3 populations was 9.79 x 10(-6) (OR 1.25 [95% CI 1.13-1.37]). No
association between rs7574865 and the presence of rheumatoid factor or
anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide autoantibodies was observed. A meta-analysis of
all published STAT4 associations revealed an OR of 1.25 (95% CI 1.19-1.33) (P = 1
x 10(-5)).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate an association between the STAT4 polymorphism
rs7574865 and RA in 3 different populations, from Spain, Sweden, and The
Netherlands, thereby confirming previous data.

PMID: 18576336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Jul;58(7):1940-6. doi: 10.1002/art.23494.

Association of STAT4 with susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis and systemic
lupus erythematosus in the Japanese population.

Kobayashi S(1), Ikari K, Kaneko H, Kochi Y, Yamamoto K, Shimane K, Nakamura Y,
Toyama Y, Mochizuki T, Tsukahara S, Kawaguchi Y, Terai C, Hara M, Tomatsu T,
Yamanaka H, Horiuchi T, Tao K, Yasutomo K, Hamada D, Yasui N, Inoue H, Itakura M,
Okamoto H, Kamatani N, Momohara S.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: STAT4 encodes a transcriptional factor that transmits signals induced 
by several key cytokines, and it might be a key molecule in the development of
autoimmune diseases. Recently, a STAT4 haplotype was reported to be associated
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in
Caucasian populations. This was replicated in a Korean RA population.
Interestingly, the degree of risk of RA susceptibility with the STAT4 haplotype
was similar in the Caucasian and Korean populations. The present study was
undertaken to investigate the effect of STAT4 on susceptibility to RA and SLE in 
the Japanese.
METHODS: We performed an association study using 3 independent Japanese RA
case-control populations (total 3,567 cases and 2,199 controls) and 3 independent
Japanese SLE populations (total 591 cases). All samples were genotyped using the 
TaqMan fluorogenic 5' nuclease assay for single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs7574865, which tags the susceptibility haplotype. The association of the SNP
with disease susceptibility in each case-control study was calculated using
Fisher's exact test, and the results were combined, using the Mantel-Haenszel
method, to obtain combined odds ratios (ORs).
RESULTS: We observed a significant association of the STAT4 polymorphism with
susceptibility to both RA and SLE. The combined ORs for RA and SLE, respectively,
were 1.27 (P = 8.4 x 10(-9)) and 1.61 (P = 2.1 x 10(-11)) for allele frequency
distribution; these ORs were quite similar to those previously observed in the
Caucasian population.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that STAT4 is associated with RA and SLE in the Japanese.
Our results indicate that STAT4 is a common genetic risk factor for autoimmune
diseases, with similar strength across major racial groups.

PMID: 18576330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Immunity. 2008 Jun;28(6):763-73. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.04.016.

Janus-kinase-3-dependent signals induce chromatin remodeling at the Ifng locus
during T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Shi M(1), Lin TH, Appell KC, Berg LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2008 Jun;28(6):725-7.

Differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into T helper type 1 (Th1) effector cells
requires both T cell receptor (TCR) signaling and cytokines such as
interleukin-12 and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma). Here, we report that a third
cytokine signal, mediated by the Janus family tyrosine kinase 3 (Jak3) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) pathway, is also required for
Th1 cell differentiation. In the absence of Jak3-dependent signals, naive CD4+ T 
cells proliferate robustly but produce little IFN-gamma after Th1 cell
polarization in vitro. This defect is not due to reduced activation of STAT1 or
STAT4 or to impaired upregulation of the transcription factor T-bet. Instead, we 
find that T-bet binding to the Ifng promoter is greatly diminished in the absence
of Jak3-dependent signals, correlating with a decrease in Ifng promoter
accessibility and histone acetylation. These data indicate that Jak3 regulates
epigenetic modification and chromatin remodeling of the Ifng locus during Th1
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2587400
PMID: 18549798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Immunology. 2008 Aug;124(4):453-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2007.02796.x. Epub
2008 Jun 28.

Massive interleukin-12-induced interferon-gamma production by
interleukin-15-stimulated lamina propria lymphocytes followed by down-regulation 
of the interleukin-12 receptor.

Ebert EC(1), Jabri B.

Author information: 
(1)UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.
jeydels@yahoo.com

The intestinal mucosal immune response must differentiate between harmless
foreign antigens and pathogens, a distinction that may depend upon changes in the
cytokine milieu. A key cytokine in the adaptive immune response is interleukin-12
(IL-12), secreted by antigen-presenting cells (APC) immediately after encounter
with a pathogen. IL-12 is important in the priming and polarization of naïve T
cells. Here, we show that IL-12 and IL-15 direct human intestinal lamina propria 
lymphocytes (LPL) in the absence of T-cell receptor engagement to secrete
extremely high amounts of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), greater than with any
other stimulus. The functional synergy of IL-12 with IL-15 surprisingly operates 
independently of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1),
STAT3, STAT4, or STAT5 phosphorylation and occurs during transcription.
Four-colour immunofluorescence showed that IL-12 receptor beta1 is found on the
CD4+ T cells expressing intracytoplasmic IFN-gamma. Importantly, IL-12 receptors 
beta1 and beta2 are not up-regulated by IL-12, unlike findings using
antigen-specific T cells, and are lost over time. This study demonstrates the
early and massive IFN-gamma response of LPL to IL-12 and IL-15, providing the
tools to deal with a pathogen. The down-regulation of IL-12 receptors may curtail
any excess damaging inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2492953
PMID: 18540964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Lab Invest. 2008 Aug;88(8):856-64. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.51. Epub 2008 Jun 
2.

Stat4 suppresses the proliferation of connective tissue-type mast cells.

Kataoka TR(1), Nishizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School/Graduate School of Frontier
Bioscience, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Mast cells are the progeny of hematopoietic stem cells, and murine mast cells are
usually divided into two distinct populations, mucosal mast cells (MMCs) and
connective tissue-type mast cells (CTMCs). We previously reported that CTMCs
expressed signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 4, but MMCs did
not. Stat4 is also expressed in T cells and plays important roles in their
homeostasis. In the present study, we show that Stat4 is involved in the
homeostasis of CTMCs. The number of skin CTMCs increased in Stat4-deficient
Balb/c mice, but that of gastric MMCs did not, when compared to those in control 
Balb/c(+/+) mice. The comparison between cultured Stat4-deficient CTMCs and
cultured Balb/c(+/+) CTMCs revealed that cell cycle progression and cyclin D3
expression in the cultured Stat4-deficient CTMCs were enhanced in a Stat3
activation-dependent manner. This phenotype was explained by upregulation of
KitL-induced interleukin (IL)-6 acting in an autocrine manner in cultured
Stat4-deficient CTMCs. These results show that Stat4 suppresses the proliferation
of CTMCs by controlling IL-6 via an autocrine mechanism.

PMID: 18521064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS Genet. 2008 May 30;4(5):e1000084. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000084.

Specificity of the STAT4 genetic association for severe disease manifestations of
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Taylor KE(1), Remmers EF, Lee AT, Ortmann WA, Plenge RM, Tian C, Chung SA,
Nititham J, Hom G, Kao AH, Demirci FY, Kamboh MI, Petri M, Manzi S, Kastner DL,
Seldin MF, Gregersen PK, Behrens TW, Criswell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis, University of
California San Francisco, California, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a genetically complex disease with
heterogeneous clinical manifestations. A polymorphism in the STAT4 gene has
recently been established as a risk factor for SLE, but the relationship with
specific SLE subphenotypes has not been studied. We studied 137 SNPs in the STAT4
region genotyped in 4 independent SLE case series (total n = 1398) and 2560
healthy controls, along with clinical data for the cases. Using conditional
testing, we confirmed the most significant STAT4 haplotype for SLE risk. We then 
studied a SNP marking this haplotype for association with specific SLE
subphenotypes, including autoantibody production, nephritis, arthritis,
mucocutaneous manifestations, and age at diagnosis. To prevent possible type-I
errors from population stratification, we reanalyzed the data using a subset of
subjects determined to be most homogeneous based on principal components analysis
of genome-wide data. We confirmed that four SNPs in very high LD (r(2) = 0.94 to 
0.99) were most strongly associated with SLE, and there was no compelling
evidence for additional SLE risk loci in the STAT4 region. SNP rs7574865 marking 
this haplotype had a minor allele frequency (MAF) = 31.1% in SLE cases compared
with 22.5% in controls (OR = 1.56, p = 10(-16)). This SNP was more strongly
associated with SLE characterized by double-stranded DNA autoantibodies (MAF =
35.1%, OR = 1.86, p<10(-19)), nephritis (MAF = 34.3%, OR = 1.80, p<10(-11)), and 
age at diagnosis<30 years (MAF = 33.8%, OR = 1.77, p<10(-13)). An association
with severe nephritis was even more striking (MAF = 39.2%, OR = 2.35, p<10(-4) in
the homogeneous subset of subjects). In contrast, STAT4 was less strongly
associated with oral ulcers, a manifestation associated with milder disease. We
conclude that this common polymorphism of STAT4 contributes to the phenotypic
heterogeneity of SLE, predisposing specifically to more severe disease.

PMCID: PMC2377340
PMID: 18516230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Immunobiology. 2008;213(6):469-79. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2007.11.007. Epub 2008
Jan 2.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), but not IL-12
contributes to Pseudomonas aeruginosa-induced lung inflammation in mice.

O'Sullivan R(1), Carrigan SO, Marshall JS, Lin TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada B3K 6R8.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a major opportunistic pathogen in immune-compromised
individuals and cystic fibrosis patients. This organism stimulates a complex
inflammatory response in the lung, including production of various cytokines and 
chemokines. The specific contribution of these mediators in the host defense
against this bacterium has yet to be fully characterized. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) 
is commonly known as a master regulator of innate and adaptive immunity. IL-12
induces its biological effects through its associated intracellular signaling
molecule, the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). To
examine a specific role of IL-12 and STAT4 in P. aeruginosa lung infection in
mice, STAT4-deficient (STAT4-/-) and IL-12 p40-deficient (IL-12 p40-/-) mice were
infected with P. aeruginosa intranasally. Interestingly, STAT4-/- mice, but not
IL-12 p40-/- mice after 24h infection showed impaired production of the
pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1beta, and
macrophage-inflammatory protein-2. However, neither STAT4 nor IL-12 p40
deficiency significantly affected INFgamma production or bacterial clearance
compared to wild-type mice. Similarly, neutrophil recruitment was not affected in
the STAT4-/- and IL-12 p40-/- mice. These results suggest that STAT4 contributes 
to P. aeruginosa-induced inflammation, but it is not essential for bacterial
clearance. Although IL-12 is essential for the host defense against various
pathogens, this cytokine is likely not a major player in the host response to P. 
aeruginosa lung infection.

PMID: 18514749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Infect Immun. 2008 Aug;76(8):3651-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00358-08. Epub 2008 May 27.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IL-23 induction of substance p synthesis in murine T
cells and macrophages is subject to IL-10 and transforming growth factor beta
regulation.

Blum A(1), Setiawan T, Hang L, Stoyanoff K, Weinstock JV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology (233), Tufts New England Medical Center, Boston, 
MA 02111, USA.

Substance P is a tachykinin that enhances pathways of inflammation. Leukocytes at
sites of intestinal inflammation make substance P. This study explored the role
of interleukin-12 (IL-12), IL-23, and the regulatory cytokines IL-10 and
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) in controlling leukocyte substance P
production. In murine schistosomiasis, it was found that IL-12 and IL-23 drive
substance P gene expression and peptide synthesis in murine splenic T cells and
macrophages, respectively. Cytokine induction of substance P synthesis both in T 
cells and in macrophages depends on intracellular NF-kappaB activation and is
Stat4 independent. IL-10 inhibits T-cell substance P production, while TGF-beta
blocks macrophage substance P expression. Intestinal macrophages also produce
substance P, subject mostly to IL-23 and TGF-beta regulation. Hemokinin is
another tachykinin with homology to substance P. Macrophages and T cells make
hemokinin, but hemokinin production is not subject to IL-12 or IL-23 regulation.

PMCID: PMC2493212
PMID: 18505813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Aug;45(2):168-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.04.003. Epub
2008 Apr 18.

Suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides inhibit atherosclerosis in ApoE(-/-) mice
through modulation of Th1/Th2 balance.

Cheng X(1), Chen Y, Xie JJ, Yao R, Yu X, Liao MY, Ding YJ, Tang TT, Liao YH,
Cheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Immunology, Institute of Cardiology, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Aug;45(2):156-8.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease, which is positively and
negatively regulated by T helper (Th) 1 and Th2 lymphocytes, respectively. Recent
findings indicate that suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) expressing TTAGGG
motifs selectively reduce Th1 cytokine production and have been proven effective 
at blocking the development of organ-specific autoimmune diseases. In the current
research, we hypothesized that suppressive ODNs may alter the development of
atherosclerosis. Eight-week-old homozygous ApoE(-/-) male mice were injected with
300 mug ODNs A151 (TTAGGG) or nonspecific ODNs 1612. Atherosclerotic lesion sizes
were dramatically reduced by ODNs A151, but not by nonspecific ODNs. MCP-1 and
VCAM-1, which are the key inflammatory factors in atherogenesis, were
significantly attenuated by the suppressive ODNs A151. In the splenic
lymphocytes, FACS analysis showed ODNs A151 reduced the percentage of
IFN-gamma-producing Th1 cells and slightly increased the percentage of
IL-4-producing Th2 cells, indicating that suppressive ODNs skewed the Th1/Th2
balance toward Th2 inflammation in vivo. Furthermore, ODNs A151 down-regulated
the phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT4 and suppressed up-regulation of T-bet, a
signal modulator for Th1, and didn't impact GATA-3 and STAT6, which are
associated with a Th2 phenotype. Consistent with this in vivo observation, ELISA 
analysis demonstrated that ODNs A151 suppressed Th1 cytokines IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha, and augmented Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 in vitro. This study
provides the first experimental evidence that suppressive ODNs inhibit the
development of atherosclerosis through inhibition of the STAT1/4 and T-bet
pathways, which further modulate the Th1/Th2 balance in vivo.

PMID: 18502445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jul;84(1):224-33. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1007669. Epub 2008 May 2.

IL-2 triggers specific signaling pathways in human NKT cells leading to the
production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines.

Bessoles S(1), Fouret F, Dudal S, Besra GS, Sanchez F, Lafont V.

Author information: 
(1)Université Montpellier I, Centre d'étude d'agents Pathogènes et
Biotechnologies pour la Santé, CNRS UMR 5236, Montpellier, France.

NKT cells belong to a conserved T lymphocyte subgroup that has been implicated in
the regulation of various immune responses, including responses to viruses,
bacteria, and parasites. They express a semi-invariant TCR that recognizes
glycolipids presented by the nonpolymorphic MHC class I-like molecule CD1d, and
upon activation, they produce various pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines.
Recent studies have shed light on the nature of glycolipids and the environmental
signals that may influence the production of cytokines by NKT cells and thus,
modulate the immune response. To better understand the regulation mechanisms of
NKT cells, we explored their behavior following activation by IL-2 and
investigated the signaling pathways and biological responses triggered. We
demonstrated that IL-2 activates not only STAT3 and -5 and the PI-3K and ERK-2
pathways as in all IL-2 responder cells but also STAT4 as in NK cells and the p38
MAPK pathway as in alphabeta T cells. We also showed that STAT6 is activated by
IL-2 in NKT cells. Moreover, IL-2 induces the production of IFN-gamma and IL-4.
The ability of IL-2 to induce pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine production, in 
addition to proliferation, could open new therapeutic approaches for use in
combination with molecules that activate NKT cells through TCR activation.

PMID: 18456817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Immunol. 2008 May 15;180(10):6656-62.

Overlapping and distinct roles of STAT4 and T-bet in the regulation of T cell
differentiation and allergic airway inflammation.

Furuta S(1), Kagami S, Tamachi T, Ikeda K, Fujiwara M, Suto A, Hirose K, Watanabe
N, Saito Y, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University Hospital,
Chiba, Japan.

T-bet and STAT4 play critical roles in helper T cell differentiation, especially 
for Th1 cells. However, it is still unknown about the relative importance and
redundancy of T-bet and STAT4 for Th1 differentiation. It is also unknown about
their independent role of T-bet and STAT4 in the regulation of allergic airway
inflammation. In this study, we addressed these issues by comparing
T-bet-deficient (T-bet(-/-)) mice, STAT4(-/-) mice, and T-bet- and
STAT4-double-deficient (T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-)) mice on the same genetic
background. Th1 differentiation was severely decreased in T-bet(-/-) mice and
STAT4(-/-) mice as compared with that in wild-type mice, but Th1 differentiation 
was still observed in T-bet(-/-) mice and STAT4(-/-) mice. However, Th1 cells
were hardly detected in T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice. In contrast, the maintenance
of Th17 cells was enhanced in T-bet(-/-) mice but was reduced in STAT4(-/-) mice 
and T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice. In vivo, Ag-induced eosinophil and neutrophil
recruitment into the airways was enhanced in T-bet(-/-) mice but was attenuated
in STAT4(-/-) mice and T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice. Ag-induced IL-17 production in 
the airways was also diminished in STAT4(-/-) mice and T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice.
These results indicate that STAT4 not only plays an indispensable role in
T-bet-independent Th1 differentiation but also is involved in the maintenance of 
Th17 cells and the enhancement of allergic airway inflammation.

PMID: 18453585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Aug 1;17(15):2274-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn128. Epub 2008 Apr
22.

Re-evaluation of putative rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility genes in the
post-genome wide association study era and hypothesis of a key pathway underlying
susceptibility.

Barton A(1), Thomson W, Ke X, Eyre S, Hinks A, Bowes J, Gibbons L, Plant D;
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, Wilson AG, Marinou I, Morgan A, Emery P; 
YEAR consortium, Steer S, Hocking L, Reid DM, Wordsworth P, Harrison P,
Worthington J.

Collaborators: Burton PR, Clayton DG, Cardon LR, Craddock N, Deloukas P,
Duncanson A, Kwiatkowski DP, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Samani NJ, Todd JA,
Donnelly P, Barrett JC, Burton PR, Davison D, Donnelly P, Easton D, Evans D,
Leung HT, Marchini JL, Morris AP, Spencer CC, Tobin MD, Cardon LR, Clayton DG,
Attwood AP, Boorman JP, Cant B, Everson U, Hussey JM, Jolley JD, Knight AS, Koch 
K, Meech E, Nutland S, Prowse CV, Stevens HE, Taylor NC, Walters GR, Walker NM,
Watkins NA, Winzer T, Todd JA, Ouwehand WH, Jones RW, McArdle WL, Ring SM,
Strachan DP, Pembrey M, Breen G, St Clair D, Caesar S, Gordon-Smith K, Jones L,
Fraser C, Green EK, Groze D, Hamshere ML, Holmans PA, Jones IR, Kirov G, Moskvina
V, Nikolov I, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Craddock N, Collier DA, Elkin A, Farmer A,
Williamson R, McGuffin P, Young AH, Ferrier IN, Ball SG, Balmforth AJ, Barrett
JH, Bishop DT, Iles MM, Maqbool A, Yuldasheva N, Hall AS, Braund PS, Burton PR,
Dixon RJ, Mangino M, Stevens S, Tobin MD, Thompson JR, Samani NJ, Bredin F,
Tremelling M, Parkes M, Drummond H, Lees CW, Nimmo ER, Satsangi J, Fisher SA,
Forbes A, Lewis C, Onnie CM, Prescott NJ, Sanderson J, Mathew CG, Barbour J,
Mohiuddin MK, Todhunter CE, Mansfield JC, Ahmad T, Cummings FR, Jewell DP,
Webster J, Brown MJ, Clayton DG, Lathrop GM, Connell J, Dominiczak A, Samani NJ, 
Braga Marcano CA, Burke B, Dobson R, Gungadoo J, Lee KL, Munroe PB, Newhouse SJ, 
Onipinla A, Wallace C, Xue M, Caulfield M, Farrall M, Barton A, The Biologics in 
RA Genetics and Genomics Study Syndicate BRAGGS, Bruce IN, Donovan H, Eyre S,
Gilbert PD, Hider SL, Hinks AM, John SL, Potter C, Silman AJ, Symmons DP, Thomson
W, Worthington J, Clayton DG, Dunger DB, Nutland S, Stevens HE, Walker NM, Widmer
B, Todd JA, Frayling TM, Freathy RM, Lango H, Perry JR, Shields BM, Weedon MN,
Hattersley AT, Hitman GA, Walker M, Elliott KS, Groves CJ, Lindgren CM, Rayner
NW, Timpson NJ, Zeggini E, McCarthy MI, Newport M, Sirugo G, Lyons E, Vannberg F,
Hill AV, Bradbury LA, Farrar C, Pointon JJ, Wordsworth P, Brown MA, Franklyn JA, 
Heward JM, Simmonds MJ, Gough SC, Seal S, Breast Cancer Susceptibility
Collaboration, Stratton MR, Rahman N, Ban M, Goris A, Sawcer SJ, Compston A,
Conway D, Jallow M, Newport M, Sirugo G, Rockett KA, Kwiatkowski DP, Bumpstead
SJ, Chaney A, Downes K, Ghori MJ, Gwilliam R, Hunt SE, Inouye M, Keniry A, King
E, McGinnis R, Potters S, Ravindrarajah R, Whittaker P, Widden C, Withers D,
Deloukas P, Leung HT, Nutland S, Stevens HE, Walker NM, Todd JA, Easton D,
Clayton DG, Burton PR, Tobin MD, Barrett JC, Evans D, Morris AP, Cardon LR,
Cardin NJ, Davison D, Ferreira T, Pereira-Gale J, Hallgrimsdóttir IB, Howie BN,
Marchini JL, Spencer CC, Su Z, Teo YY, Vukcevic D, Donnelly P, Bentley D, Brown
MA, Cardon LR, Caulfield M, Clayton DG, Compston A, Craddock N, Deloukas P,
Donnelly P, Farrall M, Gough SC, Hall AS, Hattersley AT, Hill AV, Kwiatkowski DP,
Mathew CG, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Parkes M, Pembrey M, Rahman N, Samani NJ,
Stratton MR, Todd JA, Worthington J, Emery P, Conaghan P, Quinn M, Morgan A,
Keenan AM, Hensor E, Kitcheman J, Gough A, Green M, Reece R, Hordon L, Helliwell 
P, Melsom R, Doherty S, Adebajo A, Harvey A, Jarret S, Huson G, Isdale A, Martin 
M, Karim Z, McGonagle D, Pease C, Cox S, Bejarano V, Nam J, Brown C, Thomas C,
Pickles D, Hammond A, Neville B, Fairclough A, Nunns C, Gill A, Green J,
Rhys-Evans B, Padwell B, Madden J, Taylor L, Smith S, King H, Firth J, Heard J,
Sigsworth L, Corscadden D, Henshaw K, Rashid LH, Martin SG, Robinson JI.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an archetypal, common, complex autoimmune disease
with both genetic and environmental contributions to disease aetiology. Two novel
RA susceptibility loci have been reported from recent genome-wide and candidate
gene association studies. We, therefore, investigated the evidence for
association of the STAT4 and TRAF1/C5 loci with RA using imputed data from the
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC). No evidence for association of
variants mapping to the TRAF1/C5 gene was detected in the 1860 RA cases and 2930 
control samples tested in that study. Variants mapping to the STAT4 gene did show
evidence for association (rs7574865, P = 0.04). Given the association of the
TRAF1/C5 locus in two previous large case-control series from populations of
European descent and the evidence for association of the STAT4 locus in the WTCCC
study, single nucleotide polymorphisms mapping to these loci were tested for
association with RA in an independent UK series comprising DNA from >3000 cases
with disease and >3000 controls and a combined analysis including the WTCCC data 
was undertaken. We confirm association of the STAT4 and the TRAF1/C5 loci with RA
bringing to 5 the number of confirmed susceptibility loci. The effect sizes are
less than those reported previously but are likely to be a more accurate
reflection of the true effect size given the larger size of the cohort
investigated in the current study.

PMCID: PMC2465799
PMID: 18434327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Genes Immun. 2008 Jun;9(4):379-82. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.30. Epub 2008 Apr 24.

STAT4 but not TRAF1/C5 variants influence the risk of developing rheumatoid
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus in Colombians.

Palomino-Morales RJ(1), Rojas-Villarraga A, González CI, Ramírez G, Anaya JM,
Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina López-Neyra, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Granada, Spain.

The aim of this study was to determine the influence of STAT4 (rs7574865) and
TRAF1/C5 (rs10818488 and rs2900180) gene polymorphisms on the risk of developing 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in a Colombian
population. This was a case-control study in which 839 individuals with RA
(N=274) and SLE (N=144) and matched healthy controls (N=421) were included.
Genotyping was performed by using a polymerase chain reaction system with
pre-developed TaqMan allelic discrimination assay. STAT4 rs7574865T allele
disclosed a significant influence on the risk of developing SLE (P=0.0005; OR
1.62, 95% CI 1.22-2.16) and RA (P=0.008; OR 1.36; 95% CI 1.08-1.71), whereas no
effect on these autoimmune diseases was observed for the TRAF1/C5 polymorphisms
examined. Our data strengthen STAT4 rs7574865 polymorphism as a susceptibility
factor for RA and SLE and provide further evidence for a common origin of
autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 18432273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jul 15;17(14):2190-5. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn118. Epub 2008 Apr 
15.

A functional promoter variant in IL12B predisposes to cerebral malaria.

Marquet S(1), Doumbo O, Cabantous S, Poudiougou B, Argiro L, Safeukui I, Konate
S, Sissoko S, Chevereau E, Traore A, Keita MM, Chevillard C, Abel L, Dessein AJ.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR906, Genetics and Immunology of Parasitic Diseases, Marseille
F-13005, France. sandrine.marquet@univmed.fr

The role of the Th1 pathway in the pathogenesis of severe malaria is unclear. We 
recently reported that a polymorphism with increasing IFNG transcription is
associated with protection against cerebral malaria (CM). Interleukin-12 is
required for Th1 cell differentiation, which is characterized by the production
of interferon-gamma. We investigated 21 markers in IL12-related genes, including 
IL12A and IL12B encoding the two IL-12 (IL12p70) subunits, IL12p35 and IL12p40.
We performed a family-based association study using a total sample set of 240
nuclear families. The IL12Bpro polymorphism was associated with susceptibility to
CM. The CTCTAA allele and the GC/CTCTAA genotype are over-transmitted to children
with CM (P = 0.0002 and 0.00002, respectively). We estimated the odds ratio to be
2.11 for risk of CM in heterozygous children [(95% confidence interval,
1.49-2.99); P < 0.0001]. Although the CTCTAA allele had a dominant effect on CM
susceptibility, this effect is much stronger in heterozygous children, consistent
with the functional effects of this allele in a heterozygous form. Heterozygosity
for this polymorphism has been associated with reduced expression of the gene
encoding IL12p40 and a low level of IL12p70 production. These results, together
with the findings from immunological studies of low interferon-gamma and IL-12
levels in CM, support a protective role for the Th1 pathway in CM.

PMID: 18413324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Immun. 2008 Jun;9(4):316-27. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.20. Epub 2008 Apr 10.

Stat4-dependent, T-bet-independent regulation of IL-10 in NK cells.

Grant LR(1), Yao ZJ, Hedrich CM, Wang F, Moorthy A, Wilson K, Ranatunga D, Bream 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)W Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns
Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205-1901, 
USA.

Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is intensely studied, yet little is known about the
mechanisms that control IL-10 expression. We identified striking similarities
between IL-10 and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) regulation in mouse natural killer
(NK) cells. Like IFN-gamma, IL-10 expression is induced by IL-2 and IL-12 and
IL-2+IL-12 stimulation is synergistic. Unlike IFN-gamma, neither IL-18 nor Ly-49D
cross-linking induced IL-10 expression however. Additionally, the IL-12 homologs 
IL-23 and IL-27 also do not regulate NK cell-specific IL-10. We determined that a
small population of NK cells accounts for IL-10 production. The induction of
IL-10 by IL-2+IL-12 treatment in NK cells appears to be biphasic, with an initial
burst of expression which diminishes by 12 h but spikes again at 18 h. We
determined that much like IFN-gamma, Stat4 is largely required for IL-12-induced 
IL-10. Conversely, we observed normal induction of IL-10 in T-bet-deficient NK
cells. We identified a Stat4-binding element in the fourth intron of the Il10
gene, which is completely conserved between mouse and human. This intronic Stat4 
motif is within a conserved noncoding sequence, which is also a target for
cytokine-induced histone acetylation. These findings highlight tissue- and
receptor-specific IL-10 regulatory mechanisms, which may be part of an early
feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC2689787
PMID: 18401353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nat Med. 2008 Apr;14(4):437-41. doi: 10.1038/nm1733. Epub 2008 Mar 16.

Interferon-gamma is a therapeutic target molecule for prevention of postoperative
adhesion formation.

Kosaka H(1), Yoshimoto T, Yoshimoto T, Fujimoto J, Nakanishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1, Mukogawa, Nishinomiya, 
Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Intestinal adhesions are bands of fibrous tissue that connect the loops of the
intestine to each other, to other abdominal organs or to the abdominal wall.
Fibrous tissue formation is regulated by the balance between plasminogen
activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) and tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA),
which reciprocally regulate fibrin deposition. Several components of the
inflammatory system, including cytokines, chemokines, cell adhesion molecules and
neuropeptide substance P, have been reported to participate in adhesion
formation. We have used cecal cauterization to develop a unique experimental
mouse model of intestinal adhesion. Mice developed severe intestinal adhesion
after this treatment. Adhesion development depended upon the interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 (STAT1)
system. Natural killer T (NKT) cell-deficient mice developed adhesion poorly,
whereas they developed severe adhesion after reconstitution with NKT cells from
wild-type mice, suggesting that NKT cell IFN-gamma production is indispensable
for adhesion formation. This response does not depend on STAT4, STAT6,
interleukin-12 (IL-12), IL-18, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, Toll-like receptor 4 
or myeloid differentiation factor-88-mediated signals. Wild-type mice increased
the ratio of PAI-1 to tPA after cecal cauterization, whereas Ifng(-/-) or
Stat1(-/-) mice did not, suggesting that IFN-gamma has a crucial role in the
differential regulation of PAI-1 and tPA. Additionally, hepatocyte growth factor,
a potent mitogenic factor for hepatocytes, strongly inhibited intestinal adhesion
by diminishing IFN-gamma production, providing a potential new way to prevent
postoperative adhesions.

PMID: 18345012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2007 Dec;67(4):229-33.

Contribution of bronchial biopsies in the evaluation of pathogenesis and
progression of COPD.

Magno F(1), Di Stefano A.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Palermo, Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale,
Sezione Anatomia Umana, Via del Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
francymagno@libero.it

This review summarizes and discusses the lung pathology of COPD patients
emphasising on inflammatory cell phenotypes and mechanisms which prevail in
different clinical conditions. In bronchial biopsies a series of events takes
place during the progression of the disease from mild to severe. T-lymphocytes,
particularly CD8+ cells and macrophages are the prevalent inflammatory cells in
the lungs of healthy smokers and patients with mild/moderate COPD. This T-cell
activation seems to be sustained by CD4+, CD8+ cells and macrophages expressing
transcription factors and Tc1 cytokines such as NF-kB, STAT4 and IFNgamma. In
contrast, severe disease is characterized by lymphocytes producing greater
amounts of TGF-beta1 and by an increase of nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity and
activated neutrophils, macrophages and MPO+ cells. However, the mechanisms
involved in neutrophilic migration and adhesion are currently under
investigation. Recent data has shown that in severe COPD there is an impaired
neutrophil capability to respond to chemotactic stimuli, as well as an increased 
collagen adhesion of neutrophils due to the up-regulation of CD44 and CD11b
receptors. This data together, may account for the increased neutrophilia
observed in the severe disease states of COPD. In this context, insights obtained
from the tissutal analysis of bronchial biopsies represent an irreplaceable route
to further progresses in to the pathogenesis of this disease.

PMID: 18309701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2008 Mar;233(3):344-55. doi: 10.3181/0707-RM-203.

Cytokine and chemokine expression associated with steatohepatitis and hepatocyte 
proliferation in rats fed ethanol via total enteral nutrition.

Ronis MJ(1), Butura A, Korourian S, Shankar K, Simpson P, Badeaux J, Albano E,
Ingelman-Sundberg M, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, 1120 Marshall Street, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. RonisMartinJ@uams.edu

To determine the temporal relationship between alcohol-induced changes in
cytokines and chemokines, development of liver pathology and stimulation of
hepatocyte proliferation, male Sprague-Dawley rats were intragastrically fed low 
carbohydrate-containing ethanol (EtOH) diets via total enteral nutrition (TEN)
for up to 49 d. Induction of EtOH metabolism and appearance of steatosis preceded
development of oxidative stress, inflammation, and cell death. A transitory peak 
of tumor necrosis factor (TNFalpha) and interferon gamma (IFN gamma) was observed
at 14 d followed by reduced expression of TNFalpha, IFN gamma and another Th1
cytokine IL-12 accompanied by reduced expression of the Th1 regulators T-bet and 
STAT4. After 35-49 d of EtOH, at a time when hepatocyte proliferation was
stimulated, IL-12 returned to control values and a second peak of TNFalpha
occurred. The Th2 cytokine IL-4 remained suppressed throughout the study and was 
accompanied by reductions in the Th2 regulator GATA3. There was no temporal
effect of EtOH on expression of IL-6 or TGFbeta. IL-5 and IL-13 mRNA were
undetectable. Chemokine CXCL-2 expression increased progressively up to 35 d and 
preceded the appearance of inflammatory infiltrates. These data suggest that
steatosis, increased ethanol metabolism, a transient induction of the innate
immune response and suppression of Th2 responses were acute consequences of
ethanol treatment and were followed by suppression of Th1 responses. However, the
majority of necrosis, apoptosis and a late peak of TNFalpha only occurred after
6-7 weeks of ethanol, coincided with the appearance of inflammatory infiltrates
and were associated with stimulation of hepatocyte proliferation.

PMID: 18296740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 4;105(9):3497-502. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712102105. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

Notch regulates IL-10 production by T helper 1 cells.

Rutz S(1), Janke M, Kassner N, Hohnstein T, Krueger M, Scheffold A.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.

T helper 1 (Th1) cells mediate powerful cellular immune responses. However, if
unbalanced, Th1 immunity eventually may cause pathology. Recently, it has been
shown that IL-10, an antiinflammatory cytokine strongly antagonizing Th1-mediated
effects, can be produced by Th1 cells and is indeed essential for self-regulation
of Th1 immunity. Here, we show that Notch induces IL-10 production in newly
developing and already established Th1 cells via a signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4)-dependent process. Notch signaling in the
presence of the cytokines IL-12 or IL-27 induces Th1 cells to produce large
amounts of IL-10 without diminishing IFN-gamma production. Notch-modified Th1
cells completely lose their inflammatory capacity and instead are able to
actively suppress a Th1 cell-induced delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction
in an IL-10-dependent fashion. IL-10 production can be elicited by active forms
of all four mammalian Notch receptors but was found to be specific for the
Delta-like family of Notch ligands. Dendritic cells (DC) selectively acquire
Delta-like 4 expression upon stimulation with various Toll-like receptor (TLR)
ligands and concomitantly induce IL-10 production by Th1 cells in vitro and in
vivo. This effect can be selectively reversed by pharmacological inhibitors of
Notch signaling (gamma-secretase inhibitor). Our data suggest that Notch
regulates IL-10 production in Th1 cells by a STAT4-dependent process that
converts proinflammatory Th1 cells into T cells with regulatory activity. This
pathway may provide unique opportunities for therapeutic intervention in
Th1-driven immune diseases and for Th1-associated vaccination strategies.

PMCID: PMC2265185
PMID: 18292228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 May;312(1-2):17-24. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9716-6. Epub
2008 Feb 17.

Protein-DNA array-based identification of transcription factor activities
differentially regulated in skeletal muscle of normal and dystrophin-deficient
mdx mice.

Dogra C(1), Srivastava DS, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Disease Center, Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Veteren Affairs
Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA 92357, USA.

Inactivation of dystrophin gene is the primary cause of Duchenne muscular
dystrophy (DMD) in humans and mdx mice. However, the underpinning mechanisms,
which govern the pathogenesis of dystrophin-deficient skeletal muscle, remain
poorly understood. We have previously reported activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK), nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB), and
phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) signaling pathways in diaphragm
muscle of mdx mice. In this study, using a protein-DNA array-based approach, we
have investigated the activation of 345 transcription factors in diaphragm muscle
of 6-week old normal and dystrophin-deficient mdx mice. Our data demonstrate
increased activation of a number nuclear transcription factors including AP1,
HFH-3, PPARalpha, c.myb BP, ETF, Fra-1/JUN, kBF-A, N-rasBP, lactoferrin BP,
Myb(2), EBP40_45, EKLF(1), p53(2), TFEB, Myc-Max; c-Rel; E2, ISRE; NF-kB; Stat1
p84/p91, Antioxidant RE, EVI-1, Stat3, AP3, p53, Stat4, AP4, HFH-1, FAST-1,
Pax-5, and Beta-RE in the diaphragm muscle of mdx mice compared to corresponding 
normal mice. The level of activation for p53 was highest among all the
transcription factors studied. Furthermore, higher activation of p53 in diaphragm
muscle of mdx mice was associated with its increased phosphorylation and nuclear 
translocation. Collectively, our data suggest that the primary deficiency of
dystrophin leads to the aberrant activation of nuclear transcription factors
which might further contribute to muscle pathogenesis in mdx mice.

PMCID: PMC2785438
PMID: 18278580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genes Immun. 2008 Apr;9(3):267-70. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.1. Epub 2008 Feb 14.

Variant form of STAT4 is associated with primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Korman BD(1), Alba MI, Le JM, Alevizos I, Smith JA, Nikolov NP, Kastner DL,
Remmers EF, Illei GG.

Author information: 
(1)Complex Disease Genetics Unit, Genetics and Genomics Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal, and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the STAT4 gene have recently been shown to be 
associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) is a related autoimmune disease thought to have 
a pathogenesis similar to these diseases. To test the hypothesis that the variant
haplotype of STAT4 seen in RA and SLE is also associated with pSS, we genotyped
rs7574865, the most strongly disease-associated SNP in the variant STAT4
haplotype, in 124 Caucasian pSS subjects and compared them to 1143 Caucasian
controls. The disease-associated T allele was more common in chromosomes of the
pSS patients (29.6%) than in controls (22.3%), leading to a P-value for
association of 0.01. These results implicate polymorphisms in the STAT4 gene in
the pathogenesis of pSS.

PMID: 18273036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2008 Feb 13;3(2):e1576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001576.

HLA-DR alpha 2 mediates negative signalling via binding to Tirc7 leading to
anti-inflammatory and apoptotic effects in lymphocytes in vitro and in vivo.

Bulwin GC(1), Wälter S, Schlawinsky M, Heinemann T, Schulze A, Höhne W, Krause G,
Kalka-Moll W, Fraser P, Volk HD, Löhler J, Milford EL, Utku N.

Author information: 
(1)CellAct Pharma GmbH, Berlin, Germany.

Classically, HLA-DR expressed on antigen presenting cells (APC) initiates
lymphocyte activation via presentation of peptides to TCR bearing CD4+ T-Cells.
Here we demonstrate that HLA-DR alpha 2 domain (sHLA-DRalpha2) also induces
negative signals by engaging TIRC7 on lymphocytes. This interaction inhibits
proliferation and induces apoptosis in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells via activation of
the intrinsic pathway. Proliferation inhibition is associated with SHP-1
recruitment by TIRC7, decreased phosphorylation of STAT4, TCR-zeta chain & ZAP70,
and inhibition of IFN-gamma and FasL expression. HLA-DRalpha2 and TIRC7
co-localize at the APC-T cell interaction site. Triggering HLA-DR - TIRC7 pathway
demonstrates that sHLA-DRalpha2 treatment inhibits proinflammatory-inflammatory
cytokine expression in APC & T cells after lipopolysaccaride (LPS) stimulation in
vitro and induces apoptosis in vivo. These results suggest a novel
antiproliferative role for HLA-DR mediated via TIRC7, revise the notion of an
exclusive stimulatory interaction of HLA-DR with CD4+ T cells and highlights a
novel physiologically relevant regulatory pathway.

PMCID: PMC2217592
PMID: 18270567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 May;83(5):1267-76. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1107745. Epub 2008 Feb 8.

Natural killer cells from protein kinase C theta-/- mice stimulated with
interleukin-12 are deficient in production of interferon-gamma.

Page KM(1), Chaudhary D, Goldman SJ, Kasaian MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Protein kinase C theta (PKCtheta) is expressed in NK cells, but its functional
role has not been defined. Here, we demonstrate involvement of PKCtheta in
IL-12-induced NK cell IFN-gamma production. NK cells from PKCtheta(-/-) mice
produced less IFN-gamma in response to IL-12 than those from wild-type (WT) mice.
IL-12-induced NK cell cytotoxicity was unaffected, and NK cells from
PKCtheta(-/-) mice did not display reduced IFN-gamma production in response to
IL-18, indicating a specific role for PKCtheta in IL-12-induced IFN-gamma
production. Under the conditions tested, T cells did not produce IFN-gamma in
response to IL-12 or affect the ability of NK cells to produce the cytokine.
PKCtheta deficiency did not affect NK cell numbers, granularity, viability, or
cytotoxic activity in response to polyinosinic:polycytydylic acid. NK cells from 
PKCtheta(-/-) mice exhibited normal expression of IL-12Rbeta1 and STAT4 proteins 
and normal induction of STAT4 phosphorylation in response to IL-12.
Phosphorylation of threonine 538 within the catalytic domain of PKCtheta was
detectable in NK cells from WT mice but was not enhanced by IL-12. Transcription 
of IFN-gamma increased similarly in NK cells from WT and PKCtheta(-/-) mice in
response to IL-12, and there was no difference in IFN-gamma mRNA stability. Taken
together, these findings indicate a role for PKCtheta in the post-transcriptional
regulation of IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production.

PMID: 18263766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Apr;47(4):399-402. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken005. 
Epub 2008 Feb 7.

Recent advances in the genetics of RA susceptibility.

Bowes J(1), Barton A.

Author information: 
(1)ARC-EU, Stopford Building, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
j.bowes@manchester.ac.uk

RA is a common autoimmune disease with a complex aetiology in which genetic and
environmental factors contribute to disease. The genetic component of RA is
largely undefined and, up until very recently, there were only two reproducible
associations. The strongest of these associations is of genes within the HLA
region, particularly the HLA-DRB1 gene. A second, more modest, association
identified has been of the protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor 22 (PTPN22) 
gene. Advances in genotyping technology have facilitated the application of whole
genome association approaches to identify disease causal variants. This, coupled 
with the availability of large case and control collections has enabled the
identification of low-to-moderate risk loci. These newer study designs combined
with traditional linkage and association studies have accelerated the
identification of novel risk loci. The past few months alone have witnessed the
identification of three new RA risk loci. In this review, we aim to give an
update on recent progress in RA genetics, focusing mainly on the identification
of novel loci.

PMID: 18263596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 15;180(4):2140-8.

IL-12 is required for anti-OX40-mediated CD4 T cell survival.

Ruby CE(1), Montler R, Zheng R, Shu S, Weinberg AD.

Author information: 
(1)Earle A. Chiles Research Institute, Providence Portland Medical Center,
Portland, OR 97213, USA.

Engagement of OX40 greatly improves CD4 T cell function and survival. Previously,
we showed that both OX40 engagement and CTLA-4 blockade led to enhanced CD4 T
cell expansion, but only OX40 signaling increased survival. To identify pathways 
associated with OX40-mediated survival, the gene expression of Ag-activated CD4 T
cells isolated from mice treated with anti-OX40 and -CTLA-4 was compared. This
comparison revealed a potential role for IL-12 through increased expression of
the IL-12R-signaling subunit (IL-12Rbeta2) on T cells activated 3 days previously
with Ag and anti-OX40. The temporal expression of IL-12Rbeta2 on OX40-stimulated 
CD4 T cells was tightly regulated and peaked approximately 4-6 days after initial
activation/expansion, but before the beginning of T cell contraction. IL-12
signaling, during this window of IL-12Rbeta2 expression, was required for
enhanced T cell survival and survival was associated with STAT4-specific
signaling. The findings from these observations were exploited in several
different mouse tumor models where we found that the combination of anti-OX40 and
IL-12 showed synergistic therapeutic efficacy. These results may lead to the
elucidation of the molecular pathways involved with CD4 T cell survival that
contribute to improved memory, and understanding of these pathways could lead to 
greater efficacy of immune stimulatory Abs in tumor-bearing individuals.

PMID: 18250420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Apr;83(4):1009-18. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0807528. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Deletion of MyD88 markedly attenuates sepsis-induced T and B lymphocyte apoptosis
but worsens survival.

Peck-Palmer OM(1), Unsinger J, Chang KC, Davis CG, McDunn JE, Hotchkiss RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Laboratory and Genomic Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Sepsis induces widespread lymphocyte apoptosis, resulting in impaired immune
defenses and increased morbidity and mortality. There are multiple potential
triggers or signaling molecules involved in mediating death signals. Elucidating 
the specific signaling pathways that are involved in mediating lymphocyte
apoptosis may lead to improved therapies of this lethal disorder. We investigated
a number of key cellular receptors and intracellular signaling pathways that may 
be responsible for apoptotic cell death. Specifically, we investigated the role
of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (TLR2, TLR4, and IL-1R), intracellular 
signaling proteins (MyD88 and TRIF), cytoplasmic transcription factors (STAT1 and
STAT4), and the MAPK pathway (JNK1) in sepsis-induced lymphocyte apoptosis.
Studies were performed in the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model of sepsis
using specific gene-targeted deletions. CLP-induced lymphocyte apoptosis was
evaluated 20 h post-operation by active caspase-3 and TUNEL staining.
Surprisingly, the only genetic construct that ameliorated T and B lymphocyte
sepsis-induced apoptosis ( approximately 80% and 85%, respectively) occurred in
MyD88(-/-) mice. Despite the marked decrease in sepsis-induced apoptosis,
MyD88(-/-) mice had a worsened survival. In conclusion, lymphocyte death in
sepsis likely involves multiple pathogen-sensing receptors and redundant
signaling pathways. MyD88 was effective in blocking apoptosis, as it is essential
in mediating most pathogen recognition pathways; however, MyD88 is also critical 
for host survival in a model of severe peritonitis.

PMID: 18211965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Oct;45(10):727-31.

[Effect of Radix Astragali on signal transducer and activator of transcription
activator-4 and its mRNA expression in a rat model of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CC(1), Ye LP, Su MS, Li MR, Zhang HL, Cai XH, Dong L, Luo YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yuying Chidren's Hospital Affiliated to
Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325027, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of Radix Astragali (RA) on the expression of
signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 (STAT4) and its mRNA in the
bronchus of a rat model of asthma.
METHODS: Forty male SD rats were randomly divided into four groups: the control
group, asthma group, high dosage of RA group and low dosage of RA group. In the
experiment, the rat model of asthma was established by the ovalbumin (OVA)
challenge methods. The lung tissue was gainedfrom the left lung, bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid (BALF) was gained from the right lung. The eosinophils (EOS) numbers
and differentiated cell numbers in BALF were counted by different counting
fluids; the protein expressions of STAT4 were detected by immunohistochemistry;
the mRNA expressions of STAT4 were detected by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: (1) In the BALF of the asthma group, the absolute numbers of EOS, the
ratios of EOS to the total cell numbers (EOS%) of asthma group [(35.81 +/- 7.30) 
x 10(7)/L, (8. 20 +/- 1.75)%] were all significantly higher than those of the
control group [(1.51 +/- 1.04) x 10(7)/L, (0.70 +/- 0.48)%] (P < 0.01); the total
cell numbers in BALF, the absolute numbers of EOS and EOS% of RA groups [(14.89
+/- 2.35) x 10(7)/L, (4.70 +/- 0.82)%; (10.98 +/- 1.81) x 10(7)/L, (3.56 +/-
0.53)%] were all significantly lower than those of asthma group (P < 0.01); (2)
The concentration of IL-4 in BALF of asthma group (25.70 +/- 7.36) was
significantly higher than that of the control group (8.55 +/- 2.97) (P < 0.01);
the concentration of IL-4 of BALF of RA groups [(31.89 +/- 5.46), (35.26 +/-
6.03)] was significantly lower than that of asthma group (P < 0.01); the
concentration of IL-12 of BALF of asthma group (16.10 +/- 3.38) was significantly
lower than that of the control group (42.33 +/- 9.66) (P < 0.01); the
concentration of IL-12 of BALF of the RA groups [(31.89 +/- 5.46), (35.26 +/-
6.03)] was significantly higher than that of the asthma group (P < 0.01); (3)
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization showed that the protein content of
STAT4 and the STAT4 mRNA expression around the bronchus of asthma group [(0.096
+/- 0.012), (0.098 +/- 0.011)] were lower than those of the control group [(0.216
+/- 0.034), (0.228 +/- 0.032)], while those of RA groups [(0.176 +/- 0.012),
(0.185 +/- 0.023); (0.183 +/- 0.011), (0.201 +/- 0.019)] were all significantly
higher than that of the asthma group (P < 0.01), the airway smooth muscle cells, 
the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells were the chief
expression cells; (4) the STAT4 and the STAT4mRNA expression around the bronchus 
had positive correlation with the concentration of IL-12 in BALF while had
negative correlation with the concentration of IL-4, absolute numbers of EOS in
BALF.
CONCLUSIONS: RA has an inhibitory effect on airway inflammation cells
infiltration such as EOS, it raises the STAT4 protein and its mRNA expression in 
the airway smooth muscle cells, the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells and
endothelial cells, and the key mechanism may be that the IL-12 composition is
increased.

PMID: 18211752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nat Genet. 2008 Feb;40(2):204-10. doi: 10.1038/ng.81. Epub 2008 Jan 20.

Genome-wide association scan in women with systemic lupus erythematosus
identifies susceptibility variants in ITGAM, PXK, KIAA1542 and other loci.

International Consortium for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Genetics (SLEGEN)(1),
Harley JB, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Criswell LA, Jacob CO, Kimberly RP, Moser KL,
Tsao BP, Vyse TJ, Langefeld CD, Nath SK, Guthridge JM, Cobb BL, Mirel DB, Marion 
MC, Williams AH, Divers J, Wang W, Frank SG, Namjou B, Gabriel SB, Lee AT,
Gregersen PK, Behrens TW, Taylor KE, Fernando M, Zidovetzki R, Gaffney PM, Edberg
JC, Rioux JD, Ojwang JO, James JA, Merrill JT, Gilkeson GS, Seldin MF, Yin H,
Baechler EC, Li QZ, Wakeland EK, Bruner GR, Kaufman KM, Kelly JA.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma 73104, USA. SLEGEN@wfubmc.edu

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Feb;40(2):131-2.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a common systemic autoimmune disease with
complex etiology but strong clustering in families (lambda(S) = approximately
30). We performed a genome-wide association scan using 317,501 SNPs in 720 women 
of European ancestry with SLE and in 2,337 controls, and we genotyped
consistently associated SNPs in two additional independent sample sets totaling
1,846 affected women and 1,825 controls. Aside from the expected strong
association between SLE and the HLA region on chromosome 6p21 and the previously 
confirmed non-HLA locus IRF5 on chromosome 7q32, we found evidence of association
with replication (1.1 x 10(-7) < P(overall) < 1.6 x 10(-23); odds ratio =
0.82-1.62) in four regions: 16p11.2 (ITGAM), 11p15.5 (KIAA1542), 3p14.3 (PXK) and
1q25.1 (rs10798269). We also found evidence for association (P < 1 x 10(-5)) at
FCGR2A, PTPN22 and STAT4, regions previously associated with SLE and other
autoimmune diseases, as well as at > or =9 other loci (P < 2 x 10(-7)). Our
results show that numerous genes, some with known immune-related functions,
predispose to SLE.

PMCID: PMC3712260
PMID: 18204446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 28;358(9):900-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0707865. Epub 2008 Jan
20.

Association of systemic lupus erythematosus with C8orf13-BLK and ITGAM-ITGAX.

Hom G(1), Graham RR, Modrek B, Taylor KE, Ortmann W, Garnier S, Lee AT, Chung SA,
Ferreira RC, Pant PV, Ballinger DG, Kosoy R, Demirci FY, Kamboh MI, Kao AH, Tian 
C, Gunnarsson I, Bengtsson AA, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Petri M, Manzi S, Seldin MF,
Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC, Criswell LA, Gregersen PK, Behrens TW.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 28;358(9):956-61.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a clinically heterogeneous
disease in which the risk of disease is influenced by complex genetic and
environmental contributions. Alleles of HLA-DRB1, IRF5, and STAT4 are established
susceptibility genes; there is strong evidence for the existence of additional
risk loci.
METHODS: We genotyped more than 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
DNA samples from 1311 case subjects with SLE and 1783 control subjects; all
subjects were North Americans of European descent. Genotypes from 1557 additional
control subjects were obtained from public data repositories. We measured the
association between the SNPs and SLE after applying strict quality-control
filters to reduce technical artifacts and to correct for the presence of
population stratification. Replication of the top loci was performed in 793 case 
subjects and 857 control subjects from Sweden.
RESULTS: Genetic variation in the region upstream from the transcription
initiation site of the gene encoding B lymphoid tyrosine kinase (BLK) and C8orf13
(chromosome 8p23.1) was associated with disease risk in both the U.S. and Swedish
case-control series (rs13277113; odds ratio, 1.39; P=1x10(-10)) and also with
altered levels of messenger RNA in B-cell lines. In addition, variants on
chromosome 16p11.22, near the genes encoding integrin alpha M (ITGAM, or CD11b)
and integrin alpha X (ITGAX), were associated with SLE in the combined sample
(rs11574637; odds ratio, 1.33; P=3x10(-11)).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified and then confirmed through replication two new genetic
loci for SLE: a promoter-region allele associated with reduced expression of BLK 
and increased expression of C8orf13 and variants in the ITGAM-ITGAX region.

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 18204098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Gut. 2008 Apr;57(4):475-81. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.129296. Epub 2008 Jan 15.

Enterochromaffin cell and 5-hydroxytryptamine responses to the same infectious
agent differ in Th1 and Th2 dominant environments.

Motomura Y(1), Ghia JE, Wang H, Akiho H, El-Sharkawy RT, Collins M, Wan Y,
McLaughlin JT, Khan WI.

Author information: 
(1)Intestinal Diseases Research Program, Department of Medicine, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    Gut. 2008 Sep;57(9):1340.

BACKGROUND/AIM: 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) released from enterochromaffin cells
influences intestinal homeostasis by altering gut physiology and is implicated in
the pathophysiology of various gut disorders. The mechanisms regulating 5-HT
production in the gut remain unclear. This study investigated the T helper (Th)
1/Th2-based immunoregulation of enterochromaffin cell function and 5-HT
production in a model of enteric infection.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Trichuris muris-infected AKR (susceptible to infection and
generates Th1 response), BALB/c (resistant to infection and generates Th2
response), Stat4-deficient (impaired in Th1 response) and Stat6-deficient
(impaired in Th2 response) mice were investigated to assess enterochromaffin
cells, 5-HT and cytokines. In association with the generation of a Th2 response
we observed higher enterochromaffin cell numbers and 5-HT content in the colon of
BALB/c mice compared with AKR mice. Numbers of enterochromaffin cells and amount 
of 5-HT were significantly lower in Stat6-deficient mice after infection compared
with Stat4-deficient mice. In addition, enterochromaffin cell numbers and 5-HT
content were significantly higher after reconstitution of severe combined
immunodeficient mice with in-vitro polarised Th2 cells.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated that enterochromaffin cell and 5-HT responses 
to the same infectious agent are influenced by Th1 or Th2 cytokine predominance
and suggests that the immunological profile of the inflammatory response is
important in the regulation of enterochromaffin cell biology in the gut. In
addition to new data on enterochromaffin cell function in enteric infection and
inflammation, this study provides important information on the immuno-endocrine
axis in the gut, which may ultimately lead to improved strategies against gut
disorders.

PMID: 18198200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2007 Dec;30(6):419-27.

[Transcription factors that regulate helper T cell differentiation].

Usui T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Kyoto University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Antigen-specific CD4(+) helper T cell (Th cell) is a major player for
acquired-immunity. Th cell distribute in the peripheral tissues after educations 
and selections in the thymus. By stimulation from antigen presenting cell (APC), 
Th cell differentiate into at least three types of effector Th cells by the
cytokine environments and the kinds of co-stimulatory molecules on APC. One is
Th1 cell which produces IFN-gamma mainly, and another is Th2 cell which produces 
IL-4, 5 and 13 mainly, and finally recently defined Th17 cell which produces
IL-17 mainly, and these cells are charged with the a role for "cellular",
"hormoral" and "inflammatory" immunity respectively. IL-12, STAT4 and T-bet
signals are important for Th1 differentiation, and IL-4, STAT6 andGATA3 signals
are important for Th2 differentiation, and IL-1beta, TGF-beta, IL-6, IL-23,
STAT3, RORgammat signals are important for Th17 differentiation. This newly
defined Th17 cell clearly makes a big progress for understanding the
pathophysiology of many inflammatory conditions. In the near future, many
biologics or compounds that regulate the production or function of IL-17 will be 
produced aggressively.

PMID: 18174670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4173-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-01-068908. Epub 2008
Jan 3.

Colocalization of the IL-12 receptor and FcgammaRIIIa to natural killer cell
lipid rafts leads to activation of ERK and enhanced production of
interferon-gamma.

Kondadasula SV(1), Roda JM, Parihar R, Yu J, Lehman A, Caligiuri MA, Tridandapani
S, Burry RW, Carson WE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Human
Cancer Genetics program, The Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center and
Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):3911-2.

Natural killer (NK) cells express an activating receptor for the Fc portion of
IgG (FcgammaRIIIa) that mediates interferon (IFN)-gamma production in response to
antibody (Ab)-coated targets. We have previously demonstrated that NK cells
activated with interleukin-12 (IL-12) in the presence of immobilized IgG secrete 
10-fold or more higher levels of IFN-gamma as compared with stimulation with
either agent alone. We examined the intracellular signaling pathways responsible 
for this synergistic IFN-gamma production. NK cells costimulated via the FcR and 
the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) exhibited enhanced levels of activated STAT4 and Syk 
as compared with NK cells stimulated through either receptor alone. Extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) was also synergistically activated under these
conditions. Studies with specific chemical inhibitors revealed that the
activation of ERK was dependent on the activation of PI3-K, whose activation was 
dependent on Syk, and that sequential activation of these molecules was required 
for NK cell IFN-gamma production in response to FcR and IL-12 stimulation.
Retroviral transfection of ERK1 into primary human NK cells substantially
increased IFN-gamma production in response to immobilized IgG and IL-12, while
transfection of human NK cells with a dominant-negative ERK1 abrogated IFN-gamma 
production. Confocal microscopy and cellular fractionation experiments revealed
that FcgammaRIIIa and the IL-12R colocalized to areas of lipid raft microdomains 
in response to costimulation with IgG and IL-12. Chemical disruption of lipid
rafts inhibited ERK signaling in response to costimulation and significantly
inhibited IFN-gamma production. These data suggest that dual recruitment of
FcgammaRIIIa and the IL-12R to lipid raft microdomains allows for enhanced
activation of downstream signaling events that lead to IFN-gamma production.

PMCID: PMC2288725
PMID: 18174382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Clin Invest. 2008 Feb;118(2):742-51. doi: 10.1172/JCI32451.

The emerging role of T cell Ig mucin 1 in alloimmune responses in an experimental
mouse transplant model.

Ueno T(1), Habicht A, Clarkson MR, Albin MJ, Yamaura K, Boenisch O, Popoola J,
Wang Y, Yagita H, Akiba H, Ansari MJ, Yang J, Turka LA, Rothstein DM, Padera RF, 
Najafian N, Sayegh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Research Center, Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

T cell Ig mucin 1 (TIM-1) plays an important role in regulating immune responses 
in autoimmune and asthma models, and it is expressed on both Th1 and Th2 cells.
Using an antagonistic TIM-1-specific antibody, we studied the role of TIM-1 in
alloimmunity. A short course of TIM-1-specific antibody monotherapy prolonged
survival of fully MHC-mismatched vascularized mouse cardiac allografts. This
prolongation was associated with inhibition of alloreactive Th1 responses and
preservation of Th2 responses. TIM-1-specific antibody treatment was more
effective in Th1-type cytokine-deficient Stat4(-/-) recipients as compared with
Th2-type cytokine-deficient Stat6(-/-) recipients. Subtherapeutic doses of
rapamycin plus TIM-1-specific antibody resulted in allograft acceptance and
prevented the development of chronic allograft vasculopathy. Allograft survival
via this treatment was accompanied by a Th1- to Th2-type cytokine switch.
Depletion of natural Tregs abrogated the graft-protecting effect of the
TIM-1-specific antibody. Importantly, CD4(+)CD25(+) Tregs obtained from long-term
survivors had enhanced regulatory activity as compared with naive CD4(+)CD25(+)
Tregs. Consistent with this, TIM-1-specific antibody treatment both preserved
Tregs and prevented the expansion of alloreactive effector Th1 cells in an
alloreactive TCR transgenic adoptive transfer model. These studies define
previously unknown functions of TIM-1 in regulating alloimmune responses in vivo 
and may provide a novel approach to promoting transplantation tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2157561
PMID: 18172549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. ACS Chem Biol. 2007 Dec 21;2(12):799-809.

Rationally designed inhibitors identify STAT3 N-domain as a promising anticancer 
drug target.

Timofeeva OA(1), Gaponenko V, Lockett SJ, Tarasov SG, Jiang S, Michejda CJ,
Perantoni AO, Tarasova NI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
NCI-Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Activation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is
frequently detected in many cancer types. Activated STAT3 may participate in
oncogenesis by stimulating cell proliferation and resisting apoptosis, as well as
promoting tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and migration. Many STAT3-dependent
cellular responses are mediated through interactions with other proteins, and the
amino-terminal domain (N-domain) of STAT3 was proposed to be responsible for
this. Our NMR studies revealed that synthetic analogs of the STAT4 second
alpha-helix bind to the N-domain and perturb its structure. Structural data
available for the STAT4 N-domain was used for the rational design of STAT3 helix 
2 analogs with enhanced biological activity. Cell-permeable derivatives of the
STAT3 second helix were found to directly and specifically bind to STAT3 but not 
STAT1 as determined by FRET analysis in cells expressing GFP-STAT3 and GFP-STAT1.
Furthermore, they potently induced apoptotic death in breast cancer cells but not
normal breast cells or STAT3-deficient fibroblasts. The inhibitors caused
significant changes in the mitochondrial potential of cancer cells, leading to
cell death. These compounds not only are promising drug candidates but also offer
a convenient tool for studying the mechanisms of action of STAT transcription
factors and have facilitated our understanding of the crucial role of the
N-domain in STAT3 function.

PMID: 18154267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Immunol. 2008 Jan;9(1):9-10.

IRF1: a deus ex machina in TH1 differentiation.

Unutmaz D, Vilcek J.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2008 Jan;9(1):34-41.

PMID: 18087248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. N Engl J Med. 2007 Dec 13;357(24):2517-8; author reply 2518.

Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and STAT4.

Dagna L, Frontino G, Praderio L.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Sep 6;357(10):977-86.

PMID: 18077818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Mar;93(3):1077-81. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Interleukin (IL)-23 receptor is a major susceptibility gene for Graves'
ophthalmopathy: the IL-23/T-helper 17 axis extends to thyroid autoimmunity.

Huber AK(1), Jacobson EM, Jazdzewski K, Concepcion ES, Tomer Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Vontz Center, ML 0547, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, 3125 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.
huberak@uc.edu

CONTEXT: IL-23 and its receptor (IL-23R) guide T cells toward the T-helper 17
phenotype. IL-23R single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been associated
with several autoimmune diseases, including Crohn's disease and rheumatoid
arthritis.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to determine whether variants in the IL-23R gene are
associated with Graves' disease (GD) and Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO).
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: A total of 216 North American Caucasian GD patients and 
368 healthy controls were genotyped for four SNPs spanning the IL-23R gene. SNPs 
rs11209026 and rs7530511 were genotyped using the TaqMan allelic discrimination
assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), and SNPs rs2201841 and rs10889677
were genotyped using a fluorescent-based restriction fragment length polymorphism
method.
RESULTS: The A allele of rs2201841 was present in 78.8% of GD patients with GO
and 64.7% of controls [P=1.1x10(-4); odds ratio (OR)=2.04]; the AA genotype was
also significantly increased in GO patients compared with controls (62.5 and 41%,
respectively; P=1.0x10(-4); OR=2.4). The C allele of rs10889677 was present in
78.6% of GO patients and 64.5% of controls (P=1.3x10(-4); OR=2.03), and the CC
genotype was also significantly increased in GO patients vs. controls (62.1 and
41.0%, respectively; P=1.4x10(-4); OR=2.36). The TT genotype of rs7530511 was
significantly associated with GD, but not specifically with GO; it was present in
2.5% of GD patients and 0.3% of controls (P=0.02; OR=9.4). The rs11209026 SNP,
which is the most strongly associated with Crohn's disease, was not associated
with GD or GO in our data set.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the IL-23R gene are strongly associated with GO. These
variants may predispose to GO by changing the expression and/or function of
IL-23R, thereby promoting a proinflammatory signaling cascade.

PMCID: PMC2266952
PMID: 18073300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Biol Sci. 2007 Nov 20;3(7):455-62.

Adjuvant effect of anti-4-1BB mAb administration in adoptive T cell therapy of
cancer.

Li Q(1), Iuchi T, Jure-Kunkel MN, Chang AE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-5932, USA. qiaoli@umich.edu

Administration of anti-4-1BB mAb has been found to be a potent adjuvant when
combined with other therapeutic approaches, e.g. chemotherapy, cytokine
therapies, anti-OX40 therapy, and peptide or DC vaccines. However, the adjuvant
effect of anti-4-1BB mAb administration in adoptive T cell therapy of cancer has 
not been fully evaluated. In this report, effector T cells were generated in
vitro by anti-CD3/anti-CD28 activation of tumor-draining lymph node (TDLN) cells 
and used in an adoptive immunotherapy model. While T cells or anti-4-1BB alone
showed no therapeutic efficacy in mice bearing macroscopic 10-day pulmonary
metastases, T cells plus anti-4-1BB mediated significant tumor regression in an
anti-4-1BB dose dependent manner. Mice bearing microscopic 3-day lung metastases 
treated with T cells alone demonstrated tumor regression which was significantly 
enhanced by anti-4-1BB administration. NK cell depletion abrogated the augmented 
therapeutic efficacy rendered by anti-4-1BB. Cell transfer between congenic hosts
demonstrated that anti-4-1BB administration increased the survival of adoptively 
transferred TDLN cells. Using STAT4(-/-) mice, we found that modulated IFN gamma 
secretion in wt TDLN cells after anti-CD3/CD28/4-1BB activation in vitro was lost
in similarly stimulated STAT4(-/-) TDLN cells. Additionally, anti-4-1BB
administration failed to augment the therapeutic efficacy of T cell therapy in
STAT4(-/-) mice. Together, these results indicate that administered anti-4-1BB
mAb can serve as an effective adjuvant to augment the antitumor reactivity of
adoptively transferred T cells by recruiting the host NK cells; increasing the
persistence of infused effector T cells, and modulating the STAT4 molecular
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2096735
PMID: 18071585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Brain. 2008 Jan;131(Pt 1):288-303. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Normal-appearing white matter in multiple sclerosis is in a subtle balance
between inflammation and neuroprotection.

Zeis T(1), Graumann U, Reynolds R, Schaeren-Wiemers N.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology, Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Pharmacenter,
Basel, Switzerland.

Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the CNS. Although
progressive axonal injury and diffuse inflammatory damage has been shown in the
chronic phase of the disease, little is known about the molecular mechanisms
underlying these pathological processes. In order to identify these mechanisms,
we have studied the gene expression profile in non-lesion containing tissue, the 
so-called normal-appearing white matter (NAWM). We performed differential gene
expression analysis and quantitative RT-PCR on subcortical white matter from 11
multiple sclerosis and 8 control cases. Differentially expressed genes were
further analysed in detail by in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence
studies. We show that genes known to be involved in anti-inflammatory and
protective mechanisms such as STAT6, JAK1, IL-4R, IL-10, Chromogranin C and
Hif-1alpha are consistently upregulated in the multiple sclerosis NAWM. On the
other hand, genes involved in pro-inflammatory mechanisms, such as STAT4,
IL-1beta and MCSF, were also upregulated but less regularly. Immunofluorescence
colocalization analysis revealed expression of STAT6, JAK1, IL-4R and IL-13R
mainly in oligodendrocytes, whereas STAT4 expression was detected predominantly
in microglia. In line with these data, in situ hybridization analysis showed an
increased expression in multiple sclerosis NAWM of HIF-1alpha in oligodendrocytes
and HLA-DRalpha in microglia cells. The consistency of the expression levels of
STAT6, JAK1, JAK3 and IL-4R between the multiple sclerosis cases suggests an
overall activation of the STAT6-signalling pathway in oligodendrocytes, whereas
the expression of STAT4 and HLA-DRalpha indicates the activation of
pro-inflammatory pathways in microglia. The upregulation of genes involved in
anti-inflammatory mechanisms driven by oligodendrocytes may protect the CNS
environment and thus limit lesion formation, whereas the activation of
pro-inflammatory mechanisms in microglia may favour disease progression.
Altogether, our data suggests an endogenous inflammatory reaction throughout the 
whole white matter of multiple sclerosis brain, in which oligodendrocytes
actively participate. This reaction might further influence and to some extent
facilitate lesion formation.

PMID: 18056737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cell Immunol. 2007 Aug;248(2):115-20. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Increased expression and activation of IL-12-induced Stat4 signaling in the
mucosa of ulcerative colitis patients.

Pang YH(1), Zheng CQ, Yang XZ, Zhang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, The Capital
University of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100020, China.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), including Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative 
colitis (UC), are chronic inflammatory diseases with unsolved pathogenesis.
Imbalanced Th1/Th2 may play a role in the sustained inflammation of IBD. In
China, CD is rare but the incidence of UC has been rising steadily in the last
two decades. We investigated the expression of IL-12 (p40) and IFN-gamma, and the
activational state of Stat4 signaling in mucosal tissues at the site of disease
from 30 active UC patients in comparison with 30 healthy controls. RT-PCR
analyses revealed increased mRNA expression of IL-12 (p40) but not IFN-gamma in
UC patients. Western blot analyses discovered, for the first time, increased
levels of constitutive Stat4 in the cytoplasm and phosphorylated Stat4 in the
nucleus of mucosal cells from UC patients. We conclude that a heightened, perhaps
persistent, activational state of IL-12/Stat4, and/or IL-23/Stat4 signaling may
be present in active Chinese UC patients, and possibly involved in chronic
inflammation in UC.

PMID: 18048021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2007 Sep-Oct;25(5 Suppl 46):S4-11.

The central role of T cells in rheumatoid arthritis.

Cope AP(1), Schulze-Koops H, Aringer M.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
London, London, UK. andrew.cope@imperial.ac.uk

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is one of the most common chronic inflammatory
syndromes. As such, RA is often considered the prototype disease for defining
both the molecular and pathological basis of immune-mediated chronic inflammatory
disease, and for validating targeted therapies. The immunogenetics of RA suggest 
a key role for aberrant pathways of T-cell activation in the initiation and/or
perpetuation of disease. In the T-cell activation process, CD4+ T-cells are
engaged by antigenic peptide fragments in a complex with HLA class II molecules, 
in addition to co-stimulatory molecules, such as CD80/CD86, expressed on the
surface of professional antigen presenting cells. The strongest evidence
supporting a role for CD4+ T cells in disease pathogenesis is the association
between RA and HLA-DRB1; however, the functional role of this association has yet
to be defined. Susceptibility to RA may also be linked with several RA-associated
allelic variants of genes, especially PTPN22, but also CTLA4, IL2RA, IL-2RB,
STAT4, PTPN2 and PADI4, many of which encode molecules directly implicated in
pathways of T-cell activation.The presence of inflammatory infiltrates, such as
follicular structures, in the synovial membrane provides compelling evidence of
ongoing immune reactions in moderate to severe RA. These structures likely play a
key role in T cell - B cell cooperation and the local generation of specific
autoantibodies; as such, chronically activated synovial T cells represent key
cellular targets for therapy. Evidence also supports a role for T-helper (Th)
cells, Th17 cells, and impaired CD4+CD25(hi) regulatory T cell (Treg) function in
the pathogenesis of RA. In addition to discussing a range of issues regarding
T-cell activation in RA, this review describes how therapeutic modulation of
T-cell function, as opposed to profound immunosuppression or immunodepletion, has
been associated with better disease outcomes in clinical trials. Ultimately,
elucidation of the distinct effects of co-stimulation modulation with abatacept
on T cells should provide key insights into understanding how to restore immune
homeostasis in patients with RA.

PMID: 17977483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Comp Immunol. 2008;32(5):563-74. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Gene expression profiling of chicken lymphoid cells after treatment with
Lactobacillus acidophilus cellular components.

Brisbin JT(1), Zhou H, Gong J, Sabour P, Akbari MR, Haghighi HR, Yu H, Clarke A, 
Sarson AJ, Sharif S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

Lactobacillus acidophilus has been shown to exert immunostimulating activities in
a number of species, including the chicken. To examine the molecular mechanisms
of this phenomenon, we investigated spatial and temporal expression of immune
system genes in chicken cecal tonsil and spleen mononuclear cells in response to 
structural constituents of L. acidophilus. Using a low-density chicken immune
system microarray, we found that cecal tonsil cells responded more rapidly than
spleen cells to the bacterial stimuli, with the most potent stimulus for cecal
tonsil cells being DNA and for splenocytes being the bacterial cell wall
components. We also discovered that in both splenocytes and cecal tonsil cells,
STAT2 and STAT4 genes were highly induced. Given the close interactions between
cecal tonsil cells and commensal bacteria, we further examined the involvement of
STAT2 and STAT4 signaling pathways in cellular responses to bacterial DNA. Our
results revealed that the expression of STAT2, STAT4, IL-18, MyD88, IFN-alpha,
and IFN-gamma genes were up-regulated in cecal tonsil cells after treatment with 
L. acidophilus DNA.

PMID: 17981327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Cell Mol Med. 2007 Sep-Oct;11(5):1129-37.

Curcumin modulation of IFN-beta and IL-12 signalling and cytokine induction in
human T cells.

Fahey AJ(1), Adrian Robins R, Constantinescu CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Neurology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Curcumin is a polyphenol derived from the dietary spice turmeric. It possesses
diverse anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer properties. Curcumin has been shown to 
exhibit an inhibitory effect on the production of inflammatory cytokines by human
monocytes and has inhibited the animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS),
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in association with a decrease in
interleukin 12 (IL-12) production and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) activation. The type I interferon (IFN) IFN-has the
ability to suppress IL-12. Both IL-12 and IFN-alpha/beta signal through the
activation by phosphorylation of STAT4. Our aim was to investigate the effects of
curcumin on the ability of T cells to respond to IL-12 or IFN-alpha/beta. We
report that curcumin decreases IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation, IFN-gamma
production, and IL-12 Rbeta1 and beta2 expression. IFN-beta-induced STAT4
phosphorylation, IL-10 production and IFN receptor (IFNAR) subunits 1 and 2
expression were enhanced by curcumin. Curcumin increased IFN-alpha-induced IL-10 
and IFNAR1 expression. Prior exposure to curcumin decreased IFN-alpha-induced
IFNAR2 expression and did not modify the level of IFN-alpha-induced pSTAT4
generation. Thus, the effect of curcumin on STAT4 activation in T cells is
dependent upon the stimulus to which the T cells have been exposed.

PMCID: PMC4401279
PMID: 17979888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 13;104(46):18169-74. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Antagonistic nature of T helper 1/2 developmental programs in opposing peripheral
induction of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells.

Wei J(1), Duramad O, Perng OA, Reiner SL, Liu YJ, Qin FX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recent studies have highlighted the importance of peripheral induction of
Foxp3-expressing regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the dominant control of
immunological tolerance. However, Foxp3(+) Treg differentiation from naïve CD4(+)
T cells occurs only under selective conditions, whereas the classical T helper
(Th) 1 and 2 effector development often dominate T cell immune responses to
antigen stimulation in the periphery. The reason for such disparity remains
poorly understood. Here we report that Th1/Th2-polarizing cytokines can potently 
inhibit Foxp3(+) Treg differentiation from naïve CD4(+) precursors induced by
TGF-beta. Furthermore, antigen receptor-primed CD4(+) T cells are resistant to
Treg induction because of autocrine production of IFNgamma and/or IL-4, whereas
neutralizing IFNgamma and IL-4 not only can potentiate TGF-beta-mediated Foxp3
induction in vitro but can also enhance antigen-specific Foxp3(+) Treg
differentiation in vivo. Mechanistically, inhibition of Foxp3(+) Treg development
by Th1/Th2-polarizing cytokines involves the activation of Th1/Th2 lineage
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 through the canonical Stat1-, Stat4-, and 
Stat6-dependent pathways. Using IFNgamma and IL-4 knockouts and
retrovirus-mediated transduction of T-bet and GATA-3, we further demonstrate that
enforced expression of the Th1/Th2 lineage-specific transcription factors is
sufficient to block Foxp3 induction and Treg differentiation independent of the
polarizing/effector cytokines. Thus, our study has unraveled a previously
unrecognized mechanism of negative cross-regulation of Foxp3(+) Treg fate choice 
by Th1/Th2 lineage activities. In addition, these findings also provide an
attainable explanation for the general paucity of antigen-triggered de novo
generation of Foxp3(+) Tregs in the periphery.

PMCID: PMC2084315
PMID: 17978190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. FEBS Lett. 2007 Nov 13;581(27):5199-206. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

Contribution of IL-12R mediated feedback loop to Th1 cell differentiation.

Becskei A(1), Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse,
190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. attila.becskei@molbio.uzh.ch

T helper 1 (Th1) cell fate is induced by overlapping signaling pathways, whose
kinetic principles and regulatory motifs are largely unknown. We identified a
simple positive feedback loop in the STAT4 signaling pathway, whereby activation 
by IL-12 leads to the increased expression in IL-12 receptor. A computational
analysis shows that this feedback loop synergizes with the one mediated by the
IFN-gamma secreted by differentiating cells, when the induction of Th1 cell fate 
is weak. Positive feedback loops are often utilized to enhance phenotypic
differentiation. This effect was confirmed by experiments showing that stochastic
fluctuations in the expression of IL-12 receptor gene were amplified, leading to 
two discrete levels of expression in a cell population.

PMCID: PMC2757731
PMID: 17950290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Med. 2007 Sep-Oct;13(9-10):455-60.

Association of STAT4 with rheumatoid arthritis in the Korean population.

Lee HS(1), Remmers EF, Le JM, Kastner DL, Bae SC, Gregersen PK.

Author information: 
(1)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North Shore Long Island Jewish
Health System, Manhasset, New York 11030, USA.

A recent study in the North American White population has documented the
association of a common STAT4 haplotype (tagged by rs7574865) with risk for
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus. To replicate this
finding in the Korean population, we performed a case-control association study. 
We genotyped 67 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the STAT1 and STAT4
regions in 1123 Korean patients with RA and 1008 ethnicity-matched controls. The 
most significant four risk SNPs (rs11889341, rs7574865, rs8179673, and rs10181656
located within the third intron of STAT4) among 67 SNPs are identical with those 
in the North American study. All four SNPs have modest risk for RA susceptibility
(odds ratio 1.21-1.27). A common haplotype defined by these markers (TTCG)
carries significant risk for RA in Koreans [34 percent versus 28 percent,
P=0.0027, OR (95 percent CI)=1.33 (1.10-1.60)]. By logistic regression analysis, 
this haplotype is an independent risk factor in addition to the classical shared 
epitope alleles at the HLA-DRB1 locus. There were no significant associations
with age of disease onset, radiographic progression, or serologic status using
either allelic or haplotypic analysis. Unlike several other risk genes for RA
such as PTPN22, PADI4, and FCRL3, a haplotype of the STAT4 gene shows consistent 
association with RA susceptibility across Whites and Asians, suggesting that this
risk haplotype predates the divergence of the major racial groups.

PMCID: PMC2014726
PMID: 17932559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Dec;28(12):2560-6. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

Decreased 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced carcinogenesis coincides with
the induction of antitumor immunities in adult female B6C3F1 mice pretreated with
genistein.

Guo TL(1), Chi RP, Hernandez DM, Auttachoat W, Zheng JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298-0613, USA. tlguo@vcu.edu

The objective of this study was to determine if genistein (GEN) modulation of the
immune responses might contribute to the increased host resistances to tumors. A 
time-course study was performed in adult female B6C3F1 mice that had been exposed
to GEN for 1-4 weeks at the dose level of 20 mg/kg by gavage. A significant
increase in ex vivo cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity was observed in the
periods of 2 weeks and 4 weeks. Moreover, increased activities of CTLs were
associated with a decrease in the percentage of CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells and an
increase in the production of interferon-gamma and activation of STAT1 (signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1) and STAT4. Additionally, exposure of
mice to GEN increased the activities of in vivo CTLs. An increased activity of
natural killer (NK) cells was also observed. Further study in the B16F10 tumor
model suggested that GEN-mediated enhancement in host resistance to B16F10 tumor 
was partially related to its potentiating effect on NK cells. Finally,
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced tumor model was employed to
determine the chemopreventive effect of oral GEN treatment. Mice pretreated with 
GEN for 2 weeks by gavage, the time when an enhanced CTL activity had been
produced, had a decreased susceptibility toward DMBA-mediated carcinogenesis,
while treatment with GEN after tumor induction conferred no protection. In
conclusion, pretreatment with GEN by gavage could enhance host resistances to the
B16F10 tumor and DMBA-induced carcinogenesis, suggesting that GEN modulation of
immune response was, at least partially, responsible for the antitumor effect of 
this compound.

PMCID: PMC2239241
PMID: 17916904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Exp Med. 2007 Oct 1;204(10):2397-405. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

The PP2A inhibitor SET regulates natural killer cell IFN-gamma production.

Trotta R(1), Ciarlariello D, Dal Col J, Allard J 2nd, Neviani P, Santhanam R, Mao
H, Becknell B, Yu J, Ferketich AK, Thomas B, Modi A, Blaser BW, Perrotti D,
Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. rossana.trotta@osumc.edu

Monokines (i.e., interleukin [IL]-12, -18, and -15) induce natural killer (NK)
cells to produce interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), which is a critical factor for
immune surveillance of cancer and monocyte clearance of infection. We show that
SET, which is a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase type 2A (PP2A) activity, 
is highly expressed in human CD56bright NK cells, which produce more IFN-gamma
than CD56dim NK cells. SET was up-regulated upon monokine stimulation of primary 
human NK cells. Furthermore, ectopic overexpression of SET significantly enhanced
IFN-gamma gene expression in monokine-stimulated NK cells. In contrast,
RNAi-mediated suppression of SET expression renders NK cells inefficient in
producing high levels of IFN-gamma in response to monokine costimulation.
Mechanistically, suppression of PP2A activity by SET is important for IFN-gamma
gene expression in NK cells. In fact, treatment of primary human NK cells with
the PP2A activator 1,9-dideoxy-forskolin, as well as administration of the drug
to C57BL/6 mice, significantly reduced NK-dependent IFN-gamma production in
response to monokine treatment. Further, SET knockdown or pharmacologic
activation of PP2A diminished extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, p65RelA,
signal transducer and activator of transduction 4 (STAT4), and STAT5 activity in 
monokine-stimulated NK cells, potentially contributing to the reduction in
IFN-gamma gene expression. Thus, SET expression is essential for suppressing PP2A
phosphatase activity that would otherwise limit NK cell antitumoral and/or
antiinflammatory functions by impairing NK cell production of IFN-gamma.

PMCID: PMC2118465
PMID: 17875674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Exp Med. 2007 Oct 1;204(10):2383-96. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

High basal STAT4 balanced by STAT1 induction to control type 1 interferon effects
in natural killer cells.

Miyagi T(1), Gil MP, Wang X, Louten J, Chu WM, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The best-characterized type 1 interferon (IFN) signaling pathway depends on
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT2. The
cytokines can, however, conditionally activate all STATs. Regulation of their
access to particular signaling pathways is poorly understood. STAT4 is important 
for IFN-gamma induction, and NK cells are major producers of this cytokine. We
report that NK cells have high basal STAT4 levels and sensitivity to type 1
IFN-mediated STAT4 activation for IFN-gamma production. Increases in STAT1,
driven during viral infection by either type 1 IFN or IFN-gamma, are associated
with decreased STAT4 access. Both STAT1 and STAT2 are important for antiviral
defense, but STAT1 has a unique role in protecting against sustained NK cell
IFN-gamma production and resulting disease. The regulation occurs with an NK cell
type 1 IFN receptor switch from a STAT4 to a STAT1 association. Thus, a
fundamental characteristic of NK cells is high STAT4 bound to the type 1 IFN
receptor. The conditions of infection result in STAT1 induction with displacement
of STAT4. These studies elucidate the critical role of STAT4 levels in
predisposing selection of specific signaling pathways, define the biological
importance of regulation within particular cell lineages, and provide mechanistic
insights for how this is accomplished in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2118450
PMID: 17846149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2007 Sep 30;59(11):1073-83. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Mouse models of inflammatory bowel disease.

Wirtz S(1), Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I. Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, Obere
Zahlbacher Strasse 63, 55131 Mainz, Germany. wirtz@uni-mainz.de

Animal models of intestinal inflammation are indispensable for our understanding 
of the pathogenesis of Crohn disease and Ulcerative colitis, the idiopathic forms
of inflammatory bowel disease in humans. The clinical appearance of human IBD is 
heterogeneous, a fact that is also reflected by the steadily increasing number of
mouse strains displaying IBD like intestinal alterations. The analysis of these
models together with genetic studies in humans greatly enhanced our insights into
immunoregulatory processes in the gut and led to the generally accepted
hypothesis that a deregulated immune response against components of the
intestinal microbiota is critically involved in IBD pathophysiology. In this
article we provide a brief overview of selected mouse models of IBD and discuss
their contribution to the current understanding of disease mechanisms that
contribute to IBD.

PMID: 17825455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. N Engl J Med. 2007 Sep 6;357(10):977-86.

STAT4 and the risk of rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus.

Remmers EF(1), Plenge RM, Lee AT, Graham RR, Hom G, Behrens TW, de Bakker PI, Le 
JM, Lee HS, Batliwalla F, Li W, Masters SL, Booty MG, Carulli JP, Padyukov L,
Alfredsson L, Klareskog L, Chen WV, Amos CI, Criswell LA, Seldin MF, Kastner DL, 
Gregersen PK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Dec 13;357(24):2517-8; author reply 2518.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease with a
substantial genetic component. Susceptibility to disease has been linked with a
region on chromosome 2q.
METHODS: We tested single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in and around 13
candidate genes within the previously linked chromosome 2q region for association
with rheumatoid arthritis. We then performed fine mapping of the STAT1-STAT4
region in a total of 1620 case patients with established rheumatoid arthritis and
2635 controls, all from North America. Implicated SNPs were further tested in an 
independent case-control series of 1529 patients with early rheumatoid arthritis 
and 881 controls, all from Sweden, and in a total of 1039 case patients and 1248 
controls from three series of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
RESULTS: A SNP haplotype in the third intron of STAT4 was associated with
susceptibility to both rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. The
minor alleles of the haplotype-defining SNPs were present in 27% of chromosomes
of patients with established rheumatoid arthritis, as compared with 22% of those 
of controls (for the SNP rs7574865, P=2.81x10(-7); odds ratio for having the risk
allele in chromosomes of patients vs. those of controls, 1.32). The association
was replicated in Swedish patients with recent-onset rheumatoid arthritis
(P=0.02) and matched controls. The haplotype marked by rs7574865 was strongly
associated with lupus, being present on 31% of chromosomes of case patients and
22% of those of controls (P=1.87x10(-9); odds ratio for having the risk allele in
chromosomes of patients vs. those of controls, 1.55). Homozygosity of the risk
allele, as compared with absence of the allele, was associated with a more than
doubled risk for lupus and a 60% increased risk for rheumatoid arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: A haplotype of STAT4 is associated with increased risk for both
rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus, suggesting a shared
pathway for these illnesses.

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMCID: PMC2630215
PMID: 17804842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):3792-803.

IFN-alpha is not sufficient to drive Th1 development due to lack of stable T-bet 
expression.

Ramos HJ(1), Davis AM, George TC, Farrar JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

During inflammatory immune responses, the innate cytokine IL-12 promotes CD4+
Th-1 development through the activation of the second messenger STAT4 and the
subsequent expression of T-bet. In addition, type I IFN (IFN-alphabeta), secreted
primarily during viral and intracellular bacterial infections, can promote STAT4 
activation in human CD4+ T cells. However, the role of IFN-alphabeta in
regulating Th1 development is controversial, and previous studies have suggested 
a species-specific pathway leading to Th1 development in human but not mouse CD4+
T cells. In this study, we found that although both IFN-alpha and IL-12 can
promote STAT4 activation, IFN-alpha failed to promote Th1 commitment in human
CD4+ T cells. The difference between these innate signaling pathways lies with
the ability of IL-12 to promote sustained STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation, which
correlated with stable T-bet expression in committed Th1 cells. IFN-alpha did not
promote Th1 development in human CD4+ T cells because of attenuated STAT4
phosphorylation, which was insufficient to induce stable expression of T-bet.
Further, the defect in IFN-alpha-driven Th1 development was corrected by ectopic 
expression of T-bet within primary naive human CD4+ T cells. These results
indicate that IL-12 remains unique in its ability to drive Th1 development in
human CD4+ T cells and that IFN-alpha lacks this activity due to its inability to
promote sustained T-bet expression.

PMCID: PMC2927332
PMID: 17785816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Reproduction. 2007 Sep;134(3):425-33.

In spermatozoa, Stat1 is activated during capacitation and the acrosomal
reaction.

Bastián Y(1), Zepeda-Bastida A, Uribe S, Mújica A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, México DF, Mexico.

A role for sperm-specific proteins during the early embryonic development has
been suggested by a number of recent studies. However, little is known about the 
participation of transcription factors in that stage. Here, we show that the
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (Stat1), but not Stat4, was
phosphorylated in response to capacitation and the acrosomal reaction (AR).
Moreover, Stat1 phosphorylation correlated with changes in its localization:
during capacitation, Stat1 moved from the cytoplasm to the theca/flagellum
fraction. During AR, Stat1 phosphorylation increased again. In addition, blocking
protein kinase A (PKA) and PKC during capacitation abolished both phosphorylation
and migration of Stat1. Our results show tight spatio-temporal rearrangements of 
Stat1, suggesting that after fertilization Stat1 participates in the first rounds
of transcription within the male pronucleus.

PMID: 17709561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2494-500. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Identification of a distant T-bet enhancer responsive to IL-12/Stat4 and
IFNgamma/Stat1 signals.

Yang Y(1), Ochando JC, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

T-bet plays a critical role in controlling IFNgamma expression, Th1 polarization,
and CD8 cytolytic development. Its regulation has been demonstrated to be mostly 
IFNgamma/Stat1 dependent while IL-12/Stat4 independent. Here we show that
IL-12/Stat4 binds to a distant highly conserved STAT-responsive T-bet enhancer,
and induces IFNgamma/Stat1-independent T-bet expression in CD8 T cells.
Luciferase reporter assay showed that both Stat4 and Stat1 activate reporter gene
expression from constructs containing a wild-type but not mutated T-bet enhancer.
Studies in virus-infected mice demonstrated that the IL-12/Stat4/T-bet cascade
operates in vivo and regulates IFNgamma in CD8 T cells. Together, we provide a
novel mechanism for T-bet regulation, and suggest that IL-12/Stat4/T-bet play an 
important role in CD8 effector responses.

PMCID: PMC1988915
PMID: 17575072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Neurochem Res. 2007 Dec;32(12):2123-31. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Glia maturation factor regulation of STAT expression: a novel mechanism in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Zaheer S(1), Wu Y, Bassett J, Yang B, Zaheer A.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, IA, USA. asgar-zaheer@uiowa.edu

Inflammatory cytokines are implemented in the pathogenesis of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis. We
previously demonstrated that glia maturation factor (GMF), a brain protein,
isolated, sequenced and cloned in our laboratory, induce expression of
proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine in the central nervous system (CNS). We found 
GMF-deficient (knockout) mice relatively resistant to EAE development after
immunization with encephalitogenic MOG peptide 35-55. Consistent with these
findings, the expression of proinflammatory cytokines in CNS of mice with EAE
differed profoundly between wild type and GMF-knockout mice. In the present study
we examined the expressions of six murine signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STATs) genes, which are known to regulate the cytokine-dependent
signal transduction pathways in autoimmune inflammation. The expressions of STATs
genes were evaluated in the brains and spinal cords of wild type and GMF-knockout
mice at the peak of EAE by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Compared to
GMF-knockout mice, the expressions of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, and
STAT6 genes were significantly (P < 0.001) upregulated in the wild type mice
exhibiting EAE symptoms. The results are consistent with the diminished
development of EAE in the GMF-knockout mice. A significant suppression of STATs
expression in GMF-knockout mice suggests GMF as an upstream effector of JAK/STAT 
signaling.

PMID: 17551829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 15;178(12):7640-8.

IL-21 promotes differentiation of naive CD8 T cells to a unique effector
phenotype.

Casey KA(1), Mescher MF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

IL-21, the most recently described member of the common gamma-chain cytokine
family, is produced by activated CD4 T cells, whereas CD8 T cells express the
IL-21 receptor. To investigate a possible role for IL-21 in the priming of naive 
CD8 T cells, we examined responses of highly purified naive OT-I CD8 T cells to
artificial APCs displaying Ag and B7-1 on their surface. We found that IL-21
enhanced OT-I clonal expansion and supported development of cytotoxic effector
function. High levels of IL-2 did not support development of effector functions, 
but IL-2 was required for optimal responses in the presence of IL-21. IL-12 and
IFN-alpha have previously been shown to support naive CD8 T cell differentiation 
and acquisition of effector functions through a STAT4-dependent mechanism. Here, 
we show that IL-21 does not require STAT4 to stimulate development of cytolytic
activity. Furthermore, IL-21 fails to induce IFN-gamma or IL-4 production and can
partially block IL-12 induction of IFN-gamma production. CD8 T cells that
differentiate in response to IL-21 have a distinct surface marker expression
pattern and are characterized as CD44(high), PD-1(low), CD25(low), CD134(low),
and CD137(low). Thus, IL-21 can provide a signal required by naive CD8 T cells to
differentiate in response to Ag and costimulation, and the resulting effector
cells represent a unique effector phenotype with highly effective cytolytic
activity, but deficient capacity to secrete IFN-gamma.

PMID: 17548600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 15;178(12):7550-6.

Agonist-driven development of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells requires a
second signal mediated by Stat6.

Sanchez-Guajardo V(1), Tanchot C, O'Malley JT, Kaplan MH, Garcia S, Freitas AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie des Populations Lymphocytaires, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris,
France.

The factors that induce Foxp3 expression and regulatory T (Treg) cell development
remain unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of STAT4 and STAT6 in
agonist-driven generation of Ag-specific Foxp3-expressing Treg cells. Our
findings indicate that fully efficient induction of Foxp3 expression and
development of Ag-specific Treg cells requires the synergistic action of two
signals: a TCR-mediated signal and a second signal mediated by STAT6. Indeed, by 
comparing the development of wild-type and STAT4- and STAT6-deficient
hemagglutinin-specific T cells in the presence of hemagglutinin Ag, we found that
the absence of STAT6 impaired the generation of Ag-specific CD4+CD25+Foxp3+
cells. Moreover, in transgenic mice expressing a constitutively active form of
STAT6, we found that the fraction of CD4+Foxp3+ cells exceeds that of control
wild-type littermates. Overall these findings support a role for the STAT6
pathway in Treg cell development and maintenance.

PMID: 17548589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Respir Med. 2007 Sep;101(9):1977-81. Epub 2007 May 25.

Polymorphisms of STAT-6, STAT-4 and IFN-gamma genes and the risk of asthma in
Chinese population.

Li Y(1), Wu B, Xiong H, Zhu C, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Preventive Medicine, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China. yafeilye@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a complex disease resulting from multiple gene-gene and
gene-environment interactions. Study on gene-gene interactions could provide
insight into the pathophysiologic mechanisms of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the single nucleotide polymorphisms and interactions 
among three different loci in three candidate genes (STAT-6 G2964A, STAT-4
T90089C and IFN-gamma T874A) in 95 Chinese asthmatic subjects and 95 matched
controls to determine the possible associations with asthma.
METHODS: Genotyping of the gene polymorphisms was performed by means of PCR-SSCP 
analysis. Genotype-phenotype associations were examined in dominant and recessive
genetic models using logistic regression. The method of multifactor
dimensionality reduction was used to analyze gene-gene interactions.
RESULTS: No statistically significant difference was found in the distribution of
the STAT-6 G2964A polymorphisms between asthmatic patients and controls in this
case-control study. The STAT-4 T90089C polymorphisms were significantly
associated with asthma in the dominant model (p=0.007). As for the IFN-gamma
T874A, the significant associations were found in both dominant model (p=0.004)
and recessive model (p=0.006). A significant gene-gene interaction was found
among STAT-6, STAT-4 and IFN-gamma on the risk of asthma. In the best 3-locus
model, the odds ratio for the high-risk to the low-risk group was 6.9 (95% CI,
3.5-13.7; p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that STAT-4 T90089C and IFN-gamma T874A
polymorphisms might be the genetic factors for the risk of asthma in the Chinese 
population. In addition, the significant interactions among STAT-6 G2964A, STAT-4
T90089C and IFN-gamma T874A may increase an individual's susceptibility and
contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma.

PMID: 17532201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Infect Immun. 2007 Aug;75(8):3823-32. Epub 2007 May 21.

Cytokines, signaling pathways, and effector molecules required for the control of
Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis in mice.

Rocha FJ(1), Schleicher U, Mattner J, Alber G, Bogdan C.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologisches Institut-Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene,
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Wasserturmstrasse 3-5, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Cutaneous leishmaniasis is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Leishmania.
The mechanisms of pathogen control have been established primarily in the mouse
model of Leishmania major infection, but they might not hold true for other
Leishmania species associated with cutaneous disease. Here, we analyzed the role 
of cytokines, signaling components, and effector molecules in the control of New 
World cutaneous leishmaniasis due to L. braziliensis. Unlike L. major, L.
braziliensis caused small, nonulcerative, and self-healing skin swelling in
C57BL/6 mice, as well as BALB/c mice. In contrast to the results obtained for L. 
mexicana, mice deficient for interleukin-12 or its key signaling molecule, signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4, rapidly succumbed to severe visceral
leishmaniasis. Infection of tumor necrosis factor knockout mice with L.
braziliensis led to progressive, nonhealing skin lesions with erosions and
hemorrhagic ulcerations, but in contrast to the results with L. major, only 20 to
30% of the mice developed fatal visceral disease. As seen with L. major, mice
with a deleted inducible nitric oxide synthase gene (iNOS(-/-)) were unable to
contain L. braziliensis in the skin, whereas the control of the parasite in the
spleen remained unimpaired. Unlike what happens in L. major infections, NADPH
oxidase had no impact on the course of disease in L. braziliensis-infected mice. 
These results not only define essential components of a protective immune
response to L. braziliensis but also illustrate that the requirements for the
control of cutaneous leishmaniasis vary between different parasite species.

PMCID: PMC1951993
PMID: 17517868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jun;37(6):1663-77.

Lung CD11c+ cells from mice deficient in Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3
(EBI-3) prevent airway hyper-responsiveness in experimental asthma.

Hausding M(1), Karwot R, Scholtes P, Lehr HA, Wegmann M, Renz H, Galle PR,
Birkenbach M, Neurath MF, Blumberg RS, Finotto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Lung Immunology, I Medical Clinic,
University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, and Institut Universitaire de Pathologie
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene (EBI)-3 codes for a soluble type 1 cytokine
receptor homologous to the p40 subunit of IL-12 that is expressed by
antigen-presenting cells following activation. Here, we analyzed the functional
role of EBI-3 in a murine model of asthma associated with airway
hyper-responsiveness (AHR) in ovalbumin-sensitized mice. Upon allergen challenge,
EBI-3-/- mice showed less severe AHR, decreased numbers and degranulation of
eosinophils and a significantly reduced number of VCAM-1+ cells in the lungs as
compared to wild-type littermates. We thus analyzed lung CD11c+ cells before and 
after allergen challenge in these mice and found that before allergen challenge, 
lung CD11c+ cells isolated from EBI-3-/- mice express markers of a more
plasmacytoid phenotype without releasing IFN-alpha as compared to those from
wild-type littermates. Moreover, allergen challenge induced the development of
myeloid CD11c+ cells in the lungs of EBI-3-/- mice, which released increased
amounts of IL-10 and IL-12 while not expressing IFN-alpha. Finally, inhibition of
EBI-3 expression in lung DC could prevent AHR in adoptive transfer studies by
suppressing mediator release of effector cells into the airways. These results
indicate a novel role for EBI-3 in controlling local immune responses in the
lungs in experimental asthma.

PMID: 17506035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Helicobacter. 2007 Jun;12(3):193-9.

Enhanced activation of cyclooxygenase-2 downregulates Th1 signaling pathway in
Helicobacter pylori-infected human gastric mucosa.

Pellicanò A(1), Imeneo M, Leone I, Larussa T, Luzza F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università di Catanzaro Magna
Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that an impaired T-cell response against
Helicobacter pylori plays a role in the pathogenesis of H. pylori-related
diseases. Cyclooxygenase (COX) 2 has been shown to inhibit the production of
T-helper (Th) 1 cytokines. This study aimed to ascertain whether COX-2
downregulates Th1 signaling pathway in human gastric mucosa colonized by H.
pylori.
METHODS: COX-2 expression and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) production were
determined in total proteins extracted from freshly obtained gastric biopsies of 
H. pylori-infected and uninfected patients by Western blotting and enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Phosphorylated (p)STAT4, pSTAT1, T-bet, and pSTAT6
expression and interleukin (IL)-12, interferon (IFN)-gamma, and IL-4 production
were also determined by Western blotting and ELISA, respectively, in total
protein extracts from gastric biopsy cultures of H. pylori-infected patients
treated without and with COX-2 inhibitor NS-398.
RESULTS: Enhanced expression of COX-2 and production of PGE(2) was found in H.
pylori-infected compared to uninfected patients. COX-2 inhibition significantly
increased expression of Th1 transcription factors along with production of IL-12 
and IFN-gamma. By contrast, no changes in the expression of STAT6 and production 
of IL-4 were found.
CONCLUSION: This study provides a mechanism by which H. pylori may actually
interfere with normal T-cell activation in human gastric mucosa, possibly
enhancing its pathogenicity. The use of COX-2 selective inhibitors as
immunomodulators in the course of H. pylori infection deserves investigations.

PMID: 17492998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Peptides. 2007 Sep;28(9):1814-24. Epub 2007 Mar 31.

A novel VIP signaling pathway in T cells cAMP-->protein tyrosine phosphatase
(SHP-2?)-->JAK2/STAT4-->Th1 differentiation.

Liu L(1), Yen JH, Ganea D.

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers University, Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Warren St., Newark,
NJ 07102, USA.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a potent anti-inflammatory agent. In
addition to the deactivation of macrophages, dendritic cells, and microglia, VIP 
shifts the Th1/Th2 balance, promoting the preferential differentiation and
survival of Th2 cells, to the detriment of the proinflammatory Th1 effectors.
Several mechanisms operate in the Th1/Th2 shift induced by VIP. Here we report on
a novel mechanism for the effect of VIP on T cell differentiation, and show that 
VIP inhibits Th1 differentiation by interfering directly with the IL-12Jak2/STAT4
signaling pathway in T cells. The effect of VIP is cAMP-dependent, and appears to
be mediated through the activation of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTP), with
SHP-2 as a potential target. The activation of PTPs represents a novel
cAMP-downstream target for the immunomodulatory effects of VIP.

PMCID: PMC2093951
PMID: 17462790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Ann Surg. 2007 Apr;245(4):611-21.

Gene expression profiles differentiate between sterile SIRS and early sepsis.

Johnson SB(1), Lissauer M, Bochicchio GV, Moore R, Cross AS, Scalea TM.

Author information: 
(1)R. Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. sbjohnson@umm.edu

INTRODUCTION: The systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) occurs
frequently in critically ill patients and presents similar clinical appearances
despite diverse infectious and noninfectious etiologies. Despite similar
phenotypic expression, these diverse SIRS etiologies may induce divergent
genotypic expressions. We hypothesized that gene expression differences are
present between sepsis and uninfected SIRS prior to the clinical appearance of
sepsis.
METHODS: Critically ill uninfected SIRS patients were followed longitudinally for
the development of sepsis. All patients had whole blood collected daily for gene 
expression analysis by Affymetrix Hg_U133 2.0 Plus microarrays. SIRS patients
developing sepsis were compared with those remaining uninfected for differences
in gene expression at study entry and daily for 3 days prior to conversion to
sepsis. Acceptance criteria for differentially expressed genes required: >1.2
median fold change between groups and significance on univariate and multivariate
analysis. Differentially expressed genes were annotated to pathways using DAVID
2.0/EASE analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 12,782 (23.4%) gene probes were differentially expressed on
univariate analysis 0 to 48 hours before clinical sepsis. 626 (1.1%) probes met
acceptance criteria, corresponding to 459 unique genes, 65 (14.2%) down and 395
(85.8%) up expressed. These genes annotated to 10 pathways that functionally
categorized to 4 themes involving innate immunity, cytokine receptors, T cell
differentiation, and protein synthesis regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Sepsis has a unique gene expression profile that is different from
uninfected inflammation and becomes apparent prior to expression of the clinical 
sepsis phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1877042
PMID: 17414611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Immunol. 2007 Apr 15;178(8):5375-82.

Airway exposure levels of lipopolysaccharide determine type 1 versus type 2
experimental asthma.

Kim YK(1), Oh SY, Jeon SG, Park HW, Lee SY, Chun EY, Bang B, Lee HS, Oh MH, Kim
YS, Kim JH, Gho YS, Cho SH, Min KU, Kim YY, Zhu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Postech Biotech Center, Pohang University of
Science and Technology, Namgu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Republic of Korea.

Allergic asthma is characterized by airway inflammation initiated by adaptive
immune responses to aeroallergens. Recent data suggest that severe asthma may be 
a different form of asthma rather than an increase in asthma symptoms and that
innate immune responses to LPS can modulate adaptive immune responses to
allergens. In this study, we evaluated the hypothesis that airway exposure to
different doses of LPS induces different form of asthma. Our study showed that
neutrophilic inflammation and IFN-gamma expression were higher in induced sputum 
from severe asthma patients than from mild to moderate asthmatics. Animal
experiments indicated that allergen sensitization with low-dose LPS (0.1 microg) 
induced type 2 asthma phenotypes, i.e., airway hyperresponsiveness, eosinophilic 
inflammation, and allergen-specific IgE up-regulation. In contrast, allergen
sensitization with high-dose LPS (10 microg) induced asthma phenotypes, i.e.,
airway hyperresponsiveness and noneosinophilic inflammation that were not
developed in IFN-gamma-deficient mice, but unaffected in the absence of IL-4.
During the allergen sensitization period, TNF-alpha expression was found to be
enhanced by both low- and high-dose LPS, whereas IL-12 expression was only
enhanced by high-dose LPS. Interestingly, the asthma phenotypes induced by
low-dose LPS, but not by high-dose LPS, were completely inhibited in TNF-alpha
receptor-deficient mice, whereas the asthma phenotypes induced by high-dose LPS
were abolished in the homozygous null mutation of the STAT4 gene. These findings 
suggest that airway exposure levels of LPS induces different forms of asthma that
are type 1 and type 2 asthma phenotypes by high and low LPS levels, respectively.

PMID: 17404323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Immunol. 2007 Apr 15;178(8):4901-7.

Stat3 and Stat4 direct development of IL-17-secreting Th cells.

Mathur AN(1), Chang HC, Zisoulis DG, Stritesky GL, Yu Q, O'Malley JT, Kapur R,
Levy DE, Kansas GS, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

IL-17-secreting CD4(+) T cells are critically involved in inflammatory immune
responses. Development of these cells is promoted in vivo and in vitro by IL-23
or TGFbeta1 plus IL-6. Despite growing interest in this inflammatory Th subset,
little is known about the transcription factors that are required for their
development. We demonstrate that Stat3 is required for programming the TGFbeta1
plus IL-6 and IL-23-stimulated IL-17-secreting phenotype, as well as for
RORgammat expression in TGFbeta1 plus IL-6-primed cells. Moreover, retroviral
transduction of a constitutively active Stat3 into differentiating T cell
cultures enhances IL-17 production from these cells. We further show that Stat4
is partially required for the development of IL-23-, but not TGFbeta1 plus
IL-6-primed IL-17-secreting cells, and is absolutely required for IL-17
production in response to IL-23 plus IL-18. The requirements for Stat3 and Stat4 
in the development of these IL-17-secreting subsets reveal additional mechanisms 
in Th cell fate decisions during the generation of proinflammatory cell types.

PMID: 17404271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2007 Jul 15;110(2):553-60. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Expression of Tyk2 in dendritic cells is required for IL-12, IL-23, and IFN-gamma
production and the induction of Th1 cell differentiation.

Tokumasa N(1), Suto A, Kagami S, Furuta S, Hirose K, Watanabe N, Saito Y, Shimoda
K, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Clinical Cell Biology, Chiba
University, Inohana, Chiba, Japan.

It is well documented that dendritic cells (DCs), representative
antigen-presenting cells, are important sources of Th1-promoting cytokines and
are actively involved in the regulation of T-helper-cell differentiation.
However, the intracellular event that regulates this process is still largely
unknown. In this study, we examined the role of Tyk2, a JAK kinase that is
involved in the signaling pathway under IL-12 and IL-23, in DC functions. While
the differentiation and maturation of DCs was normal in Tyk2-deficient
(Tyk2(-/-)) mice, IL-12-induced Stat4 phosphorylation was diminished in Tyk2(-/-)
DCs. IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production was also significantly diminished in
Tyk2(-/-) DCs to levels similar to those in Stat4(-/-) DCs. Interestingly,
Tyk2(-/-) DCs were defective in IL-12 and IL-23 production upon stimulation with 
CpG ODN. Furthermore, Tyk2(-/-) DCs were impaired in their ability to induce
Th1-cell differentiation but not Th2-cell differentiation. Taken together, these 
results indicate that the expression of Tyk2 in DCs is crucial for the production
of Th1-promoting cytokines such as IL-12 and IFN-gamma from DCs and thereby for
the induction of antigen-specific Th1-cell differentiation.

PMID: 17395783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. EMBO J. 2007 Apr 18;26(8):2052-60. Epub 2007 Mar 22.

Stat4 limits DNA methyltransferase recruitment and DNA methylation of the
IL-18Ralpha gene during Th1 differentiation.

Yu Q(1), Thieu VT, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, HB Wells
Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Stat4 is required for Th1 development, although how a transiently activated
factor generates heritable patterns of gene expression is still unclear. We
examined the regulation of IL-18Ralpha expression to define a mechanism for
Stat4-dependent genetic programming of a Th1-associated gene. Although Stat4
binds the Il18r1 promoter following IL-12 stimulation and transiently increases
acetylated histones H3 and H4, patterns of histone acetylation alone in Th1 cells
may not be sufficient to explain cell-type-specific patterns of gene expression. 
The level of DNA methylation and recruitment of Dnmt3a to Il18r1 inversely
correlate with IL-18Ralpha expression, and blocking DNA methylation increases
IL-18Ralpha expression. Moreover, there was decreased Il18r1-Dnmt3a association
and DNA methylation following transient trichostatin A-induced histone
hyperacetylation in Stat4-/-Th1 cultures. Increased association of Dnmt3a and the
Dnmt3a cofactor Dnmt3L with the promoters of several Stat4-dependent genes was
found in Stat4-/- Th1 cultures, providing a general mechanism for Stat4-dependent
gene programming. These data support a mechanism wherein the transient
hyperacetylation induced by Stat4 prevents the recruitment of DNA
methyltransferases and the subsequent repression of the Il18r1 locus.

PMCID: PMC1852779
PMID: 17380127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genes Immun. 2007 Apr;8(3):254-61. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Human interferon lambda-1 (IFN-lambda1/IL-29) modulates the Th1/Th2 response.

Jordan WJ(1), Eskdale J, Srinivas S, Pekarek V, Kelner D, Rodia M, Gallagher G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, New Jersey Dental School, Newark, NJ, USA.

Interferon lambda-1 (IFN-lambda1/IL-29) is a member of the Type-III interferon
family, which contains three ligands: IFN-lambda1, 2 and 3. These three ligands
use the same unique heterodimeric receptor composed of CRF2-12
(IFN-lambda-R1/IL-28Ralpha) and CRF2-4 (IL10-R-beta) chains. Like their close
relatives, the Type-I interferons, IFN-lambda1, 2 and 3, promote the
phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT2, induce the ISRE3 complex, elevate OAS and MxA
expression and exhibit antiviral activity in vitro. Their use of the IL10-R-beta 
chain and their ability to phosphorylate STAT3, STAT4 and STAT5 suggested that
they may also exhibit immunomodulatory activity; their antiviral action led us to
hypothesize that this activity might be directed toward the Th1/Th2 system. Here,
we have demonstrated that IFN-lambda1 altered the activity of Th cells in three
separate experimental systems: (i) mitogen stimulation, (ii) mixed-lymphocyte
reaction (MLR) and (iii) stimulation of naive T cells by monocyte-derived
dendritic cells (mDC). In Con-A stimulation assays, the inclusion of IFN-lambda1 
consistently led to markedly diminished levels of secreted interleukin (IL-13)
with occasional coincident, modest elevation of secreted IFN-gamma. IL-13
secretion was 100-fold more sensitive to IFN-lambda1 than was IFN-gamma
secretion. These observations were also made in the allogeneic two-way MLR.
IFN-lambda1 was able to alter cytokine-mediated Th biasing and when naive T cells
were exposed to allogeneic mDC that had been matured in the presence of
IFN-lambda1, secreted IL-13 was again markedly and consistently reduced, whereas 
secreted IFN-gamma was largely unaltered. These functions were independent of
IL-10. Our data support a hitherto unsuspected role for IFN-lambda1 in modulating
the development of Th1 and Th2 cells, with an apparent emphasis on the diminution
of IL-13 secretion.

PMID: 17361203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jun;81(6):1562-7. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

Reciprocal effects of IFN-beta and IL-12 on STAT4 activation and cytokine
induction in T cells.

Fahey AJ(1), Robins RA, Constantinescu CS.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Clinical Neurology , University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7
2UH, UK.

IL-12 is an immunoregulatory cytokine, which promotes Th1 cell differentiation
and is a major inducer of IFN-gamma. IFN-beta, a Type I IFN used in the treatment
of multiple sclerosis, has been shown to significantly increase the expression of
the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, a major suppressor of Th1 cytokines. The
beneficial immunomodulatory effects of IFN-beta may in part be a result of its
ability to suppress IL-12. However, IL-12 and IFN-beta signal via the STAT4
pathway. Our aim was to investigate the relationship between IL-12 and IFN-beta
by observing the effect of prior exposure to IL-12 or IFN-beta on the ability of 
T cells to subsequently respond to the other cytokine. We report that IFN-beta
increases IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation and up-regulates IL-12 receptor
beta1 and beta2 expression. However, despite this up-regulation, IFN-beta
suppressed IL-12-induced IFN-gamma expression. Our results suggest that this may 
be a result of the parallel induction of IL-10 by IFN-beta.

PMID: 17351016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 15;178(6):3427-36.

Targeting of the transcription factor STAT4 by antisense phosphorothioate
oligonucleotides suppresses collagen-induced arthritis.

Hildner KM(1), Schirmacher P, Atreya I, Dittmayer M, Bartsch B, Galle PR, Wirtz
S, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I Medical Clinic, University of Mainz,
Langenbeckstrasse 1, Mainz, Germany. Kai.Hildner@gmx.net

The transcription factor STAT4 mediates signals of various proinflammatory
cytokines, such as IL-12, IL-15, and IL-23, that initiate and stabilize Th1
cytokine production. Although Th1 cytokine production has been suggested to play 
a major pathogenic role in rheumatoid arthritis, the role of STAT4 in this
disease is poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate a key functional role
of STAT4 in murine collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). In initial studies we found 
that STAT4 expression is strongly induced in CD4(+) T cells and to a lesser
extent in CD11b(+) APCs during CIA. To analyze the role of STAT4 for arthritis
manifestation, we next investigated the outcome of interfering with STAT4 gene
expression in CIA by using STAT4-deficient mice. Interestingly, STAT4-deficient
mice developed significantly less severe arthritis than wild-type control mice
and the T cells from such mice produced less IL-6, TNF, and IL-17. In addition,
the targeting of STAT4 expression by a specific antisense phosphorothioate
oligonucleotide directed at the translation start site suppressed STAT4 levels
and signs of CIA even when applied during the onset of disease manifestation.
These data suggest a key regulatory role of STAT4 in the pathogenesis and
manifestation of murine collagen-induced arthritis. Furthermore, the targeting of
STAT4 emerges as a novel approach to therapy for chronic arthritis.

PMID: 17339437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Electrophoresis. 2007 Mar;28(6):903-17.

Large-scale differential display analysis of T helper cell differentiation.

Ojala P(1), Virtanen E, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Finland. pekka.ojala@btk.fi

We have developed a novel large-scale multicapillary fluorescent differential
display (FDD) platform amenable to further automation. The power of the method is
demonstrated by the analysis of T helper cell differentiation. Eight RNA samples 
from wild type, Stat4 knockout and Stat6 knockout mice were analyzed with 16
anchoring primers and 24 arbitrary primers, resulting in 285 294 sample peaks.
Visually selected patterns of differential expression suggest two major
regulatory mechanisms: activation and Stat4 genotype. A subset of the findings is
reproduced in the confirmatory differential display (DD) that included technical 
and biological replicates. In a small fragment identification pilot study, we
identify Ifi27 and Cct8 to be up-regulated by T cell activation. We present a
method for the analysis of electropherogram similarity across large datasets,
based on correlation of low-resolution representations of electrophoretic data.
We show how it can be applied to analyze experimental and technical variables.
Using this method, we demonstrate the effect of activation and genotype. In
addition, agreement of our real experimental data to the theoretical basis of DD,
as well as issues in anchoring primer selectivity, are studied.

PMID: 17309050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Immunity. 2007 Feb;26(2):163-76.

Regulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription signaling by the
tyrosine phosphatase PTP-BL.

Nakahira M(1), Tanaka T, Robson BE, Mizgerd JP, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins are a family of 
latent cytoplasmic transcription factors that are activated by tyrosine
phosphorylation after cytokine stimulation. One mechanism by which STAT signaling
is regulated is by dephosphorylation through the action of protein tyrosine
phosphatases (PTP). We have identified PTP-Basophil like (PTP-BL) as a STAT PTP. 
PTP-BL dephosphorylates STAT proteins in vitro and in vivo, resulting in
attenuation of STAT-mediated gene activation. In CD4(+) T cells, PTP-BL
deficiency leads to increased and prolonged activation of STAT4 and STAT6, and
consequently enhanced T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cell differentiation. Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that PTP-BL is a physiologically important
negative regulator of the STAT signaling pathway.

PMID: 17306571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. EMBO J. 2007 Mar 7;26(5):1292-302. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Chromatin remodeling by the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex and STAT4 activation
synergistically induce IL-12Rbeta2 expression during human Th1 cell
differentiation.

Letimier FA(1), Passini N, Gasparian S, Bianchi E, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunoregulation Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a key cytokine for the development of T helper type 1
(Th1) responses; however, naïve CD4(+) T cells do not express IL-12Rbeta2, and
are therefore unresponsive to IL-12. We have examined the mechanisms that control
Th1-specific expression of the human IL-12Rbeta2 gene at early time points after 
T-cell stimulation. We have identified a Th1-specific enhancer element that binds
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) in vivo in developing 
Th1 but not Th2 cells. T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling induced histone
hyperacetylation and recruitment of BRG1, the ATPase subunit of the SWI/SNF-like 
BAF chromatin remodeling complex, to the IL-12Rbeta2 regulatory regions and was
associated with low-level gene transcription at the IL-12Rbeta2 locus. However,
high-level IL-12Rbeta2 expression required TCR triggering in the presence of
IL-12. Our results indicate a synergistic role of TCR-induced chromatin
remodeling and cytokine-induced STAT4 activation to direct IL-12Rbeta2 expression
during Th1 cell development.

PMCID: PMC1817634
PMID: 17304212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Neuroreport. 2007 Jan 22;18(2):185-9.

Recovery from spinal cord injury in tumor necrosis factor-alpha, signal
transducers and activators of transcription 4 and signal transducers and
activators of transcription 6 null mice.

Fraidakis MJ(1), Kiyotani T, Pernold K, Bergström J, Olson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, LIME, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
matt.fraidakis@neuro.ki.se

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha is a central cytokine involved in the regulation of
the innate immune response. Signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 
and signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 are second messengers
mediating the Th1 and Th2-specific immune responses, respectively. We studied the
outcome of spinal cord injury with respect to the locomotion and axonal
regeneration in tumor necrosis factor-alpha, signal transducers and activators of
transcription 4 and signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 knockout
mice. Locomotor behavior after injury differed between mouse strains, but not
between wild-type and the knockout genotypes of the same strain. Regeneration of 
descending tracts, assessed by fluorogold/fluororuby retrograde double-labeling, 
however, appeared hampered by Th2 deficiency.

PMID: 17301687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2007 Jan;27(1):65-75.

Role of Stat4-mediated signal transduction events in the generation of aggressor 
CD4+ T cells in herpetic stromal keratitis pathogenesis.

Banerjee K(1), Biswas PS, Rouse BT.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative and Experimental Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, The
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37916, USA.

Ocular infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) causes a vision-impairing
inflammatory reaction called herpetic stromal keratitis. In murine models,
herpetic stromal keratitis lesions appear to be immunopathologic, mediated by
CD4(+) T cells of Th1 phenotype. To provide insight about cytokine networks and
signaling events involved in the development of aggressor CD4(+) T cells, ocular 
HSV infection was followed in mice deficient in Stat4 (Stat4(-/-) mice), the
signal transducer for the cytokine interleukin-12 (IL-12). After ocular HSV
infection of Stat4(-/-) and control BALB/c mice, clinical, histologic, and
immunologic analyses were carried out. Further, to evaluate the involvement of
Stat4 in the development of this aggressor population, naive CD4(+) T cells from 
Stat4(-/-) and BALB/c mice were adoptively transferred to C.B-17 SCID mice 1 day 
after corneal infection. Although Stat4(-/-) mice demonstrated increased
susceptibility to lethal encephalitis and facial lesions, interestingly, these
mice had less severe stromal keratitis in comparison to control animals. Adoptive
transfer of naive CD4(+) T cells from Stat4(-/-) mice failed to produce disease
in infected SCID recipients. The data imply a significant role of Stat4-mediated 
signaling events in the generation of an aggressor CD4(+) T cell population in
stromal keratitis pathogenesis.

PMID: 17266445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Exp Med. 2007 Jan 22;204(1):65-71. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Helper T cell IL-2 production is limited by negative feedback and STAT-dependent 
cytokine signals.

Villarino AV(1), Tato CM, Stumhofer JS, Yao Z, Cui YK, Hennighausen L, O'Shea JJ,
Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. alejandro.villarino@ucsf.edu

Although required for many fundamental immune processes, ranging from
self-tolerance to pathogen immunity, interleukin (IL)-2 production is transient, 
and the mechanisms underlying this brevity remain unclear. These studies reveal
that helper T cell IL-2 production is limited by a classic negative feedback loop
that functions autonomously or in collaboration with other common gamma chain
(IL-4 and IL-7) and IL-6/IL-12 family cytokines (IL-12 and IL-27). Consistent
with this model for cytokine-dependent regulation, they also demonstrate that the
inhibitory effect can be mediated by several signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) family transcription factors, namely STAT5, STAT4, and
STAT6. Collectively, these findings establish that IL-2 production is limited by 
a network of autocrine and paracrine signals that are readily available during
acute inflammatory responses and, thus, provide a cellular and molecular basis
for its transient pattern of expression.

PMCID: PMC2118423
PMID: 17227909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Aug;66(8):992-9. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Characterisation of a dendritic cell subset in synovial tissue which strongly
expresses Jak/STAT transcription factors from patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Walker JG(1), Ahern MJ, Coleman M, Weedon H, Papangelis V, Beroukas D,
Roberts-Thomson PJ, Smith MD.

Author information: 
(1)Repatriation General Hospital, Daws Rd, Daw Park, 5041 South Australia.

OBJECTIVES: To characterise the phenotype of the putative dendritic cells
strongly expressing Jak3 and STAT4, which have been previously identified in the 
synovial tissue of patients with active rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Synovial biopsy specimens were obtained at arthroscopy from 30 patients 
with active RA (42 synovial biopsies). Immunohistological analysis was performed 
using monoclonal antibodies to detect dendritic cell subsets, including
activation markers and cytokines relevant to dendritic cell function.
Co-localisation of cell surface markers and cytokines was assessed primarily
using sequential sections, with results confirmed by dual immunohistochemistry
and immunofluorescence with confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: The dendritic cells identified in RA synovial tissue that strongly
express Jak3 also strongly express STAT4 and STAT 6 and are correlated with the
presence of serum rheumatoid factor. These cells are not confined to a single
dendritic cell subset, with cells having phenotypes consistent with both myeloid-
and plasmacytoid-type dendritic cells. The activation status of these dendritic
cells suggests that they are maturing or mature dendritic cells. These dendritic 
cells produce IL12 as well as interferon alpha and gamma.
CONCLUSIONS: The close correlation of these dendritic cells with the presence of 
serum rheumatoid factor, a prognostic factor for worse disease outcome, and the
strong expression by these cells of components of the Jak/STAT transcription
factor pathway suggest a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of RA.

PMCID: PMC1954703
PMID: 17223651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Infect Immun. 2007 Apr;75(4):1738-44. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Interleukin-12 drives the Th1 signaling pathway in Helicobacter pylori-infected
human gastric mucosa.

Pellicanò A(1), Sebkova L, Monteleone G, Guarnieri G, Imeneo M, Pallone F, Luzza 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università di Catanzaro Magna
Graecia, Campus Universitario di Germaneto, Viale Europa, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

In this study we examined mechanisms that regulate T-helper lymphocyte 1 (Th1)
commitment in Helicobacter pylori-infected human gastric mucosa. The levels of
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4), and IL-12 in total extracts
of gastric biopsies taken from H. pylori-infected and uninfected patients were
determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The levels of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), STAT6, and T-box expressed
in T cells (T-bet) in total proteins extracted from gastric biopsies were
determined by Western blotting. Finally, the effect of a neutralizing IL-12
antibody on expression of Th1 transcription factors and the levels of IFN-gamma
in organ cultures of H. pylori-infected biopsies was examined. Increased levels
of IFN-gamma and IL-12 were found in gastric biopsy samples of H. pylori-infected
patients compared to the levels in uninfected patients. In addition, H.
pylori-infected biopsies exhibited high levels of expression of phosphorylated
STAT4 and T-bet. Higher levels of IFN-gamma and expression of Th1 transcription
factors were associated with greater infiltration of mononuclear cells in the
gastric mucosa. By contrast, production of IL-4 and expression of phosphorylated 
STAT6 were not associated with the intensity of mononuclear cell infiltration. In
ex vivo organ cultures of H. pylori-infected biopsies, neutralization of
endogenous IL-12 down-regulated the expression of phosphorylated STAT4 and T-bet 
and reduced IFN-gamma production. Our data indicated that IL-12 contributes to
the Th1 cell commitment in H. pylori-infected human gastric mucosa.

PMCID: PMC1865692
PMID: 17220306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nat Med. 2007 Jan;13(1):26-8.

IL-23: a master regulator in Crohn disease.

Neurath MF.

PMID: 17206128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Transplantation. 2006 Dec 27;82(12):1756-63.

Immature syngeneic dendritic cells potentiate tolerance to pancreatic islet
allografts depleted of donor dendritic cells in microgravity culture condition.

Stepkowski SM(1), Phan T, Zhang H, Bilinski S, Kloc M, Qi Y, Katz SM, Rutzky LP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Organ Transplantation, University of Texas Medical 
School at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. stanislaw.stepkowski@uth.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Previously we showed that pancreatic islets cultured for seven days
in rotating bioreactors survived for >100 days in allogeneic recipients without
immunosuppression. This survival coincided with almost complete elimination of
"passenger" donor dendritic cells (DCs). Herein, we examined the necessity of DCs
in the generation of CD4+ CD25+ T regulatory (Treg) cells.
METHODS: Allogeneic fresh islets or islets cultured for three days in bioreactors
were transplanted to streptozotocin-induced diabetic Balb/c(stat4 -/-) as well as
signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat)4-deficient Balb/c(stat6
-/-) or Balb/c(stat4 -/-) mice. Some Balb/c recipients of fresh islet allografts 
were also treated with a tolerogenic protocol of anti-CD40 Ligand MR1 mAb and
CTLA4Ig.
RESULTS: Islet allografts cultured for three days in bioreactors survived >100
days in all Balb/c(stat4 -/-) recipients and in 56% of Balb/c(stat6 -/-)
recipients, but in none of the Balb/c recipients; the same recipients rejected
fresh islet allografts. Purified T cells from long-term surviving Balb/c(stat4
-/-) recipients failed to transfer tolerance to SCID recipients of donor-type
fresh islet allografts. In contrast, MR1/CTLA4Ig therapy induced tolerance to
fresh islet allografts and their T cells adoptively transferred tolerance. When
Balb/c or Balb/c(stat4 -/-) recipients of bioreactor-cultured islets were
injected intravenously with immature syngeneic DCs, they became tolerant and
developed potent alloantigen-specific CD4+ CD25+ Treg cells expressing Foxp3.
CONCLUSION: Allogeneic islets depleted of donor DCs by culture in bioreactors
have almost twofold better acceptance in Balb/c(stat4 -/-) than in Balb/c(stat6
-/-) mice, but lack Treg cells. Additional injection of host immature DCs
improves tolerance in Balb/c and Balb/c(stat4 -/-) recipients by inducing potent 
CD4+ CD25+ Treg cells.

PMID: 17198272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):812-6. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

IL-12 p35 silenced dendritic cells modulate immune responses by blocking IL-12
signaling through JAK-STAT pathway in T lymphocytes.

Xu H(1), Zhang Y, Hua Y, Chen T, Wang H, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210009, China.

Dendritic cells (DC) constitute a complex system of uniquely specialized
antigen-presenting cells (APC) that play crucial roles in the initiation and
regulation of immune responses. Recent studies have demonstrated that DC silenced
by siRNA IL-12 p35 showed tolerogenic capacity in vitro. However, their mechanism
of action is not fully understood. In this study, IL-12p35 siRNA was chemically
synthesized and transfected into DCs. A coculture of T cells and DCs was
performed. After 30 min coculture, T cells were harvested and analyzed. We showed
that the IL-12 p35 silenced DCs decreased IL-12-induced T cell responses through 
blocking tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, TYK2, STAT3, and STAT4 proteins in T
cells. These results demonstrate IL-12 p35 silenced DCs modulate immune responses
by blocking IL-12 signaling through JAK-STAT pathway in T cells.

PMID: 17194445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Toxicol Sci. 2007 Mar;96(1):92-100. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

Posttranscriptional inhibition of interferon-gamma production by lead.

Heo Y(1), Mondal TK, Gao D, Kasten-Jolly J, Kishikawa H, Lawrence DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Health, Catholic University of Daegu, Kyongsan-si, 
Kyongbuk, Korea 712-702.

Lead (Pb) is known to preferentially suppress the activation and development of
type-1 CD4+ helper T cell (Th1) responses, whereas it enhances the development of
type-2 CD4+ helper T cell (Th2) responses. The inhibition of interferon-gamma
(IFNgamma) production has been demonstrated in vitro with a Th1 clone and DO11.10
ovalbumin-transgenic (OVA-tg) CD4+ T cells, and in vivo with wild-type and OVA-tg
BALB/c mice; however, the mechanisms responsible for the Pb-induced
downregulation of IFNgamma have not been reported. Here, we assessed the
modulation of IFNgamma production at the mRNA and protein levels. Pb did not
significantly affect IFNgamma mRNA expression by a Th1 clone or activated
splenocytes, as measured by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), ribonuclease protection, and real-time RT-PCR. However, Pb did
significantly lower the amount of IFNgamma protein in supernatants and cell
lysates of antigen-activated T cells in comparison to stimulated controls,
suggesting that the lower amounts of IFNgamma released into culture supernatants 
were not due to a blockage of secretion that gave rise to a cytoplasmic
accumulation of IFNgamma. Pb inhibition also was not prevented by addition of
zinc or iron. Pb did not enhance protein degradation of IFNgamma, in that
lactacystin, an effective blocker of proteosomal proteolysis, did not prevent
loss of IFNgamma; additionally, Pb did not accelerate loss of IFNgamma after
cycloheximide treatment. Pb did, however, significantly suppress IFNgamma
biosynthesis, as investigated using 35S-incorporation in pulse/chase experiments,
although it did not suppress total protein synthesis, indicating that Pb
selectively inhibits IFNgamma biosynthesis. Thus, Pb appears to selectively
interfere with the translation of certain proteins, such as IFNgamma. IL-12
blocked Pb's preferential promotion of Th2 cells, but absence of STAT6 did not
prevent the Pb skewing. Thus, Pb may modulate unique regulatory pathways.

PMID: 17164472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Mar;81(3):825-34. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

Modulation of the IL-12/IFN-gamma axis by IFN-alpha therapy for hepatitis C.

Byrnes AA(1), Li DY, Park K, Thompson D, Mocilnikar C, Mohan P, Molleston JP,
Narkewicz M, Zhou H, Wolf SF, Schwarz KB, Karp CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Although IFN-alpha forms the foundation of therapy for chronic hepatitis C, only 
a minority of patients has a sustained response to IFN-alpha alone. The antiviral
activities of IFN-alpha formed the rationale for its use in viral hepatitis.
However, IFN-alpha and the other Type I IFNs are also pleiotropic immune
regulators. Type I IFNs can promote IFN-gamma production by activating STAT4 but 
can also inhibit production of IL-12, a potent activator of STAT4 and IFN-gamma
production. The efficacy of IFN-alpha in the treatment of hepatitis C may
therefore depend in part on the balance of IFN-gamma-inducing and
IL-12-suppressing effects. We characterized the effects of pegylated IFN-alpha
therapy for hepatitis C on the capacity of patients' PBMC to produce IL-12 and
IFN-gamma ex vivo. Cells from patients with a sustained virological response to
therapy had significantly greater levels of IFN-alpha-driven IFN-gamma production
prior to treatment than those from nonresponding patients. No differences in
pretreatment IL-12 productive capacity were seen between patient groups. However,
therapy with IFN-alpha led to suppression of inducible IL-12 production
throughout the course of therapy in both groups of patients.

PMID: 17148690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 15;177(12):8714-22.

Thiocyanate-dependent induction of endothelial cell adhesion molecule expression 
by phagocyte peroxidases: a novel HOSCN-specific oxidant mechanism to amplify
inflammation.

Wang JG(1), Mahmud SA, Nguyen J, Slungaard A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation Division and 
The Vascular Biology Center, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Both eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) and neutrophil myeloperoxidase (MPO)
preferentially oxidize SCN(-) to generate HOSCN, a weak, sulfhydryl-reactive
oxidant, as a major physiologic product. We here show that HOSCN is a uniquely
potent phagocyte oxidant inducer of E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 expression in 
HUVEC as detected by Western blot and flow cytometry. EMSA and inhibitor studies 
show that HOSCN up-regulation of these adhesion molecules is transcriptionally
mediated through a mechanism that is dependent upon activation of the NF-kappaB
p65/p50 transcription factor and constitutively suppressed by PI3K-Akt pathway
activity. HUVEC monolayers exposed to HOSCN bind 8-fold more neutrophils and 3-
to 4-fold more Aml14.3D10 cells (a differentiated cell line model of mature
eosinophils) than control monolayers. Blocking Ab studies confirm the involvement
of E-selectin and ICAM-1 but not VCAM-1 in neutrophil adhesion and of all three
in Aml14.3D10 adhesion. Intraperitoneal injection of HOSCN evoked an 8-fold
increase in neutrophil peritoneal extravasation. In addition to NF-kappaB, HOSCN 
also activates the potentially proinflammatory transcription factors Stat4, CDP, 
GRE, CBF, Ets-1/PEA3, and TFIID, a pattern easily distinguishable from that
induced by LPS. These results suggest that phagocyte peroxidases function to
amplify inflammation through a novel, HOSCN-specific oxidant mechanism.

PMID: 17142773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Transplantation. 2006 Nov 27;82(10):1362-9.

Cardiac and skin xenograft survival in different recipient mouse strains.

Gock H(1), Murray-Segal L, Salvaris E, Fisicaro N, Cowan PJ, d'Apice AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Centre, University of Melbourne, St. Vincent's Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: There are conflicting reports on the importance of antibody and
cell-mediated mechanisms and the influence of TH1 or TH2 cytokines on acute
vascular xenograft rejection. We sought to resolve some of the recent
discrepancies in the rat-to-mouse xenograft model where different recipient
strains are used and investigated the TH1/TH2 influence on rejection.
METHODS: Lewis rat heart xenograft survival was compared between BALB/c and
C57BL/6 recipients. Antigraft antibody deposition, serum anti-rat antibody levels
and B-cell deficient recipients were used to examine the contribution of antibody
to rejection. To further investigate a TH1 or TH2 bias effect in vivo, we used
BALB/c STAT4 knockout (KO) and STAT6 KO recipient mice. Experiments were repeated
with rat skin xenografts to examine TH1/TH2 influences on cell-mediated
rejection.
RESULTS: The median survival (MS) of rat heart xenografts in BALB/c and C57BL/6
mice was five and eight days, respectively (P = 0.002). The MS in B-cell
deficient mice was 16 days (P < 0.001). The MS in STAT4 KO and STAT6 KO mice was 
six and seven days respectively (P = 0.009). All non-B-cell deficient recipients 
showed strong IgM deposition and histological features of both cellular and
antibody-mediated rejection. There was no correlation between serum anti-rat
antibody levels and graft outcome or graft deposition. There was no survival
difference of skin xenografts in BALB/c, C57BL/6, B-cell deficient, STAT6 KO, or 
STAT4 KO mice (8-9 days).
CONCLUSIONS: Both humoral and cell-mediated immunity have significant roles in
vascularized heart xenograft rejection. TH1/TH2 biases minimally affect rejection
through humoral but not cellular immunity.

PMID: 17130786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7673-9.

Microenvironment-dependent requirement of STAT4 for the induction of P-selectin
ligands and effector cytokines on CD4+ T cells in healthy and parasite-infected
mice.

Syrbe U(1), Hoffmann U, Schlawe K, Liesenfeld O, Erb K, Hamann A.

Author information: 
(1)Charité, Campus Mitte, Experimentelle Rheumatologie, c/o Deutsches
Rheumaforschungszentrum, Schumannstrasse 21/22, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
syrbe@drfz.de

T effector cells require selectin ligands to migrate into inflamed regions. In
vitro, IL-12 promotes induction of these ligands as well as differentiation of
CD4+ T cells into IFN-gamma-producing Th1 but not Th2 cells. STAT4 is strongly
involved in these processes. However, the presence of selectin ligands on various
T effector cell subsets in vivo points to more complex regulatory pathways. To
clarify the role of the IL-12/STAT4 signaling pathway, we analyzed the impact of 
STAT4 deficiency on the expression of P-selectin ligands (P-lig) on CD4+ T cells 
in vitro and in vivo, including conditions of infection. In vitro, we found
significant expression of P-lig upon activation not only in the presence, but
also in the absence, of IL-12, which was independent of STAT4. TGF-beta, an
alternative inducer of selectin ligands in human T cells, was not effective in
murine CD4+ T cells, suggesting a role of additional signaling pathways. In vivo,
a significant impact of STAT4 for the generation of P-lig+CD4+ T cells was
observed for cells from peripheral lymph nodes, but not for those from spleen or 
lung. However, upon infection with the Th2-inducing parasite Nippostrongylus
brasiliensis, P-lig expression became dependent on STAT4 signaling.
Interestingly, also the frequency of IL-4-producing cells was greatly diminished 
in absence of STAT4. These data reveal a hitherto unknown contribution of STAT4
to the generation of Th2 cells in parasite infection and suggest that signals
inducing inflammation-seeking properties in vivo vary depending on environmental 
conditions, such as type of organ and infection.

PMID: 17114437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7618-25.

IL-12-programmed long-term CD8+ T cell responses require STAT4.

Li Q(1), Eppolito C, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, 322 Cancer Cell
Center, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Immunological adjuvants activate innate immune cells for Ag presentation and
elicitation of cytokines like IL-12 that promote T cell expansion and effector
differentiation. An important but elusive aim for most immunization strategies is
to produce memory T cells that provide durable immunity. Recent evidence
demonstrates that the context of Ag presentation instructionally programs T cells
for short- and long-term responses. However, the role and mechanisms by which
cytokines like IL-12 condition CD8 T cells for long-term responses remain
relatively uncharacterized. In this study, we show that brief exposure (20 h) of 
naive TCR-transgenic CD8 cells to IL-12 during Ag stimulation leads to transient 
phosphorylation of STAT4 for robust effector differentiation. Moreover, the
IL-12-induced STAT4 engenders greater clonal expansion of the Ag-activated CD8
cells by regulating the expression of the transcriptional factor Bcl3- and
Bcl2-related genes that promote survival of Ag-activated CD8 cells. Remarkably,
the IL-12-conditioned CD8 T cells demonstrate increased sensitivity to IL-7 and
IL-15, whereby they are rendered "fit" for homeostatic self-renewal as well as
augmented CD4-dependent recall responses that are effective at controlling
Salmonella infection in vivo. This information provides new insights into
mechanisms by which IL-12 conditions CD8 T cells for long-term immunity, which is
likely to benefit development of new strategies for the use of IL-12 in
infectious diseases and cancer.

PMID: 17114431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2006 Dec;27(12):1616-21.

(5R)-5-hydroxytriptolide inhibits IFN-gamma-related signaling.

Zhou R(1), Wang JX, Tang W, He PL, Yang YF, Li YC, Li XY, Zuo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research,
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

AIM: (5R)-5-hydroxytriptolide (LLDT-8) displayed anti-arthritis and
anti-allogenic transplantation rejection activities in our previous studies.
Here, we aim to further clarify the effect of LLDT-8 on the pro-inflammatory
cytokine IFN-gamma.
METHODS: T cells were activated with anti-CD3 antibody or concanavalin A (ConA). 
The expression of cell surface molecules was detected with flow cytometry. Cells 
were labeled with carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) to test 
cell division. IFN-gamma production was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay. Cell proliferation was evaluated by [3H]-thymidine uptake. Mice were
immunized with ovalbumin to assess the in vivo immune response. RT-PCR and
Real-time PCR were applied to determine the mRNA expression. The protein
phosphorylation levels were detected by Western immunoblot assay.
RESULTS: LLDT-8 at 100 nmol/L did not change the CD25, CD69, and CD154
expressions in anti-CD3-stimulated T cells. LLDT-8 markedly blocked the cell
division of CD4 and CD8 T cells after ConA stimulation. LLDT-8 inhibited T
cell-derived IFN-gamma production. Moreover, LLDT-8 suppressed the
ovalbumin-specific T cell proliferation and IFN-gamma generation. In
anti-CD3-activated T cells, LLDT-8 abrogated the mRNA expression of signal
transducer and activator of transcription1 (STAT1), T-box transcription factor,
IL-12 receptor beta2, STAT4, and interferon regulatory factor 1 in the IFN-gamma 
expression pathway. Western blot analysis showed that LLDT-8 blocked the
phosphorylation levels of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, stress-activated
protein kinase (SAPK)/c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase in anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28-activated T cells. In addition, LLDT-8 reduced 
the transcripts of macrophage inflammatory protein (Mip)-1alpha, Mip-1beta,
regulated upon activation normally T-cell expressed and secreted, inducible
protein-10, IFN-inducible T cell a chemoattractant, and monokine induced by
IFN-gamma in IFN-gamma-stimulated murine macrophage cell line Raw 264.7 cells.
CONCLUSION: LLDT-8 was a potential inhibitor for IFN-gamma-associated signaling.

PMID: 17112417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2481-7. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

Hlx homeobox transcription factor negatively regulates interferon-gamma
production in monokine-activated natural killer cells.

Becknell B(1), Hughes TL, Freud AG, Blaser BW, Yu J, Trotta R, Mao HC, Caligiuri 
de Jesús ML, Alghothani M, Benson DM Jr, Lehman A, Jarjoura D, Perrotti D, Bates 
MD, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Program, Department of Internal Medicine, College of
Medicine and Public Health, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells contribute to host immunity, including tumor
surveillance, through the production of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma). Although
there is some knowledge about molecular mechanisms that induce IFN-gamma in NK
cells, considerably less is known about the mechanisms that reduce its
expression. Here, we investigate the role of the Hlx transcription factor in
IFN-gamma production by NK cells. Hlx expression is induced in monokine-activated
NK cells, but with delayed kinetics compared to IFN-gamma. Ectopic Hlx expression
decreases IFN-gamma synthesis in primary human NK cells and IFN-gamma promoter
activity in an NK-like cell line. Hlx protein levels inversely correlate with
those of STAT4, a requisite factor for optimal IFN-gamma transcription.
Mechanistically, we provide evidence indicating that Hlx overexpression
accelerates dephosphorylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of the active 
Y693-phosphorylated form of STAT4. Thus, Hlx expression in activated NK cells
temporally controls and limits the monokine-induced production of IFN-gamma, in
part through the targeted depletion of STAT4.

PMCID: PMC1852195
PMID: 17110450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Surg Res. 2007 Jan;137(1):10-5. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

The STAT4 and STAT6 pathways in pancreatitis-associated lung injury.

Simovic MO(1), Ballard BR, Gray KD, Stain SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
milomir.simovic@amedd.army.mil

BACKGROUND: The STAT pathways are integral to the inflammatory response and these
proteins provide a direct link between the cytokine receptors and
cytokine-induced gene transcription. We examined the roles of STAT4 and STAT6 in 
lung injury after caerulein-induced severe acute pancreatitis. We hypothesized
that a modified organ expression of cytokines and chemokines that occurs in
transgenic mice may affect the systemic response to severe acute pancreatitis.
METHODS: Acute pancreatitis [13-hourly intraperitoneal injections of caerulein
(50 microg/kg body weight, 0.2 mL) or the same volume of saline] was induced in
wild-type (BALB/c) and transgenic (STAT4 or STAT6) mice of the same background, 7
to 8 weeks old. The pancreatic and lung tissues were collected at 1, 6, 12, and
24 h after the completion of caerulein administration. Tissue leukocyte
sequestration was assessed by myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity. Standard
histological staining hematoxylin and eosin was performed and blindly scored by a
pathologist for evidence of lung injury (pulmonary edema, accumulations of
neutrophils and mononuclear cells, thickness of alveolar-capillary membrane,
perivascular infiltrate, and hemorrhage).
RESULTS: Caerulein-treated wild-type mice exhibited increased lung injury score
at 1 through 12 h, as compared to saline controls. As compared to wild-type,
STAT6-deficient mice had increased lung injury from 1 to 6 h, with full recovery 
by 12 h. An opposite pattern was observed in STAT4-deficient mice with mild
injury seen at 1 and 6 h, and maximal injury at 12 h. MPO activity was
significantly increased at 6 h in caerulein-treated wild-type mice compared to
saline-treated controls. Caerulein-treated STAT6 and STAT4 mice had markedly
increased MPO activity as compared with their saline controls during the first 6 
h. Both caerulein-treated STAT4- and STAT6-deficient mice had significantly
increased MPO activity in comparison with wild-type mice with pancreatitis at 6
h.
CONCLUSION: We found the maximal lung injury after caerulein-induced pancreatitis
occurred at different time-points in STAT4 and STAT6-deficient mice. These
temporal differences may suggest alternative roles in the systemic inflammatory
response associated with pancreatitis.

PMID: 17109890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(8):1864-72. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Pre-assembly of STAT4 with the human IFN-alpha/beta receptor-2 subunit is
mediated by the STAT4 N-domain.

Tyler DR(1), Persky ME, Matthews LA, Chan S, Farrar JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

CD4(+) T cells regulate adaptive responses to pathogens by secreting unique
subsets of cytokines that mediate inflammatory processes. The innate cytokines
IL-12 and IFN-alpha/beta regulate type I responses and promote acute IFN-gamma
secretion through the activation of the STAT4 transcription factor. Although
IL-12-induced STAT4 activation is a conserved pathway across species,
IFN-alpha/beta-dependent STAT4 phosphorylation does not occur as efficiently in
mice as it does in human T cells. In order to understand this species-specific
pathway for IFN-alpha/beta-dependent STAT4 activation, we have examined the
molecular basis of STAT4 recruitment by the human IFNAR. In this report, we
demonstrate that the N-domain of STAT4 interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of
the human, but not the murine IFNAR2 subunit. This interaction mapped to a
membrane-proximal segment of the hIFNAR2 spanning amino acids 299-333. Deletion
of this region within the hIFNAR2 completely abolishes IFN-alpha/beta-dependent
STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation when expressed in human IFNAR2-deficient
fibroblasts. Thus, the human IFNAR2 cytoplasmic domain serves to link STAT4 to
the IFNAR as a pre-assembled complex that facilitates cytokine-driven STAT4
activation.

PMCID: PMC2700023
PMID: 17095088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jan;81(1):355-63. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

NF-{kappa}B is required for STAT-4 expression during dendritic cell maturation.

Remoli ME(1), Ragimbeau J, Giacomini E, Gafa V, Severa M, Lande R, Pellegrini S, 
Coccia EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-Mediated Diseases, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

The transcription factor STAT-4 plays a pivotal role in the IL-12-mediated
development of naive CD4+ T cells into the Th1 phenotype. Initially thought to be
restricted to the lymphoid lineage, STAT-4 was subsequently shown to be expressed
in the myeloid compartment, mainly in activated monocytes, macrophages, and
dendritic cells (DC). Here, we have studied STAT-4 in human monocyte-derived DC, 
and we demonstrated that its expression can be induced by multiple stimuli, such 
as the ligands for TLR-4, TLR-2, and TLR-3, different pathogens, CD40 ligand, and
the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-1beta. It is interesting that we
found that STAT-4 is tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to type I IFN but not
IL-12 in human mature DC. Cloning and functional analysis of the STAT-4 promoter 
showed that a NF-kappaB binding site, localized at -969/-959 bp upstream of the
transcriptional start site, is involved in the regulation of this gene in primary
human DC. EMSAs using a probe containing this NF-kappaB binding sequence and
chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated that p65/p50 and p50/p50 dimers were the 
main NF-kappaB/Rel proteins involved in STAT-4 gene expression in maturing DC.
The mutation of this kappaB site or the overexpression of the repressor
IkappaBalpha exerted an inhibitory effect on a STAT-4 promoter-driven reporter as
well as on STAT-4 expression. Altogether, these results indicate that STAT-4 can 
be finely tuned along with DC maturation through NF-kappaB activation and that
its induction may be involved in preparing the DC to be receptive to the cytokine
environment present in lymphoid organs.

PMID: 17046972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Mar;36(3):324-32. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

IL-2 and IL-18 attenuation of airway hyperresponsiveness requires STAT4,
IFN-gamma, and natural killer cells.

Matsubara S(1), Takeda K, Kodama T, Joetham A, Miyahara N, Koya T, Swasey CH,
Okamoto M, Dakhama A, Gelfand EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical
and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

IL-18 is known to induce IFN-gamma production, which is enhanced when combined
with IL-2. In the present study, we investigated whether the combination of
exogenous IL-2 and IL-18 alters airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and airway
inflammation. Sensitized mice exposed to ovalbumin (OVA) challenge developed AHR,
inflammatory cells in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, and increases in
levels of Th2 cytokines and goblet cell numbers. The combination of IL-2 and
IL-18, but neither alone, prevented these changes while increasing levels of
IL-12 and IFN-gamma. The combination of IL-2 and IL-18 was ineffective in
IFN-gamma-deficient and signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)4-deficient mice. Flow cytometry analysis showed significant increases in
numbers of IFN-gamma-positive natural killer (NK) cells in the lung after
treatment with the combination therapy, and transfer of lung NK cells isolated
from sensitized and challenged mice treated with the combination significantly
suppressed AHR and BAL eosinophilia. These data demonstrate that the combination 
of IL-2 and IL-18 prevents AHR and airway inflammation, likely through
IL-12-mediated induction of IFN-gamma production in NK cells.

PMCID: PMC1899318
PMID: 17038663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Blood. 2007 Feb 1;109(3):1113-22. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Dendritic-cell maturation alters intracellular signaling networks, enabling
differential effects of IFN-alpha/beta on antigen cross-presentation.

Longman RS(1), Braun D, Pellegrini S, Rice CM, Darnell RB, Albert ML.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

The broad and often contrasting effects of type I interferons (IFNs) in innate
and adaptive immunity are belied by the signaling via a single receptor,
IFN-alpha receptor (IFNAR). Here, we show that IFN-alpha/beta induces opposing
effects on the immunologic outcome of antigen cross-presentation depending on
dendritic cell (DC) maturation status. Despite equivalent IFNAR expression,
immature conventional DCs (cDCs) activate STAT1 in response to IFN-alpha/beta,
whereas exposure of mature DCs to IFN-alpha/beta results in signaling via STAT4. 
Microarray analysis revealed numerous transcriptional changes resulting from the 
altered signaling. Importantly, STAT1 signaling resulted in significant
inhibition of CD40L-induced IL-12 production, accounting for the inhibition of
CD8+ T-cell activation. These data provide evidence for a molecular switch in
signaling pathways concomitant with DC maturation that offers a novel mechanism
by which DCs modulate the integration of signals from the surrounding
environment.

PMID: 17018853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 15;177(8):5195-203.

Distinct characteristics of murine STAT4 activation in response to IL-12 and
IFN-alpha.

Berenson LS(1), Gavrieli M, Farrar JD, Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Washington University of
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The role of type I IFN in Th1 development, STAT4 activation, and IFN-gamma
production in murine T cells has remained unresolved despite extensive
examination. Initial studies indicated that IFN-alpha induced Th1 development and
IFN-gamma production in human, but not murine, T cells, suggesting
species-specific differences in signaling. Later studies suggested that IFN-alpha
also induced Th1 development in mice, similar to IL-12. More recent studies have 
questioned whether IFN-alpha actually induces Th1 development even in the human
system. In the present study, we compared the capacity of IL-12 and IFN-alpha to 
induce Th1 differentiation, STAT4 phosphorylation, and IFN-gamma production in
murine T cells. First, we show that IFN-alpha, in contrast to IL-12, cannot
induce Th1 development. However, in differentiated Th1 cells, IFN-alpha can
induce transient, but not sustained, STAT4 phosphorylation and, in synergy with
IL-18, can induce transient, but not sustained, IFN-gamma production in Th1
cells, in contrast to the sustained actions of IL-12. Furthermore, loss of STAT1 
increases IFN-alpha-induced STAT4 phosphorylation, but does not generate levels
of STAT4 activation or IFN-gamma production achieved by IL-12 or convert
transient STAT4 activation into a sustained response. Our findings agree with
recent observations in human T cells that IFN-alpha-induced STAT4 activation is
transient and unable to induce Th1 development, and indicate that IFN-alpha may
act similarly in human and murine T cells.

PMID: 17015705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3721-7.

IL-21 inhibits IFN-gamma production in developing Th1 cells through the
repression of Eomesodermin expression.

Suto A(1), Wurster AL, Reiner SL, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Exposure of naive Th cell precursors (Thp) to IL-21 inhibits IFN-gamma production
from developing Th1 cells. The inhibition of IFN-gamma seen in IL-21-treated Thp 
cells is specific as the expression of other Th1 cytokines is unaffected.
Recently, it has been reported that Eomesodermin (Eomes), a member of the T-box
gene family, is expressed in developing CD8+ T cells and plays an important role 
in regulating IFN-gamma production and cytolytic effector function. In this
study, we show that Eomes mRNA and protein are also expressed in developing Th1
cells, and exposure of naive Thp cells to IL-21 results in a decrease in Eomes
expression. Moreover, the repression of Eomes expression by IL-21 is not due to
an indirect effect of IL-21 on the expression of IFN-gamma or STAT4 and is
independent of STAT1 and T-bet expression. Finally, we show that ectopic
expression of Eomes prevents the inhibition of IFN-gamma production from
IL-21-treated Thp cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Eomes
plays a role in regulating IFN-gamma production in CD4+ T cells and IL-21
inhibits IFN-gamma production in developing Th1 cells through the repression of
Eomes expression.

PMID: 16951332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Brain Res. 2006 Dec 18;1126(1):139-47. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Sex differences in coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis: IL-12Rbeta1 signaling
and IFN-gamma increase inflammation in males independent from STAT4.

Frisancho-Kiss S(1), Nyland JF, Davis SE, Frisancho JA, Barrett MA, Rose NR,
Fairweather D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, 728
Rutland Avenue, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Cardiovascular disease is the number one killer of men and women in North
America. Male BALB/c mice infected with coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) develop more
severe inflammatory heart disease compared to female mice, similar to the
increased heart disease that occurs in men. We show here that increased
inflammation in male mice is not due to increased viral replication in the heart,
but associated with increased proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta, IL-18 and
IFN-gamma. We have previously reported that IL-12Rbeta1 signaling increases
CVB3-induced myocarditis and IL-1beta/IL-18 levels in males, while
IL-12(p35)/STAT4-induced IFN-gamma does not alter the severity of acute disease. 
However, whether differences exist between males and females in these two
cytokine signaling pathways is unknown. In this study, we examined sex
differences in 1) IL-12Rbeta1 signaling or 2) STAT4/IFN-gamma pathways following 
CVB3 infection in BALB/c mice. We found that male and female mice deficient in
IL-12Rbeta1 had decreased inflammation and viral replication in the heart,
indicating that IL-12Rbeta1 signaling increases myocarditis in both sexes. In
contrast, STAT4 deficiency did not alter the sex difference in myocarditis, with 
males maintaining increased inflammation over females. IFN-gamma deficient males,
however, had decreased myocarditis and viral replication compared to females.
Thus, IFN-gamma increases inflammation in males independent from STAT4. These
results demonstrate that sex differences greatly influence viral replication and 
the severity of acute CVB3-induced myocarditis.

PMID: 16949558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 1;177(5):3028-34.

Simvastatin treatment ameliorates autoimmune disease associated with accelerated 
atherosclerosis in a murine lupus model.

Aprahamian T(1), Bonegio R, Rizzo J, Perlman H, Lefer DJ, Rifkin IR, Walsh K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus develop accelerated atherosclerosis
independent of traditional risk factors. The 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme
A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors are widely prescribed for hyperlipidemia, but
they also exhibit anti-inflammatory actions that appear to be independent of
their suppressive actions on plasma cholesterol levels. In this study, we
analyzed the effect of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor simvastatin on disease
manifestations in gld.apoE-/- mice that lack functional Fas ligand and
apolipoprotein E and exhibit accelerated atherosclerosis and aggravated
lupus-like features. Wild-type, gld, apoE-/-, and gld.apoE-/- mice were
maintained on a high cholesterol Western diet and received daily simvastatin
(0.125 mg/kg) or saline for 12 wk. Serum cholesterol levels were unaffected by
simvastatin treatment, but atherosclerotic lesion area was reduced in both
apoE-/- and gld.apoE-/- mice treated with simvastatin. Simvastatin also reduced
the lymphadenopathy, renal disease, and proinflammatory cytokine production seen 
in gld.apoE-/-, but not gld, mice. The immunomodulatory effects in gld.apoE-/-
mice were associated with enhanced STAT6 and decreased STAT4 induction in
submandibular lymph node cells. Along with reductions in serum TNF-alpha and
IFN-gamma levels, there was also an increase in IL-4 and IL-10 transcript levels 
in lymph nodes. These data indicate that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors ameliorate 
atherosclerosis and lupus-like autoimmunity independent of their
cholesterol-lowering effects via a shift from a Th1 to a Th2 phenotype in the
gld.apoE-/- model. Thus, the anti-inflammatory activities of statins may have
utility for the treatment of both autoimmunity and atherosclerosis in patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus.

PMCID: PMC2752011
PMID: 16920939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. BMC Immunol. 2006 Aug 17;7:18.

Profiling helper T cell subset gene expression in deer mice.

Oko L(1), Aduddell-Swope B, Willis D, Hamor R, Coons TA, Hjelle B, Schountz T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, 1556 Ross
Hall, Greeley, CO 80639, USA. lauren_oko@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) are the most common mammals in
North America and are reservoirs for several zoonotic agents, including Sin
Nombre virus (SNV), the principal etiologic agent of hantavirus cardiopulmonary
syndrome (HCPS) in North America. Unlike human HCPS patients, SNV-infected deer
mice show no overt pathological symptoms, despite the presence of virus in the
lungs. A neutralizing IgG antibody response occurs, but the virus establishes a
persistent infection. Limitations of detailed analysis of deer mouse immune
responses to SNV are the lack of reagents and methods for evaluating such
responses.
RESULTS: We developed real-time PCR-based detection assays for several
immune-related transcription factor and cytokine genes from deer mice that permit
the profiling of CD4+ helper T cells, including markers of Th1 cells (T-bet,
STAT4, IFNgamma, TNF, LT), Th2 cells (GATA-3, STAT6, IL-4, IL-5) and regulatory T
cells (Fox-p3, IL-10, TGFbeta1). These assays compare the expression of in vitro 
antigen-stimulated and unstimulated T cells from individual deer mice.
CONCLUSION: We developed molecular methods for profiling immune gene expression
in deer mice, including a multiplexed real-time PCR assay for assessing
expression of several cytokine and transcription factor genes. These assays
should be useful for characterizing the immune responses of experimentally- and
naturally-infected deer mice.

PMCID: PMC1559719
PMID: 16916450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006 Sep;145(3):535-44.

Treatment of monocytes with interleukin (IL)-12 plus IL-18 stimulates survival,
differentiation and the production of CXC chemokine ligands (CXCL)8, CXCL9 and
CXCL10.

Coma G(1), Peña R, Blanco J, Rosell A, Borras FE, Esté JA, Clotet B, Ruiz L,
Parkhouse RM, Bofill M.

Author information: 
(1)Fundació IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Spain.

During inflammation, interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-18 are produced by macrophages
and other cell types such as neutrophils (IL-12), keratinocytes and damaged
endothelial cells (IL-18). To explore the role of IL-12 and IL-18 in inflammatory
innate immune responses we investigated their impact on human peripheral blood
monocytes and mature bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) macrophages. IL-12 and IL-18
together, but not alone, prevented spontaneous apoptosis of cultured monocytes,
promoted monocyte clustering and subsequent differentiation into macrophages.
These morphological changes were accompanied by increased secretion of CXC
chemokine ligands (CXCL)9, CXCL10 (up to 100-fold, P < 0.001) and CXCL8 (up to
10-fold, P < 0.001) but not CCL3, CCL4 or CCL5. Mature macrophages (from BALs)
expressed high basal levels of CXCL8, that were no modified upon stimulation with
IL-12 and IL-18. In contrast, the basal production of CXCL9 and CXCL10 by BALs
was increased by 10-fold (P < 0.001) in the presence of either IL-12 or IL-18
alone and by 50-fold in the presence of both cytokines. In conclusion, our
results indicate a relevant role for IL-12 and IL-18 in the activation and
resolution of inflammatory immune responses, by increasing the survival of
monocytes and by inducing the production of chemokines. In particular, those that
may regulate angiogenesis and promote the recruitment of monocytes, activated T
cells (CXCL9 and CXCL10) and granulocytes (CXCL8).

PMCID: PMC1809701
PMID: 16907924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 1;177(3):1679-88.

Dendritic cells transduced with SOCS-3 exhibit a tolerogenic/DC2 phenotype that
directs type 2 Th cell differentiation in vitro and in vivo.

Li Y(1), Chu N, Rostami A, Zhang GX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, 
USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) have been suggested to direct a type of Th differentiation 
through their cytokine profile, e.g., high IL-12/IL-23 for Th1 (named
DC1/immunogenic DCs) and IL-10 for Th2 (DC2/tolerogenic DCs). Suppressor of
cytokine signaling (SOCS)-3 is a potent inhibitor of Stat3 and Stat4 transduction
pathways for IL-23 and IL-12, respectively. We thus hypothesize that an enhanced 
SOCS-3 expression in DCs may block the autocrine response of IL-12/IL-23 in these
cells, causing them to become a DC2-type phenotype that will subsequently promote
Th2 polarization of naive T cells. Indeed, in the present study we found that
bone marrow-derived DCs transduced with SOCS-3 significantly inhibited
IL-12-induced activation of Stat4 and IL-23-induced activation of Stat3. These
SOCS-3-transduced DCs expressed a low level of MHC class II and CD86 on their
surface, produced a high level of IL-10 but low levels of IL-12 and IFN-gamma,
and expressed a low level of IL-23 p19 mRNA. Functionally, SOCS-3-transduced DCs 
drove naive myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-specific T cells to a strong Th2 
differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Injection of SOCS-3-transduced DCs
significantly suppressed experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a Th1
cell-mediated autoimmune disorder of the CNS and an animal model of multiple
sclerosis. These results indicate that transduction of SOCS-3 in DCs is an
effective approach to generating tolerogenic/DC2 cells that then skew immune
response toward Th2, thus possessing therapeutic potential in Th1-dominant
autoimmune disorders such as multiple sclerosis.

PMID: 16849477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Arch Dermatol Res. 2006 Sep;298(4):163-73. Epub 2006 Jul 15.

Lipoteichoic acid-related molecule derived from the streptococcal preparation,
OK-432, which suppresses atopic dermatitis-like lesions in NC/Nga mice.

Horiuchi Y(1), Bae S, Katayama I, Oshikawa T, Okamoto M, Sato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-7-1 Sakamoto, 852-8501 Nagasaki, Japan, ngu-yashoriu@r7.dion.ne.jp

Bacterial stimulation may serve to control atopic disorders such as atopic
dermatitis (AD) through inducement of Th1 cell-mediated immune response. The
lipoteichoic acid (LTA)-related molecule (okLTA) from streptococcal preparation, 
OK-432, has been shown to be a potent Th1 inducer through the action of IL-12.
Examination was made of the therapeutic effects of this okLTA injected intra-
and/or subcutaneously into AD-like lesions in NC/Nga mice, particularly in the
vicinity of the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) regulatory pathways.
Using immunohistochemical staining with IL-4/IL-12p40 and phosphorylated
STAT6/p-STAT4 and RT-PCR for IL-4/IL-12p40, STAT6/STAT4 and mRNA expression and
in situ hybridization of SOCS3 and 5, evaluation was made of the immunoregulatory
effects of this okLTA in the treatment of spontaneous AD-like lesions in NC/Nga
mice. Following the injection of okLTA, remarkable improvement in the lesions of 
NC/Nga mice was noted. In okLTA-treated skin, IL-12p40/p-STAT4 positive cellular 
infiltration was extensive while IL-4/p-STAT6 positive cell infiltration was seen
to diminish considerably, compared to untreated NC mice. SOCS3 in situ expression
in okLTA-treated mice was noted to be significantly less compared to untreated NC
mice, in which the expression was prominent. SOCS5 in situ expression was rather,
though not significantly, strong in okLTA-treated mice. okLTA treatment is
clearly shown to induce Th1 cellular response and down-regulate immune response
in the Th2 pathway through SOCS3 reduction in AD-like lesions of NC/Nga mice. The
present results demonstrate that bacterial wall components such as okLTA should
serve as an effective new therapeutic approach for treating AD.

PMID: 16845523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 8;281(36):26216-24. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Identification of human STAT5-dependent gene regulatory elements based on
interspecies homology.

Nelson EA(1), Walker SR, Li W, Liu XS, Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

STAT5 is a transcription factor essential for hematopoietic physiology. STAT5
functions to transduce signals from cytokines to the nucleus where it regulates
gene expression. Although several important transcriptional targets of STAT5 are 
known, most remain unidentified. To identify novel STAT5 targets, we searched
chromosomes 21 and 22 for clusters of STAT5 binding sites contained within
regions of interspecies homology. We identified four such regions, including one 
with tandem STAT5 binding sites in the first intron of the NCAM2 gene. Unlike
known STAT5 binding sites, this site is found within a very large intron and
resides approximately 200 kb from the first coding exon of NCAM2. We demonstrate 
that this region confers STAT5-dependent transcriptional activity. We show that
STAT5 binds in vivo to the NCAM2 intron in the NKL natural killer cell line and
that this binding is induced by cytokines that activate STAT5. Neither STAT1 nor 
STAT3 bind to this region, despite sharing a consensus binding sequence with
STAT5. Activation of STAT4 and STAT5 causes the accumulation of both of these
STATs to the NCAM2 regulatory region. Therefore, using an informatics based
approach to identify STAT5 targets, we have identified NCAM2 as both a STAT4- and
STAT5-regulated gene, and we show that its expression is regulated by cytokines
essential for natural killer cell survival and differentiation. This strategy may
be an effective way to identify functional binding regions for transcription
factors with known cognate binding sites anywhere in the genome.

PMCID: PMC3427032
PMID: 16840779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Exp Neurol. 2006 Sep;201(1):212-24. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Immune-mediated neuroprotection of axotomized mouse facial motoneurons is
dependent on the IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathway in CD4(+) T cells.

Deboy CA(1), Xin J, Byram SC, Serpe CJ, Sanders VM, Jones KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Loyola University
Chicago, 2160 S. 1st Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, USA. cdeboy3@jhmi.edu

The CD4(+) T lymphocyte has recently been found to promote facial motoneuron
(FMN) survival after nerve injury. Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription (STAT)4 and STAT6 are key proteins involved in the CD4(+) T cell
differentiation pathways leading to T helper type (Th)1 and Th2 cell development,
respectively. To determine which CD4(+) T cell subset mediates FMN survival, the 
facial nerve axotomy paradigm was applied to STAT4-deficient (-/-) and STAT6-/-
mice. A significant decrease in FMN survival 4 weeks after axotomy was observed
in STAT6-/- mice compared to wild-type (WT) or STAT4-/- mice. Reconstituting
STAT6-/- mice with CD4(+) T cells obtained from WT mice promoted WT levels of FMN
survival after injury. Furthermore, rescue of FMN from axotomy-induced cell death
in recombination activating gene (RAG)-2-/- mice (lacking T and B cells) could be
achieved only by reconstitution with CD4(+) T cells expressing functional STAT6
protein. To determine if either the Th1 cytokine, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) or
the Th2 cytokine IL-4 is involved in mediating FMN survival, facial nerve axotomy
was applied to IFN-gamma-/- and IL-4-/- mice. A significant decrease in FMN
survival after axotomy occurred in IL-4-/- but not in IFN-gamma-/- mice compared 
to WT mice, indicating that IL-4 but not IFN-gamma is important for FMN survival 
after nerve injury. In WT mice, intracellular IFN-gamma vs. IL-4 expression was
examined in CD4(+) T cells from draining cervical lymph nodes 14 days after
axotomy, and substantial increase in the production of both CD4(+) effector T
cell subsets was found. Collectively, these data suggest that STAT6-mediated
CD4(+) T cell differentiation into the Th2 subset is necessary for FMN survival. 
A hypothesis relevant to motoneuron disease progression is presented.

PMID: 16806176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Hepatology. 2006 Jul;44(1):216-27.

Favored T helper 1 response in a mouse model of hepatosteatosis is associated
with enhanced T cell-mediated hepatitis.

Kremer M(1), Hines IN, Milton RJ, Wheeler MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
NC 27599, USA. mkremer@med.unc.edu

Steatohepatitis enhances the severity of liver injury caused by acute
inflammation. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that fatty
liver due to chronic choline-deficient diet exacerbates concanavalin A
(ConA)-induced liver hepatitis, which is predominantly facilitated by T cells.
Male C57BL/6 mice were fed either control choline-sufficient diet (CSD) or
choline-deficient diet (CDD) for 6 weeks before ConA administration. Mice were
sacrificed 3, 9, and 24 hours after ConA injection. Liver injury measured by
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), pathology, and 
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining
was minimal in mice fed either diet before ConA exposure. However, ConA-induced
liver injury was significantly greater in CDD-fed mice compared with control-fed 
mice. Liver cytokines were assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The expression of T helper (Th) 1 cytokines tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 12 (IL-12), and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) were 
dramatically elevated after ConA in CDD-fed mice compared with control-fed mice. 
CDD also enhanced ConA-induced STAT4 activation, but not STAT6. Notably,
regulators of T-cell differentiation were strongly shifted toward a predominant
Th1 profile. T-bet, regulator of the Th1 response, was up-regulated in CDD-fed
mice, whereas Th2 regulator GATA-3 was significantly suppressed in CDD-fed mice
after ConA. Moreover, the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling
(SOCS)-1, SOCS-3, and repressor of GATA-3 (ROG) favored a predominant Th1
cytokine response in CDD-fed mice. In conclusion, these data support the
hypothesis that hepatosteatosis caused by CDD is associated with more severe
ConA-induced hepatitis due to a predominant shift toward Th1 response.

PMID: 16799967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Exp Mol Pathol. 2006 Aug;81(1):15-22. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

STAT4 and the proliferation of artery smooth muscle cells in atherosclerosis.

Guo F(1), Zarella C, Wagner WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University, School of Medicine, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Artery smooth muscle cell proliferation is of key importance in the development
of atherosclerosis and restenosis following PTCA. In order to understand gene
regulation involved in these processes, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) from
atherosclerosis-susceptible White Carneau (WC) and atherosclerosis-resistant Show
Racer (SR) pigeons were used to identify transcription factors involved in the
enhanced proliferation of WC VSMCs. With protein/DNA array, signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) was found to have over a 10-fold increase in
expression in WC compared to SR VSMCs. The difference was confirmed with
electrophoretic-mobility shift assay (EMSA) and Western blot. Cells cultured
under low serum had 5-fold higher levels of STAT4 in WC compared to SR. By
Western analysis, aortic tissue from newly hatched WC pigeons had 1.7-2.0 times
greater STAT4 expression than in SR pigeons. A pathway whereby enhanced STAT4 may
be associated with enhanced proliferation was identified following IL-12
stimulation of WC VSMCs where 3-fold increases in proliferation and 2-fold higher
expression of STAT4 were measured. The findings suggest STAT4 may play a role in 
VSMC proliferation and describe a unique pigeon model system in which to study
STAT4 as a gene target for atherosclerosis therapy.

PMID: 16797528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Immunology. 2006 Sep;119(1):43-53. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Interleukin-4 supports interleukin-12-induced proliferation and interferon-gamma 
secretion in human activated lymphoblasts and T helper type 1 cells.

Kriegel MA(1), Tretter T, Blank N, Schiller M, Gabler C, Winkler S, Kalden JR,
Lorenz HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Institute for Clinical Immunology and
Rheumatology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
Martin.Kriegel@yale.edu

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IL-4 are known to differentially promote T helper (Th)
cell differentiation. While IL-12 induces interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) production
and maturation of Th1 cells, IL-4 is thought to antagonize IL-12 and to favour
Th2 development. Here we studied the combined action of various concentrations of
common gamma-chain (gamma(c)-chain) cytokines, including IL-4 and the Th1
cytokine IL-12, in human activated lymphoblasts and Th1 cells. IL-4 and IL-7
potentiated IL-12-induced proliferation at every concentration tested (1-10
ng/ml) without increasing rescue from apoptosis, indicating that proliferation
was directly affected by these cytokine combinations. With regards to cytokine
secretion, IL-2 together with IL-12 initiated tumour necrosis factor-alpha
synthesis, enhanced IFN-gamma production, and shedding of soluble IL-2 receptor
alpha as expected. Importantly, combining IL-4 with IL-12 also enhanced IFN-gamma
secretion in lymphoblasts and a Th1 cell line. Investigating signal transduction 
in lymphoblasts induced by these cytokines, we found that not only IL-2 but also 
IL-4 enhances signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) tyrosine
phosphorylation by IL-12. Tyrosine phosphorylations of janus kinase 2 (JAK-2),
tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and STAT4, 
STAT5 and STAT6 were not potentiated by combinations of these cytokines,
suggesting specificity for increased STAT3 phosphorylation. In conclusion, two
otherwise antagonizing cytokines co-operate in activated human lymphoblasts and
Th1 cells, possibly via STAT3 as a converging signal. These data demonstrate that
IL-4 can directly enhance human Th1 cell function independently of its known
actions on antigen-presenting cells. These findings should be of importance for
the design of cytokine-targeted therapies of human Th-cell-driven diseases.

PMCID: PMC1782327
PMID: 16762027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006 Dec;65(12):1558-64. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

Changes in synovial tissue Jak-STAT expression in rheumatoid arthritis in
response to successful DMARD treatment.

Walker JG(1), Ahern MJ, Coleman M, Weedon H, Papangelis V, Beroukas D,
Roberts-Thomson PJ, Smith MD.

Author information: 
(1)Repatriation General, Hospital, Daws Road, Daw Park 5041, South Australia,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Modulation of Jak-STAT signalling may provide an effective
therapeutic strategy in inflammatory arthritis (IA).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of successful disease-modifying antirheumatic
drug (DMARD) treatment on the expression of Jak-STAT in a cohort of patients with
active rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Synovial tissue biopsy specimens from 16 patients with active rheumatoid
arthritis, taken before and after initiation of DMARD treatment, were examined
for the presence of janus kinase (Jak)3, signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)1, STAT4 and STAT6 expression using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Successful treatment with DMARDs results in reduction in STAT1
expression in the lining, and STAT1 and STAT6 in the sublining of rheumatoid
arthritis synovial tissue. Although the overall expression of STAT4 and Jak3 was 
not significantly altered by DMARD treatment, there was a significant reduction
in the expression of the STAT4 and Jak3 bright cells, thought to be an activated 
dendritic cell subpopulation.
CONCLUSION: Results show that Jak3, STAT1, STAT4 expression and STAT6 sublining
expression decrease in response to successful treatment of rheumatoid arthritis
with standard DMARDs. Therefore, altering the expression of these pathways may
represent an alternative treatment option, either through promoting up-regulation
of inhibitory pathways, or suppressing inflammatory paths.

PMCID: PMC1798468
PMID: 16760256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug;288(1-2):179-89. Epub 2006 May 23.

IL-6 signaling via the STAT3/SOCS3 pathway: functional analysis of the conserved 
STAT3 N-domain.

Zhang L(1), Badgwell DB, Bevers JJ 3rd, Schlessinger K, Murray PJ, Levy DE,
Watowich SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
P.O. Box 301402, Unit 902, Houston, Texas, 77030-1903, USA.

The conserved N-domain of the STAT proteins has been implicated in several
activities crucial to cytokine signaling including receptor recruitment and STAT 
activation, cooperative DNA binding and STAT-dependent gene expression. We
evaluated the role of the STAT3 N-domain in the IL-6 signal transduction pathway 
leading to Socs3 gene expression, an essential mechanism that controls the
quality and magnitude of IL-6-dependent transcriptional responses. Based on the
model for STAT N-domain function in cooperative gene expression and the presence 
of tandem STAT binding motifs in the murine Socs3 promoter, we anticipated that
stabilizing interactions between adjacent STAT3 dimers via N-domain sequences
might be essential for Socs3 gene expression. This was underscored by the tight
conservation in the location and sequence of the tandem STAT binding sites
between the murine and human Socs3 promoters. Using reconstitution into Stat3-/- 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (Stat3-/- MEFs), we find that a STAT3 N-domain
deletion mutant (Delta 133STAT3) is activated by tyrosine phosphorylation in
response to IL-6 and then undergoes dephosphorylation with kinetics similar to
full-length STAT3. These results highlight important differences compared to
other STATs where the N-domain has been shown to mediate activation (STAT4) or
dephosphorylation (STAT1). STAT3 binds predominantly to a single STAT consensus
site in the Socs3 promoter, despite the presence of an adjacent STAT motif.
Significantly, Delta 133STAT3 stimulates expression of the endogenous Socs3 gene 
in Stat3-/- MEFs upon IL-6 treatment with an activity similar to reconstituted
STAT3, demonstrating that the N-domain is dispensable for Socs3 gene expression. 
We propose that the Socs3 gene in its chromosomal context is activated by the
IL-6/STAT3 pathway independent of STAT3 N-domain sequences.

PMCID: PMC2441693
PMID: 16718380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Exp Med. 2006 Jun 12;203(6):1493-505. Epub 2006 May 22.

T helper type 1-specific Brg1 recruitment and remodeling of nucleosomes
positioned at the IFN-gamma promoter are Stat4 dependent.

Zhang F(1), Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Transcriptional competence of the interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) locus is enhanced 
as Th1 effectors develop from naive CD4 T lymphocytes; conversely, this gene is
repressed during Th2 differentiation. We now show that the Switch (Swi)-sucrose
nonfermenter (SNF) component Brahma-related gene 1 (Brg1) is recruited, and
positioned nucleosomes are remodeled, in a Th1-specific manner that is dependent 
on the transcription factor Stat4 and calcineurin phosphatase activity.
Interference with specific components of mammalian Swi-SNF complexes decreased
CD4 T cell differentiation into IFN-gamma-positive Th1 cells. These findings
reveal a collaborative mechanism of IFN-gamma gene regulation during Th1
differentiation and suggest that a Th1-specific chromatin structure is created by
early recruitment of Swi-SNF complexes and nucleosome remodeling dependent on
Stat4 and calcineurin activation.

PMCID: PMC2118309
PMID: 16717115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Clin Immunol. 2006 Aug;120(2):189-98. Epub 2006 May 19.

STAT4 deficiency reduces autoantibody production and glomerulonephritis in a
mouse model of lupus.

Xu Z(1), Duan B, Croker BP, Morel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32601-0275, USA.

To determine the respective role of the IL-12 and IL-4 pathways in the
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus, we bred the Stat4 and Stat6 null
alleles onto the lupus-prone mouse B6.TC, which is a congenic derivative of
NZM2410. This model is characterized by abnormal splenocyte expansion,
distribution and architecture, T cell activation, peripheral B cell development, 
production of anti-nuclear antibodies, and proliferative glomerulonephritis.
STAT4 deficiency normalized the expression of each of these disease markers
toward or to C57BL/6 levels. In contrast, STAT6 deficiency impacted splenocyte
expansion and architecture, T cell activation, and anti-nuclear autoantibody
production, but without any significant effect on B cell development or renal
pathology. These results show that the IL-12/STAT4 pathway is involved in
multiple disease-associated phenotypes in the B6.TC mouse. In contrast, the
IL-4/STAT6 pathway regulates only a subset of disease markers that did not affect
renal pathology.

PMID: 16713741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 23;103(21):8137-42. Epub 2006 May 12.

Selective regulatory function of Socs3 in the formation of IL-17-secreting T
cells.

Chen Z(1), Laurence A, Kanno Y, Pacher-Zavisin M, Zhu BM, Tato C, Yoshimura A,
Hennighausen L, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling (Socs) 3 is a cytokine-inducible inhibitor with 
critical but selective cell-specific effects. We show that deficiency of Socs3 in
T cells had minimal effects on differentiation of T cells to the T helper (Th) 1 
or Th2 subsets; accordingly, Socs3 had no effect on IL-12-dependent signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 4 phosphorylation or
IL-4-dependent Stat6 phosphorylation. By contrast, Socs3 was found to be a major 
regulator of IL-23-mediated Stat3 phosphorylation and Th17 generation, and Stat3 
directly binds to the IL-17A and IL-17F promoters. We conclude that Socs3 is an
essential negative regulator of IL-23 signaling, inhibition of which constrains
the generation of Th17 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1459629
PMID: 16698929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Jun;36(6):1608-18.

Arthritis induced with cartilage-specific antibodiesis IL-4-dependent.

Nandakumar KS(1), Holmdahl R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Inflammation Research, Lund University, Sweden. nan@med.lu.se

It is widely believed that IL-4 exerts its influence by profiling the immune
response during priming and expansion of immune cells, and thereby modulates the 
outcome of chronic inflammation. In the present investigation, collagen
antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) was used to delineate the role of IL-4 in a T
cell-independent inflammatory phase. Mice predisposed to Th2 cytokines (BALB/c
and STAT4-deficient mice) developed a more severe arthritis than mice biased
towards Th1 cytokines (C57BL/6 and STAT6-deficient mice). Reduced incidence of
CAIA was observed in IL-4-deficient mice compared to control littermates.
Infiltrating cells in the paws of IL-4-sufficient mice had increased osteoclast
activity and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin (IL)-1beta
secretion. Massive infiltration of granulocytes and joint and cartilage damage
were present in arthritic paws. Depletion of IL-4 suppressed CAIA, which was
abrogated by IFN-gamma neutralization. IL-1R- and IL-1RTNFR-deficient mice were
completely resistant to CAIA. Thus, IL-4 promotes an antibody-mediated and
TNF-alpha/IL-1beta-dependent inflammation in vivo.

PMID: 16688680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Arerugi. 2006 Jan;55(1):1-9.

[Allergic asthma and intrinsic inhibitors of cytokine signaling].

[Article in Japanese]

Inoue H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of the Chest, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University. inoue@kokyu.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

T helper 2 cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13, play an
important role in allergic asthma. These cytokines transmit signals through the
JAK/STAT and the Ras/ERK signaling pathways, and SOCS family proteins and SPRED
family proteins regulate these pathways. SOCS3 controls IL-12-dependent STAT4
activation and Th2 differentiation process. SPRED-1 modulates IL-5-dependent ERK 
activation and eosinophilia. SOCS3 and SPRED-1 may be targets for therapeutic
strategies in allergic asthma.

PMID: 16671324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Jul;80(1):133-44. Epub 2006 May 2.

Effects of glucocorticoids on STAT4 activation in human T cells are
stimulus-dependent.

Fahey AJ(1), Robins RA, Kindle KB, Heery DM, Constantinescu CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Neurology, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Glucocorticoids affect the immune system by a number of mechanisms, including
modulation of cytokine production in lymphocytes. Glucocorticoids suppress T
helper cell type 1 immune responses by decreasing the ability of T cells to
respond to interleukin (IL)-12, a major inducer of interferon (IFN)-gamma.
IFN-beta increases the expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 and
suppresses IL-12. Signaling pathways through IFN-beta and the IL-12 receptor
(IL-12R) involve activation by phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator
of transcription 4 (STAT4). Our aim was to investigate the effects of
dexamethasone on STAT4 activation by IFN-beta and IL-12 in human T cell blasts.
We report that dexamethasone decreases IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation and
IFN-gamma production and enhances IFN-beta-induced STAT4 activation and IL-10
production. These effects are associated with a down-regulation of IL-12Rbeta1
expression but an up-regulation of IFN-betaR. These results indicate that the
effect of glucocorticoids on the STAT4 signaling pathway depends on the stimulus 
activating that pathway.

PMID: 16670125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Am Coll Surg. 2006 May;202(5):788-96.

Peptide YY attenuates STAT1 and STAT3 activation induced by TNF-alpha in acinar
cell line AR42J.

Robinson K(1), Vona-Davis L, Riggs D, Jackson B, McFadden D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

BACKGROUND: STAT1 and STAT3, members of the cytoplasmic family of signal
transducers and activators of transcription factors (STAT), have been associated 
with numerous inflammatory pathologies, including inflammatory bowel disease,
hepatitis, and acute lung injury. But little is known about their role in the
pancreas. Peptide YY (PYY), an inhibitory gastrointestinal hormone, ameliorates
pancreatitis in vivo and in vitro. In addition, we have shown that PYY attenuates
transcription factors, such as nuclear transcription factor (NF)-kappaB and
Smad3/4, which mediate inflammation. We hypothesized that tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha would induce STAT1 and STAT3, and PYY would attenuate their
transcription factor binding.
STUDY DESIGN: Rat pancreatic acinar cells were treated with recombinant TNF-alpha
(200 ng/mL); PYY (3-36; 500 pM) was added 30 minutes post-TNF-alpha treatment.
Cells were harvested at 2 hours, and nuclear protein and conditioned media were
extracted. Levels of amylase secretion and cytokine production were measured
using commercially available kits. STAT transcription factor binding was
determined by protein/DNA array analysis and densitometry; results were verified 
again by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and ELISA-based assay.
RESULTS: Amylase production was considerably increased (p < 0.05) as early as 5
minutes after addition of exogenous TNF-alpha and remained elevated for 24 hours.
PYY decreased amylase production to control levels. A notable increase (p < 0.05)
in the production of cytokines interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, and
TNF-alpha was observed with TNF-alpha treatment; production was reduced with PYY.
TNF-alpha substantially upregulated STAT1 and STAT3 (two-fold or greater); PYY
downregulated their binding activity to control levels. Results from both the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay- and the ELISA-based assays verified STAT1
and STAT3 responses to TNF-alpha and PYY.
CONCLUSIONS: In pancreatic acinar cells, TNF-alpha activated STAT1 and STAT3,
known mediators of inflammatory cytokines. Interestingly, PYY attenuated their
protein/DNA binding, which may have an impact on development of the disease.
Additional investigation of STAT proteins and PYY could provide new therapeutic
strategies for pancreatitis.

PMID: 16648019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 2006;183:58-60.

Multiplexed phosphoprotein analysis in immune cells.

Gavasso S(1), Myhr KM, Vedeler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Section of Neurology, University of Bergen
and Haukeland University Hospital, Norway. sonja.gavasso@helse-bergen.no

Analyzing signaling networks in immune cells is of particular interests in
diseases where treatment choices are preferentially immunomodulatory. By
combining phospho-specific antibodies with multicolor flow cytometry it is
possible to perform quantitative multiparameter analysis of signaling pathways
within complex cell populations. Multiplexed phosphoprotein analysis will
potentially incorporate environmental factors such as toxins or pathogens and
genetic variability of individual patients in a step towards personalized
medicine.

PMID: 16637932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Blood. 2006 Aug 1;108(3):983-5. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Proprotein convertase furin is preferentially expressed in T helper 1 cells and
regulates interferon gamma.

Pesu M(1), Muul L, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)MIIB-NIAMS-NIH, Bldg 10, Rm 9N262, 10 Center Dr, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
pesum@mail.nih.gov

Interleukin 12 (IL-12) is a major inducer of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and the
principal mediator of T helper 1 (Th1) differentiation. To identify
IL-12-regulated genes, which might contribute to Th1 differentiation and IFNG
regulation, we employed microarray analysis. Surprisingly, a ubiquitously
expressed proprotein convertase (PC), furin, was one of the most consistently
IL-12-induced genes in T cells, and among PCs was the only one regulated by this 
cytokine. Furin was preferentially expressed in differentiated Th1 cells in a
Stat4-dependent manner. Expression of furin enhanced IFN-gamma secretion, whereas
inhibition of furin interfered with IFN-gamma production. Thus, we conclude that 
IL-12 induction of furin might represent a new aspect of IFN-gamma regulation and
control of Th1 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1895858
PMID: 16627761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Immunol. 2006 May 1;176(9):5299-305.

IL-4 induces in vivo production of IFN-gamma by NK and NKT cells.

Morris SC(1), Orekhova T, Meadows MJ, Heidorn SM, Yang J, Finkelman FD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. morrissc@email.uc.edu

Although IL-4 and IFN-gamma often have opposite effects and suppress each other's
production by T cells, IL-4 can stimulate IFN-gamma production. To characterize
this, we injected mice with IL-4 and quantified IFN-gamma production with the in 
vivo cytokine capture assay. IL-4 induced Stat6-dependent IFN-gamma production by
NK and, to a lesser extent, NKT cells, but not conventional T cells, in 2-4 h.
Increased IFN-gamma production persisted at a constant rate for >24 h, but
eventually declined, even with continuing IL-4 stimulation. This eventual decline
in IFN-gamma production was accompanied by a decrease in NK and T cell numbers.
Consistent with a dominant role for NK cells in IL-4-stimulated IFN-gamma
secretion, IL-4 induction of IFN-gamma was B and T cell-independent; suppressed
by an anti-IL-2Rbeta mAb that eliminates most NK and NKT cells; reduced in
Stat4-deficient mice, which have decreased numbers of NK cells; and absent in
Rag2/gamma(c)-double-deficient mice, which lack T, B, and NK cells. IL-4-induced 
IFN-gamma production was not affected by neutralizing IL-12p40 and was increased 
by neutralizing IL-2. IL-13, which signals through the type 2 IL-4R and mimics
many IL-4 effects, failed to stimulate IFN-gamma production and, in most
experiments, suppressed basal IFN-gamma production. Thus, IL-4, acting through
the type 1 IL-4R, induces Stat6-dependent IFN-gamma secretion by NK and NKT
cells. This explains how IL-4 can contribute to Th1 cytokine-associated immune
effector functions and suggests how IL-13 can have stronger proallergic effects
than IL-4.

PMID: 16621996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006 Jul;318(1):35-44. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

(5R)-5-hydroxytriptolide attenuated collagen-induced arthritis in DBA/1 mice via 
suppressing interferon-gamma production and its related signaling.

Zhou R(1), Tang W, Ren YX, He PL, Zhang F, Shi LP, Fu YF, Li YC, Ono S, Fujiwara 
H, Yang YF, Zuo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopharmacology, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road, Shanghai 201203, People's
Republic of China.

(5R)-5-Hydroxytriptolide (LLDT-8) displays strong immunosuppressive activities
both in vitro and in vivo in our previous studies. This study aims to investigate
whether LLDT-8 has antiarthritic potential in a murine model of type II bovine
collagen (CII)-induced arthritis (CIA) and to show the mechanism(s) of LLDT-8
action. DBA/1 mice were immunized with CII to induce arthritis and administered
with LLDT-8. The severity of arthritis was evaluated according to the clinical
score and joint damage. The effects of LLDT-8 on immune responses were determined
by measurement of serum antibody levels, lymphocyte proliferation assay, cytokine
assay, nitric oxide (NO) production, arginase activity assays,
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis of splenic Mac-1+ cells, as well as 
polymerase chain reaction analysis for interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-related gene 
expression. We showed that LLDT-8 treatment significantly reduced the incidence
and severity of CIA. The preventive and therapeutic effects of LLDT-8 are
associated with 1) reduction of serum anti-CII immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgG2a, and 
IgG1 levels; 2) inhibition of CII-specific lymphocyte proliferation, IFN-gamma
and interleukin-2 production; 3) blockade of gene expressions in IFN-gamma
signaling, including IFN-gamma production pathways [signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 1, T-box transcription factor, interleukin
12Rbeta2, and STAT4] and IFN-gamma-induced chemokine transcription [macrophage
inflammatory protein (Mip)-1alpha, Mip-1beta, regulated on activation normally T 
cell expressed and secreted, and inducible protein 10]; and 4) retardation of the
abnormal increase of NO via IFN-gamma/STAT1/interferon regulatory factor
1/inducible nitric-oxide synthase pathway and arginase activity. Moreover, the
mRNA transcription of chemokine receptors was also suppressed [including C-C
chemokine receptor (CCR) 1, CCR5, and C-X-C chemokine receptor 3]. In conclusion,
our data suggest that the antiarthritic effect of LLDT-8 is closely related to
the blockade of IFN-gamma signaling. LLDT-8 may have a therapeutic value in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

PMID: 16574782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Neurosci Res. 2006 May 15;83(7):1299-309.

1,25 Dihydroxyvitamin-D3 modulates JAK-STAT pathway in IL-12/IFNgamma axis
leading to Th1 response in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.

Muthian G(1), Raikwar HP, Rajasingh J, Bright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.

Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a Th1 cell-mediated autoimmune
disease model of multiple sclerosis (MS). Vitamin D deficiency is commonly
observed in MS patients and vitamin D supplements reduce the clinical symptoms of
EAE and MS. Earlier studies have shown that in vivo treatment with vitamin D
analogs ameliorates EAE in association with the inhibition of IL-12 production
and Th1 differentiation. The mechanisms in the regulation of Th1 response by
vitamin D in EAE/MS are, however, not known. We show that in vivo treatment of
C57BL/6 and SJL/J mice (i.p.) with 100 ng of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3, on every
other day from Day 0-30, ameliorates EAE in association with the inhibition of
IL-12 production and neural antigen-specific Th1 response. In vitro treatment
with 1,25(OH)2D3 inhibited IFNgamma-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1,
without affecting JAK2, in EOC-20 microglial cells. Treatment of activated T
cells with 1,25(OH)2D3 also inhibited the IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation 
of JAK2, TYK2, STAT3, and STAT4 in association with a decrease in T cell
proliferation in vitro. These findings highlight the fact that vitamin D
modulates JAK-STAT signaling pathway in IL-12/IFNgamma axis leading to Th1
differentiation and further suggest its use in the treatment of MS and other Th1 
cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16547967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Exp Med. 2006 Mar 20;203(3):755-66. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

T-bet regulates Th1 responses through essential effects on GATA-3 function rather
than on IFNG gene acetylation and transcription.

Usui T(1), Preiss JC, Kanno Y, Yao ZJ, Bream JH, O'Shea JJ, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2006 Apr 17;203(4):1129.

T helper type 1 (Th1) development is facilitated by interrelated changes in key
intracellular factors, particularly signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)4, T-bet, and GATA-3. Here we show that CD4+ cells from
T-bet-/- mice are skewed toward Th2 differentiation by high endogenous GATA-3
levels but exhibit virtually normal Th1 differentiation provided that GATA-3
levels are regulated at an early stage by anti-interleukin (IL)-4 blockade of
IL-4 receptor (R) signaling. In addition, under these conditions, Th1 cells from 
T-bet-/- mice manifest IFNG promotor accessibility as detected by histone
acetylation and deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity. In related studies, we show
that the negative effect of GATA-3 on Th1 differentiation in T-bet-/- cells
arises from its ability to suppress STAT4 levels, because if this is prevented by
a STAT4-expressing retrovirus, normal Th1 differentiation is observed. Finally,
we show that retroviral T-bet expression in developing and established Th2 cells 
leads to down-regulation of GATA-3 levels. These findings lead to a model of T
cell differentiation that holds that naive T cells tend toward Th2
differentiation through induction of GATA-3 and subsequent down-regulation of
STAT4/IL-12Rbeta2 chain unless GATA-3 levels or function is regulated by T-bet.
Thus, the principal function of T-bet in developing Th1 cells is to negatively
regulate GATA-3 rather than to positively regulate the IFNG gene.

PMCID: PMC2118252
PMID: 16520391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2006 Feb;61(2):125-35.

Impaired interleukin-12-dependent T-cell functions during aging: role of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and suppressor of cytokine
signaling 3 (SOCS3).

Tortorella C(1), Stella I, Piazzolla G, Cappiello V, Simone O, Pisconti A,
Antonaci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Section
of Internal Medicine, University of Bari Medical School, Policlinico, 70124 Bari,
Italy. c.tortorella@intmed.uniba.it

Interleukin (IL)-12 is the major inducer of T helper cell (Th) 1-type responses. 
Despite a higher IL-12 production, phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), as well as CD4(+) or CD8(+) T cells from elderly 
donors released interferon (IFN)-gamma amounts similar to those observed in young
controls, and underwent only a slight increase in IFN-gamma production after
IL-12 costimulation. These findings were not due to an age-related reduction in
IL-12 receptor expression. Interestingly, no difference in PHA-triggered signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) phosphorylation between young
and elderly donors was found, and a significant IL-12-induced STAT4 activation
occurred only in PHA-preactivated cells from the younger group. The age-related
defect in IL-12 signaling was STAT4-restricted as it did not involve the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Finally, suppressor of cytokine 
signaling 3 (SOCS3) expression was significantly higher in unstimulated cells
from elderly individuals, and it did not diminish after cell stimulation. These
results indicate that a defective STAT4 activation, likely dependent on elevated 
SOCS3 levels, is involved in the impaired IL-12-dependent T-cell functions with
aging.

PMID: 16510856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 1;176(5):2773-80.

IL-27 suppresses CD28-mediated [correction of medicated] IL-2 production through 
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3.

Owaki T(1), Asakawa M, Kamiya S, Takeda K, Fukai F, Mizuguchi J, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.

IL-27 is a novel IL-6/IL-12 family cytokine that not only plays a role in the
early regulation of Th1 differentiation, but also exerts an inhibitory effect on 
immune responses, including the suppression of proinflammatory cytokine
production. However, the molecular mechanism by which IL-27 exerts the inhibitory
effect remains unclear. In this study we demonstrate that IL-27 inhibits
CD28-mediated IL-2 production and that suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3)
plays a critical role in the inhibitory effect. Although IL-27 enhanced IFN-gamma
production from naive CD4+ T cells stimulated with plate-coated anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 in the presence of IL-12, IL-27 simultaneously inhibited CD28-mediated 
IL-2 production. Correlated with the inhibition, IL-27 was shown to augment SOCS3
expression. Analyses using various mice lacking a signaling molecule revealed
that the inhibition of IL-2 production was dependent on STAT1, but not on STAT3, 
STAT4, and T-bet, and was highly correlated with the induction of SOCS3
expression. Similar inhibition of CD28-mediated IL-2 production and augmentation 
of SOCS3 expression by IL-27 were observed in a T cell hybridoma cell line, 2B4. 
Forced expression of antisense SOCS3 or dominant negative SOCS3 in the T cell
line blocked the IL-27-inudced inhibition of CD28-mediated IL-2 production.
Furthermore, pretreatment with IL-27 inhibited IL-2-mediated cell proliferation
and STAT5 activation, although IL-27 hardly affected the induction level of CD25 
expression. These results suggest that IL-27 inhibits CD28-mediated IL-2
production and also IL-2 responses, and that SOCS3, whose expression is induced
by IL-27, plays a critical role in the inhibitory effect in a negative feedback
mechanism.

PMID: 16493033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Immunol. 2006 May;43(12):1933-40. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Interleukin IL-12 blocks a specific subset of the transcriptional profile
responsive to UVB in epidermal keratinocytes.

Molenda M(1), Mukkamala L, Blumenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine, 4209 St. Rt. 44,
Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a proinflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokine that
plays a critical role it in innate and adaptive immunity by inducing production
of interferon-gamma and other cytokines. IL-12 was shown to block the ultraviolet
light-induced immunosuppression, important in cancer immunosurveillance,
cutaneous allergies and inflammation. To characterize the molecular effects of
IL-12 in epidermis we used large DNA microarrays and defined the transcriptional 
changes in human epidermal keratinocytes 1 h, 4 h, 24 h, and 48 h after treatment
with IL-12, as well as in cells treated with both IL-12 and UV light. In
keratinocytes, IL-12 activates STAT3 and STAT4; surprisingly, despite activating 
these transcription factors, the transcriptional effects of IL-12 did not rise
above background levels. However, pre-treatment of keratinocytes with IL-12
strongly modulated the transcriptional effects of UV. Pre-treatment with IL-12
enhanced the UV-mediated regulation of 20 and antagonized the regulation of 263
genes. IL-12 enhanced the induction of cytokines by UV. IL-12 antagonized the
suppression of cytoskeletal, junctional, metabolic, mitochondrial, and
extracellular matrix proteins, while antagonizing the induction of certain
signaling proteins and RNA processing enzymes. We conclude that in the epidermis,
IL-12 interferes with a specific subset of transcriptional effects of UV
irradiation.

PMID: 16466796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Neuroreport. 2006 Feb 27;17(3):309-12.

Impairment of axotomy-induced pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide gene 
expression in T helper 2 lymphocyte-deficient mice.

Armstrong BD(1), Abad C, Chhith S, Cheung-Lau G, Hajji OE, Coute AC, Ngo DH,
Waschek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience, Mental Retardation
Research Center, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
90095-7332, USA.

CD4+ (T helper) lymphocytes appear to play important roles in neuron survival and
regeneration after injury, although their functions in regulating gene expression
in injured neurons are unknown. Mice with targeted mutations in the STAT4 and
STAT6 genes are deficient in T helper (Th)1 and Th2 responses, respectively, and 
have been used to determine the relative importance of T helper subsets in a
variety of inflammatory processes. As pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating
peptide mRNA is normally strongly induced in facial motor neurons after axotomy, 
we examined this induction in Th1 and Th2 lymphocyte-deficient and control Balb/C
wild-type mice. As previously reported, pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating
peptide gene expression was strongly induced in ipsilateral but not contralateral
motor neurons in the facial motor nucleus of wild-type mice. The mean number of
hybridizing motor neurons in STAT4-deficient mice did not differ from that in
wild-type mice, whereas the number in STAT6 mice was reduced by more than 50%.
The results indicate that STAT6 plays a key role in the upregulation of pituitary
adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide gene expression in facial motor neurons after
injury, possibly through its role in regulating T helper cell differentiation to 
the type 2 phenotype.

PMID: 16462603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int Immunopharmacol. 2006 Mar;6(3):485-93. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Role of H1 receptors in histamine-mediated up-regulation of STAT4
phosphorylation.

Liu Z(1), Kharmate G, Patterson E, Khan MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Creighton University Medical Center,
Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Histamine shifts TH1/TH2 cytokine balance from TH1 to TH2 cytokines and regulates
the function of lymphocytes after binding to histamine receptors. The
phosphorylation of STAT factors and the translocation to the nucleus are
important steps in the regulation of TH1/TH2 cytokine balance. This study was
designed to investigate the effects of histamine on the phosphorylation of STAT4.
C57BL/6 splenocytes were isolated and treated with histamine (10(-4) to 10(-9) M)
after activation with either PMA (phorbol 12 myristate 13-acetate) plus ionomycin
or IL-12. The phosphorylated STAT4 levels were analyzed by Western Blot Analysis.
Unstimulated splenocytes expressed both STAT4 and phosphorylated STAT4. However, 
phosphorylated STAT4 gradually declined within 24 h. Histamine increased the
phosphorylation of STAT4 at lower concentrations (10(-6) to 10(-9) M), and had no
effect at higher concentrations (10(-4) and 10(-5) M) after the cells were
stimulated with PMA + ionomycin. Histamine did not affect IL-12-induced
phosphorylation of STAT4. To characterize the histamine receptor subtypes
involved in the up-regulation of STAT4 phosphorylation, various H1, H2 and H3/H4 
receptor antagonists and/or agonists were employed. H1 receptor agonist
(betahistine), but not H2 receptor agonist (amthamine), induced phosphorylation
of STAT4. H1 receptor antagonist (pyrilamine) inhibited histamine-mediated
phosphorylation of STAT4. However, H2 receptor antagonist (ranitidine) and H3/H4 
receptor antagonist (thioperamide) did not alter this effect. Tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (tyrphostin) failed to block histamine-mediated phosphorylation of
STAT4. These observations suggest that histamine up-regulated the phosphorylation
of STAT4 via H1 receptors, and that the Ca2+-PKC pathway, but not the tyrosine
kinase pathway, was involved in this effect.

PMID: 16428084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Immunology. 2006 Feb;117(2):196-204.

Activated T cells express the OX40 ligand: requirements for induction and
costimulatory function.

Mendel I(1), Shevach EM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

OX40/OX40 ligand (OX40L) interactions have been shown to exert potent
costimulatory effects on T-cell activation. OX40 expression is transiently
up-regulated on T cells following T-cell receptor engagement, while OX40L is
expressed on antigen-presenting cells following activation. Although expression
of the OX40L by T cells has been reported, the requirements for induction of
OX40L on T cells have not been studied in detail. Here, we demonstrate that the
OX40L can be induced on murine CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells after 6 days of culture 
under T helper type 1 (Th1) conditions, but not under Th2 conditions. Induction
of OX40L expression required a high concentration of interleukin-12 (IL-12), was 
not seen in the presence of interferon-gamma, and was dependent on signal
transducer and activator of transcription type 4 (STAT4). Notably, induction of
OX40L on T cells was only seen at very low concentrations of antigen or anti-CD3.
T-cell-expressed OX40L was fully capable of delivering a potent costimulatory
signal that enhanced the proliferation of CD4(+) T cells as well as promoted
their differentiation to Th2 cells. OX40L expression could also be induced on
CD4(+) T cells in vivo following immunization with low-dose antigen and an IL-12 
inducer. OX40/OX40L interactions between antigen-specific T cells may occur in
T-cell zones in lymph node and spleen when OX40L expression has diminished on
APC. Costimulation by T-cell-expressed OX40L may result in deviation of a Th1
response to a Th2 response under conditions where T cells are exposed to low
concentrations of foreign or autoantigens in the presence of high concentrations 
of IL-12.

PMCID: PMC1782207
PMID: 16423055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Clin Immunol. 2006 Jan;26(1):73-85.

COX-2 inhibitors modulate IL-12 signaling through JAK-STAT pathway leading to Th1
response in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.

Muthian G(1), Raikwar HP, Johnson C, Rajasingh J, Kalgutkar A, Marnett LJ, Bright
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.

Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a Th1 cell-mediated autoimmune
disease model of multiple sclerosis (MS). IL-12 plays a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of EAE/MS and inhibition of IL-12 production or IL-12 signaling was 
effective in preventing EAE. Cyclooxygenase (COX-2) is a key enzyme promoting
inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis and tumor induced angiogenesis. Recent
studies have shown that COX-2 inhibitors prevent EAE, however, their mechanism of
action is not fully understood. In this study, we show that in vivo treatment
(i.p.) with 100 mug COX-2 selective inhibitors (LM01, LM08, LM11, and NS398), on 
every other day from day 0 to 30, significantly reduced the incidence and
severity of EAE in SJL/J and C57BL/6 mice. Further analyses showed that the COX-2
inhibitors reduced neural antigen-induced IL-12 production, T cell proliferation 
and Th1 differentiation ex vivo and in vitro. The COX-2 inhibitors also decreased
IL-12-induced T cell responses through blocking tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2,
TYK2, STAT3, and STAT4 proteins in T cells. These results demonstrate that COX-2 
inhibitors ameliorate EAE in association with the modulation of IL-12 signaling
through JAK-STAT pathway leading to Th1 differentiation and suggest their use in 
the treatment of MS and other Th1 cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 16418805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Clin Immunol. 2006 Feb-Mar;118(2-3):250-7. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

STAT4/6-dependent differential regulation of chemokine receptors.

Kim SH(1), Gunst KV, Sarvetnick N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.

The major cell fate decision of the CD4+ helper T cells is the development of Th1
and Th2 phenotype, the balance of which determines the outcome of a wide variety 
of autoimmune responses. Signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STATs), in particular STAT4 and STAT6, are essential for the development of Th1 
and Th2 cells, respectively. We used Balb/c mice lacking STAT4 or STAT6 to
explore the ability of helper T cells to express chemokine receptors. We
demonstrated that both STAT4-/- and STAT6-/- CD4+ lymphocytes showed impaired
expansion as well as differentiation into IFN-gamma-secreting Th1 cells and IL2-,
IL4-, IL10-secreting Th2 cells. Interestingly, the expression of chemokine
receptors, which is STAT4/6-dependent, was differentially regulated via two
distinct mechanisms, positively (CCR3, CCR4) and negatively (CCR5, CCR7). These
results provide the basis for STAT-dependent differential regulation of chemokine
receptors in Th subsets.

PMID: 16413227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Int Immunol. 2006 Feb;18(2):335-45. Epub 2006 Jan 12.

Computer simulation of the role of SOCS family protein in helper T cell
differentiation.

Yamada S(1), Tsukada J, Yoshimura A, Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Engineering, Okayama University of Science, 1-1 Ridai-cho, Okayama 
700-0005, Japan.

The Th1/Th2 balance determines the nature of an immune response, and particular
cytokines, IL-4 and IL-12, determine the direction at the initial stage of
activation through TCRs. To investigate how cytokine networks and related
signaling pathways impact upon the Th1/Th2 balance, we have developed a computer 
model for the simulation of Th differentiation. The model includes the IL-4,
IL-12 and IFN-gamma signal transduction pathways, a positive and negative
feedback mechanism for cytokine signaling and cytokine-induced negative
regulators such as suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1, SOCS3 and SOCS5. In
the present study, we propose a 'Th0 model', in which naive T cells differentiate
neither into Th1 nor into Th2 states in unskewed cytokine conditions. The model
was found to be consistent with experimental results in BALB/c mice. The results 
of in silico analysis in the condition with SOCS- and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) family-deficient and transgenic states were
well fitted to ex vivo experimental results for Th1 and Th2 differentiation
profiles in the deficient and transgenic mice. The Th0 model suggested the
possibility that dominant Th1 differentiation in STAT4/STAT6 double-deficient
mice may be due to a positive feedback effect of initial IFN-gamma production
from T cells. The in silico assessment of beneficial effects of inhibitory drugs 
by simulation analysis with our Th0 model indicated that Janus kinase 3-specific 
inhibitors might be suitable candidates for the modification of Th2-dominant
immune responses. Our results demonstrate that models for the simulation of
signaling network, such as our Th0 model, are useful tools for the in silico
evaluation of novel drug candidates.

PMID: 16410311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3189-96. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

Quantitative PCR on 5 genes reliably identifies CTCL patients with 5% to 99%
circulating tumor cells with 90% accuracy.

Nebozhyn M(1), Loboda A, Kari L, Rook AH, Vonderheid EC, Lessin S, Berger C,
Edelson R, Nichols C, Yousef M, Gudipati L, Shang M, Showe MK, Showe LC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We previously identified a small number of genes using cDNA arrays that
accurately diagnosed patients with Sézary Syndrome (SS), the erythrodermic and
leukemic form of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). We now report the development 
of a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assay that uses
expression values for just 5 of those genes: STAT4, GATA-3, PLS3, CD1D, and
TRAIL. qRT-PCR data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) accurately
classified 88% of 17 patients with high blood tumor burden and 100% of 12 healthy
controls in the training set using Fisher linear discriminant analysis (FLDA).
The same 5 genes were then assayed on 56 new samples from 49 SS patients with
blood tumor burdens of 5% to 99% and 69 samples from 65 new healthy controls. The
average accuracy over 1000 resamplings was 90% using FLDA and 88% using support
vector machine (SVM). We also tested the classifier on 14 samples from patients
with CTCL with no detectable peripheral involvement and 3 patients with atopic
dermatitis with severe erythroderma. The accuracy was 100% in identifying these
samples as non-SS patients. These results are the first to demonstrate that gene 
expression profiling by quantitative PCR on a selected number of critical genes
can be employed to molecularly diagnosis SS.

PMCID: PMC1464056
PMID: 16403914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Nov;1058:87-95.

Therapeutic potential of oligonucleotides expressing immunosuppressive TTAGGG
motifs.

Klinman DM(1), Gursel I, Klaschik S, Dong L, Currie D, Shirota H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Research, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, 
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. klinman@cber.fda.gov

Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) expressing immunosuppressive TTAGGG motifs
downregulate the production of proinflammatory and Th1 cytokines. The ability of 
these "suppressive ODNs" to slow or prevent the development of diseases
characterized by over-exuberant immune stimulation was examined. Suppressive ODNs
significantly reduced disease severity in murine models of arthritis, lupus, and 
LPS-induced toxic shock. These beneficial effects were accompanied by a
significant reduction in serum autoantibody and cytokine levels. Underlying these
protective effects was the ability of suppressive ODNs to bind to and prevent the
phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT4, thereby blocking the signaling cascade
central to the initiation and/or perpetuation of these disease states. These
findings suggest that suppressive ODNs might find use in the treatment of acute
and chronic diseases characterized by excessive immune stimulation.

PMID: 16394128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):819-26.

Progesterone-induced blocking factor activates STAT6 via binding to a novel IL-4 
receptor.

Kozma N(1), Halasz M, Polgar B, Poehlmann TG, Markert UR, Palkovics T, Keszei M, 
Par G, Kiss K, Szeberenyi J, Grama L, Szekeres-Bartho J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Pecs University, Pecs,
Hungary.

Progesterone-induced blocking factor (PIBF) induces Th2-dominant cytokine
production. Western blotting and EMSA revealed phosphorylation as well as nuclear
translocation of STAT6 and inhibition of STAT4 phosphorylation in PIBF-treated
cells. The silencing of STAT6 by small interfering RNA reduced the cytokine
effects. Because the activation of the STAT6 pathway depends on the ligation of
IL-4R, we tested the involvement of IL-4R in PIBF-induced STAT6 activation.
Although PIBF does not bind to IL-4R, the blocking of the latter with an Ab
abolished PIBF-induced STAT6 activation, whereas the blocking of the IL-13R had
no effect. PIBF activated suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 and inhibited
IL-12-induced suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 activation. The blocking of
IL-4R counteracted all the described effects, suggesting that the PIBF receptor
interacts with IL-4R alpha-chain, allowing PIBF to activate the STAT6 pathway.
PIBF did not phosphorylate Jak3, suggesting that the gamma-chain is not needed
for PIBF signaling. Confocal microscopic analysis revealed a colocalization and
at 37 degrees C a cocapping of the FITC PIBF-activated PIBF receptor and PE
anti-IL-4R-labeled IL-4R. After the digestion of the cells with
phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C, the STAT6-activating effect of
PIBF was lost, whereas that of IL-4 remained unaltered. These data suggest the
existence of a novel type of IL-4R composed of the IL-4R alpha-chain and the
GPI-anchored PIBF receptor.

PMID: 16393965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Mar;26(3):527-33. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Identification of the cAMP-responsive enhancer of the murine ABCA1 gene:
requirement for CREB1 and STAT3/4 elements.

Le Goff W(1), Zheng P, Brubaker G, Smith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the mechanism by which expression of the murine ABCA1
gene is highly induced by cAMP analogues.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ABCA1 mRNA turnover cannot account for its induction by
cAMP. Thus cAMP induction of ABCA1 mRNA occurs at a transcriptional level.
Shotgun cloning DNA fragments from the murine ABCA1 locus identified a strong
cAMP responsive enhancer located in the first intron, which led to 25- to
100-fold cAMP-mediated induction of reporter gene activity. Deletions and
mutations of this enhancer led to the identification a cAMP-responsive element
(CRE) that was essential for the cAMP induction. Furthermore, the capacity of
this CRE site to mediate the cAMP induction required the presence of a STAT3/4
element located 81 bp away. A dominant-negative CREB expression vector inhibited 
the cAMP induction of ABCA1, demonstrating that CREB was required for cAMP
induction of ABCA1 expression in RAW264.7 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Phospho-CREB1 controls the cAMP-mediated induction of murine ABCA1
gene expression through a CRE site acting in cooperation with a nearby STAT
element. This CRE site is not conserved in the human ABCA1 gene, explaining why
human ABCA1 is not strongly stimulated by cAMP analogs.

PMID: 16373613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. FASEB J. 2006 Feb;20(2):343-5. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

STAT4- and STAT6-signaling molecules in a murine model of multiple sclerosis.

Rodriguez M(1), Zoecklein L, Gamez JD, Pavelko KD, Papke LM, Nakane S, Howe C,
Radhakrishnan S, Hansen MJ, David CS, Warrington AE, Pease LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.
rodriguez.moses@mayo.edu

Epidemiological studies suggest that an environmental factor (possibly a virus)
acquired early in life may trigger multiple sclerosis (MS). The virus may remain 
dormant in the central nervous system but then becomes activated in adulthood.
All existing models of MS are characterized by inflammation or demyelination that
follows days after virus infection or antigen inoculation. While investigating
the role of CD4+ T cell responses following Theiler's virus infection in mice
deficient in STAT4 or STAT6, we discovered a model in which virus infection was
followed by demyelination after a very prolonged incubation period. STAT4-/- mice
were resistant to demyelination for 180 days after infection, but developed
severe demyelination after this time point. Inflammatory cells and up-regulation 
of Class I and Class II MHC antigens characterized these lesions. Virus antigen
was partially controlled during the early chronic phase of the infection even
though viral RNA levels remained high throughout infection. Demyelination
correlated with the appearance of virus antigen expression. Bone marrow
reconstitution experiments indicated that the mechanism of the late onset
demyelination was the result of the STAT4-/- immune system. Thus, virus infection
of STAT4-/- mice results in a model that may allow for dissection of the immune
events predisposing to late-onset demyelination in MS.

PMID: 16352646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Genes Cells. 2005 Dec;10(12):1153-62.

Constitutive tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of STAT4 in T-cells transformed 
with HTLV-I.

Higashi T(1), Tsukada J, Yoshida Y, Mizobe T, Mouri F, Minami Y, Morimoto H,
Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

STAT4 is a critical mediator of IL-12-stimulated gene regulation in T-helper type
1 (Th1) cell. IL-12 activates the Janus family tyrosine kinases JAK2 and Tyk2,
which in turn phosphorylate STAT4 on tyrosine 693. The p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway is also activated in response to IL-12,
followed by phosphorylation of STAT4 on serine 721, which is required for STAT4
full transcriptional activity. In the present study, we demonstrated constitutive
activation of STAT4 in HTLV-I-transformed T-cell lines MT-2, MT-4 and HUT102 by
immunoprecipitation, Western blotting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). In HTLV-I-transformed T-cell lines, STAT4 was constitutively
phosphorylated not only on tyrosine 693 but also on serine 721, and formed a
heterodimer with STAT3. Constitutive phosphorylation of its upstream activators, 
JAK2, Tyk2 and p38 MAPK was also observed in the cells. EMSA and transient
transfection studies further showed that the high-affinity sis-inducible element 
(hSIE) preferentially binds the STAT3/STAT4 heterodimer and is constitutively
transactivated in MT-2 cells in the absence of exogenous cytokine stimulation.
When STAT4 expression vector was cotransfected along with STAT3 expression vector
into MT-2 cells, STAT4 significantly synergized with STAT3 to transactivate hSIE,
showing the functional importance of heterodimer formation between STAT4 and
STAT3.

PMID: 16324152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 1;175(11):7143-50.

STAT4 expression in human T cells is regulated by DNA methylation but not by
promoter polymorphism.

Shin HJ(1), Park HY, Jeong SJ, Park HW, Kim YK, Cho SH, Kim YY, Cho ML, Kim HY,
Min KU, Lee CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Korea.

STAT4, which plays a pivotal role in Th1 immune responses, enhances IFN-gamma
transcription in response to the interaction of IL-12 with the IL-12R. Mice
deficient in STAT4 lack IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production and Th1
differentiation and display a predominantly Th2 phenotype. Although these
findings indicate that STAT4 expression levels are important for the development 
of cytokine-producing Th1 cells, the transcriptional and posttranscriptional
mechanisms regulating STAT4 expression are unknown. We sought to identify and
characterize the transcriptional regulatory elements in the promoter region of
the human STAT4 gene. We found that disruption of multiple transcriptional
regions covering the CREB, OCT1, and SP1 motifs significantly reduced STAT4
promoter activity. However, genomic DNA isolated from 91 patients with asthma or 
rheumatoid arthritis showed no evidence of mutations in the defined STAT4
essential promoter region. The 5' flanking region of the promoter was found to
contain a -149A/G change in approximately 20-35% of patients, but this
polymorphism had no effect on promoter activity. Interestingly, STAT4 expression 
was drastically increased in human T cells following treatment with a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, and truncation of methylation sites in the proximal 
regulatory elements of the STAT4 promoter markedly enhanced transcriptional
activity. Thus, our findings provide molecular insight into STAT4 expression and 
suggest that, in human T cells, STAT4 expressional regulation is associated with 
DNA hypermethylation, but not promoter polymorphisms.

PMID: 16301617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Nov;125(5):1063-71.

Artificial barrier repair in wounds by semi-occlusive foils reduced wound
contraction and enhanced cell migration and reepithelization in mouse skin.

Schunck M(1), Neumann C, Proksch E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
MSchunck@dermatology.uni-kiel.de

The repair of the permeability barrier to prevent the entry of harmful substances
into the body is a goal in wound healing. Semi-occlusive foils, which provide an 
artificial barrier, are commonly used for the treatment of wounds. We examined
the effects of foils on wound contraction, cell migration, and reepithelization. 
Full-thickness skin wounds in mice were covered with occlusive latex foils or
semi-occlusive water vapor-permeable hydrocolloid foils for either the entire,
the first half, or the second half of the wound-healing period. We found that
application of foils for the entire healing period initially reduced wound
healing during the first week of treatment, whereas healing was enhanced during
the second week. Foils were found to reduce wound contraction, but enhanced
reepithelization during the second week of wound healing because of increased
proliferation and migration of keratinocytes. These effects were also noted when 
the hydrocolloid foils were applied for the second part of the healing period,
only. The fully occlusive latex foil led to irritation of the skin, whereas less 
irritation occurred under semi-occlusive conditions. In summary, we found that
artificial barrier repair with semi-occlusive foils in wounds reduced wound
contraction and enhanced cell migration and reepithelization without irritation.

PMID: 16297210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Nov;125(5):936-44.

Increased sensitivity to interferon-alpha in psoriatic T cells.

Eriksen KW(1), Lovato P, Skov L, Krejsgaard T, Kaltoft K, Geisler C, Ødum N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Physiology, Department of Immunology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Nov;125(5):xiv-xv.

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by abnormal
epidermal proliferation. Several studies have shown that skin-infiltrating
activated T cells and cytokines play a pivotal role during the initiation and
maintenance of the disease. Interferon (IFN)-alpha plays an important role in
host defense against infections, but recent data have also implicated IFN-alpha
in psoriasis. Thus, IFN-alpha induces or aggravates psoriasis in some patients,
and mice lacking a transcriptional attenuator of IFN-alpha/beta signaling
spontaneously develop a psoriasis-like inflammatory skin disease characterized by
CD8(+)-infiltrating T cells. In this study, we therefore investigate IFN-alpha
signaling in T cells isolated from involved skin of psoriatic patients. We show
that psoriatic T cells have increased and prolonged responses to IFN-alpha, on
the level of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)
activation, compared with infiltrating T cells from skin of non-psoriatic donors.
Functionally, the increased IFN-alpha signaling leads to an increased binding of 
STAT4 to the IFN-gamma promotor, IFN-gamma production, and inhibition of T cell
growth. In contrast, to STAT responses to other cytokines were not changed in
psoriasis. In conclusion, we provide evidence that psoriatic T cells have an
increased sensitivity to IFN-alpha. Thus, our data suggest that increased
IFN-alpha signaling is involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.

PMID: 16297193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 22;102(47):17095-100. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Histone hyperacetylated domains across the Ifng gene region in natural killer
cells and T cells.

Chang S(1), Aune TM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, 1161 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Local histone acetylation of promoters precedes transcription of many genes.
Extended histone hyperacetylation at great distances from coding regions of genes
also occurs during active transcription of gene families or individual genes and 
may reflect developmental processes that mark genes destined for cell-specific
transcription, nuclear signaling processes that are required for active
transcription, or both. To distinguish between these, we compared long-range
histone acetylation patterns across the Ifng gene region in natural killer (NK)
cells and T cells that were or were not actively transcribing the Ifng gene. In T
cells, long-range histone acetylation depended on stimulation that drives both T 
helper (Th) 1 differentiation and active transcription, and it depended
completely or partially on the presence of Stat4 or T-bet, respectively, two
transcription factors that are required for Th1 lineage commitment. In contrast, 
in the absence of stimulation and active transcription, similar histone
hyperacetylated domains were found in NK cells. Additional proximal domains were 
hyperacetylated after stimulation of transcription. We hypothesize that formation
of extended histone hyperacetylated domains across the Ifng gene region
represents a developmental mechanism that marks this gene for cell- or
stimulus-specific transcription.

PMCID: PMC1283154
PMID: 16286661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int Immunopharmacol. 2005 Dec;5(13-14):1926-35. Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Chlorophyllin attenuates IFN-gamma expression in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated
murine splenic mononuclear cells via suppressing IL-12 production.

Yun CH(1), Son CG, Chung DK, Han SH.

Author information: 
(1)International Vaccine Institute, Seoul, 151-818, Republic of Korea.

Chlorophyllin (CHL) is a chlorophyll derivative with anticarcinogen and
antioxidant activities. Despite clinical importance of CHL as a potential
therapeutics for treating cancer patients, little is known about the
immunological properties of CHL. In the present study, we investigated the effect
of CHL on the activation of murine splenocytes stimulated with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). RT-PCR analysis showed that LPS-activated IFN-gamma expression gradually
declined by CHL treatment in a dose dependent manner while mRNA production of
TNF-alpha, IL-2, and FasL was not changed. CHL also suppressed IL-12 production
(p70, a heterodimer of p40 and p35) and the mRNA expression of IL-12 p40 and
IL-12 receptors (both IL-12Rbeta1 and IL-12Rbeta2), which are involved in the
induction of IFN-gamma expression. Furthermore, an electrophoretic mobility shift
assay showed that CHL inhibited DNA binding activity of NF-kappaB, STAT-3, and
STAT-4 to their cognate DNA recognition motifs, all of which contribute to the
IL-12-induced IFN-gamma transcription. Exogenous addition of recombinant IL-12
abrogated the inhibitory effect of CHL on IFN-gamma and its mRNA expression in
LPS-activated splenocytes. Collectively, these results show that CHL inhibits
IFN-gamma production by LPS-stimulated splenic mononuclear cells due to
down-regulation of IL-12 production.

PMID: 16275627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 15;175(10):6570-9.

Differential expression of IFN regulatory factor 4 gene in human monocyte-derived
dendritic cells and macrophages.

Lehtonen A(1), Veckman V, Nikula T, Lahesmaa R, Kinnunen L, Matikainen S,
Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. anne.lehtonen@ktl.fi

In vitro human monocyte differentiation to macrophages or dendritic cells (DCs)
is driven by GM-CSF or GM-CSF and IL-4, respectively. IFN regulatory factors
(IRFs), especially IRF1 and IRF8, are known to play essential roles in the
development and functions of macrophages and DCs. In the present study, we
performed cDNA microarray and Northern blot analyses to characterize changes in
gene expression of selected genes during cytokine-stimulated differentiation of
human monocytes to macrophages or DCs. The results show that the expression of
IRF4 mRNA, but not of other IRFs, was specifically up-regulated during DC
differentiation. No differences in IRF4 promoter histone acetylation could be
found between macrophages and DCs, suggesting that the gene locus was accessible 
for transcription in both cell types. Computer analysis of the human IRF4
promoter revealed several putative STAT and NF-kappaB binding sites, as well as
an IRF/Ets binding site. These sites were found to be functional in transcription
factor-binding and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. Interestingly,
Stat4 and NF-kappaB p50 and p65 mRNAs were expressed at higher levels in DCs as
compared with macrophages, and enhanced binding of these factors to their
respective IRF4 promoter elements was found in DCs. IRF4, together with PU.1, was
also found to bind to the IRF/Ets response element in the IRF4 promoter,
suggesting that IRF4 protein provides a positive feedback signal for its own gene
expression in DCs. Our results suggest that IRF4 is likely to play an important
role in myeloid DC differentiation and gene regulatory functions.

PMID: 16272311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Oral Oncol. 2006 Feb;42(2):161-71. Epub 2005 Oct 24.

Interferon alpha2b augments suppressed immune functions in tobacco-related head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients by modulating cytokine signaling.

Bose A(1), Ghosh D, Pal S, Mukherjee KK, Biswas J, Baral R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation and Immunodiagnostics, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, 37 S.P. Mookherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India.

We have examined the role of interferon alpha2b (IFNalpha2b) in augmentation of
the suppressed immune functions and cytotoxicity of tobacco-related head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients. The suppressed killing activity of PBMC
of HNSCC patients towards KB, MCF7 and K562 cell lines could be restored by in
vitro treatment of PBMC with IFNalpha2b, as detected by LDH release assay. HNSCC 
patients with cisplatin + 5FU + IFNalpha2b treatment showed greater cytotoxic
efficacy than corresponding pretreatment values. Analysis of culture supernatant 
of HNSCC-PBMC by ELISA revealed the lower secretion of IL-12 and IFNgamma with
increased level of IL-4 and IL-10. This altered Th1/Th2 status was rectified
after in vitro and in vivo IFNalpha2b stimulation. Increased secretion of
monocyte derived IL-12 was observed after IFNalpha2b treatment that can enhance
the IFNgamma release, a key regulator for cytotoxicity. IFNalpha2b stimulated
enhancement of NK cells may be the source of greater amount of IFNgamma.
IFNalpha2b activated STAT1 and STAT4 signaling is observed to be involved in the 
regulation and maintenance of cytokine milieu. We conclude that IFNalpha2b may be
effective as a tool for adjuvant therapy along with conventional therapies to
overcome the immunosuppression in HNSCC patients.

PMID: 16249117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Proteomics. 2005 Dec;5(18):4719-32.

Characterization of microsomal fraction proteome in human lymphoblasts reveals
the down-regulation of galectin-1 by interleukin-12.

Filén JJ(1), Nyman TA, Korhonen J, Goodlett DR, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, PO Box 123, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland. jjfilen@btk.utu.fi

T helper cells (Th) are divided into Th1 and Th2 subsets based upon their
cytokine profiles and function. Naïve Th cells differentiate into Th1 and Th2
subsets depending on the antigens, costimulatory molecules, and cytokines they
encounter. Cytokine interleukin (IL)-12 enhances the generation of Th1
lymphocytes and inhibits the production of Th2 subset. Many genes involved in Th 
cell differentiation have already been identified at transcriptomic level in
microarray studies. In this study, isotope coded affinity tag labeling combined
with chromatographic techniques and tandem mass spectrometry was used to find
IL-12 regulated proteins in the microsomal fraction of Th cells. A total of 380
and 275 proteins were initially identified and quantitated in two experiments.
After the high-confidence protein identifications were restricted to those where 
at least two different peptides were identified per protein, and these confirmed 
by manual inspection of the tandem mass spectra, 147 proteins remained. Of these 
high-confidence protein identifications 41 had at least 1.5-fold change in
expression between IL-12 treated and nontreated cells. Among the differentially
regulated proteins were galectin-1 (gal-1) and CD7, and their down-regulation was
further corroborated with Western blotting and flow cytometry, respectively.
Gal-1 and CD7 are known to interact with each other, and regulate immunity
through influencing apoptosis and cytokine production. Our data indicate that
IL-12 down-regulates the expression of both gal-1 and CD7 in the microsomal
fraction of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and cord blood CD4(+) cells. The
down-regulation of these proteins is likely to have a role in specific Th cell
selection and cytokine environment creation.

PMID: 16247730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5681-9.

Murine plasmacytoid dendritic cells produce IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation.

Suto A(1), Nakajima H, Tokumasa N, Takatori H, Kagami S, Suzuki K, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

IL-4 plays a key role in inducing IL-4 production in CD4+ T cells, functioning as
an important determinant for Th2 cell differentiation. We show here that IL-4
induces IFN-gamma production in B220+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs). By
searching for cell populations that produce IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation, we
found that PDCs were a major IFN-gamma-producing cell upon IL-4 stimulation in
wild-type and Rag-2-/- splenocytes. Isolated PDCs, but not CD11b+ DCs or CD8+
DCs, produced IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation. In vivo, the depletion of PDCs by 
anti-Ly6G/C Ab prevented IFN-gamma production induced by IL-4 administration. We 
also found that IL-4 induced IFN-gamma production, but not IL-12 or IFN-alpha
production, in PDCs and also strongly enhanced CpG oligodeoxynucleotide-induced
IFN-gamma production, but not CpG oligodeoxynucleotide-induced IL-12 or IFN-alpha
production. However, IL-4 did not induce IFN-gamma production in Stat6-/- PDCs.
Moreover, IL-4 induced Stat4 expression in PDCs through a Stat6-dependent
mechanism, and only the Stat4-expressing PDCs produced IFN-gamma. Furthermore,
IL-4 did not induce IFN-gamma production in Stat4-/- PDCs. These results indicate
that PDCs preferentially produce IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation by Stat6- and
Stat4-dependent mechanisms.

PMID: 16237058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3307-19.

Identification of genes involved in the initiation of human Th1 or Th2 cell
commitment.

Lund R(1), Ahlfors H, Kainonen E, Lahesmaa AM, Dixon C, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku/Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of naïve T helper (Th) cells is induced by TCR activation and
IL-12/STAT4 or IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways, forming Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively. In this study, oligonucleotide arrays were used to identify genes
regulated during the initiation of human Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation at 2
and 6 h in presence or absence of immunosuppressive TGF-beta. As a result the
immediate targets of IL-12, IL-4 and TGF-beta were identified. The effects of
IL-12 at this early stage were minimal and consistent with the known kinetics of 
IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-4, however, was observed to rapidly regulate 63 genes,
26 of which were differentially expressed at both the 2- and 6-h time points. Of 
these IL-4 regulated genes, one-third have previously been observed to display
expression changes in the later phases of the polarization process. Similarly to 
the key regulators, TBX21 and GATA3, the transcription factors SATB1, TCF7 and
BCL6 were differentially regulated at the protein level during early Th1 and Th2 
cell polarization. Moreover, the developing Th1 and Th2 cells were demonstrated
to be responsive to the immunosuppressive TGF-beta and IL-10. In this study, a
panel of novel factors that may be important regulators of the differentiation
process was identified.

PMID: 16220538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Int Immunol. 2005 Dec;17(12):1543-52. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Physical and functional interactions between STAT3 and ZIP kinase.

Sato N(1), Kawai T, Sugiyama K, Muromoto R, Imoto S, Sekine Y, Ishida M, Akira S,
Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences Hokkaido 
University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a latent
cytoplasmic transcription factor that can be activated by cytokines and growth
factors. It plays important roles in cell growth, apoptosis and cell
transformation, and is constitutively active in a variety of tumor cells. In this
study, we provide evidence that zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIPK)
interacts physically with STAT3. ZIPK specifically interacted with STAT3, and did
not bind to STAT1, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b or STAT6. ZIPK phosphorylated STAT3 on
serine 727 (Ser727) and enhanced STAT3 transcriptional activity. Small
interfering RNA-mediated reduction of ZIPK expression decreased leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF)- and IL-6-induced STAT3-dependent transcription.
Furthermore, LIF- and IL-6-mediated STAT3 activation stimulated ZIPK activity.
Taken together, our data suggest that ZIPK interacts with STAT3 within the
nucleus to regulate the transcriptional activity of STAT3 via phosphorylation of 
Ser727.

PMID: 16219639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Sci STKE. 2005 Oct 4;2005(304):pe49.

SLIM trims STATs: ubiquitin E3 ligases provide insights for specificity in the
regulation of cytokine signaling.

Ungureanu D(1), Silvennoinen O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, 33014, Tampere,
Finland.

The Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT)
pathway has evolved to serve highly specialized functions in the regulation of
hematopoiesis, cell metabolism, and immune responses. The duration, strength, and
specificity of cytokine signaling are controlled by several mechanisms, including
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, which modulates the turnover of cytokine
receptors and activated JAKs. The specificity of the ubiquitin pathway is
achieved through various E3 ligase complexes that recognize and interact with
distinct target proteins, often in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Intriguing
new information about the ubiquitin pathway came with the identification of an E3
ubiquitin ligase, SLIM, that specifically interacts with activated STAT1 and
STAT4 and induces their ubiquitination and degradation. These findings, together 
with the evidence from paramyxoviruses about the role of ubiquitination as a
highly specific STAT inhibition mechanism, highlight the role of E3 ubiquitin
ligases as specificity determinants in the regulation of STAT activation, and
open the field for investigation of additional E3s that target other STAT
proteins.

PMID: 16204702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1123-32. Epub 2005 Oct 2.

Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct
from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages.

Harrington LE(1), Hatton RD, Mangan PR, Turner H, Murphy TL, Murphy KM, Weaver
CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1069-70.

CD4(+) T cells producing interleukin 17 (IL-17) are associated with autoimmunity,
although the precise mechanisms that control their development are undefined.
Here we present data that challenge the idea of a shared developmental pathway
with T helper type 1 (T(H)1) or T(H)2 lineages and instead favor the idea of a
distinct effector lineage we call 'T(H)-17'. The development of T(H)-17 cells
from naive precursor cells was potently inhibited by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
and IL-4, whereas committed T(H)-17 cells were resistant to suppression by T(H)1 
or T(H)2 cytokines. In the absence of IFN-gamma and IL-4, IL-23 induced naive
precursor cells to differentiate into T(H)-17 cells independently of the
transcription factors STAT1, T-bet, STAT4 and STAT6. These findings provide a
basis for understanding how inhibition of IFN-gamma signaling enhances
development of pathogenic T(H)-17 effector cells that can exacerbate
autoimmunity.

PMID: 16200070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Endocrinology. 2006 Jan;147(1):111-9. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Differential requirement of signal transducer and activator of transcription-4
(Stat4) and Stat6 in a thyrotropin receptor-289-adenovirus-induced model of
Graves' hyperthyroidism.

Land KJ(1), Gudapati P, Kaplan MH, Seetharamaiah GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Evansville, Indiana 47712, USA.

T helper type 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells have critical roles in the development of
cell-mediated and humoral immune responses, respectively. This division of
function predicts that Th1 cells mediate inflammatory diseases and Th2 cells
promote antibody (Ab)-mediated autoimmunity. Our previous studies using HEK-293
cells expressing the extracellular domain of the TSH receptor (TSHR) showed that 
Stat4-/- mice, which lack Th1 cells, are susceptible, whereas Stat6-/- mice,
which lack Th2 cells, are resistant to the induction of Graves' hyperthyroidism. 
To investigate the role of Stat4 and Stat6 genes in other murine models of
hyperthyroidism, we injected wild-type BALB/c, Stat4-/-, and Stat6-/- mice with
an adenovirus expressing amino acid residues 1-289 of TSHR (TSHR-289-ad or
289-ad). The viral system induces a much stronger immune response with much more 
rapid onset of disease. Our results showed that 56% of wild-type, 75% of
Stat4-/-, and 39% of Stat6-/- mice developed hyperthyroidism. Hyperthyroid mice
exhibited thyroid stimulatory Abs. The Stat4-/- mice developed a higher incidence
and greater severity of hyperthyroidism compared with wild-type and Stat6-/-
mice. BALB/c and Stat4-/- mice showed significantly higher TSHR Abs of the IgG1
subclass and IL-4 compared with Stat6-/- mice. In contrast, Stat6-/- mice had
predominantly the IgG2a subclass of TSHR Ab and produced significantly higher
amounts of IFN-gamma than BALB/c and Stat4-/- mice. All hyperthyroid mice showed 
enlarged thyroid glands with hyperactivity. These results suggest that in the
TSHR-289-ad model, the Th2 cells are more efficient in mediating disease, but in 
the absence of Th2 cells, Th1 cells may still initiate a reduced incidence of
Graves' hyperthyroidism.

PMID: 16195404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40782-7. Epub 2005 Sep 28.

Structure of the unphosphorylated STAT5a dimer.

Neculai D(1), Neculai AM, Verrier S, Straub K, Klumpp K, Pfitzner E, Becker S.

Author information: 
(1)Department for NMR-based Structural Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

STAT proteins have the function of signaling from the cell membrane into the
nucleus, where they regulate gene transcription. Latent mammalian STAT proteins
can form dimers in the cytoplasm even before receptor-mediated activation by
specific tyrosine phosphorylation. Here we describe the 3.21-A crystal structure 
of an unphosphorylated STAT5a homodimer lacking the N-terminal domain as well as 
the C-terminal transactivation domain. The overall structure of this fragment is 
very similar to phosphorylated STATs. However, important differences exist in the
dimerization mode. Although the interface between phosphorylated STATs is
mediated by their Src-homology 2 domains, the unphosphorylated STAT5a fragment
dimerizes in a completely different manner via interactions between their
beta-barrel and four-helix bundle domains. The STAT4 N-terminal domain dimer can 
be docked onto this STAT5a core fragment dimer based on shape and charge
complementarities. The separation of the dimeric arrangement, taking place upon
activation and nuclear translocation of STAT5a, is demonstrated by fluorescence
resonance energy transfer experiments in living cells.

PMID: 16192273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Mol Immunol. 2005 Apr;2(2):92-100.

Cytokines, STATs and liver disease.

Gao B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Liver Biology, Laboratory of Physiologic Studies, National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. bgao@mail.nih.gov

The Janus kinase-signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT)
signaling pathway, activated by more than 50 cytokines or growth factors, plays
critical roles in a wide variety of cellular functions in the hematopoietic,
immune, neuronal and hepatic systems. In the liver, this signaling pathway,
activated by more than 20 cytokines, growth factors, hormones, and hepatitis
viral proteins, plays critical roles in antiviral defense, acute phase response, 
hepatic injury, repair, inflammation, transformation, and hepatitis. This article
reviews the biological significance of STAT1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 in hepatic functions 
and diseases.

PMID: 16191414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2005 Aug;23(4):252-5.

[Differentially expressed genes of cell signal transduction associated with
benzene poisoning by cDNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Bi Y, Tao N, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the differential expression of cell signal transduction
genes associated with benzene poisoning, and to explore the pathogenic mechanisms
of blood system damage induced by benzene.
METHODS: Peripheral white blood cell gene expression profile of 7 benzene
poisoning patients, including one aplastic anemia, was determined by cDNA
microarray. Seven chips from normal workers were served as controls. Cluster
analysis of gene expression profile was performed.
RESULTS: Among the 4265 target genes, 176 genes associated with cell signal
transduction were differentially expressed. 35 up-regulated genes including
PTPRC, STAT4, IFITM1 etc were found in at least 6 pieces of microarray; 45
down-regulated genes including ARHB, PPP3CB, CDC37 etc were found in at least 5
pieces of microarray.
CONCLUSION: cDNA microarray technology is an effective technique for screening
the differentially expressed genes of cell signal transduction. Disorder in cell 
signal transduction may play certain role in the pathogenic mechanism of benzene 
poisoning.

PMID: 16188087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Nov;31(11):1564-9. Epub 2005 Sep 20.

Loss of signal transducer and activator of transduction 4 or 6 signaling
contributes to immune cell morbidity and mortality in sepsis.

Song GY(1), Chung CS, Rhee RJ, Cioffi WG, Ayala A.

Author information: 
(1)Shock-Trauma Research Laboratories in the Division of Surgical Research,
Department of Surgery, Rhode Island Hospital and Brown University School of
Medicine, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The role of signal transducer and activator of transduction (STAT) 4
vs. 6 has been assessed thus far only in a model of high mortality strongly
driven by proinflammation alone. Their role in a low-mortality (LD25) model of
sepsis remains unclear.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Prospective controlled animal study in a research laboratory.
SUBJECTS: STAT4 and STAT6 knockout mice.
INTERVENTIONS: We induced sepsis by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) or sham CLP
in three groups of mice: (a) STAT4-/-, (b) STAT6-/-, (c) BALB/c. Splenic T cells 
or macrophages were then harvested 24 h after CLP, and their ability to produce
cytokines was assessed.
RESULTS: Following CLP T-cells from BALB/c mice were suppressed in the ability to
release the Th1 cytokines interleukin (IL) 2 and interferon gamma. The release of
Th2 cytokine IL-10 was increased. The Th1 response of STAT4-deficient animals was
not only markedly lower in shams but was further suppressed by CLP. The Th2
cytokine response was elevated even more than that of the septic BALB/c. This was
associated with lower survival than in the BALB/c. STAT6 deficiency resulted in a
stronger Th1 response and a suppressed Th2 response to CLP. A similar difference 
between IL-12 and IL-10 release was seen in macrophages from these mice.
Interestingly, while this resulted in improved survival, compared to STAT4-/-
mice, the STAT6-/- animals still had a higher mortality than the BALB/c.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that contributions from both STAT4 driven
processes as well as STAT6 responses are needed in a balanced fashion to maximize
the animals' ability to survive septic challenge.

PMID: 16172848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Chem Immunol Allergy. 2005;89:118-25.

Progesterone-dependent immunomodulation.

Szekeres-Bartho J(1), Polgar B, Kozma N, Miko E, Par G, Szereday L, Barakonyi A, 
Palkovics T, Papp O, Varga P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Pecs University, Medical
School, Pecs, Hungary.

The biological effects of progesterone are mediated by a 34-kDa protein named the
progesterone-induced blocking factor (PIBF). PIBF, synthesized by lymphocytes of 
healthy pregnant women in the presence of progesterone, inhibits arachidonic acid
release as well as NK activity, and modifies the cytokine balance. Within the
cell the full-length PIBF is associated with the centrosome, while secretion of
shorter forms is induced by activation of the cell. PIBF induces nuclear
translocation of STAT6 as well as PKC phosphorylation and exerts a negative
effect on STAT4 phosphorylation. The concentration of PIBF in pregnancy urine is 
related to the positive or negative outcome of pregnancy; furthermore, premature 
pregnancy termination is predictable by lower than normal pregnancy PIBF values. 
In vivo data suggest the biological importance of the above findings. Treatment
of pregnant Balb/c mice with the antiprogesterone RU 486 results in an increased 
resorption rate, which is associated with the inability of spleen cells to
produce PIBF. High resorption rates induced by progesterone receptor block as
well as those due to high NK activity are corrected by simultaneous PIBF
treatment.

PMID: 16129958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jan;290(1):E92-E102. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

Activation of the 12-lipoxygenase and signal transducer and activator of
transcription pathway during neointima formation in a model of the metabolic
syndrome.

Pei H(1), Gu J, Thimmalapura PR, Mison A, Nadler JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Virginia, PO Box 801405, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Insulin resistance (IR) is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular
diseases. The obese Zucker rat (ZR) is a model of IR that shows markedly
increased insulin and triglyceride concentrations without major changes in
glucose. In this study, we evaluated the response of obese and lean ZR to carotid
balloon injury and determined potential mechanisms and treatments. The
neointima-to-media ratio of obese ZR was greater than that of lean ZR, starting
at 14 days after injury, and persisted until at least day 30. An enhanced
inflammatory response to balloon injury in the obese ZR was reflected by
significantly higher ED1-positive macrophage cells in the injured vessel wall
compared with that in lean ZR at 3, 7, and 14 days after balloon injury.
Inflammatory mediators 12-lipoxygenase (12-LO) and STAT4 were studied in
neointimal lesions. Expression of 12-LO RNA was increased beginning at day 7 and 
showed increases of 4.3-fold on day 14 and 7-fold on day 30 in obese ZR compared 
with lean animals. Staining of phosphorylated STAT4 (PSTAT4), the activated form 
of STAT4, in lesions from obese ZR was also increased compared with that in
leans. We tested the effects of a novel anti-inflammatory agent, lisofylline
(LSF), in the obese ZR. LSF markedly reduced neointimal formation in the obese
ZR. LSF also reduced monocyte/macrophage infiltration into the vessel wall and
the activation of PSTAT4. These studies suggest both the presence of an
exaggerated injury response in the insulin-resistant obese ZR model and that
inflammation plays a major role in mediating neointimal growth.

PMID: 16118253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Neurotoxicology. 2005 Aug;26(4):729-37.

Selective alterations of transcription factors in MPP+-induced neurotoxicity in
PC12 cells.

Xu Z(1), Cawthon D, McCastlain KA, Duhart HM, Newport GD, Fang H, Patterson TA,
Slikker W Jr, Ali SF.

Author information: 
(1)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Division of Neurotoxicology, HFT-132, National
Center for Toxicological Research, Food and Drug Administration, 3900 NCTR Road, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA.

MPP(+) (1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium; the active metabolite of the neurotoxin MPTP
(1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine)) depletes dopamine (DA) content
and elicits cell death in PC12 cells. However, the mechanism of MPP(+)-induced
neurotoxicity is still unclear. In this study, the dose response and time-course 
of MPP(+)-induced DA depletion and decreased cell viability were determined in
nerve growth factor (NGF)-differentiated PC12 cells. The alteration of
transcription factors (TFs) induced by MPP(+) from a selected dose level and time
point was then evaluated using protein/DNA-binding arrays. K-means clustering
analysis identified four patterns of protein/DNA-binding changes. Three of the 28
TFs identified in PC12 cells increased by 100% (p53, PRE, Smad SBE) and 2
decreased by 50% (HSE, RXR(DR1)) of control with MPP(+) treatment. In addition,
three TFs decreased within the range of 33-50% (TFIID, E2F1, CREB) and two TFs
increased within the range of 50-100% (PAX-5, Stat4). An electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) was used to confirm the changes of p53 and HSE. The observed
changes in TFs correlated with the alterations of DA and cell viability. The data
indicates that selective transcription factors are involved in MPP(+)-induced
neurotoxicity and it provides mechanistic information that may be applicable to
animal studies with MPTP and clinical studies of Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 16112330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Gut. 2005 Nov;54(11):1558-64. Epub 2005 Aug 16.

Cholera toxin subunit B inhibits IL-12 and IFN-{gamma} production and signaling
in experimental colitis and Crohn's disease.

Coccia EM(1), Remoli ME, Di Giacinto C, Del Zotto B, Giacomini E, Monteleone G,
Boirivant M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-mediated diseases, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cholera toxin B subunit (CT-B) is a powerful modulator of
immune responses. The authors have previously demonstrated that oral
administration of recombinant CT-B (rCT-B) is able to prevent and cure the
Crohn's disease (CD)-like trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) mediated colitis. 
In this study they extended their observations and examined if rCT-B interferes
with the molecular signaling underlying the Th1 type response both in TNBS
colitis and in ex vivo human CD explants.
METHODS: TNBS treated mice were fed with rCT-B, and IFN-gamma and IL-12
production by colonic lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMC) was examined by
ELISA. In vitro culture of mucosal explants from CD patients and non-inflammatory
bowel disease controls, pre-incubated with rCT-B, were examined for IFN-gamma and
IL-12 production by ELISA and semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reactions. STAT-1, -4, -6 activation and T-bet expression were examined
following rCT-B treatment by western blotting both in TNBS treated mice and in
human mucosal explants.
RESULTS: rCT-B significantly reduced IL-12 and IFN-gamma secretion by LPMC from
TNBS treated mice. Consistent with this, rCT-B inhibited both STAT-4 and STAT-1
activation and downregulated T-bet expression. Inhibition of Th1 signaling by
CT-B associated with no change in IL-4 synthesis and expression of active STAT-6 
indicating that rCT-B does not enhance Th2 cell responses. Moreover, in vitro
treatment of CD mucosal explants with rCT-B resulted in reduced secretion of
IL-12/IFN-gamma and inhibition of STAT-4/STAT-1 activation and T-bet expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies indicate that CT-B inhibits mucosal Th1 cell signaling
and suggest that rCT-B may be a promising candidate for CD therapy.

PMCID: PMC1774744
PMID: 16105891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Blood. 2005 Dec 1;106(12):3867-73. Epub 2005 Aug 11.

A crucial role for T-bet in selectin ligand expression in T helper 1 (Th1) cells.

Underhill GH(1), Zisoulis DG, Kolli KP, Ellies LG, Marth JD, Kansas GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 E Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Proinflammatory T helper 1 (Th1) cells express high levels of carbohydrate
ligands for the endothelial selectins, but the molecular basis for this phenotype
is incompletely understood. We document here a significant role in selectin
ligand formation for the recently described Th1 transcription factor T-bet. Th1
cells generated from T-bet-/- mice showed significantly lower levels of ligands
for both E-selectin and P-selectin, compared with wild-type (WT) Th1 cells.
Enforced expression of T-bet in WT Th0 cells only modestly up-regulated
P-selectin ligands and had no effect on E-selectin ligands. To define a mechanism
for the defects observed in T-bet-/- mice, we examined expression of
glycosyltransferases involved in selectin ligand biosynthesis. T-bet-/- Th1 cells
expressed significantly lower levels of core 2 beta1,6
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (C2GlcNAcT-I), but no differences in levels of 
alpha 2,3-sialyltransferase IV (ST3Gal-IV). Further, we show that T-bet is
responsible for the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(Stat4)-independent increase in Th1 cells of fucosyltransferase VII (FucT-VII).
We also identify ST3Gal-VI, which is thought to play an important role in E- and 
P-selectin ligand formation, as an interleukin 12 (IL-12)-regulated,
T-bet-dependent gene. These data show that T-bet controls selectin ligand
formation in Th1 cells via control of expression of multiple key enzymes in
response to IL-12 signaling and establishes an independent transcriptional
pathway for control of Th1 cell traffic.

PMCID: PMC1895099
PMID: 16099875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006 Feb;65(2):149-56. Epub 2005 Aug 11.

Expression of Jak3, STAT1, STAT4, and STAT6 in inflammatory arthritis: unique
Jak3 and STAT4 expression in dendritic cells in seropositive rheumatoid
arthritis.

Walker JG(1), Ahern MJ, Coleman M, Weedon H, Papangelis V, Beroukas D,
Roberts-Thomson PJ, Smith MD.

Author information: 
(1)Repatriation General Hospital, Daws Rd, Daw Park 5041 South Australia.
Jenny.Walker@rgh.sa.gov.au

BACKGROUND: Modulation of Jak-STAT signalling may provide an effective
therapeutic strategy in inflammatory arthritis.
OBJECTIVE: To document Jak-STAT expression in a cohort of patients with active
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), spondyloarthritis (SpA), and osteoarthritis (OA) and
compare these subsets with normal synovial tissue.
METHODS: Synovial tissue biopsy specimens from patients with RA, OA, and SpA and 
histologically normal tissue (n = 10 in each arthritis group) were examined for
the presence of Jak3, STAT1, STAT4, and STAT6 expression using
immunohistochemistry. Phenotyping was performed using immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence. Clinical and serological characteristics of patients with RA 
expressing Jak3-STAT4 were assessed.
RESULTS: STAT1, STAT4, and Jak3 protein expression was generally increased in
inflammatory arthritis. In contrast, STAT6 expression was relatively
heterogeneous. A subpopulation of CD1a positive dendritic cells unique to
seropositive patients with RA was detected. These cells showed intense protein
expression for Jak3, STAT4, and STAT6.
CONCLUSION: CD1a positive dendritic cells intensely express Jak3, STAT4, and
STAT6 in seropositive RA tissue and may be an alternative marker for dendritic
cells in their early stages of activation as well as providing a tool for
identifying RA at the level of the synovium. Jak3 inhibition may be a potential
therapeutic target to prevent dendritic cell maturation in RA. STAT1 expression
is increased in inflammatory arthritis, suggesting that its pro-apoptotic and
anti-inflammatory effects cannot effectively counteract inflammation. STAT6
expression is heterogeneous in synovium, suggesting a possible homoeostatic role 
in addition to any anti-inflammatory effects.

PMCID: PMC1798020
PMID: 16096332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 15;175(4):2191-200.

A role for IL-27 in early regulation of Th1 differentiation.

Owaki T(1), Asakawa M, Morishima N, Hata K, Fukai F, Matsui M, Mizuguchi J,
Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
Japan.

IL-27 is a novel IL-6/IL-12 family cytokine that is considered to play a role in 
Th1 differentiation, whereas the exact role of IL-27 in Th1 differentiation and
its molecular mechanism remain unclear. In this study we demonstrate a role for
IL-27 in the early regulation of Th1 differentiation and its possible molecular
mechanism. The ability of IL-27 to induce Th1 differentiation was most prominent 
under Th1-polarizing conditions, but without IL-12 in a STAT4- and
IFN-gamma-independent manner, and was overruled by IL-12 dose dependently. IL-27 
rapidly up-regulated the expression of ICAM-1 on naive CD4+ T cells, but not on
APCs, and blocking Abs against ICAM-1 and LFA-1 inhibited the IL-27-induced Th1
differentiation. Although IL-27 augmented T-bet expression in naive CD4+ T cells 
as previously reported, T-bet was not necessary for the IL-27-induced rapid
up-regulation of ICAM-1 expression and Th1 differentiation. In contrast, STAT1
was revealed to be required for the rapid up-regulation of ICAM-1 expression and 
Th1 differentiation by directly mediating the transcriptional enhancement of
ICAM-1 gene expression. These results indicate that IL-27 efficiently induces Th1
differentiation under Th1-polarizing conditions, but without IL-12, and that the 
rapid up-regulation of ICAM-1 expression on naive CD4+ T cells is important for
the IL-27-induced Th1 differentiation. Considering that IL-27 is produced from
macrophages and DCs earlier than IL-12, the present results suggest that IL-27
may play a pivotal role in early efficient induction of Th1 differentiation until
sufficient IL-12 is produced.

PMID: 16081786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 15;175(4):2102-10.

Opposing roles for RelB and Bcl-3 in regulation of T-box expressed in T cells,
GATA-3, and Th effector differentiation.

Corn RA(1), Hunter C, Liou HC, Siebenlist U, Boothby MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN 37208, USA.

CD4+ T cells with a block in the NF-kappaB signaling pathway exhibit decreases in
Th1 responses and diminished nuclear levels of multiple transactivating
NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaB proteins. To determine the lineage-intrinsic contributions 
of these transactivators to Th differentiation, T cells from mice deficient in
specific subunits were cultured in exogenous cytokines promoting either Th1 or
Th2 differentiation. RelB-deficient cells exhibited dramatic defects in Th1
differentiation and IFN-gamma production, whereas no consistent defect in either 
Th1 or Th2 responses was observed with c-Rel-deficient cells. In sharp contrast, 
Bcl-3-null T cells displayed no defect in IFN-gamma production, but their Th2
differentiation and IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production were significantly impaired.
The absence of RelB led to a dramatic decrease in the expression of T-box
expressed in T cells and Stat4. In contrast, Bcl-3-deficient cells exhibited
decreased GATA-3, consistent with evidence that Bcl-3 can transactivate a gata3
promoter. These data indicate that Bcl-3 and RelB exert distinct and opposing
effects on the expression of subset-determining transcription factors, suggesting
that the characteristics of Th cell responses may be regulated by titrating the
stoichiometry of transactivating NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaB complexes in the nuclei of
developing helper effector cells.

PMID: 16081776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. FEBS Lett. 2005 Aug 15;579(20):4470-8.

STAT4 is a target of the hematopoietic zinc-finger transcription factor Ikaros in
T cells.

Yap WH(1), Yeoh E, Tay A, Brenner S, Venkatesh B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore.

STAT4 is a transcription factor activated in response to IL-12, and is involved
in Th1 cell development. The molecular mechanisms controlling the transcription
of the STAT4 gene are however, unclear. Sequence comparison of the 5' flanking
regions of human, mouse and pufferfish (Fugu rubripes) Stat4 genes revealed a
high frequency of Ikaros (Ik) binding elements in all three species. We then
investigated the role of Ik binding elements in the human STAT4 promoter using
Jurkat T cells. Transactivation, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and RNA
interference-mediated gene knockdown experiments revealed that Ik is involved in 
the regulation of STAT4 in human T cells.

PMID: 16081070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 1;175(3):1686-93.

Augmentation of effector CD8+ T cell generation with enhanced granzyme B
expression by IL-27.

Morishima N(1), Owaki T, Asakawa M, Kamiya S, Mizuguchi J, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan.

IL-27 is a novel IL-12 family member that plays a role in the early regulation of
Th1 initiation. We have recently demonstrated that IL-27 has a potent antitumor
activity, which is mainly mediated through CD8+ T cells, and also has an adjuvant
activity to induce epitope-specific CTL in vivo. In this study, we further
investigated the in vitro effect of IL-27 on CD8+ T cells of mouse spleen cells. 
In a manner similar to CD4+ T cells, IL-27 activated STAT1, -2, -3, -4, and -5,
and augmented the expression of T-bet, IL-12Rbeta2, and granzyme B, and slightly 
that of perforin in naive CD8+ T cells stimulated with anti-CD3. IL-27 induced
synergistic IFN-gamma production with IL-12 and proliferation of naive CD8+ T
cells. Moreover, IL-27 enhanced proliferation of CD4+ T cell-depleted spleen
cells stimulated by allogeneic spleen cells and augmented the generation of CTL. 
In STAT1-deficient naive CD8+ T cells, IL-27-induced proliferation was not
reduced, but synergistic IFN-gamma production with IL-12 was diminished with
decreased expression of T-bet, IL-12Rbeta2, granzyme B, and perforin. In
T-bet-deficient naive CD8+ T cells, IL-27-induced proliferation was hardly
reduced, but synergistic IFN-gamma production with IL-12 was diminished with
decreased expression of IL-12Rbeta2, granzyme B, and perforin. However, IL-27
still augmented the generation of CTL from T-bet-deficient CD4+ T cell-depleted
spleen cells stimulated by allogeneic spleen cells with increased granzyme B
expression. These results suggest that IL-27 directly acts on naive CD8+ T cells 
in T-bet-dependent and -independent manners and augments generation of CTL with
enhanced granzyme B expression.

PMID: 16034109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int Immunol. 2005 Sep;17(9):1157-65. Epub 2005 Jul 18.

Stat4-null non-obese diabetic mice: protection from diabetes and experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis, but with concomitant epitope spread.

Boyton RJ(1), Davies S, Marden C, Fantino C, Reynolds C, Portugal K, Dewchand H, 
Altmann DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Transplantation Biology Group, Medical
Research Council, Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
London, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, UK.

There is much interest in therapeutic manipulation of cytokine responses in
autoimmunity, yet studies in mouse models have sometimes produced conflicting
findings as to the role of particular mediators in disease. Examples include the 
contradictory findings regarding susceptibility to experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis (EAE) or diabetes in knockout mice for various individual Th1
or Th2 cytokines or their receptors. An alternative approach to the analysis of
Th1 and Th2 mechanisms in these diseases is to investigate strains carrying a
null mutation for molecules involved in cytokine receptor signal transduction,
signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat4) and Stat6. Stat4 is
pivotal in Th1 polarization, being activated when IL-12 binds the IL-12R and
leading to the production of IFNgamma. We here report disease susceptibility in
non-obese diabetic mice carrying a Stat4-null mutation. Knockout mice were almost
completely protected from diabetes, only rarely showing pancreatic peri-islet
infiltrates. Furthermore, there was near complete protection from the induction
of EAE by either of the two encephalitogenic myelin epitopes. Despite this
protection, Stat4-null mice showed clear epitope spread compared with controls
during myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-induced EAE as judged by T cell
proliferation, although this was not associated with a strong Th1 response to the
initial or spread epitope and, furthermore, there was no evidence of a switch to 
Th2 cytokines.

PMID: 16027138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Int J Radiat Biol. 2005 Mar;81(3):221-31.

Factors effecting the Th2-like immune response after gamma-irradiation: low
production of IL-12 heterodimer in antigen-presenting cells and small expression 
of the IL-12 receptor in T cells.

Park HR(1), Jo SK, Paik SG.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Food and Biotechnology Team, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute 
(KAERI), Yusong, Daejeon, Korea.

Ionizing radiation is known to reduce the helper T (Th) 1-like function, but not 
the Th2-like function, resulting in a Th1/Th2 imbalance. While this has been
known for some time, the mechanism behind the preferential suppression of the Th1
cell activation has not yet been explained. The aim is to elucidate the mechanism
in the Th cell imbalance after ionizing irradiation. C57BL/6 mice, 7 weeks old,
received whole-body gamma-irradiation (WBI) of 5 Gy. In all instances, the spleen
and peritoneal cells were obtained from mice 7 weeks after irradiation. To
distinguish Th1 and Th2 cell function, interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin
(IL)-4 produced by these cells were analysed by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). To isolate the primary T cells, the anti-CD90.2
microbead-conjugated antibody was used and the labelled cells were separated by
magnetic cell sorting (MACS). To investigate the influence of the IL-12p70
secreted by the antigen-presenting cells, ovalbumin (OVA)-primed peritoneal
adherent cells (PAC) were fixed by 1% paraformaldehyde and co-cultured with
OVA-specific Th cells in the presence of supernatant of PAC culture with OVA for 
16 h. IL-12 receptor, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4
(STAT4) and IFN-gamma expression in the T cells of the WBI mice were detected by 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The spleen lymphocytes 
of WBI mice showed a depression of IFN-gamma production against OVA, although the
total IL-12 was highly secreted. However, the heterodimer IL-12, biologically
active protein, was induced less in WBI mice. Although the OVA-specific Th cells 
were co-cultured with fixed OVA-primed PAC obtained from normal mice, the
OVA-specific Th cells showed a decreased IFN-gamma secretion in the presence of
the culture supernatant of the activated PAC from the WBI mice. In addition,
recombinant IL-12p70 restored the cytokine balance of the OVA-specific Th cells. 
However the cytokine balance of primary T cells from WBI mice was not completely 
restored by the normal antigen-presenting cells that abundantly secrete IL-12p70.
It was assumed that after WBI, the regenerated T cells also have some problems.
It was then observed that the IL-12 receptor expression and intracellular levels 
of the STAT4 were much lower in the T cells of the WBI mice. The results suggest 
that the shifted response of the helper T cells after WBI exposure is due not
only due to a significant suppression of the secretion of the IL-12p70 in the
antigen-presenting cells, but also to the lower expression of the IL-12 receptor 
on T cells.

PMID: 16019931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Jul;24(7):833-40.

Peripheral expansion of circulating T-helper 1 cells predicts coronary
endothelial dysfunction after cardiac transplantation.

Methe H(1), Wiegand D, Welsch U, Krombach F, Meiser B, Nabauer M, Koglin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Grosshadern,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. heiko.methe@med.uni-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess the importance of Th1 cells for the development of
cardiac allograft vasculopathy.
BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in immunosuppressive regimens, chronic rejection
still represents one of the leading causes of death beyond the first year after
heart transplantation. Chronic rejection is characterized by the development of
transplant vasculopathy. The exact mechanisms initiating and promoting this form 
of arteriosclerosis in the human setting remain unclear.
METHODS: In order to assess the role of T lymphocytes we characterized
differentiated T-cell subsets in 32 transplant recipients early after
transplantation using RT-PCR, flow cytometry and immunhistochemistry and matched 
these findings with endothelial function testing as an early clinical indicator
of transplant vasculopathy.
RESULTS: Allograft endothelial dysfunction (ED) was defined as a compromised
coronary flow reserve to acetylcholine (CFVR<2 in 8 of 32 transplant recipients).
In these patients, mRNA transcript levels for the T-helper (Th)1 signature
cytokines interferon (INF)-gamma (p<0.0001) and interleukin (IL)-2 (p<0.005) and 
STAT4 (Th1 transcription factor, p<0,05) were significantly higher than in the
remaining 24 patients with normal endothelial function. This correlated with a
significant increase in circulating CD3(+)/IFN-gamma(+)-T-cells (28.6 +/- 4.4% vs
8.7 +/- 5.6%; p<0.0001). In contrast, transcript levels for the Th2 signature
cytokines (IL-4, IL-10) and STAT6 (Th2 transcription factor) did not differ
significantly between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Peripheral expansion of circulating Th1 but not Th2 cells predicts
coronary ED after cardiac transplantation. Therefore, quantification of
circulating T cells might be a diagnostic tool to predict development of ED in
patients after heart transplantation.

PMID: 15982610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Microb Pathog. 2005 Jul-Aug;39(1-2):35-43.

Mycobacterial trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate preferentially induces type 1 helper T
cell responses through signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
protein.

Oiso R(1), Fujiwara N, Yamagami H, Maeda S, Matsumoto S, Nakamura S, Oshitani N, 
Matsumoto T, Arakawa T, Kobayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan. ryuta@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp

Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an intracellular pathogen of tuberculosis and its
pathogenicity is related to the ability to escape killing by ingested macrophages
and induce delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH). A major component of the cell
wall of M. tuberculosis is trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate (TDM), which has been
implicated as a pathogenetic factor. The expression of DTH and cell-mediated
immunity is dependent on the macrophage-cytokine-type 1 helper T (Th1) lymphocyte
axis. Cytokines, interleukin-12 (IL-12) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), play a 
critical role in the process and IL-12-activated signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT) 4 is required for the development of fully functional Th1
cells. To clarify host responses to mycobacterial TDM, we have analyzed footpad
reaction, histopathology and cytokine profile of experimental granulomatous
lesions using STAT4-deficient mice. In the present study, we have demonstrated
that mycobacterial TDM selectively induces the Th1 response through the STAT4
signaling pathway, because mice lacking STAT4 protein significantly reduced to
develop DTH, hypersensitivity granulomas, and Th1 cytokine responses, when
compared to BALB/c mice. These results shed light on the molecular pathogenesis
of mycobacterial disease. Taken together with previous studies, TDM is a
pleiotropic molecule against the host and participates in the pathogenesis.

PMID: 15967629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Immunity. 2005 Jun;22(6):729-36.

SLIM is a nuclear ubiquitin E3 ligase that negatively regulates STAT signaling.

Tanaka T(1), Soriano MA, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

STAT proteins are a family of latent cytoplasmic transcription factors that are
activated by tyrosine phosphorylation in response to a variety of cytokines,
growth factors, and hormones. Once activated, STAT proteins translocate into the 
nucleus and help coordinate gene transcription. One striking feature of STAT
signaling is its rapid and transient activation and deactivation cycle, although 
the molecular mechanisms responsible for this remain poorly understood. Here, we 
report on a nuclear protein that contains both PDZ and LIM domains and that
interacts with activated STAT4 molecules. We show that SLIM is an ubiquitin E3
ligase that acts on STAT proteins to cause their proteosome-mediated degradation 
and enhance their dephosphorylation. Overexpression of SLIM leads to impaired
STAT1 and STAT4 activity due to reduced STAT protein levels, while
SLIM-deficiency results in increased STAT expression and thus enhanced IFNgamma
production by Th1 cells. These studies suggest that SLIM is a novel ubiquitin E3 
ligase whose targets include STAT proteins.

PMID: 15963787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 Jun 21;45(12):1939-45.

Enhanced T-helper-1 lymphocyte activation patterns in acute coronary syndromes.

Methe H(1), Brunner S, Wiegand D, Nabauer M, Koglin J, Edelman ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Grosshadern,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. hmethe@mit.edu

OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine whether different stages of coronary artery
disease (CAD) are associated with distinct differentiation patterns of activated 
T cells.
BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease. However, little is known 
about specific inflammatory cell activation in atherosclerosis, for example, the 
T-helper (Th)1/Th2-balance.
METHODS: We studied 18 patients with stable angina (SA), 28 patients with acute
coronary syndrome (ACS) (16 with unstable angina pectoris and 12 with ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction), 19 patients with unheralded myocardial
infarction (UH), and 16 control patients. Cytokine patterns and transcription
factor signaling pathways of circulating T cells were characterized using reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Although interferon (IFN)-gamma(+)/CD3(+) T cells were approximately
2-fold greater in patients with SA or UH than in control subjects, there was a
massive expansion of Th1 cells in patients with ACS (p < 0.001). This increase
was paralleled by significantly increased mRNA transcript levels for
signal-transducer-and-activator-4 (ACS 1.17 +/- 0.14 relative units [RU]; control
patients 0.44 +/- 0.09 RU; SA 0.67 +/- 0.12 RU; UH 0.61 +/- 0.17 RU),
interleukin-2 (ACS 1.55 +/- 0.51 RU; control patients 0.21 +/- 0.09 RU; SA 0.54
+/- 0.18 RU; UH 0.45 +/- 0.16 RU), and IFN-gamma in ACS (1.27 +/- 0.39 RU;
control patients 0.35 +/- 0.09 RU; SA 0.58 +/- 0.11 RU; UH 0.53 +/- 0.24 RU; p < 
0.002). Th2 and Th0 cells were not different across patient subsets. The burden
of CAD was identical between SA (1.4 +/- 0.2 diseased vessels, 68 +/- 13%
diameter stenosis) and ACS (1.4 +/- 0.2 diseased vessels, 64 +/- 17% diameter
stenosis) but significantly greater in patients with UH (2.5 +/- 0.5 diseased
vessels, 95 +/- 7% diameter stenosis; p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with UH have a greater burden of obstructive CAD than SA
but no greater T-cell activation. Patients with ACS have the same extent of CAD
than SA but significantly greater activation of Th1 cells that may contribute to 
the increasing instability. Differences in circulating Th1 cells might indicate
different pathogenic components, leading to ACS and UH.

PMID: 15963390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 1;174(11):7194-201.

IL-4-transfected tumor cell vaccines activate tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells 
and promote type-1 immunity.

Eguchi J(1), Kuwashima N, Hatano M, Nishimura F, Dusak JE, Storkus WJ, Okada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, PA 15213, USA.

We previously demonstrated that IL-4 gene-transfected glioma cell vaccines induce
effective therapeutic immunity in preclinical glioma models, and have initiated
phase I trials of these vaccines in patients with malignant gliomas. To gain
additional mechanistic insight into the efficacy of this approach, we have
treated mice bearing the MCA205 (H-2(b)) or CMS-4 (H-2(d)) sarcomas. IL-12/23
p40(-/-) and IFN-gamma(-/-) mice, which were able to reject the initial
inoculation of IL-4 expressing tumors, failed to mount a sustained systemic
response against parental (nontransfected) tumor cells. Paracrine production of
IL-4 in vaccine sites promoted the accumulation and maturation of
IL-12p70-secreting tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells (TIDCs). Adoptive transfer 
of TIDCs isolated from vaccinated wild-type, but not IL-12/23 p40(-/-), mice were
capable of promoting tumor-specific CTL responses in syngeneic recipient animals.
Interestingly, both STAT4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) mice failed to reject
IL-4-transfected tumors in concert with the reduced capacity of TIDCs to produce 
IL-12p70 and to promote specific antitumor CTL reactivity. These results suggest 
that vaccines consisting of tumor cells engineered to produce the type 2
cytokine, IL-4, critically depend on type 1 immunity for their observed
therapeutic efficacy.

PMID: 15905564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 1;174(11):6781-90.

Regulation of IFN-gamma production by B effector 1 cells: essential roles for
T-bet and the IFN-gamma receptor.

Harris DP(1), Goodrich S, Gerth AJ, Peng SL, Lund FE.

Author information: 
(1)Trudeau Institute, Saranac Lake, NY 12983, USA.

This manuscript systematically identifies the molecular mechanisms that regulate 
the ability of B cells to produce the critical type 1 cytokine, IFN-gamma. B
cells produce IFN-gamma in response to IL-12 and IL-18 and when primed by Th1
cells. We show that development of IFN-gamma-producing B cells by either Th1
cells or IL-12/IL-18 is absolutely dependent on expression of the IFN-gammaR and 
the T-box transcription factor, T-bet. Interestingly, although T-bet
up-regulation in developing B effector 1 (Be1) cells is controlled by
IFN-gammaR-mediated signals, STAT1-deficient B cells up-regulate T-bet and
produce IFN-gamma, indicating that additional transcriptional activators must be 
coupled to the IFN-gammaR in B cells. Finally, we show that although IL-12/IL-18 
or IFN-gamma-producing Th1 cells are required to initiate transcription of the
IFN-gamma gene in B cells, sustained expression of IFN-gamma and T-bet by B cells
is dependent on an IFN-gamma/IFN-gammaR/T-bet autocrine feedback loop. These
findings have significant implications, because they suggest that
IFN-gamma-producing B cells not only amplify Th1 responses, but also imprint a
type 1 phenotype on B cells themselves. In the case of immune responses to
bacterial or viral pathogens, this B cell-driven autocrine feedback loop is
likely to be beneficial; however, in the case of B cell responses to
autoantigens, it may result in amplification of the autoimmune loop and increased
pathology.

PMID: 15905519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Immunol Res. 2005;31(3):231-42.

STAT4: a critical regulator of inflammation in vivo.

Kaplan MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 950 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202,
USA. mkaplan2@iupui.edu

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) is a central mediator 
in generating inflammation during protective immune responses and immune-mediated
diseases. In the 8 yr since their first description, STAT4-deficient mice have
defined the role of STAT4 in a variety of in vivo model systems. Despite the
extensive study and use of these mice, the exact role of STAT4 in vivo is still
unclear. In this review, I focus on describing the phenotypes of STAT4-deficient 
immune responses to pathogens and in diseases. Comparing the effects of STAT4
deficiency among numerous model systems will further enhance the development of a
systemic model of STAT4 function in vivo.

PMID: 15888914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):5950-8.

TGF-beta 1 uses distinct mechanisms to inhibit IFN-gamma expression in CD4+ T
cells at priming and at recall: differential involvement of Stat4 and T-bet.

Lin JT(1), Martin SL, Xia L, Gorham JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and The Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

TGF-beta1 plays a critical role in restraining pathogenic Th1 autoimmune
responses in vivo, but the mechanisms that mediate TGF-beta1's suppressive
effects on CD4(+) T cell expression of IFN-gamma expression remain incompletely
understood. To evaluate mechanisms by which TGF-beta1 inhibits IFN-gamma
expression in CD4(+) T cells, we primed naive wild-type murine BALB/c CD4(+) T
cells in vitro under Th1 development conditions in the presence or the absence of
added TGF-beta1. We found that the presence of TGF-beta1 during priming of CD4(+)
T cells suppressed both IFN-gamma expression during priming as well as the
development of Th1 effector cells expressing IFN-gamma at a recall stimulation.
TGF-beta1 inhibited the development of IFN-gamma-expressing cells in a
dose-dependent fashion and in the absence of APC, indicating that TGF-beta1 can
inhibit Th1 development by acting directly on the CD4(+) T cell. During priming, 
TGF-beta1 strongly inhibited the expression of both T-bet (T box expressed in T
cells) and Stat4. We evaluated the importance of these two molecules in the
suppression of IFN-gamma expression at the two phases of Th1 responses. Enforced 
expression of T-bet by retrovirus prevented TGF-beta1's inhibition of Th1
development, but did not prevent TGF-beta1's inhibition of IFN-gamma expression
at priming. Conversely, enforced expression of Stat4 partly prevented TGF-beta1's
inhibition of IFN-gamma expression during priming, but did not prevent
TGF-beta1's inhibition of Th1 development. These data show that TGF-beta1 uses
distinct mechanisms to inhibit IFN-gamma expression in CD4(+) T cells at priming 
and at recall.

PMID: 15879087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;19(8):2047-59. Epub 2005 Apr 28.

Female steroid hormones use signal transducers and activators of transcription
protein-mediated pathways to modulate the expression of T-bet in epithelial
cells: a mechanism for local immune regulation in the human reproductive tract.

Kawana K(1), Kawana Y, Schust DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fearing Research Laboratory, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Reproductive Biology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet promotes the differentiation of inflammatory Th1 T
helper cells. T-bet expression in lymphoid cells is regulated by cytoplasmic
signaling through Janus kinase phosphorylation, nuclear signaling using signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) family proteins, and
autocrine/paracrine feedback involving interferon (IFN)-gamma. T-bet is here
shown to be present in epithelial cells of the human female reproductive tract.
Regulation of T-bet expression was modulated by cytokines and the female
reproductive steroids, estrogen, and progesterone. The mechanisms of T-bet
regulation in epithelia differ from those in conventional immune cells. During a 
15-d exposure to progesterone, T-bet levels in endometrial epithelial cells
(EECs) undulated. Prior exposure to estrogen enhanced these effects. More
prolonged exposure of EECs to these hormones, singly or in combination,
suppressed T-bet production. Stat1 and Stat5 bound to the EEC T-bet regulatory
region (TRR) at the IFN-gamma-activated sequence site, but Stat3 and Stat4 did
not. Binding of Stat1 and Stat5 to the TRR were modified by progesterone in
distinct ways. Estrogen suppressed the binding of Stat1 and Stat5 to the TRR.
Mutation of gamma-activated sequence element reduced T-bet promoter activity,
binding of Stat proteins to the TRR and regulation of the promoter by cytokines
and hormones. In EECs, cytokine exposure caused phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2
and TRR-bound Stat proteins; female steroid hormones altered only phosphorylation
of TRR-bound Stat5. Although there is no autocrine IFN-gamma feedback loop in
reproductive tract epithelial cells, an IL-15/T-bet positive feedback loop may
exist. The implications of hormonally regulated T-bet expression are discussed.

PMID: 15860546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Blood. 2005 Aug 1;106(3):963-70. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Impaired interferon-gamma production as a consequence of STAT4 deficiency after
autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for lymphoma.

Robertson MJ(1), Chang HC, Pelloso D, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow and Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Indiana University Medical 
Center, 1044 W Walnut St, Rm R4-202, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
mjrobert@iupui.edu

Production of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) is critical for optimal antitumor
immunotherapy in several preclinical animal models. Interleukin-12
(IL-12)-induced IFN-gamma production is markedly defective after autologous stem 
cell transplantation. Quantitative deficiency in CD4 T cells, relative increase
in CD25+CD4+ T cells, and bias toward T helper 2 (Th2) differentiation are not
the primary mechanisms of defective IFN-gamma production. IL-12 receptor beta1
(IL-12Rbeta1) and IL-12Rbeta2 are expressed at equivalent or higher levels on
posttransplantation patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) as
compared with control PBMCs. IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) was undetectable or barely
detectable in posttransplantation patient PBMCs, whereas IL-4-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT6 did not differ in posttransplantation patient and
control PBMCs. Levels of STAT4 protein were decreased by 97% in
posttransplantation patient PBMCs. Levels of STAT4 mRNA were also significantly
decreased in posttransplantation patient PBMCs. Incubation with IL-12 and IL-18
in combination partially reversed the defective IFN-gamma production by
posttransplantation patient PBMCs. IFN-gamma production in response to IL-12 plus
IL-18 did not require increased expression of STAT4 but was dependent on the
activity of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). These results indicate
that defective IFN-gamma production is due to an intrinsic deficiency in STAT4
expression by posttransplantation patient lymphocytes and suggest strategies for 
circumventing this deficiency in cancer immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC1895167
PMID: 15817683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 15;174(8):4630-8.

Suppressive effect of IL-4 on IL-13-induced genes in mouse lung.

Finkelman FD(1), Yang M, Perkins C, Schleifer K, Sproles A, Santeliz J, Bernstein
JA, Rothenberg ME, Morris SC, Wills-Karp M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. ffinkelman@pol.net

Although IL-4 signals through two receptors, IL-4R alpha/common gamma-chain
(gamma(c)) and IL-4R alpha/IL-13R alpha1, and only the latter is also activated
by IL-13, IL-13 contributes more than IL-4 to goblet cell hyperplasia and airway 
hyperresponsiveness in murine asthma. To determine whether unique gene induction 
by IL-13 might contribute to its greater proasthmatic effects, mice were
inoculated intratracheally with IL-4 or IL-13, and pulmonary gene induction was
compared by gene microarray and real-time PCR. Only the collagen alpha2 type VI
(Ca2T6) gene and three small proline-rich protein (SPRR) genes were reproducibly 
induced > 4-fold more by IL-13 than by IL-4. Preferential IL-13 gene induction
was not attributable to B cells, T cells, or differences in cytokine potency.
IL-4 signaling through IL-4R alpha/gamma(c) suppresses Ca2T6 and SPRR gene
expression in normal mice and induces these genes in RAG2/gamma(c)-deficient
mice. Although IL-4, but not IL-13, induces IL-12 and IFN-gamma, which suppress
many effects of IL-4, IL-12 suppresses only the Ca2T6 gene, and IL-4-induced
IFN-gamma production does not suppress the Ca2T6 or SPRR genes. Thus, IL-4
induces genes in addition to IL-12 that suppress STAT6-mediated SPRR gene
induction. These results provide a potential explanation for the dominant role of
IL-13 in induction of goblet cell hyperplasia and airway hyperresponsiveness in
asthma.

PMID: 15814686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 15;174(8):4579-83.

Suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides protect mice from lethal endotoxic shock.

Shirota H(1), Gursel I, Gursel M, Klinman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Endotoxic shock is a life-threatening condition caused by exposure to bacterial
LPS. LPS triggers the release of acute phase, proinflammatory, and Th1 cytokines 
that facilitate the development of endotoxic shock. Synthetic
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) expressing suppressive TTAGGG motifs effectively
down-regulate the production of proinflammatory and Th1 cytokines elicited by a
variety of immune stimuli. The current results demonstrate that suppressive ODN
protect mice from LPS-induced endotoxic shock. Underlying this protective effect 
is the ability of suppressive ODN to bind to and prevent the phosphorylation of
STAT1 and STAT4, thereby blocking the signaling cascade mediated by LPS-induced
IFN-beta and IL-12. These findings suggest that suppressive ODN might be of use
in the treatment of endotoxic shock.

PMID: 15814679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 15;174(8):4465-9.

Type I IFNs provide a third signal to CD8 T cells to stimulate clonal expansion
and differentiation.

Curtsinger JM(1), Valenzuela JO, Agarwal P, Lins D, Mescher MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

In this study, we show that IFN-alpha beta can have a direct role in linking
innate and adaptive responses by providing the "third signal" needed by naive CD8
T cells responding to Ag and costimulatory ligands. Stimulation of CD8 T cells in
the absence of a third signal leads to proliferation, but clonal expansion is
limited by poor survival and effector functions do not develop. We show that
IFN-alpha beta can provide the third signal directly to CD8 T cells via a
STAT4-dependent pathway to stimulate survival, development of cytolytic function,
and production of IFN-gamma. Provision of the third signal by either IFN-alpha
beta or IL-12 results in regulation of the expression of a number of genes,
including several that encode proteins critical for effector function.

PMID: 15814665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Immunology. 2005 Apr;114(4):484-92.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 enhances the interferon-gamma-dependent,
interleukin-12-independent pathway of T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Smeltz RB(1), Chen J, Shevach EM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunology. 2005 Apr;114(4):459-60.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, a pleiotropic cytokine that has multiple
effects on immune responses, has been shown to inhibit interleukin (IL)-4/GATA-3 
expression as well as T helper 2 (Th2) differentiation. Consistent with these
reports, we found that priming T cells from DO11.10 transgenic mice with antigen 
in the presence of TGF-beta inhibited GATA-3 expression and the development of
IL-4-producing T cells. Unexpectedly, the inhibition of Th2 development was
accompanied by a substantial increase in the number of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma)-producing cells. T cells primed with TGF-beta secreted IFN-gamma in
response to both T-cell receptor ligation and IL-12/IL-18 stimulation, and
expressed high levels of T-bet and low levels of GATA-3. The TGF-beta-mediated
enhancement of T helper 1 (Th1) priming was independent of IL-12 and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-4, but required endogenous
IFN-gamma. TGF-beta-mediated enhancement of the IFN-gamma-dependent,
IL-12-independent pathway of Th1 priming was mediated primarily by the inhibition
of IL-4 produced by memory/activated T cells in the unfractionated CD4+ responder
population. Nevertheless, TGF-beta did not inhibit this pathway of Th1
differentiation when purified naive CD4+ T cells were used as responders. These
data have important implications for strategies being considered for the use of
TGF-beta-producing T cells for the treatment of autoimmune disorders.

PMCID: PMC1782105
PMID: 15804285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Immunogenetics. 2005 Mar;56(12):861-70. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Evaluation of microsatellite markers in association studies: a search for an
immune-related susceptibility gene in sarcoidosis.

Tanaka G(1), Matsushita I, Ohashi J, Tsuchiya N, Ikushima S, Oritsu M, Hijikata
M, Nagata T, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, Keicho N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Research Institute, International Medical 
Center of Japan, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Association studies using linkage disequilibrium (LD) between candidate loci and 
nearby markers have been proposed to identify susceptibility genes for complex
diseases. We analyzed polymorphisms of microsatellites (MSs) and LD patterns of
the regions in which candidate genes related to the Th1 immune response have been
annotated and attempted to identify a susceptibility gene for sarcoidosis in a
marker-based association study. Nineteen MSs were identified in six Th1-related
genes (IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IL12RB1, IL12RB2, STAT1 and STAT4) and then eight were
further characterized as useful polymorphic markers. Most of these MSs showed LD 
with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on both 5' and 3' ends of these
candidate genes, in which r(2) values between at least one of the MS marker
alleles and the SNPs were higher than 0.1. A significant association with one MS 
allele near STAT4 was shown and a cluster of SNPs in LD with the MS marker was
associated with sarcoidosis. These results suggest that association studies using
not only SNPs but also multi-allelic MS within or near candidate loci would be
useful markers to search for a disease susceptibility gene, especially in
populations with unknown LD structure.

PMID: 15778901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 1;174(7):4105-12.

Stat5a inhibits IL-12-induced Th1 cell differentiation through the induction of
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 expression.

Takatori H(1), Nakajima H, Kagami S, Hirose K, Suto A, Suzuki K, Kubo M,
Yoshimura A, Saito Y, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University School of
Medicine, Chiba City, Japan.

In previous studies, we have shown that Th2 cell differentiation is diminished
but Th1 cell differentiation is increased in Stat5a-deficient (Stat5a(-/-))
CD4(+) T cells. In the present study, we clarified the molecular mechanisms of
Stat5a-mediated Th cell differentiation. We found that enhanced Th1 cell
differentiation and the resultant IFN-gamma production played a dominant
inhibitory role in the down-regulation of IL-4-induced Th2 cell differentiation
of Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. We also found that IL-12-induced Stat4
phosphorylation and Th1 cell differentiation were augmented in Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+)
T cells. Importantly, the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)3,
a potent inhibitor of IL-12-induced Stat4 activation, was decreased in
Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. Moreover, a reporter assay showed that a
constitutively active form of Stat5a but not Stat6 activated the SOCS3 promoter. 
Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Stat5a binds to
the SOCS3 promoter in CD4(+) T cells. Finally, the retrovirus-mediated expression
of SOCS3 restored the impaired Th cell differentiation of Stat5a(-/-) CD4(+) T
cells. These results suggest that Stat5a forces the Th1/Th2 balance toward a
Th2-type by preventing IL-12-induced Th1 cell differentiation through the
induction of SOCS3.

PMID: 15778369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 1;174(7):3906-11.

IL-12 induction of mRNA encoding substance P in murine macrophages from the
spleen and sites of inflammation.

Arsenescu R(1), Blum AM, Metwali A, Elliott DE, Weinstock JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40515, 
USA. razvan-arsenescu@uky.edu <razvan-arsenescu@uky.edu>

Substance P (SP), a neuropeptide, interacts with the neurokinin 1 receptor
(NK-1R) on immune cells to help control IFN-gamma production. In murine
schistosomiasis mansoni, schistosome worms produce ova that incite focal Th2-type
granulomatous inflammation within the liver and intestines. Normal gut is
characterized by a controlled state of inflammation. IL-10 knockout mice develop 
chronic Th1-type colitis spontaneously. Both schistosome granulomas and gut
mucosa display an SP immune regulatory circuit. However, the origin and
regulation of SP production at these sites of inflammation are poorly understood.
Macrophages are a potential source of SP. We therefore studied macrophages
(F4/80(+)) from these models of inflammation. SP mRNA (preprotachykinin A (PPT
A)) was detected within the schistosome granuloma, spleen, and lamina propria
macrophages. Compared with those from wild-type mice, granuloma macrophages from 
STAT6(-/-) mice had 10-fold higher PPT A mRNA expression, whereas in STAT4(-/-)
animals, PPT A mRNA expression was nearly abolished. IL-12 signals via STAT4 to
induce Th1-type inflammation. It was demonstrated that IL-12, but not IL-18,
induces SP mRNA expression in resting splenic macrophages from
Schistosoma-infected mice and in wild-type lamina propria mononuclear cells.
Thus, macrophages are a source for SP at these sites of chronic inflammation, and
IL-12 and STAT4 are regulators of macrophage SP mRNA expression.

PMID: 15778345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Gastroenterology. 2005 Mar;128(3):687-94.

Interleukin-21 enhances T-helper cell type I signaling and interferon-gamma
production in Crohn's disease.

Monteleone G(1), Monteleone I, Fina D, Vavassori P, Del Vecchio Blanco G, Caruso 
R, Tersigni R, Alessandroni L, Biancone L, Naccari GC, MacDonald TT, Pallone F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Centro di Eccellenza per lo studio delle
malattie complesse e multifattoriali, Università Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
Gi.Monteleone@Med.uniroma2.it

BACKGROUND & AIMS: T-helper (Th)1 cells play a central role in the pathogenesis
of tissue damage in Crohn's disease (CD). Interleukin (IL)-12/STAT4 signaling
promotes Th1 cell commitment in CD, but other cytokines are needed to maintain
activated Th1 cells in the mucosa. In this study, we examined the expression and 
role of IL-21, a T-cell-derived cytokine of the IL-2 family; in tissues and cells
isolated from patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
METHODS: IL-21 was examined by Western blotting in whole mucosa and lamina
propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) from patients with CD, ulcerative colitis (UC),
and controls. We also examined the effects of exogenous IL-12 on IL-21
production, as well as the effects of blocking IL-21 with an IL-21-receptor Ig
fusion protein. Interferon (IFN)-gamma was measured in the culture supernatants
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and phosphorylated STAT4 and T-bet were
examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: IL-21 was detected in all samples, but its expression was higher at the 
site of disease in CD in comparison with UC and controls. Enhanced IL-21 was seen
in both ileal and colonic CD and in fibrostenosing and nonfibrostenosing disease.
IL-12 enhanced IL-21 in normal lamina propria lymphocytes through an
IFN-gamma-independent mechanism, and blocking IL-12 in CD LPMCs decreased
anti-CD3-stimulated IL-21 expression. Neutralization of IL-21 in CD LPMC cultures
decreased phosphorylated STAT4 and T-bet expression, thereby inhibiting IFN-gamma
production.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that IL-21 contributes to the ongoing Th1 mucosal
response in CD.

PMID: 15765404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Hum Genet. 2005;50(3):133-8. Epub 2005 Mar 3.

Association analysis of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) polymorphisms with asthma.

Park BL(1), Cheong HS, Kim LH, Choi YH, Namgoong S, Park HS, Hong SJ, Choi BW,
Lee JH, Park CS, Shin HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., 11th Floor, MaeHun
B/D, 13 Chongro 4 Ga, Chongro-Gu, Seoul 110-834, Korea.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) on chromosome
2q32.2-q32.3 is known to be essential for mediating responses to interleukin 12
in lymphocytes and regulating the differentiation of T helper cells. In an effort
to discover additional polymorphism(s) in genes in which variant(s) have been
implicated in asthma, we investigated the genetic polymorphisms in STAT4 to
evaluate it as a potential candidate gene for a host genetic study of asthma. By 
direct DNA sequencing in 24 individuals, we identified 12 sequence variants
within introns and their flanking regions, including the 1.5 kb promoter region
of STAT4. Among them, seven common polymorphic sites were selected for genotyping
in our asthma cohort (502 asthmatic patients, 164 normal controls). Using
logistic regression analysis for association with the risk of asthma, while
controlling for age, gender, and smoking status as covariates, no significant
associations with the risk of asthma were detected. However, one single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in intron 11 (+90089T--> C) and two haplotypes
showed positive association (P= 0.03, 0.03 and 0.03, respectively) with
production of specific IgE to Dermatophagoides farinae (D.f.) or Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus (D.p.) among asthmatic patients. The minor allele frequencies of
+90089T--> C and BLOCK2-ht1 were higher (0.54 and 0.47, respectively) among
individuals who produced specific IgE to D.f. or D.p. than frequencies (0.47 and 
0.39, respectively) among individuals who did not produce specific IgE (OR=1.38
and 1.40, respectively). Our findings suggest that polymorphisms in STAT4 might
be one of the genetic factors for the risk of production of specific IgE to mite 
allergens.

PMID: 15744455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mult Scler. 2005 Feb;11(1):16-23.

Immunological heterogeneity of multiple sclerosis in Sardinia and Sweden.

Huang YM(1), Liu X, Steffensen K, Sanna A, Arru G, Fois ML, Rosati G, Sotgiu S,
Link H.

Author information: 
(1)Neurotec Department, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
yu-min.huang@neurotec.ki.se

Subjects from Sardinia, Italy, are relatively homogeneous compared to Swedes.
Although ethnically distant, both populations have similarly high multiple
sclerosis (MS) incidence rates. Pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and their
receptors, signalling molecules and other immune response-associated factors
might influence MS pathogenesis, though definite proof is missing. The study of
populations with similar MS incidence but different genetic and environmental
background could make possible the definition of factors that relate to such
background differences. We selected untreated female MS patients from Sassari,
Sardinia, and Stockholm, Sweden, and corresponding sex- and age-matched healthy
controls (HC), to study blood mononuclear cells (MNC) for mRNA expression of 20
immune response-related genes considered relevant in MS, employing real-time PCR.
Higher expression of IL-12p40 mRNA was confined to MS from both Sassari and
Stockholm, compared to corresponding HC. MS patients from Sassari, but not
Stockholm, expressed higher TNF-alpha compared to corresponding HC. MS patients
from Stockholm, but not Sassari, expressed higher IL-6. Indoleamine 2,3
dioxygenase (IDO), a molecule necessary in tolerance induction, was lower in MS
from Stockholm compared to corresponding HC. This was not observed in Sassari. No
differences were detected for other members of the IL-12 family, other Th1 and
Th2 cytokines, and the signalling molecules Stat 4 and 6. The results corroborate
a pro-inflammatory state in MS as reflected by high expression of IL-12,
TNF-alpha and IL-6, although the extent of expression of TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IDO 
differs between strictly matched MS patients from different high-incidence areas.
This might result from genetic and/or environmental differences. They may account
for some of the discrepancies regarding immune response-related molecules
previously reported in MS. In conclusion, a pro-inflammatory state exists in MS
patients from Sassari as well as Stockholm. The changes of pro-inflammatory and
other immune response-related variables differ however between the two MS
populations. This may be attributed to the genetic and/or environmental
background.

PMID: 15732262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 1;174(5):2796-804.

Synergistic effect of IL-2, IL-12, and IL-18 on thymocyte apoptosis and Th1/Th2
cytokine expression.

Rodriguez-Galán MC(1), Bream JH, Farr A, Young HA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

In the periphery, IL-18 synergistically induces the expression of the Th1
cytokine IFN-gamma in the presence of IL-12 and the Th2 cytokines IL-5 and IL-13 
in the presence of IL-2. Although the expression of these cytokines has been
described in the thymus, their role in thymic development and function remains
uncertain. We report here that freshly isolated thymocytes from C57BL/6 and
BALB/c mice stimulated in vitro with IL-2-plus-IL-18 or IL-12-plus-IL-18 produce 
large amounts of IFN-gamma and IL-13. Analysis of the thymic subsets,
CD4(-)CD8(-) (DN), CD4(+)CD8(+), CD4(+)CD8(-), and CD4(-)CD8(+) revealed that
IL-18 in combination with IL-2 or IL-12 induces IFN-gamma and IL-13
preferentially from DN cells. Moreover, DN2 and DN3 thymocytes contained more
IFN-gamma(+) cells than cells in the later stage of maturation. Additionally,
IL-18 in combination with IL-2 induces CCR4 (Th2-associated) and CCR5
(Th1-associated) gene expression. In contrast, IL-18-plus-IL-12 specifically
induced CCR5 expression. The IL-2-plus-IL-18 or IL-12-plus-IL-18 effect on
IFN-gamma and IL-13 expression is dependent on Stat4 and NF-kappaB but
independent of Stat6, T-bet, or NFAT. Furthermore, IL-12-plus-IL-18 induces
significant thymocyte apoptosis when expressed in vivo or in vitro, and this
effect is exacerbated in the absence of IFN-gamma. IL-12-plus-IL-18-stimulated
thymocytes can also induce IA-IE expression on cortical and medullary thymic
epithelial cells in an IFN-gamma-dependent manner. Thus, the combination of IL-2,
IL-12, and IL-18 can induce phenotypic and functional changes in thymocytes that 
may alter migration, differentiation, and cell death of immature T cells inside
the thymus and potentially affect the Th1/Th2 bias in peripheral immune
compartments.

PMID: 15728489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Br J Ophthalmol. 2005 Mar;89(3):275-9.

The effects of atorvastatin in experimental autoimmune uveitis.

Thomas PB(1), Albini T, Giri RK, See RF, Evans M, Rao NA.

Author information: 
(1)The A Ray Irvine Ocular Pathology Laboratory, Doheny Eye Institute, Department
of Ophthalmology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

AIM: To investigate the effect of atorvastatin (Lipitor), a commonly used drug
for dyslipidaemia in experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU).
METHODS: 48 B10-RIII mice were immunised with human interphotoreceptor retinoid
binding protein (IRBP) peptide p161-180. They were divided into three groups of
16 each and treated orally once daily for 14 days; group one received phosphate
buffered saline (control group), group two received 1 mg/kg of atorvastatin (low 
dose group), and group three received 10 mg/kg (high dose). On day 14 lymph
nodes, spleens, and right eyes were harvested. RNA was extracted from lymph nodes
for RNase protection assay (RPA) to determine proinflammatory (IL-1 alpha and
IL-1 beta), Th1 (TNF-alpha, IL-2, IL-12), and Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10)
cytokine levels. Protein was extracted from spleens for western blot to detect
the expression of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) 4 and STAT6. The severity of inflammation in enucleated eyes was graded by
a masked observer. Paired t test was performed for the mean difference in
histological scoring between treated groups and the immunised control group.
RESULTS: Surprisingly, atorvastatin did not modulate the immune response. The
proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta, and Th1 cytokines, TNF-alpha
and IL-2, were upregulated equally in control and atorvastatin treated groups.
IL-12 and Th2 cytokines were not upregulated in all three groups. Western blot
analysis showed high levels of phosphorylated STAT4, but not STAT6 protein in the
control and atorvastatin treated groups. Mean differences in histological scoring
between treated groups and the immunised control group were not statistically
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Atorvastatin treatment had no effect on Th1 and Th2 cytokine
transcription. Although histological grading suggested mildly decreased
inflammation in the high dose treated group, the equivalence of cytokine
expression in all groups suggests that the statins may not modulate IRBP induced 
uveoretinitis.

PMCID: PMC1772538
PMID: 15722302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Clin Immunol. 2005 Mar;114(3):299-306.

Effect of targeted disruption of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Stat)4 and Stat6 genes on the autoimmune diabetes development induced by
multiple low doses of streptozotocin.

Cetkovic-Cvrlje M(1), Uckun FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Parker Hughes Institute, 2720 Patton Road, St. Paul,
MN 55113, USA. mcetkovic@ih.org

The MLDS (multiple low doses of streptozotocin) model of diabetes was induced in 
Stat4(-/-), Stat6(-/-), and double-deficient Stat4(-/-)/6(-/-) mice to examine
the role of STAT4/STAT6 deficiency in development of autoimmune diabetes.
Cytokine production of T-cells from Stat4(-/-) mice confirmed a predominantly
Th2-type immune response. Stat4(-/-) mice exhibited delayed onset and reduced
severity of disease compared to wild-type (WT) mice. In contrast, STAT6
deficiency, with a predominant Th1 response, did not influence the kinetics or
severity of MLDS-induced autoimmune diabetes. Interestingly, Stat4(-/-)/6(-/-)
mice, with a prominent Th1-type response, experienced an accelerated and
aggravated course of diabetes after MLDS, implicating a STAT4-independent Th1
response in the immunopathogenesis of MLDS-induced autoimmune diabetes. The
sensitivity of islet cells from Stat4(-/-) or Stat4(-/-)/6(-/-) mice to cytokines
and STZ was not different from that of islet cells of WT mice. Hence, the
observed effects of STAT4 and STAT4/6 deficiency on MLDS-induced autoimmune
diabetes are likely due to their effects on T-cell responses.

PMID: 15721841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Am J Transplant. 2005 Mar;5(3):475-83.

Inflammatory blockade improves human pancreatic islet function and viability.

Yang Z(1), Chen M, Ellett JD, Carter JD, Brayman KL, Nadler JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. zy4q@virginia.edu

The pathogenesis of pancreatic beta-cell death in diabetes mellitus is still
under investigation. Inflammation is likely to be one of the factors responsible 
for beta-cell death during disease development. In this study, we have used a
novel antiinflammatory compound, Lisofylline (LSF), to investigate the role of
inflammatory blockade in protecting human pancreatic islets. LSF is a small
synthetic molecule that reduces inflammatory cytokine production and action,
improves beta-cell mitochondrial metabolism, and regulates immune activities. The
present study has demonstrated that the treatment of human islets with LSF not
only allows the retention of glucose responsiveness and insulin secretion in the 
presence of multiple proinflammatory cytokines, but also enhances basal insulin
secretion of beta cells in vitro. LSF also significantly reduces islet apoptosis,
protects beta cells from proinflammatory cytokine damage, and maintains cellular 
viability. In a mouse transplantation model, insulin independence could be
reached in diabetic recipient mice by implantation of 30% fewer islets when LSF
was used in islet culture compared to the control group. These results
demonstrate that LSF profoundly enhances beta-cell function, and suggest the
potential of using inflammatory blockade, such as LSF, to improve beta-cell
function for islet transplantation.

PMID: 15707401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Cancer. 2005 Jun 20;115(3):443-9.

Suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma by transplantation of ex-vivo
immune-modulated NKT lymphocytes.

Margalit M(1), Shibolet O, Klein A, Elinav E, Alper R, Thalenfeld B, Engelhardt
D, Rabbani E, Ilan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Department of Medicine, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.

NKT cells are a regulatory subset of T lymphocytes with immune modulatory effects
and an important role in anti-tumor immunity. The feasibility of "ex-vivo
education" of NKT cells has recently been demonstrated. To evaluate the
anti-tumor effect of ex-vivo immune-modulated NKT lymphocytes in a murine model
of hepatocellular carcinoma. Athymic Balb/C mice were sublethally irradiated and 
transplanted with human Hep3B HCC. NKT cells prepared from immunocompetent Balb/C
mice were pulsed ex vivo with HCC-derived antigens (Group A), Hep3B cells (group 
B) or BSA (group C), and adoptively transferred into HCC harboring mice (1 x 0(6)
NKT cells per mouse). Group D mice did not undergo NKT cell transplantation.
Group E mice were transplanted with 1 x 10(6) NKT cells from HBV-immunized
donors. Mice were followed for tumor size and weight. To determine the mechanism 
of the anti-tumor effect, intrasplenic lymphocyte populations were analyzed by
FACS for NKT, CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocyte subpopulations; STAT 1, 4 and 6 expression
in splenocytes was assessed by Western blot, and serum cytokine levels were
measured by ELISA. Adoptive transfer of NKT cells pulsed with HCC-derived
antigens (group A) and NKT cells from immunized donors (group E) resulted in
complete disappearance of tumors within 4 weeks and attenuated weight loss (6.5% 
and 7% in groups A and E, respectively). In contrast, mice in groups B, C, and D 
developed large, necrotic tumors and severe weight loss (21%, 17% and 23% weight 
loss in groups B, C, and D, respectively). NKT/CD4 and CD8/CD4 ratios were
significantly increased in groups A and E (12.3 and 17.6 in groups A and D,
respectively, compared to 6.4, 4.8 and 5.6 in groups B, C and D, respectively,
for the NKT/CD4 ratio; 41 and 19.8 in groups A and E, respectively, compared to
6.5, 11.8 and 3.2 in groups B, C, and D, respectively, for the CD8/CD4 ratio).
Expression of the transcription factor STAT4 was evident in group A, but not in
groups B-D. Serum IFNgamma, IL12 and IL4 levels were increased in groups A and E.
Adoptive transfer of NKT lymphocytes exposed ex vivo by HCC-derived antigens
loaded on dendritic cells and NKT cells from immunized donors led to suppression 
of HCC in mice. NKT-mediated anti-tumor activity was associated increased NKT and
CD8+ T lymphocyte numbers, increased expression of STAT4, a marker for IL-12
activity and elevated serum levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IFNgamma and 
IL12, and of IL4. Ex-vivo modulation of NKT lymphocytes holds promise as a novel 
mode of immune therapy for HCC.

PMID: 15688366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 1;174(3):1188-95.

Polarized development of memory cell-like IFN-gamma-producing cells in the
absence of TCR zeta-chain.

Krymskaya L(1), Lee WH, Zhong L, Liu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

TCR/CD3 complex-mediated signals play critical roles in regulating CD4(+) Th cell
differentiation. In this report, we have examined the in vivo role of a key
TCR/CD3 complex molecule zeta-chain in regulating the differentiation of Th
cells. We have studied T cells from zeta-chain-deficient mice (zetaKO mice),
zeta-chain-bearing mice (zeta(+) mice), and from zetaKO mice expressing a
FcRgamma chain transgene (FcRgammaTG, zetaKO mice). Our results demonstrated
that, compared with those of control mice, CD4(+) T cells and not CD8(+) T cells 
from zetaKO mice were polarized into IFN-gamma-producing cells. Some of these
IFN-gamma-producing cells could also secrete IL-10. Interestingly, zetaKO mouse T
cells produced IFN-gamma even after they were cultured in a Th2 condition. Our
studies to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the polarized IFN-gamma 
production revealed that the expression level of STAT4 and T-bet were
up-regulated in freshly isolated T cells from zetaKO mice. Further studies showed
that noncultured zetaKO mice CD4(+) T cells and thymocytes bore a unique memory
cell-like CD44(high), CD62L(low/neg) phenotype. Altogether, these results suggest
that, in the absence of the zeta-chain, CD4(+) T cells develop as polarized
IFN-gamma-producing cells that bear a memory cell-like phenotype. The
zeta-chain-bearing T cells may produce a large amount of IFN-gamma only after
they are cultured in a condition favoring Th1 cell differentiation. This study
may provide important implications for the down-regulation of zeta-chain in T
cells of patients bearing a variety of tumors, chronic inflammatory and
infectious diseases.

PMID: 15661872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 1;174(3):1178-87.

Different competitive capacities of Stat4- and Stat6-deficient CD4+ T cells
during lymphophenia-driven proliferation.

Sanchez-Guajardo V(1), Borghans JA, Marquez ME, Garcia S, Freitas AA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Population Biology Unit, Institute Pasteur, France.

The outcome of an immune response relies on the competitive capacities acquired
through differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into Th1 or Th2 effector cells. Because
Stat4 and Stat6 proteins are implicated in the Th1 vs Th2 generation and
maintenance, respectively, we compare in this study the kinetics of Stat4(-/-)
and Stat6(-/-) CD4(+) T cells during competitive bone marrow reconstitution and
lymphopenia-driven proliferation. After bone marrow transplantation, both
populations reconstitute the peripheral T cell pools equally well. After transfer
into lymphopenic hosts, wild-type and Stat6(-/-) CD4(+) T cells show a
proliferation advantage, which is early associated with the expression of an
active phospho-Stat4 and the down-regulation of Stat6. Despite these differences,
Stat4- and Stat6-deficient T cells reach similar steady state numbers. However,
when both Stat4(-/-) and Stat6(-/-) CD4(+) T cells are coinjected into the same
hosts, the Stat6(-/-) cells become dominant and out-compete Stat4(-/-) cells.
These findings suggest that cell activation, through the Stat4 pathway and the
down-regulation of Stat6, confers to pro-Th1 T cells a slight proliferation
advantage that in a competitive situation has major late repercussions, because
it modifies the final homeostatic equilibrium of the populations and favors the
establishment of Th1 CD4(+) T cell dominance.

PMID: 15661871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Am J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jan;100(1):64-72.

Activation pattern of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)
factors in inflammatory bowel diseases.

Mudter J(1), Weigmann B, Bartsch B, Kiesslich R, Strand D, Galle PR, Lehr HA,
Schmidt J, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of 1st Medical Clinic, Department of Pathology,
Johannes-Gutenberg-University of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55101 Mainz,
Germany.

Comment in
    Am J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jan;100(1):73-4.

OBJECTIVES: Cytokine signaling pathways involving transcription factors of the
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family play a key role 
in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). STAT proteins are
latent cytoplasmic transcription factors that induce transcription upon
phosphorylation, dimerization, and nuclear translocation. However, their
activation pattern in IBD is poorly understood. The aim of our study was to
characterize STAT-expression in IBD.
METHODS: Mononuclear cells were isolated from 36 colonic specimens of Crohn's
disease, ulcerative colitis, or from control patients. Cells were stimulated
overnight with antibodies against human CD2 and CD28 and mononuclear cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry. Alternatively, CD4(+) T cells were immunomagnetically
separated and then assessed by flow cytometry. Intracellular stainings of the
following transcription factors were performed: STAT-1, STAT-2, STAT-3, STAT-4,
and STAT-6. In addition, immunofluorescence staining on cryosections for
phosphorylated STAT-1 and STAT-3 was performed.
RESULTS: Average expression of the IFN-gamma inducible transcription factor
STAT-1 was increased in Crohn's disease as compared to patients with ulcerative
colitis and control patients. However, levels of phospho-STAT-1 were surprisingly
not markedly upregulated in IBD as compared to controls. In contrast, STAT-3 and 
phospho-STAT-3 levels were significantly increased in IBD patients as compared to
controls (p < 0.01). No differences could be detected in STAT-6 levels. Finally, 
average expression of STAT-2, which is involved in type I interferon signalling, 
was downregulated in IBD as compared to control patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of STAT activation patterns could serve as a helpful
tool to characterize intestinal inflammation. Furthermore, the IL-6/STAT-3 rather
than the IFN-gamma/STAT-1 signaling pathway emerges as a key target for the
development of future therapeutic concepts in IBD.

PMID: 15654782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Jan;115(1):80-7.

Association analysis of common variants of STAT6, GATA3, and STAT4 to asthma and 
high serum IgE phenotypes.

Pykäläinen M(1), Kinos R, Valkonen S, Rydman P, Kilpeläinen M, Laitinen LA,
Karjalainen J, Nieminen M, Hurme M, Kere J, Laitinen T, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Academic
University, Finland. maritta.pykalainen@btk.fi

BACKGROUND: Immune responses characterized by T H 2 type cells and IgE are
important for the development of asthma and atopy. The transcription factors
STAT6, GATA3, and STAT4 mediate the cytokine-induced development of naive CD4 + T
cells into either T H 1 or T H 2 type.
OBJECTIVE: We studied genetic variation of the STAT6, GATA3, and STAT4 genes and 
examined whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these loci were
associated with asthma or serum high IgE levels in the Finnish asthmatic
families.
METHODS: With denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography we screened all
exons and exon-intron boundaries of the genes in 14 to 22 patients. All
identified SNPs were genotyped in 120 nuclear families, and the haplotypes were
analyzed by Haplotype Pattern Mining based statistical analysis. When potential
association was observed, the analysis was replicated among 245 asthmatic
patients and 405 population-based control subjects.
RESULTS: A total of 23 SNPs were identified, of which 8 were not previously
listed in the SNP database. Interestingly, a haplotype analysis of GATA3 showed 3
related haplotypes that associated with different asthma and atopy related
phenotypes among both the family and case-control data sets. For STAT6 and STAT4,
no significant association to asthma or serum total IgE levels was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a panel of novel SNPs in genes coding for proteins
important in the T H 1/T H 2 cell differentiation. SNPs of the GATA3 gene showed 
an initial association to asthma-related phenotypes. Elucidation of the
importance of the identified panel of SNPs in other T H 1/T H 2 mediated diseases
will be of great interest.

PMID: 15637551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 15;174(2):1013-9.

Abnormal Th1 cell differentiation and IFN-gamma production in T lymphocytes from 
motheaten viable mice mutant for Src homology 2 domain-containing protein
tyrosine phosphatase-1.

Yu WM(1), Wang S, Keegan AD, Williams MS, Qu CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical
Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) plays an 
important role in T and B lymphocyte signaling; however, the function of SHP-1 in
Th cell differentiation, in particular, the Th1 response, has not been defined.
In this study, we provide evidence that SHP-1 phosphatase negatively regulates
Th1 cell development and IFN-gamma production. Compared with the wild-type
control, anti-CD3-activated mouse T lymphocytes carrying the motheaten viable
mutation in the SHP-1 gene produced a significantly increased amount of IFN-gamma
in the presence of IL-12. This increase was also seen at the basal level without 
IL-12 addition. Similarly, Th1 cell differentiation and proliferation of
anti-CD3-activated SHP-1 mutant lymph node cells in the presence or absence of
IL-12 were markedly enhanced, indicating a negative role for SHP-1 phosphatase in
such lymphocyte activities. Interestingly, IL-12-induced activation of Jak2 and
STAT4, critical components for IL-12-mediated cellular responses, was shortened
or attenuated in mutant T cells. Together these results suggest that SHP-1
negatively regulates Th1 cell development and functions through a mechanism that 
is not directly related to IL-12 signaling.

PMID: 15634925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Blood. 2005 Apr 15;105(8):3372-80. Epub 2004 Dec 23.

Targeting of inducible costimulator (ICOS) expressed on alloreactive T cells
down-regulates graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and facilitates engraftment of
allogeneic bone marrow (BM).

Taylor PA(1), Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH, Noelle RJ, Rudensky 
AY, Mak TW, Serody JS, Blazar BR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division
of BMT, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Inducible costimulator (ICOS), a CD28/cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4)
family member, is expressed on activated T cells. ICOS ligand, a B7 family
member, is constitutively expressed on B cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells 
and is up-regulated on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and some nonlymphoid
tissues by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
Thus, ICOS: ICOS ligand (ICOSL) blockade could reduce alloreactive T cell-APC
interactions responsible for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and bone marrow
(BM) graft rejection. ICOS blockade, achieved with ICOS-/- mice or anti-ICOS
monoclonal antibody (mAb) administration, resulted in significant inhibition of
GVHD in multiple strain combinations whether mediated by CD4+ and/or CD8+ T
cells, alloantigen-specific T-cell receptor (TCR) transgenic (Tg) T cells, or
CD28-, T helper 1 (Th1)-, or Th2-deficient T cells. Anti-ICOS significantly
delayed GVHD mortality even when mAb infusions were delayed until day 5 after
transplantation. ICOS blockade reduced the number of alloantigen-specific
effector cells but did not prevent their activation. Imaging of green fluorescent
protein-positive (GFP+) effectors indicated that ICOS blockade inhibited
expansion of GVHD-causing effector T cells in secondary lymphoid and GVHD target 
organs. Engraftment rates were significantly higher in ICOS-/- versus wild-type
(WT) mice receiving allogeneic BM, and ICOS blockade significantly inhibited
expansion of host antidonor alloantigen-specific BM graft-rejecting T cells.
These data suggest that the ICOS pathway may be a beneficial therapeutic target
for GVHD inhibition, GVHD therapy, and BM graft promotion.

PMID: 15618467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 1;174(1):294-301.

IL-12, but not IFN-alpha, promotes STAT4 activation and Th1 development in murine
CD4+ T cells expressing a chimeric murine/human Stat2 gene.

Persky ME(1), Murphy KM, Farrar JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Humans and mice have evolved distinct pathways for Th1 cell development. Although
IL-12 promotes CD4(+) Th1 development in both murine and human T cells,
IFN-alphabeta drives Th1 development only in human cells. This
IFN-alphabeta-dependent pathway is not conserved in the mouse species due in part
to a specific mutation within murine Stat2. Restoration of this pathway in murine
T cells would provide the opportunity to more closely model specific human
disease states that rely on CD4(+) T cell responses to IFN-alphabeta. To this
end, the C terminus of murine Stat2, harboring the mutation, was replaced with
the corresponding human Stat2 sequence by a knockin targeting strategy within
murine embryonic stem cells. Chimeric m/h Stat2 knockin mice were healthy, bred
normally, and exhibited a normal lymphoid compartment. Furthermore, the
murine/human STAT2 protein was expressed in murine CD4(+) T cells and was
activated by murine IFN-alpha signaling. However, the murine/human STAT2 protein 
was insufficient to restore full IFN-alpha-driven Th1 development as defined by
IFN-gamma expression. Furthermore, IL-12, but not IFN-alpha, promoted acute
IFN-gamma secretion in collaboration with IL-18 stimulation in both CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells. The inability of T cells to commit to Th1 development correlated 
with the lack of STAT4 phosphorylation in response to IFN-alpha. This finding
suggests that, although the C terminus of human STAT2 is required for STAT4
recruitment and activation by the human type I IFNAR (IFN-alphabetaR), it is not 
sufficient to restore this process through the murine IFNAR complex.

PMID: 15611252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 1;174(1):261-9.

IL-12 protects against coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis by increasing
IFN-gamma and macrophage and neutrophil populations in the heart.

Fairweather D(1), Frisancho-Kiss S, Yusung SA, Barrett MA, Davis SE, Steele RA,
Gatewood SJ, Rose NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 720 Rutland
Avenue, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Th1-type immune responses, mediated by IL-12-induced IFN-gamma, are believed to
exacerbate certain autoimmune diseases. We recently found that signaling via
IL-12Rbeta1 increases coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3)-induced myocarditis. In this
study, we examined the role of IL-12 on the development of CVB3-induced
myocarditis using mice deficient in IL-12p35 that lack IL-12p70. We found that
IL-12 deficiency did not prevent myocarditis, but viral replication was
significantly increased. Although there were no changes in the total percentage
of inflammatory cells in IL-12-deficient hearts compared with wild-type BALB/c
controls by FACS analysis, macrophage and neutrophil populations were decreased. 
This decrease corresponded to reduced TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma levels in the
heart, suggesting that macrophage and/or neutrophil populations may be a primary 
source of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma during acute CVB3 myocarditis. Increased viral 
replication in IL-12-deficient mice was not mediated by reduced TNFRp55
signaling, because viral replication was unaltered in TNFRp55-deficient mice.
However, STAT4 or IFN-gamma deficiency resulted in significantly increased viral 
replication and significantly reduced TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma levels in the
heart, similar to IL-12 deficiency, indicating that the IL-12/STAT4 pathway of
IFN-gamma production is important in limiting CVB3 replication. Furthermore,
STAT4 or IFN-gamma deficiency also increased chronic CVB3 myocarditis, indicating
that therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing Th1-mediated autoimmune diseases
may exacerbate common viral infections such as CVB3 and increase chronic
inflammatory heart disease.

PMID: 15611248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Immunol Rev. 2004 Dec;202:157-74.

Issues in T-helper 1 development--resolved and unresolved.

Berenson LS(1), Ota N, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

T-helper 1 cell (Th1) development participates in immunity to many pathogens in
part by providing a source of interferon (IFN)-gamma that contributes numerous
protective effects. The process of Th1 development involves signals provided by
antigen-presenting cells and cytokines produced in response to pathogens, with
IFN-gamma itself, interleukin (IL)-12, and IL-18 each promoting the process in
some way. Despite the rapid progress into mechanisms of Th1 development in recent
years, there are still a number of important unresolved issues in this area. The 
precise sequence of effector and cellular mechanisms represents a relatively
recent avenue of research but is still the subject of current debate, as is the
basis of mechanisms that may stabilize a Th1 response. Another unresolved issue
is the role of type I IFNs in substituting for IL-12-mediated activation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (Stat4) and induction of
IFN-gamma in either murine or human T cells. It is now clear that Th1 cells
acquire the property of being capable of nonantigen-dependent activation through 
the coordinate signaling of IL-12 and IL-18, but the precise order of
intracellular signaling events and the uniqueness of this pathway's reliance on
the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway are still issues in need 
of resolution. Finally, the process of verifying the effects of Stat4 mutations
on functional responses has led to the recognition of an unexpected action of the
STAT N-domain that may apply generally to other STAT proteins as well. None of
these areas is static or resolved fully, and they likely will remain topics of
rapid progress.

PMID: 15546392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Immunol Rev. 2004 Dec;202:139-56.

Signaling by IL-12 and IL-23 and the immunoregulatory roles of STAT4.

Watford WT(1), Hissong BD, Bream JH, Kanno Y, Muul L, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology & Inflammation Branch, NIAMS, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1820, USA.

Produced in response to a variety of pathogenic organisms, interleukin (IL)-12
and IL-23 are key immunoregulatory cytokines that coordinate innate and adaptive 
immune responses. These dimeric cytokines share a subunit, designated p40, and
bind to a common receptor chain, IL-12R beta 1. The receptor for IL-12 is
composed of IL-12R beta 1 and IL-12R beta 2, whereas IL-23 binds to a receptor
composed of IL-12R beta 1 and IL-23R. Both cytokines activate the Janus kinases
Tyk2 and Jak2, the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4), as well as other STATs. A major action of IL-12 is to
promote the differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into T-helper (Th) 1 cells,
which produce interferon (IFN)-gamma, and deficiency of IL-12, IL-12R subunits or
STAT4 is similar in many respects. In contrast, IL-23 promotes end-stage
inflammation. Targeting IL-12, IL-23, and their downstream signaling elements
would therefore be logical strategies for the treatment of immune-mediated
diseases.

PMID: 15546391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Immunity. 2004 Nov;21(5):719-31.

Silencing T-bet defines a critical role in the differentiation of autoreactive T 
lymphocytes.

Lovett-Racke AE(1), Rocchini AE, Choy J, Northrop SC, Hussain RZ, Ratts RB,
Sikder D, Racke MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390 USA. amy.lovett-racke@utsouthwestern.edu

As a means of developing therapies that target the pathogenic T cells in multiple
sclerosis (MS) without compromising the immune system or eliciting systemic side 
effects, we investigated the use of T-bet-specific antisense oligonucleotides and
small interfering RNAs (siRNA) to silence T-bet expression in autoreactive
encephalitogenic T cells and evaluated the biological consequences of this
suppression in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a model for MS. The
T-bet-specific AS oligonucleotide and siRNA suppressed T-bet expression, IFNgamma
production, and STAT1 levels during antigen-specific T cell differentiation. In
vitro suppression of T-bet during differentiation of myelin-specific T cells and 
in vivo administration of a T-bet-specific antisense oligonucleotide or siRNA
inhibited disease. T-bet was shown to bind the IFNgamma and STAT1 promoters, but 
did not regulate the IL-12/STAT4 pathway. Since T-bet regulates IFNgamma
production in CD4(+) T cells, but to a lesser extent in most other
IFNgamma-producing cells, T-bet may be a target for therapeutics for Th1-mediated
diseases.

PMID: 15539157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):6241-7.

Enhancer role of STAT5 in CD2 activation of IFN-gamma gene expression.

Gonsky R(1), Deem RL, Bream J, Young HA, Targan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 
Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

IFN-gamma is an important immunoregulatory protein with tightly controlled
expression in activated T and NK cells. Three potential STAT binding regions have
been recognized within the IFN-gamma promoter: 1) an IL-12-mediated STAT4 binding
site at -236 bp; 2) a newly identified IL-2-induced STAT5 binding element at -3.6
kb; and 3) CD2-mediated STAT1 and STAT4 binding to an intronic element in mucosal
T cells. However, functional activation of these sites remains unclear. In this
study we demonstrate CD2-mediated activation of the newly characterized -3.6-kb
IFN-gamma STAT5 binding region. CD2 signaling of human PBMC results in activation
of the -3.6-kb IFN-gamma promoter, whereas mutation of the -3.6-kb STAT5 site
attenuates promoter activity. Functional activation is accompanied by STAT5A but 
little STAT5B nucleoprotein binding to the IFN-gamma STAT5 site, as determined by
competition and supershift assays. STAT5 activation via CD2 occurs independent of
IL-2. Western and FACS analysis shows increased phospho-STAT5 following CD2
signaling. AG490, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor affecting Jak proteins, inhibits
CD2-mediated IFN-gamma mRNA expression, secretion, and nucleoprotein binding to
the IFN-gamma STAT5 site in a dose-dependent fashion. This report is the first to
describe CD2-mediated activation of STAT5 and supports STAT5 involvement in
regulation of IFN-gamma expression.

PMID: 15528362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1037-43. Epub 2004 Nov 1.

Interleukin-12-induced interferon-gamma production by human peripheral blood T
cells is regulated by mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).

Kusaba H(1), Ghosh P, Derin R, Buchholz M, Sasaki C, Madara K, Longo DL.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, Gerontology Research
Center, NIA, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Depending on the type of external signals, T cells can initiate multiple
intracellular signaling pathways that can be broadly classified into two groups
based on their sensitivity to the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporin A (CsA).
Interleukin (IL)-12-mediated interferon (IFN)-gamma production by activated T
cells has been shown to be CsA-insensitive. In this report, we demonstrate that
the IL-12-induced CsA-resistant pathway of IFN-gamma production is sensitive to
rapamycin. Rapamycin treatment resulted in the aberrant recruitment of Stat3,
Stat4, and phospho-c-Jun to the genomic promoter region resulting in decreased
IFN-gamma transcription. IL-12-induced phosphorylation of Stat3 on Ser-727 was
affected by rapamycin, which may be due to the effect of rapamycin on the
IL-12-induced interaction between mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and Stat3.
In accordance with this, reduction in the mTOR protein level by small interfering
RNA resulted in suppression of Stat3 phosphorylation and decreased production of 
IFN-gamma after IL-12 stimulation. These results suggest that mTOR may play a
major role in IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production by activated T cells.

PMID: 15522880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Neuroscience. 2004;129(1):75-83.

Interleukin-12 p40-homodimer production in sensory dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Hikawa N(1), Ishikawa Y, Takenaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yokohama City University, School of Medicine, 3-9
Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. hikawa_naoshi@isc.sagami-wu.ac.jp

Recently, the reports that sensory nerves contribute to induction and development
of peripheral inflammation have been accumulating. Although neuropeptides have
been thought to participate in modulation of inflammation, we supposed the
involvement of cytokines. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a key regulator of
cell-mediated immunity. IL-12 is heterodimer cytokine consisting of a p35 and a
p40 subunit, but the results that some of immune cell types secrete p40-homodimer
have been reported. In this study, we investigated the expression and secretion
of IL-12 in mouse sensory neurons in order to evaluate the involvement of sensory
neurons in cell-mediated immunity. Expression of IL-12 p40 mRNA was detected and 
enhanced by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), but another subunit of IL-12 p35 mRNA
was not detected in sensory dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons in culture. IL-12 
p40 molecule was detected in DRG neurons by immunocytochemistry. In addition,
cultured DRG neurons secreted p40-homodimer that inhibited IL-12-induced STAT4
phosphorylation in T cells. p40 mRNA expression was accumulated in DRG after
administration of IFN-gamma into mouse footpad, and this enhancement was
eliminated by a cut of sciatic nerve. These results suggest the possibility that 
p40-homodimer derived from sensory nerves suppresses the excessive peripheral
inflammation.

PMID: 15489030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Dermatol Sci. 2004 Oct;36(1):51-6.

Hapten-induced contact hypersensitivity is enhanced in Tyk2-deficient mice.

Hosogi M(1), Tonogaito H, Aioi A, Hamada K, Shimoda K, Muromoto R, Matsuda T,
Miyachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, Pias Corporation, 1-3-1 Murotani, Nishi-ku, Kobe
651-2241, Japan. miwahoso@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that Tyk2, a member of the Janus family
of protein tyrosine kinases, which are activated by a variety of cytokines, plays
a crucial role in interleukin (IL)-12-mediated T-cell functions such as IFN-gamma
production. On the other hand, hapten-induced contact hypersensitivity (CHS) is
mediated by IFN-gamma producing CD8+ T cells and regulated by CD4+ T cells.
OBJECTIVE: This study hypothesized that the CHS response might be reduced in
Tyk2-deficient mice because of a lack of IFN-gamma production from CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cells.
METHODS: The CHS reaction was evoked in wild-type and Tyk2-deficient mice and the
ears of the mice were examined to measure for several cytokines.
RESULTS: Ear swelling during CHS was significantly enhanced in Tyk2-deficient
mice compared with the controls. IL-12 and IFN-gamma levels at the reaction sites
in Tyk2-deficient mice were significantly lower than in the controls, whereas
IL-2 and IL-4 levels were elevated. Furthermore, STAT3- and STAT4-phosphorylation
in the draining lymph node cells of Tyk2-deficient mice decreased.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the lack of Tyk2-mediated signal
transduction enhances a compensative pathway during CHS.

PMID: 15488705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Cytokine. 2004 Nov 7;28(3):124-36.

Genetic background influences natural killer cell activation during bacterial
peritonitis in mice, and is interleukin 12 and interleukin 18 independent.

Scott MJ(1), Hoth JJ, Gardner SA, Peyton JC, Cheadle WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Some mouse strains produce strong pro-inflammatory, T-helper (Th)1 responses
(e.g. C57BL/6), or strong anti-inflammatory, Th2 responses (e.g. BALB/c). The
exact mechanisms for development of distinct immune responses to infection are
not completely understood, although cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-12, IL-18 
and IL-4 are known to play roles. Natural killer T (NKT)/natural killer (NK)
cells are important regulators of immune responses in infection and non-infection
models, and NKT/NK activation is also regulated by IL-12 and IL-18 in many
models. We investigated the role of IL-12/IL-18 in NKT/NK activation in murine
bacterial peritonitis, as well as differential NKT and NK cell activation in
C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice. No differences in NKT or NK cell activation or
intracellular interferon (IFN)-gamma were determined between mice given control, 
anti-IL-12 or anti-IL-18 antibodies or in NKT/NK cell activation in STAT4-/- mice
(deficient in IL-12 signaling) or wild type controls. However, there were
significant differences in the activation of NKT and NK cells between C57BL/6
mice and BALB/c mice, with NKT/NK cytokine production following Th1 or Th2 lines 
dependent on strain. This suggests a role for NKT and NK cell activation in the
development of Th1 and Th2 responses during bacterial infection independently of 
IL-12 or IL-18.

PMID: 15473954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Immunol. 2004 Oct 15;173(8):5002-7.

Suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides inhibit Th1 differentiation by blocking
IFN-gamma- and IL-12-mediated signaling.

Shirota H(1), Gursel M, Klinman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Repetitive TTAGGG motifs present at high frequency in mammalian telomeres can
suppress Th1-mediated immune responses. Synthetic oligonucleotides (ODN)
containing TTAGGG motifs mimic this activity and have proven effective in the
prevention/treatment of certain Th1-dependent autoimmune diseases. This work
explores the mechanism by which suppressive ODN block the induction of Th1
immunity. Findings indicate that these ODN inhibit IFN-gamma-induced STAT1
phosphorylation and IL-12-induced STAT3 and STAT4 phosphorylation. As a result,
T-bet expression is reduced as is the maturation of naive CD4+ cells into Th1
effectors. These changes indirectly support the generation of Th2-dominated
immune responses. Suppressive ODN may thus represent a novel approach to
influence the Th1:Th2 balance in vivo.

PMID: 15470043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2004 Oct;8(5):409-22.

STAT proteins as novel targets for cancer drug discovery.

Turkson J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, SRB 22214, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
turksonj@moffitt.usf.edu

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent
cytoplasmic transcription factors that were discovered in the context of cytokine
and growth factor signalling. Normal STAT signalling is tightly controlled with
finite kinetics, which is in keeping with standard cellular responses. However,
persistent STAT activation has also been observed and is frequently associated
with malignant transformation. Constitutive activation of STAT proteins, notably 
of Stat3 and Stat5, is detected in many human tumour cells and cells transformed 
by oncoproteins that activate tyrosine kinase signalling pathways. It is
well-established that constitutively active Stat3 is one of the molecular
abnormalities that has a causal role in oncogenesis. Aberrant Stat3 promotes
uncontrolled growth and survival through dysregulation of gene expression,
including cyclin D1, c-Myc, Bcl-xL, Mcl-1 and survivin genes, and thereby
contributes to oncogenesis. Moreover, recent studies reveal that persistently
active Stat3 induces tumour angiogenesis by upregulation of vascular endothelial 
growth factor induction, and modulates immune functions in favour of tumour
immune evasion. Overall, studies have validated Stat3 as a novel target for
cancer therapy, and hence provided the rationale for developing small-molecule
Stat3 inhibitors. This review will discuss current evidence for the critical role
of aberrant STAT signalling in malignant transformation, and examine the validity
as well as the therapeutic potential of Stat3 as a cancer target. An update on
the efforts to develop novel Stat3 inhibitors for therapeutic application will
also be provided.

PMID: 15469392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1016-20. Epub 2004 Sep 30.

Involvement of connective tissue-type mast cells in Th1 immune responses via
Stat4 expression.

Kataoka TR(1), Komazawa N, Morii E, Oboki K, Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Medical School, Yamada-oka 2-2,
Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. trkata@patho.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Mast cells are the sentinels of immune systems and, like other immuno-competent
cells, they are produced by hematopoietic stem cells. We analyzed the expression 
of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (Stat4), and investigated
its role in mast cells. Murine mast cells are usually divided into 2 distinct
populations by their distribution and contents of their granules: mucosal mast
cells (MMCs) and connective tissue-type mast cells (CTMCs). Stat4 protein was
detected in CTMCs but not in MMCs. The absence of Stat4 expression in cultured
mast cells was due to the presence of Stat6. In T-helper (Th) cells, Stat4 plays 
an important role in Th1 shift by inducing a set of genes, such as interferon
gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin-18 receptor alpha subunit (IL-18Ralpha). As in 
Th1 shift, we found that Stat4 trans-activated these genes in the
Stat4-expressing cultured mast cells, namely, microphthalmia transcription factor
(MITF)-deficient cultured MMCs, Stat6-deficient cultured MMCs, and cultured
CTMCs. Stat4 also enhanced expression of nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) in CTMCs,
which brought about increased levels of NO-dependent cytotoxic activity. These
data indicate that expression of Stat4 in CTMCs plays an important role on Th1
immune responses.

PMID: 15459017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Microb Pathog. 2004 Oct;37(4):177-84.

Stat 4 but not Stat 6 mediated immune mechanisms are essential in protection
against plague.

Elvin SJ(1), Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
UK. sjelvin@dstl.gov.uk

The Caf1 and LcrV sub-unit vaccine for plague has been shown to be highly
protective against challenge with virulent Yersinia pestis in a mouse model.
Production of large amounts of IgG1 in response to the vaccine correlates with
protection against aerosol and parenteral infection. In this study the effect of 
genetic mutation in the immune system on protection was addressed. Stat 6(-/-)
mice which are unable to utilise the type 2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 and so
should have reduced IgG1 responses were utilised in order to determine whether an
immune system biased towards the type 1 axis could mount an effective response to
the vaccine. Conversely in the Stat 4(-/-) mouse model, IL-12 and
interferon-gamma-mediated immune mechanisms are inactive and the immune response 
should be biased towards the type 2 axis. Serum antibody responses to vaccination
in both the knockout strains and their wild type controls revealed little
difference in levels of IgG and isotype profiles. Elispot analysis of cytokine
production at the single cell level did however reveal a functional defect in the
Stat 4(-/-) mice which had low levels of IFN-gamma producing cells. Following
virulent challenge, the Stat 6(-/-) mice showed high levels of protection, while 
the Stat 4(-/-) mice were poorly protected, indicating a fundamental defect in
their immune systems which could not be overcome even by the passive transfer of 
CD4(+) cells from immunised BALB/c donors. It appears therefore that type 1
immune mechanisms, activated following Stat 4 phosphorylation, are essential in
protection against plague.

PMID: 15458778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1319-28. Epub 2004 Sep 21.

Minute numbers of contaminant CD8+ T cells or CD11b+CD11c+ NK cells are the
source of IFN-gamma in IL-12/IL-18-stimulated mouse macrophage populations.

Schleicher U(1), Hesse A, Bogdan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Immunologu and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen, Germany.

Macrophages were reported to be strong producers of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) 
after stimulation by interleukin 12 (IL-12) plus IL-18, which gave rise to a
novel concept of auto-crine macrophage activation. Here, we show that peritoneal 
exudate and bone marrow-derived mouse macrophages generated by conventional
techniques contain small quantities of CD11b(+)CD11c(+)CD31(+)DX5(+)NK1.1(+)
natural killer (NK) cells or CD3(+)CD8(+)TCRbeta(+) T cells, respectively.
Intracellular cytokine staining, purification of macrophages by sorting, and the 
analysis of macrophages from alymphoid RAG2(-/-)gamma-chain(-/-) mice revealed
that the high amount of IFN-gamma protein in the supernatants of unseparated
IL-12/IL-18-stimulated macrophage populations originates exclusively from the
contaminating lymphoid cells. Notably, IL-12/IL-18 still induced IFN-gamma mRNA
in highly purified macrophages from wild-type mice and in macrophages from
RAG2(-/-)gamma-chain(-/-) mice, whereas nuclear translocation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and production of IFN-gamma
protein were no longer detectable. These results question the concept of
autocrine macrophage activation by secreted IFN-gamma, suggest differences in the
expression of IFN-gamma mRNA and protein between macrophages and lymphoid cells, 
and illustrate that the limited purity of most myeloid cell populations (</= 98%)
might lead to false conclusions.

PMID: 15383459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Dermatol Sci. 2004 Sep;35(3):187-97.

Therapeutic effects of streptococcal preparation OK-432 on atopic dermatitis-like
lesions in NC/Nga mice: possible shift from a Th2- to Th1-predominance.

Horiuchi Y(1), Bae S, Katayama I, Nishioka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nagaski University School of Medicine, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan. nu-yhori@jcom.home.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: The inducement of Th1 cell-mediated immune response, possibly brought
about through bacterial stimulation, may serve to control atopic disorders such
as atopic dermatitis (AD). The streptococcal preparation, OK-432, has been shown 
a potent Th1 inducer through the action of IL-12. NC/Nga mice under ordinary
conditions have been found to contract dermatitis similar to human AD.
OBJECTIVE: Examination was made of the therapeutic effects of OK-432 local intra-
and/or subcutaneous injections on AD-like lesions in NC/Nga mice.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining with IL-4/IL-12p40 and CD80/86 and
phosphorylated STAT4/p-STAT6 and RT-PCR for IL-4/IL-12p40 and STAT6/STAT4 mRNA
was conducted for the evaluation of OK-432 treatment of spontaneous AD-like
lesions in NC/Nga mice.
RESULTS: At 5 weeks following injection of OK-432, for treating head and back
lesions in NC/Nga mice, 10 of 12 OK-432 treated NC mice were found to have
clinically improved quite considerably. On the head and back skin of
OK-432-treated mice, IL-12p40/CD80 positive cellular infiltration was
conspicuous, in contrast to non-treated mice. IL-4/CD86 positive cellular
infiltrates in OK-432-treated mice had decreased significantly more than in
non-treated mice and IL-4 mRNA expression was virtually absent in OK-432-treated 
mice. P-STAT4 positive cells could be seen abundantly present in OK-432-treated
mice, and p-STAT6 positive cells were much fewer than in non-treated mice.
CONCLUSIONS: OK-432-treatment appears to induce Th1 cellular response and to
down-regulate that of the Th2 pathway in AD-like lesions of NC/Nga mice. The
present results demonstrate bacterial components from such Streptococcus to
likely constitute an effective new therapeutic approach in the treatment of AD.

Copyright 2004 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology

PMID: 15381240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Curr Pharm Des. 2004;10(23):2839-50.

The role of STATs in inflammation and inflammatory diseases.

Pfitzner E(1), Kliem S, Baus D, Litterst CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44,
60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. e.pfitzner@em.uni-frankfurt.de

The immune response is regulated by the concerted action of pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines. The deregulation of this process causes
immunological disorders like allergic and autoimmune diseases. The Janus Kinase
(JAK)--Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway is one
major signaling pathway converting the cytokine signal into gene expression
programs regulating the proliferation and differentiation of the immune cells.
Several members of the STAT protein family in particular STAT1, STAT2, STAT3,
STAT4 and STAT6 act as transcription factors in modulating pro- and
anti-inflammatory responses. Here we review the evidence for the involvement of
the different STAT proteins in inflammation, autoimmune and allergic diseases. We
discuss novel approaches to interfere with the function of these signaling
transcription factors for therapeutic purpose.

PMID: 15379672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6579-87.

Photodynamic therapy causes cross-linking of signal transducer and activator of
transcription proteins and attenuation of interleukin-6 cytokine responsiveness
in epithelial cells.

Liu W(1), Oseroff AR, Baumann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a local treatment of cancers. The principle of PDT 
is the production of reactive oxygen species, in particular singlet oxygen, by
light activation of a photosensitizer introduced into the target cells. The
direct photochemical and subsequent redox reactions can lead to cell death. This 
study sought to identify effects occurring during PDT and some of their
consequences in surviving cells. Using epithelial cells in tissue culture and in 
tumors, several distinct PDT-mediated reactions were found, including global
dephosphorylation of proteins, induced phosphorylation of a 71-kDa protein,
initiation of cellular stress responses, structural modification and loss of
epidermal growth factor receptor, and cross-linking of proteins. Specific
covalent cross-linking of nonactivated signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-3, and to a lesser extent of STAT1 and STAT4, correlated
with PDT dose. Cross-linked STAT3 was primarily localized to the cytoplasm and
failed to bind to DNA. The combination of STAT cross-linking and inactivation of 
receptor functions rendered PDT-treated cells refractory for at least 24 hours to
interleukin-6 and oncostatin M, cytokines known to be elevated at site of tissue 
damage and inflammation. It is suggested that the loss of responsiveness to these
inflammatory cytokines in the PDT-treated field assists tumor cells in evading
the growth-suppressive activity of these mediators expected to be present at
tissue sites after PDT.

PMID: 15374971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Clin Immunol. 2004 Sep;24(5):542-52.

Quercetin, a flavonoid phytoestrogen, ameliorates experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis by blocking IL-12 signaling through JAK-STAT pathway in T
lymphocyte.

Muthian G(1), Bright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37212, USA.

Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a Th1 cell-mediated inflammatory
demyelinating autoimmune disease model of multiple sclerosis (MS). Quercetin
(3,3'4',5,7-pentahydroxy flavone) is a flavonoid phytoestrogen that has profound 
anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities. In this study, we show that in vivo 
treatment of SJL/J mice with quercetin (i.p. 50 or 100 microg every other day)
ameliorates EAE in association with the inhibition of IL-12 production and neural
antigen-specific Th1 differentiation. In vitro treatment of activated T cells
with quercetin blocks IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, TYK2,
STAT3, and STAT4, resulting in a decrease in IL-12-induced T cell proliferation
and Th1 differentiation. These findings highlight the fact that quercetin
ameliorates EAE by blocking IL-12 signaling and Th1 differentiation and suggest
its use in the treatment of MS and other Th1 cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 15359113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Viral Immunol. 2004;17(3):411-22.

Expression of IL-12 receptor by neurons.

Ireland DD(1), Reiss CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-12, a key cytokine bridging innate and acquired immunity, is
efficacious in enhancing recovery from experimental vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV) infection of the mouse central nervous system (CNS). This response is
associated with the upregulation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS-1),
independent of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha. We hypothesized that neurons may respond 
directly IL-12. Our data are consistent with the expression of a functional IL-12
receptor (IL-12R) by neurons in culture and this receptor-ligand interaction
results in the induction of an innate antiviral immune response. N18 cells, which
did not express IL-12Rbeta2 were transfected with the IL-12Rbeta2 receptor gene; 
Koch's postulates were fulfilled, as clones derived from this transfection were
reconstituted for IL-12 responsiveness.

PMID: 15357907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):4075-83.

STAT4 is a critical mediator of early innate immune responses against pulmonary
Klebsiella infection.

Deng JC(1), Zeng X, Newstead M, Moore TA, Tsai WC, Thannickal VJ, Standiford TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109, USA.

Bacterial pneumonia is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the U.S. An 
effective innate immune response is critical for the clearance of bacteria from
the lungs. IL-12, a key T1 cytokine in innate immunity, signals through STAT4.
Thus, understanding how STAT4 mediates pulmonary immune responses against
bacterial pathogens will have important implications for the development of
rational immunotherapy targeted at augmenting innate immunity. We intratracheally
administered Klebsiella pneumoniae to wild-type BALB/c and STAT4 knockout
(STAT4-/-) mice. Compared with wild-type controls, STAT4-/- mice had decreased
survival following intratracheal Klebsiella administration, which was associated 
with a higher lung and blood bacterial burden. STAT4-/- animals also displayed
impaired pulmonary IFN-gamma production and decreased levels of proinflammatory
cytokines, including the ELR- CXC chemokines IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10 and
monokine induced by IFN-gamma. Although total lung leukocyte populations were
similar between STAT4-/- and wild-type animals following infection, alveolar
macrophages isolated from infected STAT4-/- mice had decreased production of
proinflammatory cytokines, including IFN-gamma, compared with infected wild-type 
mice. The intrapulmonary overexpression of IFN-gamma concomitant with the
systemic administration of IFN-gamma partially reversed the immune deficits
observed in STAT4-/- mice, resulting in improved bacterial clearance from the
blood. Collectively, these studies demonstrate that STAT4 is required for the
generation of an effective innate host defense against bacterial pathogens of the
lung.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3001230
PMID: 15356157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5578-86.

Aberrant expression of the tyrosine kinase receptor EphA4 and the transcription
factor twist in Sézary syndrome identified by gene expression analysis.

van Doorn R(1), Dijkman R, Vermeer MH, Out-Luiting JJ, van der Raaij-Helmer EM,
Willemze R, Tensen CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands.

Sézary syndrome (Sz) is a malignancy of CD4+ memory skin-homing T cells and
presents with erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, and peripheral blood involvement. To
gain more insight into the molecular features of Sz, oligonucleotide array
analysis was performed comparing gene expression patterns of CD4+ T cells from
peripheral blood of patients with Sz with those of patients with erythroderma
secondary to dermatitis and healthy controls. Using unsupervised hierarchical
clustering gene, expression patterns of T cells from patients with Sz were
classified separately from those of benign T cells. One hundred twenty-three
genes were identified as significantly differentially expressed and had an
average fold change exceeding 2. T cells from patients with Sz demonstrated
decreased expression of the following hematopoietic malignancy-linked tumor
suppressor genes: TGF-beta receptor II, Mxi1, Riz1, CREB-binding protein, BCL11a,
STAT4, and Forkhead Box O1A. Moreover, the tyrosine kinase receptor EphA4 and the
potentially oncogenic transcription factor Twist were highly and selectively
expressed in T cells of patients with Sz. High expression of EphA4 and Twist was 
also observed in lesional skin biopsy specimens of a subset of patients with
cutaneous T cell lymphomas related to Sz, whereas their expression was nearly
undetectable in benign T cells or in skin lesions of patients with inflammatory
dermatoses. Detection of EphA4 and Twist may be used in the molecular diagnosis
of Sz and related cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Furthermore, the membrane-bound
EphA4 receptor may serve as a target for directed therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 15313894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Sep;34(9):2365-74.

Frontline: absence of functional STAT4 activation despite detectable tyrosine
phosphorylation induced by murine IFN-alpha.

Berenson LS(1), Farrar JD, Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

We previously reported that IL-12, but not IFN-alphaA/D, induces T helper type
(Th) 1 development and STAT4 phosphorylation in murine CD4+ T cells. However, a
recent study reported that IFN-alphaA/D and recombinant murine IFN-alphaA can
induce STAT4 phosphorylation, although more weakly than IL-12, largely in CD8+
rather than CD4+ T cells. That report did not examine Th1 development or directly
demonstrate induction of IFN-gamma by IFN-alpha. To address these differences, we
compared IFN-alphaA/D, murine IFN-alphaA, and IL-12 for STAT4 phosphorylation,
formation of active nuclear DNA binding complexes, induction of Th1 development, 
and production of IFN-gamma in murine CD4+ T cells. IFN-alphaA induced detectable
STAT4 phosphorylation, although at significantly lower levels than induced by
IL-12. Furthermore, in contrast to IL-12, IFN-alphaA failed to induce Th1
development or the formation of DNA binding complexes or to synergize with IL-18 
for induction of IFN-gamma production. STAT1-deficient CD4+ T cells showed
increased IFN-alphaA-induced STAT4 phosphorylation but still exhibited
significantly lower amounts of cytokine-induced IFN-gamma compared to IL-12. In
summary, these results suggest that in contrast to IL-12, IFN-alphaA does not
play a functionally significant role in meditating the STAT4-dependent induction 
of Th1 development or IFN-gamma production in CD4+ T cells.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.

PMID: 15307169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Clin Exp Allergy. 2004 Aug;34(8):1156-67.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an
overview.

Di Stefano A(1), Caramori G, Ricciardolo FL, Capelli A, Adcock IM, Donner CF.

Author information: 
(1)Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, IRCCS, Medical Center of Rehabilitation,
Division of Pulmonary Disease, Veruno (NO), Italy. adistefano@fsm.it

In the last decade, the analysis of bronchial biopsies and lung parenchyma
obtained from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients compared with
those from smokers with normal lung function and non-smokers has provided new
insights on the role of the different inflammatory and structural cells, their
signalling pathways and mediators, contributing to a better knowledge of the
pathogenesis of COPD. This review summarizes and discusses the lung pathology of 
COPD patients with emphasis on inflammatory cell phenotypes that predominate in
different clinical conditions. In bronchial biopsies, a cascade of events takes
place during progression from mild-to-severe disease. T lymphocytes, particularly
CD8+ cells and macrophages are the prevalent inflammatory cells in the lung of
healthy smokers and patients with mild COPD, while total and activated
neutrophils predominate in severe COPD. The number of CD4+, CD8+ cells and
macrophages expressing nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB), STAT-4 and IFN-gamma
proteins as well as endothelial adhesion molecule-1 in endothelium is increased
in mild/moderate disease. In contrast, activated neutrophils (MPO+ cells) and
increased nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity develops in severe COPD. In bronchial
biopsies obtained during COPD exacerbations, some studies have shown an increased
T cell and granulocyte infiltration. Regular treatment with high doses of inhaled
glucocorticoids does not significantly change the number of inflammatory cells in
bronchial biopsies from patients with moderate COPD. The profile in lung
parenchyma is similar to bronchial biopsies. 'Healthy' smokers and mild/moderate 
diseased patients show increased T lymphocyte infiltration in the peripheral
airways. Pulmonary emphysema is associated with a general increase of
inflammatory cells in the alveolar septa. The molecular mechanisms driving the
lymphocyte and neutrophilic prevalence in mild and severe disease, respectively, 
needs to be extensively studied. Up-regulation of pro-inflammatory transcription 
factors NF-kappaB and STAT-4 in mild, activated epithelial and endothelial cells 
in the more severe disease may contribute to this differential prevalence of
infiltrating cells.

PMID: 15298554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Eur Respir J. 2004 Jul;24(1):78-85.

STAT4 activation in smokers and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Di Stefano A(1), Caramori G, Capelli A, Gnemmi I, Ricciardolo FL, Oates T, Donner
CF, Chung KF, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, IRCCS, Medical Centre of Rehabilitation,
Division of Pulmonary Disease, Veruno, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2004 Jul;24(1):3-5.

Activation of the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-4 is critical for the differentiation of T-helper 1
cells/type-1 cytotoxic T-cells and the production of interferon (IFN)-gamma.
Expression of STAT4, phospho-STAT4, IFN-gamma and T-box expressed in T-cells
(T-bet) proteins in bronchial biopsies and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)-derived
lymphocytes, obtained from 12 smokers with mild/moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) (forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 59 +/-
16% predicted), 14 smokers with normal lung function (FEV1 106 +/- 12% pred) and 
12 nonsmoking subjects (FEV1 111 +/- 14% pred), was examined by
immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry. In bronchial biopsies of COPD
patients, the number of submucosal phospho-STAT4+ cells was increased (240
(22-406) versus 125 (0-492) versus 29 (0-511) cells mm(-2)) when compared with
both healthy smokers and control nonsmokers, respectively. In smokers,
phospho-STAT4+ cells correlated with the degree of airflow obstruction and the
number of IFN-gamma+ cells. Similar results were seen in BAL (2.8 (0.2-5.9)
versus 1.03 (0.09-1.6) versus 0.69 (0-2.3) lymphocytes x mL(-1) x 10(3)). In all 
smokers who underwent lavage, phospho-STAT4+ lymphocytes correlated with airflow 
obstruction and the number of IFNgamma+ lymphocytes. T-bet expression was not
altered in bronchial biopsies and BAL-derived lymphocytes between the three
groups. In conclusion, this study suggests that stable mild/moderate chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease is associated with an active T-helper 1 cell/type-1
cytotoxic T-cell inflammatory process involving activation of signal transducer
and activator of transcription 4 and interferon-gamma production.

PMID: 15293608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Eur Respir J. 2004 Jul;24(1):3-5.

Autoimmunity, T-cells and STAT-4 in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Cosio MG.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2004 Jul;24(1):78-85.

PMID: 15293596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Infect Immun. 2004 Aug;72(8):4552-60.

A STAT4-dependent Th1 response is required for resistance to the helminth
parasite Taenia crassiceps.

Rodríguez-Sosa M(1), Saavedra R, Tenorio EP, Rosas LE, Satoskar AR, Terrazas LI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez,
Mexico, D.F. 14080, Mexico.

To determine the role of STAT4-dependent Th1 responses in the regulation of
immunity to the helminth parasite Taenia crassiceps, we monitored infections with
this parasite in resistant mice lacking the STAT4 gene. While T.
crassiceps-infected STAT4(+/+) mice rapidly resolved the infection, STAT4(-/-)
mice were highly susceptible to infection and displayed large parasite loads.
Moreover, the inability of STAT4(-/-) mice to control the infection was
associated with the induction of an antigen-specific Th2-type response
characterized by significantly higher levels of Th2-associated immunoglobulin G1 
(IgG1) and total IgE as well as interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-10, and IL-13 than those
in STAT4(+/+) mice, who produced significantly more gamma interferon.
Furthermore, early after infection, macrophages from STAT4(-/-) mice produced
lower levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-12, tumor necrosis factor
alpha, IL-1 beta, and nitric oxide (NO) than those from STAT4(+/+) mice,
suggesting a pivotal role for macrophages in mediating protection against
cysticercosis. These findings demonstrate a critical role for the STAT4 signaling
pathway in the development of a Th1-type immune response that is essential for
mediating protection against the larval stage of T. crassiceps infection.

PMCID: PMC470677
PMID: 15271915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. FEBS Lett. 2004 Jul 16;570(1-3):63-8.

GATA-3 suppresses IFN-gamma promoter activity independently of binding to
cis-regulatory elements.

Kaminuma O(1), Kitamura F, Kitamura N, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Yamamoto K, Miura O,
Miyatake S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
3-18-22, Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

The regulatory mechanism by which GATA-3 suppresses IFN-gamma gene expression was
investigated. A reduction of GATA-3 using RNA interference technology enhanced,
whereas overexpression of GATA-3 suppressed IFN-gamma mRNA expression. IL-4
expression was reciprocally affected by GATA-3. GATA-3-mediated down-regulation
of IFN-gamma was achieved through the inhibition of its promoter/enhancer
activity. Two GATA elements located in the cis-regulatory elements did not
contribute to the suppression of IFN-gamma promoter activity, even though they
behaved as binding sites for GATA-3. The effect of GATA-3 on IFN-gamma promoter
was lost upon removal of the region encompassing -257 to -172. Among several
transcription factors putatively interacting with this region, Stat4, which
enhanced IFN-gamma promoter activity, was down-regulated by GATA-3 at gene
transcription level. Although GATA-3 has the capacity to interact with the
cis-regulatory elements, it suppresses IFN-gamma gene transcription via
down-regulation of Stat4.

PMID: 15251440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Gut. 2004 Aug;53(8):1090-5.

Regulation of the T helper cell type 1 transcription factor T-bet in coeliac
disease mucosa.

Monteleone I(1), Monteleone G, Del Vecchio Blanco G, Vavassori P, Cucchiara S,
MacDonald TT, Pallone F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Centro di Eccellenza per lo studio delle
malattie complesse e multifattoriali, Università Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
Gi.Monteleone@Med.uniroma2.it

Comment in
    Gut. 2004 Aug;53(8):1065-7.

BACKGROUND: In coeliac disease (CD) mucosa, the histological lesion is associated
with marked infiltration of T helper cell type 1 (Th1) cells. However, the
molecular mechanisms which regulate Th1 cell differentiation in CD mucosa are
unknown.
AIMS: To analyse expression of transcription factors which control the Th1 cell
commitment in CD.
PATIENTS: Duodenal mucosal samples were taken from untreated CD patients and
normal controls.
METHODS: Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin (IL)-4 RNA expression was
examined in T lamina propria lymphocytes by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. T-bet and STAT-4, two Th1 promoting
transcription factors, and STAT-6 and GATA-3, transcription factors which govern 
T helper cell type 2 (Th2) cell polarisation, were examined in duodenal biopsies 
by western blotting. The effect of gliadin and IFN-gamma on expression of T-bet
was examined in an ex vivo culture of biopsies taken from normal and treated CD
patients.
RESULTS: As expected, IFN-gamma but not IL-4 RNA transcripts were increased in
the mucosa of CD patients in comparison with controls. CD mucosal samples
consistently exhibited higher levels of T-bet than controls. However, no
difference in active STAT-4 expression was seen between CD patients and controls,
suggesting that Th1 polarisation was not induced by local IL-12. GATA-3 and
STAT-6 were also low in both CD and control mucosa. In normal duodenal biopsies, 
IFN-gamma stimulated T-bet through a STAT-1 dependent mechanism. Challenge of
treated CD but not control biopsies with gliadin enhanced T-bet and this effect
was also inhibited by STAT-1 inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that activation of STAT-1 by IFN-gamma promotes
T-bet in CD mucosa.

PMCID: PMC1774159
PMID: 15247173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Hum Gene Ther. 2004 Jul;15(7):691-8.

Interleukin 13 gene transfer in liver ischemia and reperfusion injury: role of
Stat6 and TLR4 pathways in cytoprotection.

Ke B(1), Shen XD, Gao F, Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation, Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center,
Department of Surgery, and David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA.

Ischemia and reperfusion injury (IRI) represents the major problem in clinical
liver transplantation. We have shown that transcription of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 4 (Stat4) plays a key role in the mechanism of hepatic
IRI, whereas local induction of interleukin 13 (IL-13) is cytoprotective. The
disruption of innate Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling prevents mouse livers 
from undergoing fulminant IRI. This study analyzes in vivo interplay between
innate (TLR4) and adaptive (Stat6) immunity in Ad-IL-13 (recombinant adenovirus
encoding IL-13) cytoprotection in hepatic IRI. Using a partial 90-min lobar warm 
ischemia model, groups of wild-type and Stat6-deficient knockout mice were
assessed for the severity of hepatocellular damage at 6 hr postreperfusion.
Unlike in wild-type mice, treatment of Stat6 knockout recipients with Ad-IL-13
failed to improve hepatic function/histology. The expression of mRNAs encoding
tumor necrosis factor alpha/IL-1 beta and IL-2/interferon gamma remained
depressed in the wild-type plus Ad-IL-13 group, but not in the Stat6 knockout
plus Ad-IL-13 group. Ad-IL-13 increased antioxidant heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1)
expression and prevented TLR4 activation in livers of Stat6-competent (wild-type)
mice. In contrast, low HO-1 expression and enhanced TLR4 expression were recorded
in Stat6 knockout recipients despite Ad-IL-13 therapy. Thus (1) Stat6 is required
for Ad-IL-13 to prevent IRI, and (2) depression of TLR4 activation is Stat6
dependent. In conclusion, the Stat6 pathway operates as a key negative regulator 
in the hepatic inflammatory ischemia-reperfusion response. This study outlines
requirements for Ad-IL-13 use to maximize the organ donor pool through the use of
liver transplants despite prolonged ischemia.

PMID: 15242529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):1360-5.

Blockade of allergic airway inflammation following systemic treatment with a
B7-dendritic cell (PD-L2) cross-linking human antibody.

Radhakrishnan S(1), Iijima K, Kobayashi T, Rodriguez M, Kita H, Pease LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, and Division of Allergic Disease and Internal
Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Retraction in
    Iijima K, Kobayashi T, Rodriguez M, Kita H, Pease LR. J Immunol. 2010 Jun
1;184(11):6553.

We present a novel immunotherapeutic strategy using a human B7-DC cross-linking
Ab that prevents lung inflammation, airway obstruction, and hyperreactivity to
allergen in a mouse model of allergic inflammatory airway disease. Dendritic
cells (DC) have the ability to skew the immune response toward a Th1 or Th2
polarity. The sHIgM12 Ab functions in vitro by cross-linking the costimulatory
family molecule B7-DC (PD-L2) on DC up-regulating IL-12 production, homing to
lymph nodes, and T cell-activating potential of these APCs. Using chicken OVA as 
a model Ag, the administration of sHIgM12 Ab to BALB/c mice blocked lung
inflammation, airway pathology, and responsiveness to methacholine, even after
animals were presensitized and a Th2-polarized immune response was established.
This therapeutic strategy was ineffective in STAT4-deficient animals, indicating 
that IL-12 production is critical in this system. Moreover, the polarity of the
immune response upon in vitro restimulation with Ag is changed in wild-type mice,
with a resulting decrease in Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-5 and an increase in the
immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10. These studies demonstrate that the immune
response of hypersensitized responders can be modulated using B7-DC cross-linking
Abs, preventing allergic airway disease upon re-exposure to allergen.

PMID: 15240731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;23(6):341-50.

Molecular and cellular control of T1/T2 immunity at the interface between
antimicrobial defense and immune pathology.

Bot A(1), Smith KA, von Herrath M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Cancer Research, MannKind Corporation, Valencia, 
California, USA. abot@mannkindcorp.com

The immune system evolved to rapidly recognize infectious threats and promptly
mobilize cellular effectors to the infection site. Establishment of a robust
T1-type immunity is a prerequisite for effective defense against most viruses and
intracellular bacteria. However, accumulating evidence shows that T1 and T2
responses during such infections are not mutually exclusive. A possibility may be
that the dual T1-T2 nature of antiviral immune responses is merely a byproduct of
less than perfect crossregulatory mechanisms. Herein, we discuss molecular and
cellular mechanisms of T-cell differentiation along with recent evidence
supporting the hypothesis that rather than representing an epiphenomenon,
coinduction of virus-specific T2 cells plays a significant homeostatic role.
Thus, molecular pathways that regulate IL-4 production during influenza virus
infection monitor T1-mediated immune responses in vital organs such as lungs and 
prevent immune pathology that may otherwise interfere with recovery from disease.
Such evidence suggests that coinduction of T2 immunity maintains immune
homeostasis during T1-mediated defense reactions. Finally, we outline
implications on the earlier concept of T1/T2 dichotomy, supporting a model in
which these two subsets, rather than being mutually antagonistic, together
facilitate the recovery from infection.

PMID: 15231067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Int Immunol. 2004 Aug;16(8):1173-9. Epub 2004 Jun 28.

The role of Tyk2, Stat1 and Stat4 in LPS-induced endotoxin signals.

Kamezaki K(1), Shimoda K, Numata A, Matsuda T, Nakayama K, Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Mice lacking Tyk2, Stat1 or Stat4, which are members of the Jak-Stat signaling
cascade, were resistant to LPS-induced endotoxin shock. Interestingly,
Tyk2-deficient mice had higher resistance to LPS challenge than mice lacking
either Stat1 or Stat4. The activation of MAPK and NF-kappaB by LPS, and the
production of TNF-alpha and IL-12 after LPS injection, were not abrogated by the 
absence of Tyk2, Stat1 or Stat4. In Stat1-deficient mice, the induction of
IFN-beta by LPS in macrophages was severely reduced, although the serum level of 
IFN-gamma was elevated after LPS injection. In contrast, in Stat-4 deficient
mice, the induction of IFN-beta by LPS was normal, but the serum level of
IFN-gamma remained low after LPS injection. Interestingly, the induction of both 
IFN-beta and IFN-gamma by LPS was severely reduced in Tyk2-deficient mice.
Therefore, Stat1 and Stat4 independently play substantial roles in the
susceptibility to LPS. Tyk2 is essential for LPS-induced endotoxin shock, and
this signaling pathway is transduced by the activation of Stat1 and Stat4.

PMID: 15226272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Mol Ther. 2004 Jun;9(6):895-901.

Retroviral-mediated gene transfer restores IL-12 and IL-23 signaling pathways in 
T cells from IL-12 receptor beta1-deficient patients.

Bosticardo M(1), Witte I, Fieschi C, Novelli F, Casanova JL, Candotti F.

Author information: 
(1)Disorders of Immunity Section, Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 49 Convent Drive,
Building 49, Room 3A20, MSC 4442, Bethesda, MD 20892-4442, USA.

Genetic deficiency of human IL-12 receptor beta1 chain (IL-12Rbeta1) results in
increased vulnerability to weakly pathogenic strains of Mycobacteria and
Salmonella. This phenotype results from the combined lack of IL-12 and IL-23
signaling as both cytokine receptors share IL-12Rbeta1. Such infections can be
treated by administration of antibiotics and IFN-gamma; however, patients can
succumb to infections despite these treatments. Reversion of patients'
susceptibility by corrective gene transfer could prevent the infectious episodes,
thus providing a beneficial alternative. We therefore evaluated the feasibility
of retroviral-mediated gene correction of T cells obtained from patients carrying
"null" mutations of IL-12Rbeta1. Transduction of the IL-12Rbeta1 cDNA restored
the expression of IL-12Rbeta1 and resulted in the reconstitution of a functional 
IL-12 signaling pathway, as demonstrated by STAT4 phosphorylation and IFN-gamma
production. IFN-gamma production in response to IL-23 was also corrected after
gene transfer. These results indicate that the biological defects of T cells from
patients carrying IL-12Rbeta1 deficiency can be corrected by gene transfer and
form the basis for further development of gene therapy for this disease.

PMID: 15194056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Immunol. 2004 Jun 15;172(12):7574-82.

Protection against progressive leishmaniasis by IFN-beta.

Mattner J(1), Wandersee-Steinhäuser A, Pahl A, Röllinghoff M, Majeau GR, Hochman 
PS, Bogdan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Type I IFNs (IFN-alphabeta) exert potent antiviral and immunoregulatory
activities during viral infections, but their role in bacterial or protozoan
infections is poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that the
application of low, but not of high doses of IFN-beta protects 60 or 100% of
BALB/c mice from progressive cutaneous and fatal visceral disease after infection
with a high (10(6)) or low (10(4)) number of Leishmania major parasites,
respectively. IFN-beta treatment of BALB/c mice restored the NK cell cytotoxic
activity, increased the lymphocyte proliferation, and augmented the production of
IFN-gamma and IL-12 in the draining lymph node. Low, but not high doses of
IFN-beta caused enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT4, suppressed 
the levels of suppressor of cytokine signaling-1, and up-regulated the expression
of inducible NO synthase in vivo. The IFN-beta-induced increase of IFN-gamma
production was dependent on STAT4. Protection by IFN-beta strictly required the
presence of inducible NO synthase. In the absence of STAT4 or IL-12, IFN-beta led
to an amelioration of the cutaneous and visceral disease, but was unable to
prevent its progression. These results identify IFN-beta as a novel cytokine with
a strong, dose-dependent protective effect against progressive cutaneous
leishmaniasis that results from IL-12- and STAT4-dependent as well as
-independent events.

PMID: 15187137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2004 Jul;134(3):240-7. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

Impaired interferon-gamma production in a subset population of severe atopic
dermatitis.

Katsunuma T(1), Kawahara H, Yuki K, Akasawa A, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jikei University School of Medicine, National
Children's Research Center, Tokyo, Japan. tkatsunuma@jikei.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease
characterized by pruritic chronic eczema. The immunopathogenesis of this
condition is still not well understood. We assessed the transcription and
production of IFN-gamma, the Th1 cytokine, and the Th2 cytokine IL-5 in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with severe AD.
METHODS: The subjects included 17 severe (serum IgE: 5,000-92,000 U/ml, median:
20,000 U/ml), 4 mild AD (IgE: 2-520 U/ml) and 8 nonatopic controls (IgE: <100
U/ml). The severe AD patients were classified into two groups according to the
response to standard treatment with topical glucocorticoids. Individuals were
classified as poorly responsive (AD-P) if the clinical score decreased less than 
one third after 2 weeks of hospital treatment and as responsive (AD-R) if the
score decreased more than one third. PBMCs isolated from the subjects were
stimulated with PHA and PMA.
RESULTS: The expression of IFN-gamma in PBMCs in the AD-P group was much lower
than that observed in the other groups at both mRNA and protein levels. There
were no significant differences in the levels of IL-5 both in mRNA and protein
levels between the groups. There were no significant differences in STAT4
DNA-binding activity following PHA/IL-2/IL-12 stimulation between AD-P and
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the decreased INF-gamma production may
account for the abnormal immunopathogenesis of severe, intractable AD.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15178894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Leukoc Biol. 2004 Aug;76(2):416-22. Epub 2004 Jun 3.

IFN-alpha regulates IL-21 and IL-21R expression in human NK and T cells.

Strengell M(1), Julkunen I, Matikainen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Mannerheimintie 
166, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland. mari.strengell@ktl.fi

Interleukin (IL)-21 is a T cell-derived cytokine that regulates innate and
adaptive immune responses. IL-21 receptor (IL-21R), which is expressed in natural
killer (NK) and T cells, is structurally homologous to IL-2Rbeta and IL-15Ralpha.
These receptors also share a common cytokine receptor gamma-chain with IL-4,
IL-7, and IL-9. Macrophage- or dendritic cell-derived interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta
is a key cytokine in regulation of NK and T cell functions. We demonstrate here
that in addition to activating IFN-gamma gene expression, IFN-alpha/beta and
IL-12 enhance the mRNA expression of IL-21 in activated human T cells. In
addition, IFN-alpha/beta enhanced T cell receptor stimulation-induced IL-21 and
IFN-gamma gene expression in resting T cells. The promoter analysis of IL-21 gene
revealed a putative IFN-gamma activation site element, which was found to bind
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), STAT2, STAT3, and
STAT4 proteins in IFN-alpha/beta-stimulated NK or T cell extracts. In contrast to
IL-21 expression, IFN-alpha/beta down-regulated IL-21R mRNA expression in NK and 
T cells. IFN-alpha/beta-induced down-regulation of IL-21R expression resulted in 
reduced STAT3 phosphorylation and DNA binding after IL-21 stimulation. In
conclusion, our results suggest a novel role for IFN-alpha/beta in the regulation
of IL-21 response.

PMID: 15178704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Blood. 2004 Oct 1;104(7):2095-101. Epub 2004 Jun 3.

A novel form of complete IL-12/IL-23 receptor beta1 deficiency with cell
surface-expressed nonfunctional receptors.

Fieschi C(1), Bosticardo M, de Beaucoudrey L, Boisson-Dupuis S, Feinberg J,
Santos OF, Bustamante J, Levy J, Candotti F, Casanova JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University of Paris René 
Descartes (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U550),
Paris, France, EU.

Complete interleukin-12/interleukin-23 receptor beta1 (IL-12Rbeta1) deficiency is
the most frequent known genetic etiology of the syndrome of Mendelian
susceptibility to mycobacterial disease. The patients described to date lack
IL-12Rbeta1 at the surface of their natural killer (NK) and T cells due to
IL12RB1 mutations, which either interrupt the open reading frame or disrupt
protein folding. We describe a patient with a large in-frame deletion of 12165
nucleotides (nt) in IL12RB1, encompassing exons 8 to 13 and resulting in the
surface expression of nonfunctional IL-12Rbeta1. These 6 exons encode the
proximal NH2-terminal half of the extracellular domain downstream from the
cytokine-binding domain. Five of 6 monoclonal anti-IL-12Rbeta1 antibodies tested 
recognized the internally truncated chain on the cell surface. However, IL-12 and
IL-23 did not bind normally to the patient's IL-12Rbeta1-containing respective
heterodimeric receptors. As a result, signal transducer and activator of
transcription-4 (STAT4) was not phosphorylated and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
production was not induced in the patient's cells upon stimulation with even high
doses of IL-12 or IL-23. The functional defect was completely rescued by
retrovirus-mediated IL-12Rbeta1 gene transfer. Thus, the detection of IL-12Rbeta1
on the cell surface does not exclude the possibility of complete IL-12Rbeta1
deficiency in patients with mycobacteriosis or salmonellosis. Paradoxically, the 
largest IL12RB1 mutation detected is associated with the cell surface expression 
of nonfunctional IL-12Rbeta1, defining a novel genetic form of IL-12Rbeta1
deficiency.

PMID: 15178580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2004 Feb;10 Suppl 1:S25-8.

Gene disruption and immunity in experimental colitis.

Elson CO(1), Konrad A, Cong Y, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294-0007, USA. coelson@uab.edu

PMID: 15168826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32269-74. Epub 2004 May 27.

Role of the interleukin (IL)-28 receptor tyrosine residues for antiviral and
antiproliferative activity of IL-29/interferon-lambda 1: similarities with type I
interferon signaling.

Dumoutier L(1), Tounsi A, Michiels T, Sommereyns C, Kotenko SV, Renauld JC.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels Branch and the Experimental
Medicine Unit, Université de Louvain, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Interferon (IFN)-lambda 1, -lambda 2, and -lambda 3 are the latest members of the
class II cytokine family and were shown to have antiviral activity. Their
receptor is composed of two chains, interleukin-28R/likely interleukin or
cytokine or receptor 2 (IL-28R/LICR2) and IL-10R beta, and mediates the tyrosine 
phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, and STAT5. Here, we show that activation 
of this receptor by IFN-lambda 1 can also inhibit cell proliferation and induce
STAT4 phosphorylation, further extending functional similarities with type I
IFNs. We used IL-28R/LICR2-mutated receptors to identify the tyrosines required
for STAT activation, as well as antiproliferative and antiviral activities. We
found that IFN-lambda 1-induced STAT2 tyrosine phosphorylation is mediated
through tyrosines 343 and 517 of the receptor, which showed some similarities
with tyrosines from type I IFN receptors involved in STAT2 activation. These two 
tyrosines were also responsible for antiviral and antiproliferative activities of
IFN-lambda 1. By contrast, STAT4 phosphorylation (and to some extent STAT3
activation) was independent from IL-28R/LICR2 tyrosine residues. Taken together, 
these observations extend the functional similarities between IFN-lambdas and
type I IFNs and shed some new light on the mechanisms of activation of STAT2 and 
STAT4 by these cytokines.

PMID: 15166220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Immunol. 2004 Jun 1;172(11):6775-82.

Early target genes of IL-12 and STAT4 signaling in th cells.

Lund RJ(1), Chen Z, Scheinin J, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, Turku University and Abo Akademi, Turku
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Turku University, Turku, Finland.
riikka.lund@btk.utu.fi

IL-12 signaling through STAT4 is essential for induction of optimal levels of
IFN-gamma production and commitment of Th1 cells. The molecular mechanism that
controls how IL-12 and STAT4 signaling induces Th1 differentiation is poorly
described. To identify the early target genes of IL-12 and STAT4 signaling,
oligonucleotide arrays were used to compare the gene expression profiles of
wild-type and STAT4-knockout murine Th cells during the early Th1
differentiation. According to the results, 20 genes were regulated in an IL-12-
and STAT4-dependent manner. Importantly, Ifngamma was clearly the first gene
induced by IL-12 in a STAT4-dependent manner. Most of the other defects in gene
expression in STAT4-knockout cells were seen after 48 h of Th1 polarization. In
addition to IL-12 signaling mediated by STAT4, STAT4-independent induction of a
number of genes was observed immediately in response to Th1 induction. This
induction was at least in part driven by IFN-gamma independently of STAT4.
Importantly, addition of exogenous IFN-gamma into Th1 cell cultures of
STAT4-knockout cells restored the defect in IFN-gamma production further
demonstrating the critical role of IFN-gamma in early Th1 differentiation.

PMID: 15153495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Immunol. 2004 May 15;172(10):5870-9.

Differential gene expression patterns by oligonucleotide microarray of basal
versus lipopolysaccharide-activated monocytes from cord blood versus adult
peripheral blood.

Jiang H(1), Van De Ven C, Satwani P, Baxi LV, Cairo MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of New York-Presbyterian,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Monocytes (Mo) are critically important in the generation of inflammatory
mediators, cytokines/chemokines, and regulation of innate and adaptive immune
responses. We and others have previously demonstrated significant dysregulated
cytokine gene expression and protein production and in vitro functional
activities of activated cord blood (CB) vs adult peripheral blood (APB)
mononuclear cells (MNC). In this study, we compared, by oligonucleotide
microarray, the differential gene expression profiles of basal and LPS-activated 
APB vs CB Mo. We demonstrated a significant increase in the gene expression of
several important functional groups of CB genes compared with basal levels
including cytokine (IL-12p40, 5-fold), immunoregulatory (signaling lymphocytic
activation molecule, 4-fold), signal transduction (Pim-2, 3-fold), and cell
structure (Rho7, 4-fold) among others. Furthermore, there was significantly
differentially amplified gene expression in LPS-activated APB vs LPS-activated CB
Mo, including cytokine (G-CSF, 14-fold), chemokine (macrophage-inflammatory
protein 1alpha, 5-fold), immunoregulatory (MHC DRB1, 5-fold), transcription
factor (JunB, 4-fold), signal transduction (STAT4, 5-fold), apoptotic regulation 
(BAX, 5-fold), and cell structure (ladinin 1, 6-fold) among others. These results
provide insight into the molecular basis for normal genetic regulation of Mo
development and cellular function and differential inflammatory and innate and
adaptive immune responses between activated CB and APB Mo.

PMID: 15128766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Endocrinology. 2004 Aug;145(8):3724-30. Epub 2004 Apr 29.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)-6-dependent, but not
Stat4-dependent, immunity is required for the development of autoimmunity in
Graves' hyperthyroidism.

Land KJ(1), Moll JS, Kaplan MH, Seetharamaiah GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Evansville, Indiana 47712, USA.

The role of T helper (Th) cells in experimental models of Graves' hyperthyroidism
is still somewhat controversial. To further investigate the role of Th1- and
Th2-dependent immunity during the development of Graves' hyperthyroidism, we
tested mice with targeted deletion of signal transducer and activator of
transcription-4 (Stat4) or Stat6 genes that, respectively, have impaired Th1 and 
Th2 immunity. We immunized wild-type BALB/c, Stat4(-/-), or Stat6(-/-) mice with 
human embryonic kidney cells (293 cells) expressing the extracellular domain of
human TSH receptor (293-TBP cells). Fifty percent of wild-type BALB/c and
Stat4(-/-) mice developed Graves' hyperthyroidism with elevated serum T(4) levels
and thyroid stimulatory antibodies. In contrast, Stat6(-/-) mice resisted
development of the disease. Stat4(-/-) mice exhibited a dominant Th2 immune
response characterized by the production of IL-4 and IgG1 anti-TSH receptor
antibodies. However, Stat6(-/-) mice displayed a strong Th1 immune response
characterized by the production of interferon-gamma and IgG2a antibodies.
Hyperthyroid mice showed enlargement of thyroid glands with hypertrophy and
decreased amounts of colloid material, all characteristics of Graves' disease.
These data demonstrate that in this model, Stat6-dependent Th2 immunity is
critical for the development of Graves' hyperthyroidism.

PMID: 15117875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 18;279(25):26789-96. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

Interferon alpha but not interleukin 12 activates STAT4 signaling in human
vascular endothelial cells.

Torpey N(1), Maher SE, Bothwell AL, Pober JS.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Vascular Biology and Transplantation, Boyer
Center for Molecular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

STAT4 signaling, activated by either interleukin 12 (IL12) or interferon alpha
(IFNalpha), promotes T(H)1 responses in CD4(+) T cells. Vascular endothelial
cells (EC) may also become polarized in response to various cytokines, favoring
recruitment and activation of T(H)1 or T(H)2 effector cells. Here we have
investigated the role of the STAT4 pathway in EC. Cultured human umbilical vein
EC (HUVEC) express low levels of STAT4, which may be tyrosine-phosphorylated by
treatment with IFNalpha but not IL12. This is because HUVEC lack both subunits of
the IL12 receptor (IL12Rbeta1 and IL12Rbeta2), even following treatment with
various cytokines. IL12 phosphorylation of STAT4 can be observed in HUVEC that
have been transduced to express the IL12R. To identify STAT4-induced genes we
pursued three approaches: analysis by DNA microarray and quantitative RT-PCR
(Q-PCR) of the IL12 responses in IL12R-transduced EC; analysis by Q-PCR of
IFNalpha responses in STAT4-overexpressing EC; and analysis of IFNalpha responses
in U3A neuroblastoma cell lines that express either STAT1 or STAT4, but not both.
In all three instances we observe STAT4-mediated induction of the chemokine
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1) and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 
(SOCS3) mRNA, and we confirm the production of each protein in both
IL12R-transduced EC and STAT4-transduced U3A cells. These observations reveal
that there is a STAT4 response of EC, activated by IFNalpha but not IL12, and
that it may modulate the pro-inflammatory behavior of EC.

PMID: 15087447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Cytokine. 2004 Apr 21;26(2):57-65.

Mechanism of glutamine-mediated amelioration of lipopolysaccharide-induced IL-8
production in Caco-2 cells.

Liboni K(1), Li N, Neu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, PO Box
100296, Gainesville, FL 32610-0296, USA.

The mechanism of glutamine (Gln)-mediated down-regulation of inflammation in the 
intestine is poorly understood. We hypothesize that Gln down-regulates
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated IL-8 production in intestinal epithelial
cells via transcription factors that counteract the effect of LPS-mediated
increase in IL-8. Caco-2 cells were incubated with different doses of Gln with or
without methionine sulfoximine (MS), an inhibitor of glutamine synthetase for 24 
h before stimulation by LPS (100 microg/ml for 24 h). Inhibitors of the mitogen
activated protein kinase (MAPK) family were added to cells for 1.5 h following
stimulation by LPS. The p38 inhibitor SB 203580 resulted in a significant
decrease in IL-8 peptide production (p < 0.01). However, p38 MAPK activity
increased with Gln (p < 0.05), suggesting that this was not involved with
Gln-mediated down-regulation of IL-8. Screening of 54 transcription factors
demonstrated that STAT-4 was the only inflammation-related transcription factor
that was up-regulated by Gln depletion and down-regulated with Gln
supplementation (2-fold increase), paralleling IL-8 production. EMSA analysis
confirmed these findings (3.5-fold increase). These results indicate that Gln
deprivation enhances IL-8 production by Caco-2 cells after LPS stimulation and
that down-regulation of IL-8 production with Gln is associated with alterations
in STAT-4 transcription factor binding.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15050605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 23;317(1):121-7.

Cysteamine alters redox state, HIF-1alpha transcriptional interactions and
reduces duodenal mucosal oxygenation: novel insight into the mechanisms of
duodenal ulceration.

Khomenko T(1), Deng X, Sandor Z, Tarnawski AS, Szabo S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Service, Diagnostic and Molecular Medicine
Health Care Group, Department of Medicine, VA Medical Center, CA 90822, USA.

Our recent studies demonstrated a critical role of enhanced transcriptional
activity of early growth response factor-1 (Egr-1) in early stages of
cysteamine-induced duodenal ulcer in rats. Since cysteamine is also a reducing
agent, the aims of this study were to determine the effect of cysteamine on
proximal duodenal mucosa: (a) redox status, (b) mucosal oxygenation, (c)
expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1alpha) and its binding to DNA, and
(d) HIF-1alpha interaction with Egr-1 and other redox-sensitive transcription
factors. Here we demonstrate for the first time that cysteamine treatment reduced
the duodenal oxygenation by 19% (vs. baseline) and markedly increased the redox
status in duodenal mucosa (p<0.05). Cysteamine increased HIF-1alpha expression,
its binding to DNA, and enhanced the HIF-1alpha interactions with Egr-1 and other
transcription factors (e.g., AP-1, AP-2, L-III BP, NF-E1, NF-E2, STAT4, and MRE),
their binding to DNA. Thus, these data demonstrate the involvement of the
redox-dependent regulatory mechanisms in the early stages of duodenal ulceration.

PMID: 15047156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 7;23(7):1576-86. Epub 2004 Mar 25.

GADD45beta/GADD45gamma and MEKK4 comprise a genetic pathway mediating
STAT4-independent IFNgamma production in T cells.

Chi H(1), Lu B, Takekawa M, Davis RJ, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.

The stress-inducible molecules GADD45beta and GADD45gamma have been implicated in
regulating IFNgamma production in CD4 T cells. However, how GADD45 proteins
function has been controversial. MEKK4 is a MAP kinase kinase kinase that
interacts with GADD45 in vitro. Here we generated MEKK4-deficient mice to define 
the function and regulation of this pathway. CD4 T cells from MEKK4-/- mice have 
reduced p38 activity and defective IFNgamma synthesis. Expression of GADD45beta
or GADD45gamma promotes IFNgamma production in MEKK4+/+ T cells, but not in
MEKK4-/- cells or in cells treated with a p38 inhibitor. Thus, MEKK4 mediates the
action of GADD45beta and GADD45gamma on p38 activation and IFNgamma production.
During Th1 differentiation, the GADD45beta/GADD45gamma/MEKK4 pathway appears to
integrate upstream signals transduced by both T cell receptor and IL12/STAT4,
leading to augmented IFNgamma production in a process independent of STAT4.

PMCID: PMC391077
PMID: 15044949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Autoimmun. 2004 May;22(3):191-200.

Autoimmune diabetes is blocked in Stat4-deficient mice.

Yang Z(1), Chen M, Ellett JD, Fialkow LB, Carter JD, McDuffie M, Nadler JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
University of Virginia, P.O. Box 801413, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.
zy4q@virginia.edu

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins are activated 
in response to many cytokines, growth factors and hormones. STAT4 mediates IL-12 
signaling and regulates T helper 1 (Th1) cell differentiation. Both IL-12 and Th1
cell activation participate in the development of autoimmune diabetes. In this
study, we investigated the role of STAT4 in autoimmune diabetes. We crossbred
Stat4 deficient (Stat4-/-) mice with nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice to generate the
Stat4-/- NOD model. In Stat4-/- NOD mice, serum levels of both IFN-gamma and IL-2
were significantly reduced as compared to the controls. Insulin secretion in
pancreatic islets was preserved in Stat4-/- NOD mice. Significantly, disruption
of Stat4 activation completely prevented the development of spontaneous diabetes 
in NOD mice. This study reveals the important role of STAT4 in autoimmune
diabetes pathogenesis.

PMID: 15041039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Immunol. 2004 Apr 1;172(7):4260-5.

Defining Th1 and Th2 immune responses in a reciprocal cytokine environment in
vivo.

Chitnis T(1), Salama AD, Grusby MJ, Sayegh MH, Khoury SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Laboratory of Immunogenetics and
Transplantation, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard School of Public Health,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The ability of committed Th1 and Th2 cells to function in altered cytokine
environments is a central issue in autoimmune and immune-mediated diseases.
Therefore, it is of interest to study the ability of Th1 or Th2 cells to expand
and produce cytokine reciprocal environments in vivo. Using STAT4- and
STAT6-deficient mice, we studied the expansion and cytokine production of
Ag-specific Th1 or Th2 cells after transfer into Th1, Th2, or wild-type
recipients. Our data show that these Th1 or Th2 cells proliferated and clonally
expanded normally, regardless of the in vivo cytokine environment. These data
have implications for the treatment of immune-mediated diseases by
immunomodulatory agents that alter the cytokine milieu in vivo.

PMID: 15034039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Clin Exp Allergy. 2004 Mar;34(3):363-8.

RNA editing of interleukin-12 receptor beta2, 2451 C-to-U (Ala 604 Val)
conversion, associated with atopy.

Kondo N(1), Matsui E, Kaneko H, Aoki M, Kato Z, Fukao T, Kasahara K, Morimoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Tsukasa-machi
40, Gifu 500-8705, Japan. nkondo@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The production of IgE in B lymphocytes is down-regulated by
IFN-gamma. IL-12 induces IFN-gamma production by T lymphocytes and natural killer
cells by binding to its specific receptor. RNA editing is a post-transcriptional 
modification.
OBJECTIVE: Here we show that the RNA editing of IL-12 receptor (R) beta2 is
associated with atopy.
METHODS: Atopic patients and non-atopic healthy controls were studied. Fragments 
of IL-12R beta2 cDNA and genomic DNA were amplified and sequenced. Furthermore,
the function of the IL-12R beta2 chain was investigated.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the cDNA clones representing IL-12R beta2 mRNA
transcripts revealed a C-to-U conversion at nucleotide 2451 (Ala 604 Val) on exon
13 in some atopic patients. Surprisingly, sequence analysis of their genomic DNA 
showed no 2451 C-to-T (Ala 604 Val) mutation. We concluded that the observed
C-to-U mismatch in the cDNA clone is due to a post-transcriptional modification, 
RNA editing. The C-to-U conversion was observed in 21 (20.6%) of 102 atopic
patients, whereas this conversion was observed in only 4 (3.8%) of 104 non-atopic
subjects (P<0.001). IFN-gamma production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) stimulated with IL-12 in the subjects with the C-to-U conversion was
significantly lower than that in the subjects without the C-to-U conversion. In
atopic patients with the C-to-U conversion, PBMCs faintly showed the tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat4, and the IgE production by PBMCs was not suppressed by
IL-12 whereas it was suppressed by IFN-gamma.
CONCLUSIONS: The RNA editing of IL-12R beta2, 2451 C-to-U (Ala 604 Val)
conversion causes impairment of the IL-12 signal cascade and the subsequent
reduction in IFN-gamma production, resulting in the impaired down-regulation of
IgE production. This is the first report indicating that atopy is associated with
RNA editing.

PMID: 15005728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Immunol. 2004 Mar 15;172(6):3905-12.

Impairment of IL-12-dependent STAT4 nuclear translocation in a patient with
recurrent Mycobacterium avium infection.

Toyoda H(1), Ido M, Hayashi T, Gabazza EC, Suzuki K, Bu J, Tanaka S, Nakano T,
Kamiya H, Chipeta J, Kisenge RR, Kang J, Hori H, Komada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.

We examined the immunological abnormality in a patient with recurrent
Mycobacterium avium infection. T cells from the patient showed decreased ability 
both to produce IFN-gamma and to proliferate in response to IL-12. Despite
decreased expression of IL-12R beta1 and beta2 chains in the patient's
PHA-activated T cells, there was no difference in IL-12-induced tyrosine and
serine phosphorylation of STAT4 in PHA-activated T cells between the patient and 
healthy subjects, suggesting that IL-12R signals are transmitted to STAT4 in the 
patient's PHA-activated T cells. Using EMSA, confocal laser microscopy, and
Western blotting, we demonstrated that the nuclear translocation of STAT4 in
response to IL-12 is reduced in PHA-activated T cells from the patient when
compared with those from healthy subjects. Leptomycin B was used to examine
whether nuclear export of STAT4 is increased in the patient's T cells. However,
leptomycin B treatment did not reverse impaired IL-12-induced nuclear
accumulation of STAT4. Although the exact mechanism responsible for the impaired 
STAT4 nuclear translocation in this patient remains unclear, the absence of
mutation in the IL-12Rbeta1, IL-12Rbeta2, STAT4, and STAT4-binding sequence of
the IFN-gamma gene and preservation of STAT4 tyrosine and serine phosphorylation 
suggest the existence of a defective STAT4 nuclear translocation. This defect is 
likely responsible for the impaired STAT4 nuclear translocation in
IL-12-stimulated T cells, leading to impairment of both IFN-gamma production and 
cell proliferation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a
patient with atypical mycobacterial infection associated with impairment of STAT4
nuclear translocation.

PMID: 15004198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2004 Jan-Apr;17(1):5-14.

Novel shift of Jak/Stat signalling characterizes the protective effect of
aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA) from tumor necrosis factor-alpha toxicity in human 
B lymphocytes.

Marchisio M(1), Grimley PM, Di Baldassarre A, Santavenere E, Miscia S.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Unit, Department of Biomorphology, University of Chieti,
Chieti, Italy.

Previous results demonstrated that the occurrence of death in human peripheral B 
lymphocytes by TNF-alpha was paralleled by the activation of the cytoplasmic Jak1
and Tyk2 protein kinases, along with the recruitment of transcription factors
Stat3 and Stat5b. In this study we demonstrate that the balance of survival
signals in the presence of TNF-alpha was altered by the addition of a salicylate 
compound, the endonuclease inhibitor aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA). Apoptosis
effected by TNF-alpha alone was suppressed by ATA and this event was paralleled
by phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Jak2, Stat2, Stat4 and NF-kB,
along with inhibition of caspase activation. These results confirm that among the
different cellular responses evoked by TNF-alpha in human B cells, recruitment of
Jak/Stat proteins and possible related gene modulation represent contributing
factors and address the issue of the development of potential therapeutic
strategies aimed at the control of systemic or local effects produced by
TNF-alpha.

PMID: 15000861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 1;64(3):1152-6.

Potent antitumor activity of interleukin-27.

Hisada M(1), Kamiya S, Fujita K, Belladonna ML, Aoki T, Koyanagi Y, Mizuguchi J, 
Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center and Department of
Immunology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Although much promising data that interleukin (IL)-12 could be a powerful
therapeutic agent against cancer were reported in animal models, its excessive
toxicity has become a problem for its clinical application. IL-27 is a novel
IL-12 family member that plays a role in the early regulation of T helper cell 1 
initiation, including induction of T-bet and IL-12 receptor beta 2 expression. In
the present study, we have evaluated the antitumor activity of IL-27 against a
murine tumor model of colon carcinoma C26. C26 cells, which were transduced with 
the single-chain IL-27 cDNA and became secreting IL-27 (C26-IL-27), exhibited
minimal tumor growth in vivo, and all of the mice inoculated with these cells
survived healthily with complete tumor remission. Inoculation of mice with
C26-IL-27 induced enhanced IFN-gamma production and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
activity against C26 tumor in spleen cells. Recovered mice from the inoculation
showed a tumor-specific protective immunity to the following challenge with
parental C26 tumor. The antitumor activity of IL-27 was almost diminished in nude
mice, and depletion of CD8(+) T cells and neutralization of IFN-gamma in
immunocompetent mice reduced greatly the antitumor activity. Moreover, the
antitumor activity was abolished in T-bet-deficient mice, whereas it was observed
unexpectedly in mice deficient of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 4. These results suggest that IL-27 has potent abilities to 
induce tumor-specific antitumor activity and protective immunity and that the
antitumor activity is mediated mainly through CD8(+) T cells, IFN-gamma, and
T-bet but not through STAT4.

PMID: 14871851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Feb;34(2):519-29.

Control of Leishmania major in the absence of Tyk2 kinase.

Schleicher U(1), Mattner J, Blos M, Schindler H, Röllinghoff M, Karaghiosoff M,
Müller M, Werner-Felmayer G, Bogdan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

IL-12 is indispensable for the control of many intracellular pathogens, but the
components of the signaling pathway that are essential for its function in vivo
are incompletely understood. Here, we investigated in the Leishmania major mouse 
model whether Tyk2 kinase is required for the generation of a protective immune
response. Unlike C57BL/6 controls, Tyk2(-/-)mice developed severe skin lesions
after infection that frequently ulcerated, but ultimately healed. NK cell
cytotoxicity was absent in infected Tyk2(-/-) mice, even after IL-12
pretreatment, which correlated with a STAT4 activation defect. IFN-alpha / beta, 
which was still able to activate STAT1 in Tyk2(-/-) NK cells, reconstituted their
cytotoxic activity, but not their IL-12 responsiveness. The IL-12-induced
production of IFN-gamma by NK cells and CD8(+) T cells was strongly suppressed in
Tyk2(-/-) mice at day 1 of infection, but partly regained during the late phase
of infection. Tyk2(-/-) CD4(+) T cells developed into Th1 cells (although in a
delayed fashion) and infected Tyk2(-/-) mice expressed normals levels of
inducible NO synthase. Thus, Tyk2 is required for the IL-12 response of NK cells 
and CD8(+) T cells in L. major-infected mice, but not for the generation of Th1
cells and the ultimate control of the disease.

PMID: 14768057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biomol NMR. 2004 Mar;28(3):205-12.

Improving the accuracy of NMR structures of large proteins using pseudocontact
shifts as long-range restraints.

Gaponenko V(1), Sarma SP, Altieri AS, Horita DA, Li J, Byrd RA.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biophysics Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, P.O. Box B,
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

We demonstrate improved accuracy in protein structure determination for large
(>/=30 kDa), deuterated proteins (e.g. STAT4(NT)) via the combination of
pseudocontact shifts for amide and methyl protons with the available NOEs in
methyl-protonated proteins. The improved accuracy is cross validated by Q-factors
determined from residual dipolar couplings measured as a result of magnetic
susceptibility alignment. The paramagnet is introduced via binding to
thiol-reactive EDTA, and multiple sites can be serially engineered to obtain data
from alternative orientations of the paramagnetic anisotropic susceptibility
tensor. The technique is advantageous for systems where the target protein has
strong interactions with known alignment media.

PMID: 14752254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Immunol. 2004 Feb 1;172(3):1355-63.

Mechanistic insights into impaired dendritic cell function by rapamycin:
inhibition of Jak2/Stat4 signaling pathway.

Chiang PH(1), Wang L, Bonham CA, Liang X, Fung JJ, Lu L, Qian S.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute and Department of Surgery,
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

The suppressive effect of rapamycin on T cells has been extensively studied, but 
its influence on the function of APC is less clear. The data in this study
demonstrated that immunostimulatory activity of B10 (H2(b)) dendritic cells (DC) 
exposed to rapamycin (rapa-DC) was markedly suppressed as evidenced by the
induction of low proliferative responses and specific CTL activity in allogeneic 
(C3H, H2(k)) T cells. Administration of rapa-DC significantly prolonged survival 
of B10 cardiac allografts in C3H recipients. Treatment with rapamycin did not
affect DC expression of MHC class II and costimulatory molecules or IL-12
production. Rapamycin did not inhibit DC NF-kappaB pathway, however, IL-12
signaling through Janus kinase 2/Stat4 activation was markedly suppressed.
Indeed, Stat4(-/-) DC similarly displayed poor allostimulatory activity. The
Stat4 downstream product, IFN-gamma, was also inhibited by rapamycin, but DC
dysfunction could not solely be attributed to low IFN-gamma production as DC
deficient in IFN-gamma still exhibited vigorous allostimulatory activity.
Rapamycin did not affect DC IL-12R expression, but markedly suppressed
IL-18Ralpha and beta expression, which may in turn down-regulate DC IL-12
autocrine activation.

PMID: 14734710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Immunol. 2004 Feb 1;172(3):1347-54.

Induction of tumor regression by administration of B7-Ig fusion proteins:
mediation by type 2 CD8+ T cells and dependence on IL-4 production.

Yamaguchi N(1), Hiraoka S, Mukai T, Takeuchi N, Zhou XY, Ono S, Kogo M,
Dunussi-Joannopoulos K, Ling V, Wolf S, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

CD28 signals contribute to either type 1 or type 2 T cell differentiation. Here, 
we show that administration of B7.2-Ig fusion proteins to tumor-bearing mice
induces tumor regression by promoting the differentiation of antitumor type 2
CD8(+) effector T cells along with IL-4 production. B7.2-Ig-mediated regression
was not induced in IL-4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) mice. However, it was elicited in
IFN-gamma(-/-) and STAT4(-/-) mice. By contrast, IL-12-induced tumor regression
occurred in IL-4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) mice, but not in IFN-gamma(-/-) and
STAT4(-/-) mice. Moreover, B7.2-Ig treatment was effective in a tumor model not
responsive to IL-12. B7.2-Ig administration elicited elevated levels of IL-4
production. Tumor regression was predominantly mediated by CD8(+) T cells,
although the induction of these effector cells required CD4(+) T cells. Tumor
regression induced by CD8(+) T cells alone was inhibited by neutralizing the IL-4
produced during B7.2-Ig treatment. Thus, these results indicate that stimulation 
in vivo of CD28 with B7.2-Ig in tumor-bearing mice results in enhanced induction 
of antitumor type 2 CD8(+) T cells (Tc2) leading to Tc2-mediated tumor
regression.

PMID: 14734709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int Immunol. 2004 Feb;16(2):295-302.

A mechanism underlying STAT4-mediated up-regulation of IFN-gamma induction
inTCR-triggered T cells.

Park WR(1), Nakahira M, Sugimoto N, Bian Y, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Zhou XY, Yang YF,
Hamaoka T, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology (C6), Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

IL-12 promotes T(h)1 development/IFN-gamma expression by activating STAT4.
However, it is still unclear how STAT4 elicits IFN-gamma promoter activation.
Here, we investigated the mechanism by which IL-12-activated STAT4 functions for 
IFN-gamma induction in TCR-triggered T cells. TCR stimulation induced high levels
of IFN-gamma production depending on co-stimulation with IL-12. IL-12 stimulation
greatly enhanced the promoter-binding activity of c-Jun/AP-1, a critical
transcription factor for IFN-gamma gene expression in wild-type T cells, but not 
in STAT4-deficient (STAT4(-/-)) T cells. Comparable amounts of c-Jun were induced
by TCR stimulation in both wild-type and STAT4(-/-) T cells irrespective of IL-12
co-stimulation. However, c-Jun bound to STAT4 in IL-12-co-stimulated wild-type T 
cells. c-Jun forming a complex with STAT4 efficiently interacted with the
AP-1-related sequence of the IFN-gamma promoter. Such an enhanced c-Jun binding
did not occur in STAT4(-/-) T cells. These results show that STAT4 contributes to
enhancing IFN-gamma expression by up-regulating the binding of TCR signal-induced
AP-1 to the relevant promoter sequence.

PMID: 14734615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1273-86.

Potential targets of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitor
for multiple sclerosis therapy.

Nath N(1), Giri S, Prasad R, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Ralph H.
Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston, SC
29425.

The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors or
statins are newly identified immunomodulators. In vivo treatment of SJL/J mice
with lovastatin reduced the duration and clinical severity of active and passive 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for multiple
sclerosis. Lovastatin induced the expression of GATA3 and the phosphorylation of 
STAT6, whereas it inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2, tyrosine 
kinase 2, and STAT4. Inhibition of the Janus kinase-STAT4 pathway by lovastatin
modulated T0 to Th1 differentiation and reduced cytokine (IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha) production, thus inducing Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10). It
inhibited T-bet (T box transcription factor) and NF-kappaB in activated T cells
and significantly reduced infiltration of CD4- and MHC class II-positive cells to
CNS. Further, it stabilized IL-4 production and GATA-3 expression in
differentiated Th2 cells, whereas in differentiated Th1 cells it inhibited the
expression of T-bet and reduced the production of IFN-gamma. Moreover,
lovastatin-exposed macrophage and BV2 (microglia) in allogeneic MLRs induced the 
production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. These observations indicate
that the anti-inflammatory effects of lovastatin are mediated via T cells as well
as APCs, because it modulates the polarization patterns of naive T cell
activation in an APC-independent system. Together, these findings reveal that
lovastatin may have possible therapeutic value involving new targets (in both
APCs and T cells) for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and other inflammatory 
diseases.

PMID: 14707106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Ann Neurol. 2004 Jan;55(1):46-57.

Multiple sclerosis: cytokine receptors on oligodendrocytes predict innate
regulation.

Cannella B(1), Raine CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461,
USA. cannella@aecom.yu.edu

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated demyelinating condition in which
numerous soluble mediators have been implicated. We have extended the repertoire 
of cytokines studied in MS tissue by examining interleukin (IL-4), IL-6, IL-10,
IL-12, IL-18, interferon (IFNgamma), and their receptors and have compared
patterns with those seen in normal subjects and other neurological diseases
(OND). Expression was evaluated by immunocytochemistry and Western blots.
Remarkably, oligodendrocytes expressed all the cytokine receptors examined,
particularly Th2-type, constitutively in normal subjects and upregulated in
disease. Microglial cells also expressed cytokine receptors at similar levels.
Cytokine expression was invariably a feature of microglial cells, except for
IL-10, which was exclusively astrocytic. Oligodendrocytes did not display
cytokines, except for low levels of IL-18. Although no pattern was specific for
MS, most molecules were upregulated in MS and OND. Downstream JAK/STAT molecules 
were correspondingly upregulated. Cytokine receptors on oligodendrocytes (and
microglia), and their corresponding ligands on microglia (and astrocytes), may
implicate paracrine/autocrine regulation and may bespeak innate immunity in the
central nervous system.

PMID: 14705111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Nat Immunol. 2004 Feb;5(2):208-15. Epub 2004 Jan 4.

N-domain-dependent nonphosphorylated STAT4 dimers required for cytokine-driven
activation.

Ota N(1), Brett TJ, Murphy TL, Fremont DH, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The N-terminal protein interaction domain (N-domain) of the signal transducer and
activator of transcription-4 (STAT4) is believed to stabilize interactions
between two phosphorylated STAT4 dimers to form STAT4 tetramers. Here, we show
that nonphosphorylated STAT4 dimers form in vivo before cytokine receptor-driven 
activation. Mutations in the N-domain dimerization interface abolished assembly
of nonphosphorylated STAT4 dimers and prevented STAT4 phosphorylation mediated by
cytokine receptors. In addition, N-domain dimerization occurred for other STAT
family members but was homotypic in character. This implies a conserved role for 
N-domain dimerization, which might include influencing interactions with cytokine
receptors, favoring homodimer formation or accelerating formation of the
phosphorylated STAT dimer.

PMID: 14704793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Transplantation. 2003 Dec 27;76(12):1749-58.

Analysis of cytokine functions in graft rejection by gene expression profiles.

Liang Y(1), Christopher K, DeFina R, Cidado J, He H, Haley KJ, Finn PW, Perkins
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02215,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The function of interferon (IFN)gamma in the regulation of the immune
response after allogeneic transplantation is still poorly understood. Previous
studies have suggested that IFNgamma can promote rejection and be important in
tolerance induction.
METHODS: To analyze the various IFNgamma-dependent functions in terms of T
helpers 1 and 2 responses during rejection, we investigated mice deficient in the
transcription factors (signal transducer of activated T cells [STAT]4 and 6) and 
IFNgamma in fully major histocompatibility complex-mismatched vascularized
cardiac transplants. Serum levels of the cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
IFNgamma, and interleukin (IL)-1beta were evaluated by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, and the graft-infiltrating cells were examined by
immunohistochemical staining. To analyze a large panel of immune parameters, we
determined the expression of chemokines, chemokine receptors, and clusters of
differentiation markers by RNAase protection assays. The data were analyzed with 
algorithms that generated hierarchic clustering dendrograms. Also, the expression
profiles of individual genes were determined with self-organizing maps.
RESULTS: Our data show that both the STAT4- and STAT6-deficient groups have
statistically prolonged graft survival (P<0.04 and P<0.01). Despite the absence
of prolongation of graft survival in the IFNgamma-deficient group, our analysis
of variance data show that more genes (18) were modulated in the
IFNgamma-deficient group compared with the other two STAT4- and STAT6-deficient
groups (five each).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that IFNgamma plays a distinct role in the
modulation of gene expression that includes STAT4-independent mechanisms. Our
study identifies eight genes (IL-1beta, IL-1RA, macrophage inflammatory
protein-1beta, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, CC-chemokine receptor (CCR)-1,
CCR2, CCR5, and F4/80) that are highly expressed in all of our experimental
groups. Thus, these genes become candidates for essential functions during
rejection.

PMID: 14688527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):457-63.

STAT1 plays a critical role in the regulation of antimicrobial effector
mechanisms, but not in the development of Th1-type responses during
toxoplasmosis.

Lieberman LA(1), Banica M, Reiner SL, Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The production of IFN-gamma by T cells and the ability of this cytokine to
activate the transcription factor STAT1 are implicated in the activation of
antimicrobial mechanisms required for resistance to intracellular pathogens. In
addition, recent studies have suggested that the ability of STAT1 to inhibit the 
activation of STAT4 prevents the development of Th1 responses. However, other
studies suggest that STAT1 is required to enhance the expression of T-bet, a
transcription factor that promotes Th1 responses. To address the role of STAT1 in
resistance to T. gondii, Stat1-/- mice were infected with this pathogen, and
their response to infection was assessed. Although Stat1-/- mice produced normal 
serum levels of IL-12 and IFN-gamma, these mice were unable to control parasite
replication and rapidly succumbed to this infection. Susceptibility to
toxoplasmosis was associated with an inability to up-regulate MHC expression on
macrophages, defects in NO production, and the inability to up-regulate some of
the IFN-inducible GTPase family of proteins, molecules associated with
antitoxoplasma activity. Analysis of T cell responses revealed that STAT1 was not
required for the development of a Th1 response, but was required for the
infection-induced up-regulation of T-bet. Together these studies suggest that
during toxoplasmosis the major role of STAT1 is not in the development of
protective T cell responses, but, rather, STAT1 is important in the development
of antimicrobial effector mechanisms.

PMID: 14688355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):97-103.

The susceptibility to experimental myasthenia gravis of STAT6-/- and STAT4-/-
BALB/c mice suggests a pathogenic role of Th1 cells.

Wang W(1), Ostlie NS, Conti-Fine BM, Milani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, 321 Church Street, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Autoantibodies to the muscle acetylcholine receptor (AChR) cause the symptoms of 
human and experimental myasthenia gravis (EMG). AChR-specific CD4+ T cells permit
development of these diseases, but the role(s) of the Th1 and Th2 subsets is
unclear. The STAT4 and STAT6 proteins, which mediate intracellular cytokine
signaling, are important for differentiation of Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. 
Wild-type (WT) BALB/c mice, which are prone to develop Th2 rather than Th1
responses to Ag, are resistant to EMG. We have examined the role of Th1 and Th2
cells in EMG using STAT4 (STAT4-/-)- or STAT6 (STAT6-/-)-deficient BALB/c mice.
After AChR immunization, STAT6-/- mice were susceptible to EMG: they developed
more serum anti-AChR Ab, and had more complement-fixing anti-AChR IgG2a and 2b
and less IgG1 than WT or STAT4-/- mice. The susceptibility to EMG of STAT6-/-
mice is most likely related to the Th1 cell-induced synthesis of anti-AChR Ab,
which trigger complement-mediated destruction of the neuromuscular junction. CD4+
T cells of the STAT6-/- mice had proliferative responses to the AChR comparable
to those of WT and STAT4-/- mice, and recognized similar AChR epitopes. STAT6-/- 
mice had abundant AChR-specific Th1 cells, which were nearly absent in WT and
STAT4-/- mice. Spleen and lymph nodes from STAT6-/- mice contained cells that
secreted IL-4 when cultured with AChR: these are most likely STAT6-independent
cells, stimulated in a non-Ag-specific manner by the cytokines secreted by
AChR-specific Th1 cells.

PMID: 14688314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):61-9.

Sustained IL-12 signaling is required for Th1 development.

Athie-Morales V(1), Smits HH, Cantrell DA, Hilkens CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Activation Laboratory and Biochemical Regulatory Mechanisms
Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields
Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

STAT4 is an essential transcription factor for Th1 cell development. IL-12 and
IFN-alpha both activate STAT4, but with different kinetics. In this study we
compared their capacities to drive differentiation of human naive Th cells toward
the Th1 phenotype. The Th1-polarizing activity of IFN-alpha was much weaker than 
that of IL-12, correlating with a marked difference in the kinetics of STAT4
activation; the response to IL-12 was sustained (>48 h), whereas the response to 
IFN-alpha was transient (4 h). The continuous presence of IL-12 was required for 
sustained STAT4 activation. Similarly, optimal Th1 polarization was only achieved
upon prolonged exposure to IL-12 and could not be induced by a transient IL-12
pulse. Furthermore, the cytokine IL-2 potentiated sustained IL-12/STAT4 responses
through up-regulation of IL-12R expression and synergized with IL-12 in driving
Th1 cell development. Transient IFN-alpha responses, on the other hand, were not 
prolonged by IL-2. IFN-alpha treatment induced down-regulation of IFN-alphabeta
receptor subunit 1, rendering cells refractory to IFN-alpha, but did not
trans-inhibit the IL-12/STAT4 response. These data indicate that sustained IL-12 
signaling is essential for optimal Th1 cell development and that transient
activation of STAT4 in response to IFN-alpha may explain the poor Th1-polarizing 
capacity of this cytokine. Collectively these data show that the duration of
cytokine signaling is important for determining the biological response.

PMID: 14688310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Nov;1005:409-11.

Inhibition of STAT4 activation by lisofylline is associated with the protection
of autoimmune diabetes.

Yang Z(1), Chen M, Fialkow LB, Ellett JD, Wu R, Nadler JL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
jln2n@virginia.edu

We investigated the signal transduction pathway of IL-12 and showed that
lisofylline (LSF) inhibited the signal transducer and activator of transcription 
factor-4 (STAT4) activation. Interruption of IL-12-mediated STAT4 activation
prevented autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice.

PMID: 14679102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):7339-45. Epub 2003 Dec 2.

STAT4 is required for interleukin-12-induced chromatin remodeling of the CD25
locus.

O'Sullivan A(1), Chang HC, Yu Q, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) is a critical mediator
of interleukin-12 (IL-12)-stimulated inflammatory immune responses. Despite
extensive analysis of the immune responses of STAT4-deficient mice, there is
still very little understood about STAT4-dependent gene induction. IL-12
stimulated increases in IL-2 receptor alpha chain gene (CD25) mRNA levels and
surface expression require STAT4. In this report, we utilize chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to analyze IL-12-stimulated and STAT4-dependent
changes in chromatin remodeling of the CD25 gene. Gene activation requires
binding of STAT4 to the PRRIII upstream regulatory element, the recruitment of
the CREB-binding protein (CBP), and chromatin remodeling including increased
acetylation and decreased methylation of histones within the CD25 promoter.
Evidence suggests that STAT4 also facilitates binding of other factors to the
CD25 promoter including c-Jun. Thus, these results provide a model for
STAT4-dependent gene induction and a mechanism for cytokine-induced expression of
the CD25 gene.

PMID: 14660657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 9;100(25):15047-52. Epub 2003 Dec 1.

IL-27 regulates IL-12 responsiveness of naive CD4+ T cells through
Stat1-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Lucas S(1), Ghilardi N, Li J, de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.

IL-27, a novel heterodimeric cytokine produced by antigen-presenting cells,
signals through the T cell cytokine receptor (TCCR)/WSX-1 expressed on naïve CD4+
T cells and natural killer cells. TCCR/WSX-1 deficiency results in delayed T
helper type 1 (TH1) development through an unresolved mechanism. We report here
that IL-27 stimulation in developing murine T helper cells potently induces the
expression of the major TH1-specific transcription factor T-bet and its
downstream target IL-12R beta2, independently of IFN gamma. In addition, IL-27
suppresses basal expression of GATA-3, the critical TH2-specific transcription
factor that inhibits TH1 development by down-regulating signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat) 4. IL-27 signaling through TCCR/WSX-1 induces
phosphorylation of Stat1, Stat3, Stat4, and Stat5. Stat1 is required for
suppression of GATA-3, but T-bet induction by IL-27 can also be mediated through 
a Stat1-independent pathway. Despite its TH1-like signaling profile, IL-27 is not
sufficient to drive the differentiation of CD4+ T cells into IFN gamma-producing 
cells. Similarly, IL-27 induces T-bet expression in primary natural killer cells,
but this does not result in an increase of IFN gamma production or cytotoxic
activity. Therefore, although IL-27 is unable to drive IFN gamma production on
its own, it plays an important role in the early steps of TH1 commitment by
contributing in a paracrine manner to the control of IL-12 responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC299900
PMID: 14657353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Genet Vaccines Ther. 2003 Oct 27;1(1):3.

Chitosan IFN-gamma-pDNA Nanoparticle (CIN) Therapy for Allergic Asthma.

Kumar M(1), Kong X, Behera AK, Hellermann GR, Lockey RF, Mohapatra SS.

Author information: 
(1)The Joy McCann Culverhouse Airway Disease Center, Division of Allergy and
Immunology, University of South Florida College of Medicine and James A Haley VA 
Hospital, Tampa, FL, USA. smohapat@hsc.usf.edu

BACKGROUND: Allergic subjects produce relatively low amounts of IFN-gamma, a
pleiotropic Th-1 cytokine that downregulates Th2-associated airway inflammation
and hyperresponsiveness (AHR), the hallmarks of allergic asthma.
Adenovirus-mediated IFN-gamma gene transfer reduces AHR, Th2 cytokine levels and 
lung inflammation in mice, but its use would be limited by the frequency of gene 
delivery required; therefore, we tested chitosan/IFN-gamma pDNA nanoparticles
(CIN) for in situ production of IFN-gamma and its in vivo effects. METHODS: CIN
were administered to OVA-sensitized mice to investigate the possibility of using 
gene transfer to modulate ovalbumin (OVA)-induced inflammation and AHR. RESULTS: 
Mice treated with CIN exhibit significantly lower AHR to methacholine challenge
and less lung histopathology. Production of IFN-gamma is increased after CIN
treatment while the Th2-cytokines, IL-4 and IL-5, and OVA-specific serum IgE are 
reduced compared to control mice. AHR and eosinophilia are also significantly
reduced by CIN therapy administered therapeutically in mice with established
asthma. CIN was found to inhibit epithelial inflammation within 6 hours of
delivery by inducing apoptosis of goblet cells. Experiments performed on
STAT4-defective mice do not show reduction in AHR with CIN treatment, thus
implicating STAT4 signaling in the mechanism of CIN action. CONCLUSION: These
results demonstrate that mucosal CIN therapy can effectively reduce established
allergen-induced airway inflammation and AHR.

PMCID: PMC280670
PMID: 14613519  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


402. J Immunol. 2003 Nov 15;171(10):5225-32.

Specific signaling pathways triggered by IL-2 in human V gamma 9V delta 2 T
cells: an amalgamation of NK and alpha beta T cell signaling.

Lafont V(1), Loisel S, Liautard J, Dudal S, Sablé-Teychené M, Liautard JP, Favero
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 431,
Université Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France. vlafont@crit.univ-montp2.fr

The global immune response can be simplified into two components: the innate and 
the acquired systems. The innate immune response comprises primarily macrophages 
and NK cells, while B and T cells orchestrate the acquired response. Human
Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cells represent a minor T cell subpopulation in blood (1-5%)
that is activated via the TCR by small nonpeptidic molecules. Their percentage
dramatically increases during the early phase of infection by intracellular
pathogens, and they display many characteristics of NK cells, which places them
at a unique position within the immune system. Our aim was to explore the
behavior of these cells when they are activated by a receptor that is common to
NK and alphabeta T cells, and to determine signaling pathways and biological
responses induced in these cells through this receptor. Thus, we investigated
whether Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cells behave as NK cells or as alphabeta T cells. We
demonstrated that IL-2 activates not only STAT3, STAT5, the phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase pathway, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase-2 pathway, but also
STAT4 as in NK cells, and the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway as in 
alphabeta T cells. Moreover, IL-2 induces the production of IFN-gamma in
Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cells as observed in NK cells. Due to their double profiles,
Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cells are at the interface of the innate and the acquired immune
response and may therefore not only modulate the activity of innate cells, but
also influence Th1/Th2 differentiation.

PMID: 14607923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Cytokine. 2003 Nov 7;24(3):81-90.

IFN-alpha and IL-12 activate IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1), IRF-4, and IRF-8
gene expression in human NK and T cells.

Lehtonen A(1), Lund R, Lahesmaa R, Julkunen I, Sareneva T, Matikainen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Mannerheimintie 
166, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland. anne.lehtonen@ktl.fi

IFN-alpha and IL-12 are macrophage-derived cytokines that enhance innate and Th1 
immune responses. However, there is little information regarding IFN-alpha and
IL-12 target genes that would be involved in mediating the immunostimulatory
effects of these cytokines. The interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of
transcription factors is known to be involved in controlling lymphocyte
differentiation and functions. In this work we have studied the effect of
IFN-alpha and IL-12 on the expression of IRF transcription factors in human NK
and T cells. Both IFN-alpha and IL-12 strongly up-regulated IRF-1, IRF-4, and
IRF-8 mRNA and protein expression. The binding of IRF-4 and IRF-8 to the lambdaB 
gene enhancer sequence was also increased following IFN-alpha- and
IL-12-treatment of NK and T cells. A GAS element from the promoter region of the 
IRF-4 gene was identified. Following stimulation of cells with IFN-alpha or
IL-12, Stat4 was found to bind to this IRF-4 GAS element, as detected by EMSA and
DNA affinity binding, implying that the IRF-4 gene is directly activated by both 
cytokines. Our results suggest that IFN-alpha and IL-12 may enhance innate and
Th1 immune responses by inducing IRF-1, IRF-4, and IRF-8 gene expression.

PMID: 14581002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Endotoxin Res. 2003;9(5):308-12.

Role of interferons in LPS hypersensitivity.

Freudenberg MA(1), Kalis C, Chvatchko Y, Merlin T, Gumenscheimer M, Galanos C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut fü r Immunbiologie, Freiburg, Germany.
freudenberg@immunbio.mpg.de

The innate immune response to Gram-negative bacteria depends mainly on the
ability of the host to respond to the LPS component. Consequently, the state of
LPS sensitivity at the time of infection and the numbers of invading bacteria
(i.e. the amounts of LPS) are primary factors determining the innate responses
provoked by Gram-negative pathogens. LPS sensitivity increases following
treatment of mice with live or killed micro-organisms. Two types of sensitization
have been recognized, strong, IFN-gamma-dependent and moderate
IFN-gamma-independent. IL-12 and IL-18 are intimately involved in the induction
of IFN-gamma by bacteria. We showed that Gram-negative bacteria induce IFN-gamma 
in mice also by an IFN-beta-dependent pathway that requires IL-18 and is
independent of IL-12 signaling. This pathway is STAT4 dependent, the activation
of which is directly linked to IFN-beta. Further, IFN-beta can be replaced by
IFN-alpha. While different components of Gram-negative bacteria induce IL-12 and 
IL-18, LPS seems to be the only component in these bacteria capable of inducing
IFN-beta. Therefore, the IFN-beta pathway of IFN-gamma induction, unlike the
IL-12 pathway, proceeds only in LPS responder mice. The IFN-alpha/beta-dependent 
pathway is expected to play a role whenever IFN-alpha or IFN-beta, and IL-18 are 
produced concomitantly during infection.

PMID: 14577847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Int Immunol. 2003 Nov;15(11):1309-17.

Differential activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)3 and STAT5 and induction of suppressors of cytokine signalling in T(h)1
and T(h)2 cells.

Anderson P(1), Sundstedt A, Li L, O'Neill EJ, Li S, Wraith DC, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Sciences, Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, London EC1A 7ED, UK. Per.Anderson@wblab.lu.se

Cytokines direct the differentiation of naive CD4(+) T cells into either
IFN-gamma-producing T(h)1 cells or IL-4-producing T(h)2 cells. In this study, we 
analyzed the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)1, STAT3 and STAT5 (together with STAT4 and STAT6), and the expression of
the recently identified suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS) proteins, in
differentiated T(h)1 and T(h)2 cells, both before and after re-stimulation with
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28. In addition to the polarized activation of STAT4 in T(h)1
cells and STAT6 in T(h)2 cells, we found that STAT3 and STAT5 are selectively
activated in T(h)1 cells after differentiation. This activation of STAT3 and
STAT5 was maintained after TCR re-stimulation. The selective activation of STAT3 
and STAT5 in T(h)1 cells was associated with differential induction of SOCS
molecules. After re-stimulation, SOCS1 expression was significantly increased in 
T(h)2 cells, but not in T(h)1 and non-polarized 'T(h)' cells. Additionally, the
level of CIS was higher in T(h)2 cells compared with T(h)1 and T(h) cells. In
contrast, the expression of SOCS3 was higher in T(h)1 cells. The differential
induction of SOCS proteins was paralleled by the differential expression of
cytokines in re-stimulated T(h)1 and T(h)2 cells (IFN-gamma and IL-4/IL-13
respectively). Our results suggests that STAT3 and STAT5, possibly regulated by
the SOCS proteins, may play a role in the differentiation of T(h) cells, and in
the maintenance of the T(h)1 and T(h)2 phenotype.

PMID: 14565929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 31;310(4):1188-93.

SOCS-3 inhibits IL-12-induced STAT4 activation by binding through its SH2 domain 
to the STAT4 docking site in the IL-12 receptor beta2 subunit.

Yamamoto K(1), Yamaguchi M, Miyasaka N, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

IL-12 promotes the proliferation of T cells as well as NK cells and plays a
critical role in induction of the Th1 differentiation. IL-12 mediates its
biological activities through activation of the receptor-associated JAK family
kinases and STAT4, which is recruited to phosphorylated Tyr-800 in the human
IL-12 receptor beta2 subunit (IL-12Rbeta2). Here we demonstrate that suppressor
of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS-3) is also recruited to IL-12Rbeta2 by the
interaction involving the SOCS-3 SH2 domain and phosphorylated Tyr-800 in
IL-12Rbeta2. Furthermore, SOCS-3, but not its SH2 domain-defective mutant,
inhibited the IL-12-induced activation of DNA-binding and transcriptional
activities of STAT4. These results suggest that SOCS-3, expressed at high levels 
in Th2 cells, plays an inhibitory role in STAT4-mediated IL-12 signaling by
binding to the STAT4 docking site in IL-12Rbeta2, thus raising a possibility that
SOCS-3 may play a role in regulation of Th differentiation.

PMID: 14559241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Oct;33(10):2706-16.

Regulation of PD-1, PD-L1, and PD-L2 expression during normal and autoimmune
responses.

Liang SC(1), Latchman YE, Buhlmann JE, Tomczak MF, Horwitz BH, Freeman GJ, Sharpe
AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Newer members of the B7-CD28 superfamily include the receptor PD-1 and its two
ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2. Here, we characterize the expression of PD-1, PD-L1,
and PD-L2 in tissues of naive miceand in target organs from two models of
autoimmunity, the pancreas from non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice and brain from mice
with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). In naive mice,
proteiexpression of PD-1, PD-L1, and PD-L2 was detected in the thymus, while PD-1
and PD-L1 were detected in the spleen. PD-L1, but not PD-L2, was also detected at
low levels on cardiac endothelium, pancreatic islets, and syncyciotrophoblasts in
the placenta. In pre-diabetic NOD mice, PD-1 and PD-L1 were expressed on
infiltrating cells in the pancreatic islets. Furthermore, PD-L1 was markedly
up-regulated on islet cells. In brains from mice with EAE, PD-1, PD-L1, and PD-L2
were expressed on infiltrating inflammatory cells, and PD-L1 was up-regulated on 
endothelium within EAE brain. The distinct expression patterns of PD-L1 and PD-L2
led us to compare their transcriptional regulation in STAT4(-/-), STAT6(-/-), or 
NF-kappaB p50(-/-)p65(+/-) dendritic cells (DC).PD-L2, but not PD-L1, expression 
was dramatically reduced in p50(-/-)p65(+/-) DC. Thus, PD-L1 and PD-L2 exhibit
distinct expression patterns and are differentially regulated on the
transcriptional level.

PMID: 14515254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Cell Physiol. 2003 Nov;197(2):157-68.

STAT proteins: from normal control of cellular events to tumorigenesis.

Calò V(1), Migliavacca M, Bazan V, Macaluso M, Buscemi M, Gebbia N, Russo A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Oncology, Department of Oncology, Regional Reference
Center for the Biomolecular Characterization of Neoplasms and Genetic Screening
of Hereditary Tumors, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins comprise a
family of transcription factors latent in the cytoplasm that participate in
normal cellular events, such as differentiation, proliferation, cell survival,
apoptosis, and angiogenesis following cytokine, growth factor, and hormone
signaling. STATs are activated by tyrosine phosphorylation, which is normally a
transient and tightly regulates process. Nevertheless, several constitutively
activated STATs have been observed in a wide number of human cancer cell lines
and primary tumors, including blood malignancies and solid neoplasias. STATs can 
be divided into two groups according to their specific functions. One is made up 
of STAT2, STAT4, and STAT6, which are activated by a small number of cytokines
and play a distinct role in the development of T-cells and in IFNgamma signaling.
The other group includes STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5, activated in different tissues 
by means of a series of ligands and involved in IFN signaling, development of the
mammary gland, response to GH, and embriogenesis. This latter group of STATS
plays an important role in controlling cell-cycle progression and apoptosis and
thus contributes to oncogenesis. Although an increased expression of STAT1 has
been observed in many human neoplasias, this molecule can be considered a
potential tumor suppressor, since it plays an important role in growth arrest and
in promoting apoptosis. On the other hand, STAT3 and 5 are considered as
oncogenes, since they bring about the activation of cyclin D1, c-Myc, and bcl-xl 
expression, and are involved in promoting cell-cycle progression, cellular
transformation, and in preventing apoptosis.

PMID: 14502555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 1;171(7):3711-7.

Cysteine protease B of Leishmania mexicana inhibits host Th1 responses and
protective immunity.

Buxbaum LU(1), Denise H, Coombs GH, Alexander J, Mottram JC, Scott P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

C3H mice infected with Leishmania mexicana fail to develop a protective Th1
response, and are unable to cure. In this study, we show that L. mexicana
cysteine proteases suppress the antileishmanial immune response. Previous studies
demonstrated that deletion of the entire multicopy cysteine protease B (CPB) gene
array in L. mexicana is associated with decreased parasite virulence, potentially
attributable to factors related to parasite fitness rather than to direct effects
on the host immune response. We now show that C3H mice infected with the L.
mexicana deletion mutant (Deltacpb) initially develop lesions that grow at rates 
comparable to those of wild-type L. mexicana-infected mice. However, in contrast 
to controls, Deltacpb-induced lesions heal with an accompanying Th1 immune
response. Lesion resolution was Th1 dependent, as Deltacpb-infected IL-12p40(-/-)
and STAT4(-/-) mice developed high parasite burdens and progressive disease.
Moreover, when L. major was transfected with a cosmid expressing multiple L.
mexicana CPB genes, this parasite induced a significantly lower IFN-gamma
response compared with wild-type L. major. These data indicate that cysteine
proteases of L. mexicana are critical in suppressing protective immune responses 
and that inhibition of CPB may prove to be a valuable immunomodulatory strategy
for chronic forms of leishmaniasis.

PMID: 14500670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Hematother Stem Cell Res. 2003 Aug;12(4):401-8.

Distinct requirements for Stat4 and Stat6 in hematopoietic progenitor cell
responses to growth factors and chemokines.

Kaplan MH(1), Chang HC, Cooper S, Lee Y, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. mkaplan2@iupui.edu

Hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) homeostasis is critical in maintaining innate
immunity and healing processes. Recently, we demonstrated that Th1 cells regulate
HPC homeostasis, partly based on altered homeostasis in Stat4- and
Stat6-deficient mice. To explore changes in HPC responsiveness in altered T
helper cell environments, we directly examined growth factor-stimulated colony
formation and chemokine-induced myelosuppression of HPC in Stat4- and
Stat6-deficient bone marrow cells. Stat6-deficient cells have increased responses
to the synergy between granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
and steel factor (SLF), compared to wild-type and Stat4-deficient cells.
Increased responses are eliminated by in vivo depletion of CD4 cells. Whereas
Stat6-deficient bone marrow cells respond to chemokine-mediated myelosuppression,
Stat4-deficient bone marrow cells are refractory to the suppressive effects of
chemokines. Thus, T helper cell development affects HPC homeostasis through
several mechanisms, including the sensitivity to growth factor stimulation and
chemokine suppression of HPC colony formation. Since Stat4 and Stat6 regulate
opposing programs of T helper differentiation, there are distinct requirements
for Stat4 and Stat6 in regulation of growth factor and chemokine responses of
HPC.

PMID: 12965077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 2003 Dec 15;102(13):4608-17. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Reduced expression of NFAT-associated genes in UCB versus adult CD4+ T
lymphocytes during primary stimulation.

Kaminski BA(1), Kadereit S, Miller RE, Leahy P, Stein KR, Topa DA, Radivoyevitch 
T, Veigl ML, Laughlin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, 11100 Euclid Ave, Wearn 433, Cleveland, OH
44106-5065, USA.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the blunted allo-responsiveness 
of umbilical cord blood (UCB) T cells have not been fully elucidated. Protein
expression of NFATc2 (nuclear factor of activated T cells c2), a critical
transcription factor necessary for up-regulation of multiple cytokines known to
amplify T-cell allogeneic responses, is reduced in UCB T cells. Affymetrix
oligonucleotide microarrays were used to compare gene expression of primary
purified CD4+ UCB T cells to adult peripheral blood CD4+ T cells (AB) at
baseline, 6, and 16 hours of primary stimulation. NFAT-regulated genes exhibited 
lower expression in UCB CD4+ T cells including the following:
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 3 (IL-3), IL-4,
IL-5, IL-13, IL-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha; CD25), CD40L, and macrophage
inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP-1alpha). Transcription factors involved in the 
NFAT pathway including C/EBPbeta, JunB, and Fosl1 (Fra-1), as well as Th1- and
Th2-related transcription factors STAT4 (signal transducers and activators of
transcription 4), T-bet, and c-maf showed reduced expression in UCB compared with
AB during primary stimulation. Reduced cytokine, chemokine, and receptor
expression was also found in UCB. Gene array data were confirmed using RNase
protection assays, flow cytometry, and quantitative multiplexed cytokine
measurements. Reduced global expression of NFAT-associated genes, as well as
cytokines and chemokines, in UCB CD4+ T cells may contribute to the decreased
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) observed after UCB transplantation.

PMID: 12946996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Clin Invest. 2003 Aug;112(4):535-43.

Dysregulated Sonic hedgehog signaling and medulloblastoma consequent to
IFN-alpha-stimulated STAT2-independent production of IFN-gamma in the brain.

Wang J(1), Pham-Mitchell N, Schindler C, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, SP315, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The type I IFNs (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta), which are crucial in antiviral defense 
and immune regulation, signal via the Janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway with activation of STAT1 and STAT2.
Here, the function of STAT2 was studied in transgenic mice (termed GIFN/STAT2-/-)
with CNS production of IFN-alpha. Surprisingly, GIFN/STAT2-/-, but not
GIFN/STAT1-null, transgenic mice, with CNS production of IFN-alpha, died
prematurely with medulloblastoma. An immune response also induced in the brain of
the GIFN/STAT2-/- mice was associated with IFN-gamma gene expression by CD3+ T
cells and the activation of the STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, and STAT5 molecules.
Expression of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the downstream transcriptional factor 
Gli-1 genes, implicated in the pathogenesis of medulloblastoma, was found to be
significantly increased and cotranscribed in cerebellar granule neurons of the
GIFN/STAT2-/- mice. IFN-gamma, but not IFN-alpha, induced STAT1-dependent
expression of the Shh gene in cultured cerebellar granule neurons. Thus, there is
an unexpected and extraordinarily adverse biological potency of IFN-alpha in the 
CNS when the primary signal transduction molecule STAT2 is absent. Moreover, a
hitherto unknown role is indicated for the immune system in the pathogenesis of
developmental disorders and tumorigenesis of the CNS via dysregulated Shh
signaling mediated by IFN-gamma.

PMCID: PMC171394
PMID: 12925694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. EMBO J. 2003 Aug 15;22(16):4237-48.

Distinct requirements for the naturally occurring splice forms Stat4alpha and
Stat4beta in IL-12 responses.

Hoey T(1), Zhang S, Schmidt N, Yu Q, Ramchandani S, Xu X, Naeger LK, Sun YL,
Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)4 is a signaling molecule 
required for normal responses to interleukin-12 (IL-12) and is critically
involved in inflammatory responses. We have isolated an alternatively spliced
isoform of Stat4, termed Stat4beta, which lacks 44 amino acids at the C-terminus,
encompassing the putative transcriptional activation domain. To assess the in
vivo roles of these Stat4 isoforms, we generated transgenic Stat4-deficient mice 
expressing Stat4alpha or Stat4beta. Our results indicate that T-cell-specific
expression of Stat4alpha or Stat4beta can mediate many aspects of IL-12 signaling
including the differentiation of Th1 cells. However, Stat4alpha is required for
normal levels of IL-12-induced interferon-gamma production from Th1 cells.
Microarray analysis identified 98 genes induced by both Stat4 isoforms, 32 genes 
induced only by Stat4alpha and 29 genes induced only by Stat4beta. Some induced
genes correlate with specific functions including the ability of Stat4beta, but
not Stat4alpha, to mediate IL-12-stimulated proliferation. Thus, Stat4alpha and
Stat4beta have distinct roles in mediating responses to IL-12.

PMCID: PMC175783
PMID: 12912921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 15;171(4):1816-24.

T cell-intrinsic requirement for NF-kappa B induction in postdifferentiation
IFN-gamma production and clonal expansion in a Th1 response.

Corn RA(1), Aronica MA, Zhang F, Tong Y, Stanley SA, Kim SR, Stephenson L,
Enerson B, McCarthy S, Mora A, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

NF-kappaB/Rel transcription factors are linked to innate immune responses and APC
activation. Whether and how the induction of NF-kappaB signaling in normal CD4(+)
T cells regulates effector function are not well-understood. The liberation of
NF-kappaB dimers from inhibitors of kappaB (IkappaBs) constitutes a central
checkpoint for physiologic regulation of most forms of NF-kappaB. To investigate 
the role of NF-kappaB induction in effector T cell responses, we targeted
inhibition of the NF-kappaB/Rel pathway specifically to T cells. The Th1 response
in vivo is dramatically weakened when T cells defective in their NF-kappaB
induction (referred to as IkappaBalpha(DeltaN) transgenic cells) are activated by
a normal APC population. Analyses in vivo, and IL-12-supplemented T cell cultures
in vitro, reveal that the mechanism underlying this T cell-intrinsic requirement 
for NF-kappaB involves activation of the IFN-gamma gene in addition to clonal
expansion efficiency. The role of NF-kappaB in IFN-gamma gene expression includes
a modest decrease in Stat4 activation, T box expressed in T cell levels, and
differentiation efficiency along with a more prominent postdifferentiation step. 
Further, induced expression of Bcl-3, a trans-activating IkappaB-like protein, is
decreased in T cells as a consequence of NF-kappaB inhibition. Together, these
findings indicate that NF-kappaB induction in T cells regulates efficient clonal 
expansion, Th1 differentiation, and IFN-gamma production by Th1 lymphocytes at a 
control point downstream from differentiation.

PMID: 12902482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Blood. 2003 Dec 1;102(12):4084-9. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

In human B cells, IL-12 triggers a cascade of molecular events similar to Th1
commitment.

Durali D(1), de Goër de Herve MG, Giron-Michel J, Azzarone B, Delfraissy JF,
Taoufik Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E-109, Faculté de Médecine Paris XI, 63 rue Gabriel Péri, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre Cedex, 94276 France.

Two functionally distinct subsets of B cells that produce Th1- and Th2-like
patterns of cytokines have recently been identified. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a 
critical immunoregulatory cytokine that promotes Th1 differentiation through
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). IL-12
has been reported to induce interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) production in B cells,
but the relevant signaling pathways are poorly documented. Here, in human primary
B cells, we found a functional IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) that internalizes
following IL-12 binding. IFN-gamma and, to a lesser extent, IL-12 positively
regulated the IL-12Rbeta2 subunit but had no effect on IL-12Rbeta1. On examining 
the effect of IL-12 on STAT4 and T-bet (2 key factors involved in IFN-gamma
promoter activation), we found that IL-12 induced the phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of STAT4. IL-12-dependent constitutive STAT4 activation was also
observed in the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B-cell line RPMI 8866 that
spontaneously produces IL-12. T-bet expression has been shown to be dependent on 
STAT1. IL-12 had no direct effect on STAT1 activation or T-bet expression in
primary B cells. In contrast, IL-12-induced IFN-gamma led to STAT1 activation,
strong expression of T-bet, and IFN-gamma expression. IL-12 therefore initiates a
cascade of events in B cells, including STAT4 activation, IL-12Rbeta2
up-regulation, IFN-gamma production, and T-bet up-regulation, potentially leading
to Th1-like differentiation.

PMID: 12893768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 1;171(3):1564-71.

Pivotal role of Stat4 and Stat6 in the pathogenesis of the lupus-like disease in 
the New Zealand mixed 2328 mice.

Jacob CO(1), Zang S, Li L, Ciobanu V, Quismorio F, Mizutani A, Satoh M, Koss M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

We have developed novel genetically lupus-prone (NZB x NZW)F(1)-derived congenic 
New Zealand mixed (NZM) 2328 lines, which are either Stat4- or Stat6-deficient.
Our studies show that the deficiency of Stat4 and Stat6 significantly alters the 
phenotype of the lupus-like disease in NZM 2328 congenic mice. Specifically,
Stat4-deficient NZM mice develop accelerated nephritis and increased mortality in
the absence of high levels of autoantibodies including anti-dsDNA Abs, and in the
presence of relatively reduced levels of IFN-gamma. In contrast, Stat6-deficient 
NZM mice display a significant reduction in incidence of kidney disease, with a
dramatic increase in survival, despite the presence of high levels of anti-dsDNA 
Abs. The lack of correlation between levels of these autoantibodies and kidney
disease raises the question of the direct cause-effect relationships between the 
presence of autoantibodies and kidney disease. Furthermore, these results also
question the apparent equation of the effect of Stat deficiency with loss of
secretion or response to particular cytokines.

PMID: 12874250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 1;171(3):1352-9.

Positive modulation of IL-12 signaling by sphingosine kinase 2 associating with
the IL-12 receptor beta 1 cytoplasmic region.

Yoshimoto T(1), Furuhata M, Kamiya S, Hisada M, Miyaji H, Magami Y, Yamamoto K,
Fujiwara H, Mizuguchi J.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
yoshimot@tokyo-med.ac.jp

IL-12 is a key immunoregulatory cytokine that promotes Th1 differentiation and
cell-mediated immune responses. IL-12 stimulation results in the activation of
Janus kinase 2 and tyrosine kinase 2 and, subsequently, STAT4 and STAT3. In
addition, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 6/p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathways have been recently
demonstrated to be activated by IL-12 and play an important role in IL-12
signaling. To further elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying IL-12
signaling, we have performed a yeast two-hybrid screening and identified mouse
sphingosine kinase 2 (SPHK2) as a molecule associating with the mouse IL-12Rbeta1
cytoplasmic region. Analyses of various mutants of each molecule revealed that
the region including the proline-rich domain in SPHK2 is probably responsible for
the binding to IL-12Rbeta1, while the regions including the carboxyl terminus and
Box II in the IL-12Rbeta1 cytoplasmic region appear to be involved in the binding
to SPHK2. Transient expression of wild-type SPHK2 in T cell hybridoma augmented
IL-12-induced STAT4-mediated transcriptional activation. Ectopic expression of
dominant-negative SPHK2 in Th1 cell clone significantly reduced IL-12-induced
IFN-gamma production, while that of wild-type SPHK2 enhanced it. In contrast, the
expression minimally affected IL-12-induced proliferation. A similar decrease in 
IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production was observed when dominant-negative SPHK2 was 
expressed in activated primary T cells using a retroviral expression system.
These results suggest that SPHK2 associates with the IL-12Rbeta1 cytoplasmic
region and probably plays a role in modulating IL-12 signaling.

PMID: 12874225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Nat Med. 2003 Aug;9(8):1047-54. Epub 2003 Jun 29.

SOCS-3 regulates onset and maintenance of T(H)2-mediated allergic responses.

Seki Y(1), Inoue H, Nagata N, Hayashi K, Fukuyama S, Matsumoto K, Komine O,
Hamano S, Himeno K, Inagaki-Ohara K, Cacalano N, O'Garra A, Oshida T, Saito H,
Johnston JA, Yoshimura A, Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biological Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, 2669 
Yamazaki, Noda City, Chiba 278-0022, Japan.

Members of the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family are involved in the
pathogenesis of many inflammatory diseases. SOCS-3 is predominantly expressed in 
T-helper type 2 (T(H)2) cells, but its role in T(H)2-related allergic diseases
remains to be investigated. In this study we provide a strong correlation between
SOCS-3 expression and the pathology of asthma and atopic dermatitis, as well as
serum IgE levels in allergic human patients. SOCS-3 transgenic mice showed
increased T(H)2 responses and multiple pathological features characteristic of
asthma in an airway hypersensitivity model system. In contrast, dominant-negative
mutant SOCS-3 transgenic mice, as well as mice with a heterozygous deletion of
Socs3, had decreased T(H)2 development. These data indicate that SOCS-3 has an
important role in regulating the onset and maintenance of T(H)2-mediated allergic
immune disease, and suggest that SOCS-3 may be a new therapeutic target for the
development of antiallergic drugs.

PMID: 12847520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 22;278(34):32471-7. Epub 2003 Jun 12.

STAT4 requires the N-terminal domain for efficient phosphorylation.

Chang HC(1), Zhang S, Oldham I, Naeger L, Hoey T, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, and the Walther Cancer Institute,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

STAT4 (signal transducer and activator of transcription-4) mediates biological
effects in response to interleukin-12 (IL-12). STAT4 has multiple domains that
have distinct functions in signaling and gene activation. To characterize the
role of the STAT4 N-terminal domain in mediating STAT4 biological function, we
have generated STAT4-deficient transgenic mice that express human full-length
STAT4 or an N-terminal deletion mutant (Delta N-STAT4) lacking the N-terminal 51 
amino acids. Whereas full-length STAT4 rescued IL-12 responsiveness, T
lymphocytes expressing the STAT4 N-terminal mutant failed to proliferate in
response to IL-12 and had limited Th1 cell development as evidenced by minimal
interferon-gamma production. Deletion of the N-terminal domain resulted in
failure of STAT4 to be phosphorylated following IL-12 stimulation despite similar
phosphorylation of JAK2 and TYK2 in full-length STAT4 and Delta N-STAT4
transgenic T cells. We demonstrate that the lack of phosphorylation in cultured
cells is due to reduced efficiency of phosphorylation of Delta N-STAT4 by Janus
kinases. These data support a new model wherein the N-terminal domain is required
to mediate the phosphorylation of STAT4 in addition to the previously documented 
role in gene transactivation.

PMID: 12805384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Clin Immunol. 2003 May;23(3):147-61.

Cytokines and transcription factors that regulate T helper cell differentiation: 
new players and new insights.

Agnello D(1), Lankford CS, Bream J, Morinobu A, Gadina M, O'Shea JJ, Frucht DM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Building 10,
Room 9N262, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1820, Bethesda, Maryland 20802-1820, USA.

The differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into subsets of T helper cells is a
pivotal process with major implications for host defense and the pathogenesis of 
immune-mediated diseases. Though the basic paradigm was discovered more than 15
years ago, new discoveries continue to be made that offer fresh insights into the
regulation of this process. T helper (TH)1 cells produce interferon (IFN)-gamma, 
promoting cell-mediated immunity and control of intracellular pathogens. We now
know that TH1 differentiation is regulated by transcription factors such as
T-bet, Stat1, and Stat4, as well as cytokines such as IL-12, IL-23, IL-27, type I
IFNs, and IFN-gamma. In contrast, TH2 cells produce IL-4, which promotes allergic
responses and is important in host defense against helminths. The transcription
factors Stat6, GATA-3, c-Maf, NFATs, and the cytokine IL-4 promote TH2
differentiation. These key regulators of TH differentiation are the subject of
this review.

PMID: 12797537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 1;170(11):5464-9.

IL-21 in synergy with IL-15 or IL-18 enhances IFN-gamma production in human NK
and T cells.

Strengell M(1), Matikainen S, Sirén J, Lehtonen A, Foster D, Julkunen I, Sareneva
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki,
Finland. mari.strengell@ktl.fi

NK and T cell-derived IFN-gamma is a key cytokine that stimulates innate immune
responses and directs adaptive T cell response toward Th1 type. IL-15, IL-18, and
IL-21 have significant roles as activators of NK and T cell functions. We have
previously shown that IL-15 and IL-21 induce the expression of IFN-gamma, T-bet, 
IL-12R beta 2, and IL-18R genes both in NK and T cells. Now we have studied the
effect of IL-15, IL-18, and IL-21 on IFN-gamma gene expression in more detail in 
human NK and T cells. IL-15 clearly activated IFN-gamma mRNA expression and
protein production in both cell types. IL-18 and IL-21 enhanced IL-15-induced
IFN-gamma gene expression. IL-18 or IL-21 alone induced a modest expression of
the IFN-gamma gene but a combination of IL-21 and IL-18 efficiently up-regulated 
IFN-gamma production. We also show that IL-15 activated the binding of STAT1,
STAT3, STAT4, and STAT5 to the regulatory sites of the IFN-gamma gene. Similarly,
IL-21 induced the binding of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4 to these elements. IL-15-
and IL-21-induced STAT1 and STAT4 activation was verified by immunoprecipitation 
with anti-phosphotyrosine Abs followed by Western blotting with anti-STAT1 and
anti-STAT4 Abs. IL-18 was not able to induce the binding of STATs to IFN-gamma
gene regulatory sites. IL-18, however, activated the binding of NF-kappa B to the
IFN-gamma promoter NF-kappa B site. Our results suggest that both IL-15 and IL-21
have an important role in activating the NK cell-associated innate immune
response.

PMID: 12759422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Immunol. 2003 May 15;170(10):5003-7.

IL-18 and IL-12 signal through the NF-kappa B pathway to induce NK-1R expression 
on T cells.

Weinstock JV(1), Blum A, Metwali A, Elliott D, Arsenescu R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. joel-weinstock@uiowa.edu

Substance P engages the T cell neurokinin 1 receptor (NK-1R) to enhance IFN-gamma
production. NK-1R on T cells is inducible. We studied mechanisms regulating T
cell NK-1R expression. Murine splenocytes were cultured for 4 h with or without
rIL-12 or rIL-18. Both IL-12 and IL-18 induced splenic T cells to express NK-1R
transcripts. Induction was blocked by actinomycin D, but not cycloheximide,
suggesting that protein synthesis was not required for initiation of NK-1R gene
transcription. Inhibition of T cell NF-kappa B activation or NF-kappa B nuclear
translocation also blocked NK-1R transcription. IL-12 and IL-18 strongly induce
NK-1R mRNA expression in splenocytes from Stat4(-/-) mice, suggesting that the
Stat4 pathway was not required for the induction of NK-1R transcription. Splenic 
T cells exposed to IL-12 or IL-18 in the presence of IL-10 expressed no NK-1R
mRNA. However, TGF beta did not prevent NK-1R mRNA expression. Thus, IL-12 and
IL-18 induce T cells to express NK-1R through NF-kappa B activation. IL-10, a
regulator of the Th1 response, blocks this activation. These data further suggest
that SP and NK-1R, which promote IFN-gamma synthesis, are part of the Th1 pathway
of immunity.

PMID: 12734344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Eur J Immunol. 2003 May;33(5):1152-62.

CD2 mediates activation of the IFN-gamma intronic STAT binding region in mucosal 
T cells.

Gonsky R(1), Deem RL, Young HA, Targan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

The pathways leading to activation of mucosal lamina propria (LP) T cells differ 
from those of peripheral T cells. LP T cells exhibit enhanced IFN-gamma secretion
when activated through the CD2 pathway. This study demonstrates CD2 signaling is 
followed by activation of STAT proteins in both peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) and lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMC), although, distinct
differences exist in regulation of IFN-gamma promoter gene expression. Both PBMC 
and LPMC exhibit enhanced secretion and transactivation of the -2.7 kb IFN-gamma 
promoter region following CD2 signaling, but the IFN-gamma STAT-binding region
(within the first intron) serves as an orientation-independent enhancer of
promoter activity only in LPMC. Mutation of the STAT site impairs enhancer
activity. In LPMC, but not PBMC, CD2 mediates binding of STAT1 and STAT4 to the
IFN-gamma intronic element. Unstimulated LMPC exhibit low levels of
phosphotyrosine-STAT4 and STAT1 and phosphoserine-STAT1, which increase
substantially following CD2 activation. In PBMC, CD2-mediated phosphorylation is 
primarily restricted to enhanced levels of phosphotyrosine-STAT1. Thus, these
results indicate that both common as well as unique molecular mechanisms are
involved in CD2 signaling and activation of the STAT pathway in LP T cells which 
are critical for regulation of IFN-gamma expression in the gut.

PMID: 12731040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Virol. 2003 May;77(10):5794-800.

Infection-triggered regulatory mechanisms override the role of STAT 4 in control 
of the immune response to influenza virus antigens.

Bot A(1), Rodrigo E, Wolfe T, Bot S, Von Herrath MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp., San Diego, California
92130, USA. abot@mannkindcorp.com

Accurate control of the balance of the T1 and T2 cells during antiviral immunity 
is essential for optimizing immune effector functions and for avoiding
potentially severe immunopathology. We examined the in vivo role of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 in regulating the T1/T2
balance during the response to live influenza virus and isolated viral proteins. 
We found that the differentiation of gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-producing Th1
and Tc1 cells after inoculation of live virus occurred independently of STAT 4
expression. Influenza virus-specific T2 and Tc2 responses were well controlled in
such STAT 4-deficient mice unless IFN-gamma was eliminated as well. In contrast, 
the STAT 4-dependent signaling pathway played a more essential role in regulating
the T1/T2 balance after immunization with viral proteins and, in particular,
inactivated nonreplicating virus. Pulmonary infection was cleared even in the
absence of both functional STAT 4 genes and functional IFN-gamma genes because
virus-neutralizing antibodies were still generated, consistent with a substantial
redundancy in different antiviral effector pathways. Thus, replicating agents
such as live influenza virus can elicit IFN-gamma and control T2 immunity
independently of STAT 4, whereas the profile of immunity to isolated proteins is 
more reliant on an intact STAT 4 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC154013
PMID: 12719572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):21327-30. Epub 2003 Apr 25.

PIASx is a transcriptional co-repressor of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4.

Arora T(1), Liu B, He H, Kim J, Murphy TL, Murphy KM, Modlin RL, Shuai K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of California-Los Angeles, 10833
Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1678, USA.

In response to interleukin 12 (IL-12) stimulation, a latent cytoplasmic
transcription factor, Stat4 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 4),
becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated and translocates into the nucleus where it binds 
to DNA to activate transcription. Cofactors that can directly bind and regulate
Stat4 activity have not been described. We report here that PIASx, a member of
the protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) family, is a negative regulator of
Stat4. PIASx becomes associated with Stat4 following IL-12 stimulation in vivo.
PIASx inhibits IL-12-stimulated and Stat4-dependent gene activation in human T
cells. PIASx does not inhibit the DNA binding activity of Stat4. Instead PIASx is
present in the Stat4-DNA binding complex. Finally the inhibitory activity of
PIASx on Stat4-mediated gene activation is abolished by the histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A. Our results suggest that PIASx may function as a
co-repressor of Stat4.

PMID: 12716907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2003 Aug;285(2):F319-25. Epub 2003 Apr 22.

Contrasting roles for STAT4 and STAT6 signal transduction pathways in murine
renal ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Yokota N(1), Burne-Taney M, Racusen L, Rabb H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Johns Hopkins Univ. School of Medicine, Rm. 970, 720
Rutland Ave., Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Recent data support a modulatory role for CD4 T cells in experimental renal
ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). CD4 T cells can functionally differentiate to 
either a Th1 (IFN-gamma producing) or the counterbalancing Th2 (IL-4) phenotype. 
The enzymes signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 4 and STAT6
regulate Th1 or Th2 differentiation and cytokine production, respectively. We
therefore hypothesized that mice that were STAT4 deficient would be protected
from renal IRI and that STAT6-deficient mice would have a more severe course.
Intracellular cytokine staining of splenocytes from STAT4-/- or STAT6-/-
exhibited distinct IFN-gamma and IL-4 cytokine expression profiles. STAT6-/- had 
markedly worse renal function and tubular injury postischemia compared with wild 
type. STAT4-/- had only mildly improved function. Renal phagocyte infiltration
and ICAM-1 upregulation were similar in STAT4-/-, STAT6-/-, and wild type. To
evaluate if the mechanism of the marked worsening in the STAT6-/- mice could be
due to IL-4 deficiency, IL-4-deficient mice were studied and had similar
postischemic phenotype to STAT6-/- mice. These data demonstrate that the STAT6
pathway has a major protective role in renal IRI. IL-4 deficiency is a likely
mechanism underlying the STAT6 effect. A "yin-yang" role for inflammation is
emerging in renal IRI, similar to recent observations in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12709397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Immunol. 2003 May 1;170(9):4818-25.

Differential contribution of IL-4 and STAT6 vs STAT4 to the development of lupus 
nephritis.

Singh RR(1), Saxena V, Zang S, Li L, Finkelman FD, Witte DP, Jacob CO.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Children's Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45220, USA.

Mechanisms that initiate lupus nephritis and cause progression to end-stage renal
disease remain poorly understood. In this study, we show that lupus-prone New
Zealand Mixed 2410 mice that develop a severe glomerulosclerosis and rapidly
progressive renal disease overexpress IL-4 in vivo. In these mice, STAT6
deficiency or anti-IL-4 Ab treatment decreases type 2 cytokine responses and
ameliorates kidney disease, particularly glomerulosclerosis, despite the presence
of high levels of IgG anti-dsDNA Abs. STAT4 deficiency, however, decreases type 1
and increases type 2 cytokine responses, and accelerates nephritis, in the
absence of high levels of IgG anti-dsDNA Abs. Thus, STAT6 and IL-4 may
selectively contribute to the development of glomerulosclerosis, whereas STAT4
may play a role in autoantibody production.

PMCID: PMC2291553
PMID: 12707364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Microbes Infect. 2003 Apr;5(4):241-9.

IL-12Rbeta2-deficient mice of a genetically resistant background are susceptible 
to Leishmania major infection and develop a parasite-specific Th2 immune
response.

Chakir H(1), Campos-Neto A, Mojibian M, Webb JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1H 8M5.

The cytokine IL-12 plays a critical role in inducing the production of IFN-gamma 
from T and NK cells and in the polarization of T cells towards the Th1 phenotype.
IL-12 is comprised of two subunits (IL-12p40 and IL-12p35) that together form the
biologically active p70 molecule, and IL-12 functions via binding to a
heterodimeric receptor (IL-12Rbeta1 and IL-12Rbeta2). Previous studies utilizing 
mice deficient for either the IL-12 cytokine or the IL-12-induced signaling
molecule STAT4 have established a critical role for IL-12 during infection with
Leishmania major. However, these studies warrant careful re-interpretation in
light of the recent discovery of the IL-12-related cytokine, IL-23, which
utilizes the IL-12p40 chain in combination with an IL-12p35-related molecule,
called p19, and a receptor comprised of the IL-12Rbeta1 chain plus a unique chain
referred to as IL-23R. We analyzed the course of L. major infection in mice
deficient for the IL-12-specific IL-12Rbeta2 subunit in order to assess the role 
of IL-12 signaling without disruption of the IL-23 pathway. After infection with 
L. major, IL-12Rbeta2KO mice of a resistant background (C57Bl/6) developed large 
cutaneous lesions similar to those developed by susceptible BALB/c mice. Draining
lymph node cells from L. major-infected IL-12Rbeta2KO mice released the Th2
cytokines IL-4 and IL-5 after in vitro stimulation with Leishmania lysate but
were completely devoid of IFN-gamma, consistent with a default towards a strong
parasite-specific Th2 response. L. major-infected IL-12Rbeta2KO mice were also
devoid of parasite-specific IgG2a antibodies, and interestingly, their footpad
lesions ulcerated earlier than those of susceptible BALB/c mice.

PMID: 12706437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Blood. 2003 Aug 1;102(3):1042-50. Epub 2003 Apr 10.

Mycosis fungoides shows concurrent deregulation of multiple genes involved in the
TNF signaling pathway: an expression profile study.

Tracey L(1), Villuendas R, Dotor AM, Spiteri I, Ortiz P, Garcia JF, Peralto JL,
Lawler M, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas,
Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3 Madrid 28029, Spain.

Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most frequent type of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma,
whose diagnosis and study is hampered by its morphologic similarity to
inflammatory dermatoses (ID) and the low proportion of tumoral cells, which often
account for only 5% to 10% of the total tissue cells. cDNA microarray studies
using the CNIO OncoChip of 29 MF and 11 ID cases revealed a signature of 27 genes
implicated in the tumorigenesis of MF, including tumor necrosis factor receptor
(TNFR)-dependent apoptosis regulators, STAT4, CD40L, and other oncogenes and
apoptosis inhibitors. Subsequently a 6-gene prediction model was constructed that
is capable of distinguishing MF and ID cases with unprecedented accuracy. This
model correctly predicted the class of 97% of cases in a blind test validation
using 24 MF patients with low clinical stages. Unsupervised hierarchic clustering
has revealed 2 major subclasses of MF, one of which tends to include more
aggressive-type MF cases including tumoral MF forms. Furthermore, signatures
associated with abnormal immunophenotype (11 genes) and tumor stage disease (5
genes) were identified.

PMID: 12689942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Apr;33(4):1105-16.

Kinetics and STAT4- or STAT6-mediated regulation of genes involved in lymphocyte 
polarization to Th1 and Th2 cells.

Lund RJ(1), Ylikoski EK, Aittokallio T, Nevalainen O, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Center for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi, Turku,
Finland. riikka.lund@btk.utu.fi

Many genes implicated in Th1 and Th2 differentiation have been identified in both
human and mouse. However, the functional roles and hierarchy of these factors in 
the signaling pathways leading to either Th1 or Th2 responses are less clear. To 
explore at which stage of polarization the differences between Th1 and Th2 cells 
occur, we have studied the expression of 23 key genes implicated in the process
during the first week of polarization from human precursor T helper cells using
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR. According to our results, 14 of
the genes were clearly regulated differentially in Th1 and Th2 conditions in
distinct time-dependent patterns, either during the first 2 days or after 1 week 
of polarization. Furthermore, 6 of these genes were identified to be targets of
STAT4/6 regulation. Thus, for the first time we demonstrate expression kinetics
of a number of key genes involved in Th1 and Th2 differentiation during the first
week of polarization in both human and mouse. In addition, our study shows for
the first time that the genes BCL-6 and TRADD are differentially regulated during
the polarization of human Th1 and Th2 cells.

PMID: 12672077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Hepatology. 2003 Apr;37(4):771-80.

Role of type 1 versus type 2 immune responses in liver during the onset of
chronic woodchuck hepatitis virus infection.

Wang Y(1), Menne S, Jacob JR, Tennant BC, Gerin JL, Cote PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
wangy8@georgetown.edu

Immune response messenger RNAs (mRNA) were compared in liver during self-limited 
(resolved) and chronic neonatal woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) infection. At
week 14 postinfection (mid-acute phase), mRNAs for leukocyte markers (CD3, CD4,
CD8), type 1 cytokines and related transcription factors (IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha,
STAT4, T-bet), and IL-10 were increased in livers from resolving infections, but 
mRNAs of other type 1 (IL-2) and type 2 (IL-4, STAT6, and GATA3 markers remained 
at baseline levels. Increased coexpression of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha mRNAs
correlated in most cases with lower levels of intrahepatic WHV covalently closed 
circular DNA (cccDNA). At the same time point postinfection, livers from
woodchucks that eventually progressed to chronic infection had baseline or
slightly elevated levels of CD and type 1 mRNAs, which were significantly lower
(or elevated less frequently) compared with resolving woodchucks. Earlier, at
week 8, there were no differences between the two outcome settings. During these 
early time points and at a later stage in chronic infection (15 months), type 2
mRNAs in carrier liver remained at baseline levels or, when elevated, were never 
in excess of those in resolving woodchucks. In conclusion, the onset and
maintenance of neonatal chronic WHV infection are not associated with
antagonistic type 2 immunoregulation of type 1 responses in liver. Accordingly,
chronicity develops in association with a primary deficiency in the intrahepatic 
CD responses, especially involving CD8(+) T lymphocytes, and in both
extracellular (cytokine) and intracellular (transcriptional) type 1 response
mediators. This has relevant implications for future treatment of chronic
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in humans.

PMID: 12668969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Neuroimmunol. 2003 Apr;137(1-2):154-63.

IFN-gamma up-regulation of IL-12 beta 2 receptor is associated with experimental 
autoimmune uveitis susceptible B10.A mice, but not in EAU resistant BALB/c mice.

Wu Y(1), Lin Y, Hou W, Wang Y, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai, 200031, PR China.

IFN-gamma production is a hallmark of Th1 response, and IFN-gamma has multiple
roles in Th1 development, depending on the experimental conditions. In this
study, the correlation between IFN-gamma and interleukin 12 receptor beta2
(IL-12R beta 2) expression was investigated in experimental autoimmune uveitis
(EAU) susceptible B10.A and resistant BALB/c mice. B10.A mice expressed high
IL-12R beta 2 on T cells either in the disease target eyes or draining lymph node
cells (LNC), and its expression correlated with the Th1-type response. In
contrast, BALB/c mice only expressed minimal IL-12R beta 2 in draining LNC and
had lower Th1-response. B10.A mice produced more IFN-gamma and generated a higher
number of Th1 cells than that of BALB/c in the draining LNC. Furthermore, IL-12R 
beta 2 expression and STAT4 signaling were inhibited by anti-IFN-gamma mAb in the
cultured draining LNC from B10.A mice, but enhanced by adding exogenous IFN-gamma
in the cultured cells from BALB/c mice. The IL-12R beta 2 expression on Th1 cells
from draining LNC was increased in the presence of IL-12 and IFN-gamma. In
conclusion, IFN-gamma production correlated with IL-12R beta 2 expression on
Th1-cells and IFN-gamma had a potential to regulate IL-12R beta 2 expression in
vivo. This regulatory mechanism might be involved in EAU induction.

PMID: 12667660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):2002-8.

Resistance to acute babesiosis is associated with interleukin-12- and gamma
interferon-mediated responses and requires macrophages and natural killer cells.

Aguilar-Delfin I(1), Wettstein PJ, Persing DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

We examined the role of the cytokines gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) and
interleukin-12 (IL-12) in the model of acute babesiosis with the WA1 Babesia.
Mice genetically deficient in IFN-gamma-mediated responses (IFNGR2KO mice) and
IL-12-mediated responses (Stat4KO mice) were infected with the WA1 Babesia, and
observations were made on the course of infection and cytokine responses. Levels 
of IFN-gamma and IL-12 in serum increased 24 h after parasite inoculation. The
augmented susceptibility observed in IFNGR2KO and Stat-4KO mice suggests that the
early IL-12- and IFN-gamma-mediated responses are involved in protection against 
acute babesiosis. Resistance appears to correlate with an increase in nitric
oxide (NO) production. In order to assess the contribution of different cell
subsets to resistance against the parasite, we also studied mice lacking B cells,
CD4+ T cells, NK cells, and macrophages. Mice genetically deficient in B
lymphocytes or CD4+ T lymphocytes were able to mount protective responses
comparable to those of immunosufficient mice. In contrast, in vivo depletion of
macrophages or NK cells resulted in elevated susceptibility to the infection. Our
observations suggest that a crucial part of the response that protects from the
pathogenic Babesia WA1 is mediated by macrophages and NK cells, probably through 
early production of IL-12 and IFN-gamma, and induction of macrophage-derived
effector molecules like NO.

PMCID: PMC152030
PMID: 12654819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Immunity. 2003 Mar;18(3):415-28.

GATA-3 suppresses Th1 development by downregulation of Stat4 and not through
effects on IL-12Rbeta2 chain or T-bet.

Usui T(1), Nishikomori R, Kitani A, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. wstrober@niaid.nih.gov

To further understand the interaction among GATA-3, Stat4, and T-bet in helper T 
cell development, we first showed that retroviral expression of GATA-3 in
developing Th1 cells suppresses Th1 development through downregulation of Stat4
rather through downregulation of the IL-12Rbeta2 chain. Correspondingly, Stat4
levels are greatly suppressed during physiological Th2 development. Then, using
cells doubly infected with GFP- and YFP-expressing retroviruses, we showed that
retroviral GATA-3 expression in developing Th1 cells does not block Th1
development in cells coexpressing Stat4 but does so in cells coexpressing T-bet. 
Finally, we showed that retroviral Stat4 expression could facilitate Th2-->Th1
conversion in cells bearing an IL-12Rbeta2 transgene, even in cells lacking
T-bet. These findings reassert that Stat4 signaling is a central element of
Th1/Th2 development.

PMID: 12648458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Immunol. 2003 Apr 1;170(7):3859-65.

STAT4 signal pathways regulate inflammation and airway physiology changes in
allergic airway inflammation locally via alteration of chemokines.

Raman K(1), Kaplan MH, Hogaboam CM, Berlin A, Lukacs NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Mice homozygous for the STAT4-null mutation were sensitized to cockroach Ag,
challenged intratracheally 21 days later, and compared with STAT4-competent
allergic mice. The STAT4(-/-) mice showed significant decreases in airway
hyperreactivity (AHR) and peribronchial eosinophils compared with wild-type
controls. In addition, pulmonary levels of chemokines were decreased in the
STAT4(-/-) mice, including CC chemokine ligand (CCL)5, CCL6, CCL11, and CCL17.
However, levels of Th2-type cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-13, as well as serum
IgE levels were similar in the two groups. Transfer of splenic lymphocytes from
sensitized wild-type mice into sensitized STAT4(-/-) mice did not restore AHR in 
the mutant mice. Furthermore, chemokine production and peribronchial eosinophilia
were not restored during the cellular transfer experiments. Thus, it appears that
STAT4 expression contributes to a type 2 process such as allergen-induced
chemokine production and AHR. In additional studies, competent allergic mice were
treated with anti-IL-12 locally in the airways at the time of allergen
rechallenge. These latter studies also demonstrated a decrease in AHR.
Altogether, these data suggest that STAT4-mediated pathways play a role locally
within the airway for the exacerbation of the allergen-induced responses.

PMID: 12646654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Int Immunopharmacol. 2003 Mar;3(3):365-73.

Suppressive effect of a traditional Japanese medicine, Hachimi-jio-gan
(Ba-Wei-Di-Huang-Wan), on the hyperresponsiveness to IL-18 in autoimmune
MRL/MPJ-lpr/lpr mice.

Furuya Y(1), Kawakita T, Nomoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Development and Pharmacology, Kanebo Kampo and
Healthcare Research Laboratories, 3-1, Kanebo-machi, Takaoka 933-0856, Japan.
yuri_funya@yahoo.co.jp

Oral administration of Hachimi-jio-gan (HMG, Ba-Wei-Di-Huang-Wan), a traditional 
Japanese herbal medicine, for several weeks, ameliorates some autoimmune symptoms
of MRL/lpr mice. In the short time treatment for 9 days, hyperresponsiveness of
mesenteric lymph node (MLN) cells to interleukin (IL)-18 manifested by the
proliferation or the production of interferon (IFN)-gamma was significantly
suppressed. Additionally, the treatment with HMG suppressed the expressions of
IL-18Ralpha and IL-18Rbeta mRNA in CD45R(-) T cells, and also the expression of
IL-18Ralpha mRNA in unpurified whole cells. Although the short treatment with HMG
had no effect on the mRNA expressions of IL-10, IL-12 and IL-18, or the
phosphorelated signal transducer and activator transcription (STAT)4 protein
level in CD45R(-) MLN cells, the IL-4 mRNA expression or the phosphorelated STAT6
protein level were up-regulated by HMG, and the IL-4 mRNA up-regulation was
clearer in whole cells than CD45R(-) cells. Furthermore, the treatment with HMG
promoted the mRNA expression of invariant Valpha14 TCR that is uniquely expressed
on NKT cells. Valpha14 NKT cells can produce large amount of IL-4 and play a
crucial role in controlling the development of MRL/lpr mouse autoimmune disease. 
Therefore, these results suggested that HMG reduced the hyperresponsiveness of
MRL/lpr mouse MLN cells to IL-18 through the reduction of IL-18Rs caused by
Valpha14 NKT cell-produced IL-4, and consequently HMG suppressed the development 
of MRL/lpr autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 12639814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Blood. 2003 Jul 1;102(1):207-14. Epub 2003 Mar 13.

IL-4 synergistically enhances both IL-2- and IL-12-induced IFN-gamma expression
in murine NK cells.

Bream JH(1), Curiel RE, Yu CR, Egwuagu CE, Grusby MJ, Aune TM, Young HA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Building 560, Room 31-23, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.
breamj@mail.nih.gov

Interleukin-4 (IL-4) is thought to influence T and natural killer (NK) cells by
down-regulating T helper 1 (Th1)-type cytokines like interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma). While investigating IL-4 regulation of IFN-gamma expression, we
found that IL-4 synergized with IL-2 or IL-12 to enhance IFN-gamma production and
mRNA expression in spleen-derived, IL-2-cultured NK cells, as well as negatively 
sorted fresh DX5+/CD3- NK cells albeit at lower levels. The positive effect of
IL-4 on IL-2-induced IFN-gamma production was dependent upon signal transducer
and activator of transcription 6 (Stat6) because this response was virtually
abrogated in Stat6-/- mice. Notably, though, IL-12 plus IL-4 synergy on IFN-gamma
expression was intact in Stat6-/- mice. In exploring possible molecular
mechanisms to account for the synergistic effects of IL-4 on murine NK cells, we 
found that IL-2 plus IL-4 stimulation resulted in a modest increase in tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5, while IL-12 plus IL-4 treatment resulted in a more
substantial increase in tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat4. Finally, to identify
regions of the IFN-gamma promoter that may be involved, NK cells from human
IFN-gamma promoter/luciferase transgenic mice were treated with cytokines. NK
cells from proximal (-110 to +64) promoter region mice did not respond to
cytokine stimulation; however, the intact -565 to +64 IFN-gamma promoter
responded synergistically to IL-2 plus IL-4 and to IL-12 plus IL-4 in NK cells.
These data demonstrate a role for IL-4 in enhancing IFN-gamma expression in
murine NK cells that is partially dependent on Stat6 in IL-2 costimulation and
completely independent of Stat6 in IL-12 costimulations.

PMID: 12637316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):16777-81. Epub 2003 Mar 3.

Constitutive STAT3 activation in intestinal T cells from patients with Crohn's
disease.

Lovato P(1), Brender C, Agnholt J, Kelsen J, Kaltoft K, Svejgaard A, Eriksen KW, 
Woetmann A, Ødum N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, the Panum Institute,
University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Via cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways, cytokines induce a variety of
biological responses and modulate the outcome of inflammatory diseases and
malignancies. Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease of unknown 
etiology. Perturbation of the intestinal cytokine homeostasis is believed to play
a pivotal role, but the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease is not fully understood. 
Here, we study intestinal T cells from Crohn's disease and healthy volunteers. We
show that STAT3 and STAT4 are constitutively activated in Crohn's patients but
not in healthy volunteers. The activation is specific, because other STAT
proteins are not constitutively activated. Furthermore, the STAT3 regulated
protein, SOCS3, is also constitutively expressed in Crohn's patients but not in
healthy volunteers. Taken together, these data provide evidence of abnormal
STAT/SOCS signaling in Crohn's disease. This aberrant activation, so far noted
only in malignant cells, establish a new critical approach for better
understanding the immunopathogenesis of Crohn's disease.

PMID: 12615922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Jan;33(1):243-51.

Differential requirements for JAK2 and TYK2 in T cell proliferation and IFN-gamma
production induced by IL-12 alone or together with IL-18.

Sugimoto N(1), Nakahira M, Ahn HJ, Micallef M, Hamaoka T, Kurimoto M, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan.

IL-12 activates TYK2 and Janus kinase (JAK)-2 to induce the phosphorylation of
various signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins.
However, little is known regarding how these JAK exhibit the distinct biological 
effects of IL-12. Using two JAK inhibitors, tyrphostin A1 (A1) for TYK2 and
tyrphostin B42 (B42) for JAK2, we investigated the involvement of JAK2 and TYK2
in IL-12-induced T cell proliferation and IFN-gamma production. B42, but not A1, 
inhibited T cell proliferation along with down-regulation of IL-12-induced c-Myc 
expression and STAT5 phosphorylation. In contrast, A1 but not B42 inhibited
STAT4/STAT3 phosphorylation and IFN-gamma production. IL-18, but not IL-12,
induced activator protein-1 (AP-1) responsible for high levels of IFN-gamma
promoter activation. However, this IL-18 effect depended on the interaction of
AP-1 with STAT4. A1 prevented AP-1 binding by inhibiting STAT4 involvement and
down-regulated synergistic IFN-gamma promoter activation. These results indicate 
that JAK2 activation is required for IL-12-mediated T cell growth, whereas the
TYK2-STAT4 signaling pathway is critical for IFN-gamma expression that is
mediated by IL-12 alone and enhanced synergistically by combination with IL-18.

PMID: 12594853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):16198-208. Epub 2003 Feb 19.

The oncogenic fusion protein-tyrosine kinase ZNF198/fibroblast growth factor
receptor-1 has signaling function comparable with interleukin-6 cytokine
receptors.

Baumann H(1), Kunapuli P, Tracy E, Cowell JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. heinz.baumann@roswellpark.org

The reciprocal t(8;13) chromosome translocation results in a fusion gene (FUS) in
which the N-terminal half of the zinc finger protein ZNF198 is combined with the 
cytoplasmic domain of the fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1). Expression
of FUS is suggested to provide growth-promoting activity to myeloid cells similar
to the activity of hematopoietic cytokine receptors. This study determined the
specificity of FUS to activate signal transduction pathways. Because no tumor
cell line expressing FUS was available, the mode of FUS action was identified in 
cells transiently and stably transfected with an expression vector for FUS. FUS
acted as a constitutively active protein-tyrosine kinase and mediated
phosphorylation of STAT1, 3, and 5 but not STAT4 and 6. The same specificity but 
lower activity was determined for normal FGFR1. STAT activation by FUS, similar
to that by interleukin-6-type cytokines, promoted STAT-specific induction of
genes. The functionality of FUS, as well as the relative recruitment of STAT
isoforms, was determined by the dimerizing function of the zinc finger domain.
Replacement of the ZNF198 portion by the Bcr portion as present in the t(8;22)
translocation shifted the signaling toward a more prominent STAT5 activation.
This study documents that both gene partners forming the fusion oncogene define
the activity and the signaling specificity of the protein-tyrosine kinase of
FGFR1.

PMID: 12594223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Immunol. 2003 Feb 15;170(4):1958-63.

CD4+ T cells mediate abscess formation in intra-abdominal sepsis by an
IL-17-dependent mechanism.

Chung DR(1), Kasper DL, Panzo RJ, Chitnis T, Grusby MJ, Sayegh MH, Tzianabos AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2003 Apr 15;170(8):4411. Chtinis, T [corrected to Chitnis, T].

Abscess formation associated with intra-abdominal sepsis causes severe morbidity 
and can be fatal. Previous studies have implicated T cells in the pathogenesis of
abscess formation, and we have recently shown that CD4(+) T cells activated in
vitro by zwitterionic capsular polysaccharides from abscess-inducing bacteria
such as Staphylococcus aureus and Bacteroides fragilis initiate this host
response when transferred to naive rats. In this study, we show that mice
deficient in alphabetaTCR-bearing T cells or CD4(+) T cells fail to develop
abscesses following challenge with B. fragilis or abscess-inducing zwitterionic
polysaccharides, compared with CD8(-/-) or wild-type animals. Transfer of CD4(+) 
T cells from wild-type mice to alphabetaTCR(-/-) animals reconstituted this
ability. The induction of abscesses required T cell costimulation via the CD28-B7
pathway, and T cell transfer experiments with STAT4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) mice
demonstrated that this host response is dependent on STAT4 signaling.
Significantly higher levels of IL-17, a proinflammatory cytokine produced almost 
exclusively by activated CD4(+) T cells, were associated with abscess formation
in Th2-impaired (STAT6(-/-)) mice, while STAT4(-/-) mice had significantly lower 
levels of this cytokine than control animals. The formation of abscesses was
preceded by an increase in the number of activated CD4(+) T cells in the
peritoneal cavity 24 h following bacterial challenge. Confocal laser-scanning
microscopy analysis revealed that CD4(+) T cells comprise the abscess wall in
these animals and produce IL-17 at this site. Administration of a neutralizing Ab
specific for IL-17 prevented abscess formation following bacterial challenge in
mice. These data delineate the specific T cell response necessary for the
development of intra-abdominal abscesses and underscore the role of IL-17 in this
disease process.

PMID: 12574364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Immunol. 2003 Feb 15;170(4):1870-6.

Stat signals release activated naive Th cells from an anergic checkpoint.

Mohrs M(1), Lacy DA, Locksley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Medicine, University of
California-San Francisco, 521 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0654,
USA.

Activation of naive Th lymphocytes by the TCR and the costimulatory molecule,
CD28, is believed to provide competent signals for differentiation to effector
cells. Such activated cells proliferated and expressed IL-2, but arrested in an
immature state maintained by CTLA-4. Although unresponsive to restimulation by
TCR/CD28 alone, restimulation with TCR/CD28 and either Stat4- or Stat6-mediated
cytokine signals rescued cells to proliferate and differentiate to the
appropriately matched canonical Th subsets. Addition of IL-4 at defined periods
revealed that naive T cells were receptive to IL-4-mediated differentiation for
up to 3 days after their initial priming. A Stat-dependent anergic checkpoint
between clonal expansion and effector cell differentiation may defer the cytokine
profile to be instructed at the site of infection, thus preventing the
unregulated development of potentially damaging effector cells.

PMID: 12574353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Eur J Immunol. 2002 Nov;32(11):3206-15.

Control of New World cutaneous leishmaniasis is IL-12 independent but STAT4
dependent.

Buxbaum LU(1), Uzonna JE, Goldschmidt MH, Scott P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Leishmania mexicana, a New World protozoan parasite, induces small, chronic, but 
non-progressive lesions in C57BL/6 (B6) mice. In this study we investigated the
role of IL-12, and subsequent Th1 factors, in controlling cutaneous L. mexicana
infection. IL-12 treatment failed to promote disease resolution, suggesting that 
the inability of mice to heal is not related to a deficiency of endogenous IL-12 
production. Surprisingly, L. mexicana-induced cutaneous lesions in wild-type and 
IL-12p40-deficient mice were indistinguishable, with similar parasite burdens,
immune responses, and lesion histopathology. In contrast, iNOS, IFN-gamma, and
STAT4-deficient mice developed progressive disease and uncontrolled parasite
growth. These results differ dramatically from L. major infection, in which
IL-12p40-deficient mice are highly susceptible, with very rapid lesion growth,
very large parasite burdens, and the development of a strong Th2 response. These 
data uncover the existence of an alternate IFN-gamma and iNOS pathway for control
of Leishmania lesions, which is IL-12 independent, but which unexpectedly
requires STAT4.

PMID: 12555666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Hepatology. 2003 Feb;37(2):296-303.

Stat4 and Stat6 signaling in hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice: HO-1
dependence of Stat4 disruption-mediated cytoprotection.

Shen XD(1), Ke B, Zhai Y, Gao F, Anselmo D, Lassman CR, Busuttil RW,
Kupiec-Weglinski JW.

Author information: 
(1)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation,
Department of Surgery, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury remains an important problem in clinical organ 
transplantation. There is growing evidence that T lymphocytes, and activated CD4+
T cells in particular, play a key role in hepatic I/R injury. This study analyzes
the role of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (Stat4) and Stat6 
signaling in liver I/R injury. Using a partial lobar warm ischemia model, groups 
of wild-type (WT), T cell-deficient, Stat4-/Stat6-deficient knockout (KO) mice
were assessed for the extent/severity of I/R injury. Ninety minutes of warm
ischemia followed by 6 hours of reperfusion induced a fulminant liver failure in 
WT and Stat6 KO mice, as assessed by hepatocellular damage (serum alanine
aminotransferase [sALT] levels), neutrophil accumulation (myeloperoxidase [MPO]
activity) and histology (Suzuki scores). In contrast, T cell deficiency (nu/nu
mice) or disruption of Stat4 signaling (Stat4 KO mice) reduced I/R insult. Unlike
adoptive transfer of WT or Stat6-deficient T cells, infusion of Stat4-deficient T
cells failed to restore hepatic I/R injury and prevented tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-alpha) production in nu/nu mice. Diminished TNF-alpha/Th1-type
cytokine messenger RNA (mRNA)/protein elaborations patterns, along with
overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)-accompanied hepatic cytoprotection in
Stat4 KO recipients. In contrast, HO-1 depression restored hepatic injury in
otherwise I/R resistant Stat4 KOs. In conclusion, Stat4 signaling is required
for, whereas Stat4 disruption protects against, warm hepatic I/R injury in mice. 
The cytoprotection rendered by Stat4 disruption remains HO-1-dependent.

PMID: 12540779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Protein Sci. 2003 Feb;12(2):361-5.

A reinterpretation of the dimerization interface of the N-terminal domains of
STATs.

Chen X(1), Bhandari R, Vinkemeier U, Van Den Akker F, Darnell JE Jr, Kuriyan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas,
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The crystal structures of the N-terminal domain (N-domain) and the core region of
the STAT family of transcription factors have been determined previously. STATs
can form cooperative higher order structures (tetramers or higher oligomers)
while bound to DNA. The crystal packing in the STAT4 N-domain crystal structure, 
determined at 1.5 A resolution, suggests two alternate organizations of the
N-domain dimer. We now present the results of site directed mutagenesis of
residues predicted to be involved at each dimer interface. Our results indicate
that the dimer interface suggested earlier as being physiologically relevant is, 
in fact, unlikely to be so. Given the alternative model for the N-domain dimer,
the ability of the N-domain to mediate interactions of two STAT dimers on DNA
remains unchanged.

PMCID: PMC2312425
PMID: 12538899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Jan;73(1):49-56.

A unique role for IL-23 in promoting cellular immunity.

Lankford CS(1), Frucht DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Division of Monoclonal Antibodies, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Recent discoveries of interleukin (IL)-23, its receptor, and its
signal-transduction pathway add to our understanding of cellular immunity. IL-23 
is a heterodimer, comprising IL-12 p40 and the recently cloned IL-23-specific p19
subunit. IL-23 uses many of the same signal-transduction components as IL-12,
including IL-12Rbeta1, Janus kinase 2, Tyk2, signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)1, Stat3, Stat4, and Stat5. This may explain the similar
actions of IL-12 and IL-23 in promoting cellular immunity by inducing
interferon-gamma production and proliferative responses in target cells.
Additionally, both cytokines promote the T helper cell type 1 costimulatory
function of antigen-presenting cells. IL-23 does differ from IL-12 in the T cell 
subsets that it targets. Whereas IL-12 acts on naïve CD4+ T cells, IL-23
preferentially acts on memory CD4+ T cells. This review summarizes recent
advances regarding IL-23, providing a functional and mechanistic basis for the
unique niche that IL-23 occupies in cellular immunity.

PMID: 12525561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Blood. 2003 May 1;101(9):3741-8. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Ligation of OX40 (CD134) regulates graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and graft
rejection in allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients.

Blazar BR(1), Sharpe AH, Chen AI, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Lees C, Akiba H, Yagita
H, Killeen N, Taylor PA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division
of Bone Marrow Transplantation, Minneapolis, MN, USA. blaza001@tc.umn.edu

OX40 (CD134) is expressed on activated T cells; its ligand, OX40 ligand (OX40L)
is expressed on dendritic cells, B cells, and activated endothelial cells. To
determine how OX40-OX40L interaction affects graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), we
used antagonistic anti-OX40L monoclonal antibody (mAb) or OX40(-/-) donor or
OX40L(-/-) recipient mice. Similar degrees of GVHD reduction were observed with
each approach. Despite the fact that OX40 is up-regulated on both CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells isolated during GVHD, the major effects of OX40 ligation were on
CD4(+) and not CD8(+) T-cell-mediated alloresponses as assessed in both GVHD and 
engraftment model systems. GVHD inhibition by blockade of the OX40/OX40L pathway 
did not require CD28 signaling. Some studies have indicated OX40 is essential for
inducing T-helper type 2 (Th2) responses. However, in vivo blockade of OX40-OX40L
interactions reduced GVHD mortality induced by either signal transducer and
activator of transcription-6(-/-) (Stat-6(-/-)) (Th2-defective) or Stat-4(-/-)
(Th1-defective) major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-disparate splenocytes,
indicating that the GVHD-ameliorating effects did not require Stat-4 or Stat-6
signaling. Although OX40L has been reported to be expressed on activated T cells,
no effects on GVHD were observed when OX40L(-/-) versus OX40L(+/+) T cells were
infused in different models. These data provide insights as to the mechanisms
responsible for OX40/OX40L regulation of GVHD.

PMID: 12521997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):300-7.

Activated STAT4 and a functional role for IL-12 in human Peyer's patches.

Monteleone G(1), Holloway J, Salvati VM, Pender SL, Fairclough PD, Croft N,
MacDonald TT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection, Inflammation, and Repair, University of Southampton
School of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.

T cells in the Peyer's patches (PP) of the human ileum are exposed to a myriad of
dietary and bacterial Ags from the gut lumen. Recall proliferative responses to
common dietary Ags are readily demonstrable by PP T cells from healthy
individuals, and the cytokine response is dominated by IFN-gamma. Consistent with
Th1 skewing, PP cells spontaneously secrete IL-12p70, and IL-12p40 protein can be
visualized underneath the PP dome epithelium. In this study, we have analyzed
IL-12 signaling in PP and investigated whether IL-12 plays a functional role.
CD3+ T lymphocytes isolated from PP and adjacent ileal mucosa spontaneously
secrete IFN-gamma with negligible IL-4 or IL-5. RNA transcripts for IL-12Rbeta2, 
the signaling component of the IL-12R, are present in purified CD4+ and CD8+ T PP
lymphocytes. Active STAT4, a transcription factor essential for IL-12-mediated
Th1 differentiation, is readily detectable in biopsies from PP and ileal mucosa
and STAT4-DNA binding activity is demonstrable by EMSA. Nuclear proteins from
CD3+ T PP lymphocytes contain STAT4 and T-bet, a transcription factor selectively
expressed in Th1 cells. Stimulation of freshly isolated PP cells with
staphylococcal enterotoxin B dramatically enhanced the production of IFN-gamma,
an effect which was largely inhibited by neutralizing anti-IL-12 Ab. These data
show that IL-12 in human PP is likely to be responsible for the Th1-dominated
cytokine response of the human mucosal immune system.

PMID: 12496413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biomol NMR. 2002 Oct;24(2):143-8.

Breaking symmetry in the structure determination of (large) symmetric protein
dimers.

Gaponenko V(1), Altieri AS, Li J, Byrd RA.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biophysics Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, PO Box B,
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

We demonstrate a novel methodology to disrupt the symmetry in the NMR spectra of 
homodimers. A paramagnetic probe is introduced sub-stoichiometrically to create
an asymmetric system with the paramagnetic probe residing on only one monomer
within the dimer. This creates sufficient magnetic anisotropy for resolution of
symmetry-related overlapped resonances and, consequently, detection of
pseudocontact shifts and residual dipolar couplings specific to each monomeric
component. These pseudocontact shifts can be readily incorporated into existing
structure refinement calculations and enable determination of monomer orientation
within the dimeric protein. This methodology can be widely used for solution
structure determination of symmetric dimers.

PMID: 12495030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Med Microbiol. 2003 Jan;52(Pt 1):29-34.

Relative importance of STAT4 in murine tuberculosis.

Sugawara I(1), Yamada H, Mizuno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The Research Institute of Tuberculosis,
Japan Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 3-1-24 Matsuyama, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-0022,
Japan. sugawara@jata.or.jp

This study was designed to determine the roles of STAT proteins in defence
against mycobacterial infection. Airborne infection of STAT4 knockout (KO) mice
with a Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain induced large granulomas with massive
neutrophil infiltration over time, while that in STAT6 KO mice did not. The STAT4
KO mice succumbed to mycobacterial infection by the 80th day after infection.
Compared with the levels in wild-type (WT) and STAT6 KO mice, pulmonary inducible
nitric oxide synthase, interferon-alpha, -beta and -gamma mRNA levels were
significantly lower in STAT4 KO mice, but expression of interleukin-2, -6, -12
and -18 mRNAs was slightly higher up to the fifth week after aerial infection.
Therefore, STAT4, but not STAT6, appears to be a critical transcription factor in
mycobacterial regulation.

PMID: 12488562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Neuroimmunol. 2002 Oct;131(1-2):92-7.

IL-12, while beneficial, is not essential for the host response to VSV
encephalitis.

Chesler DA(1), Reiss CS.

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Biology, New York University, 1009 Main Building, 100 Washington 
Square East, New York, NY 10003, USA.

In this report, the role of STAT4 and local production of interleukin (IL)-12 in 
the central nervous system (CNS) were examined during experimental vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) encephalitis. We have previously shown that IL-12
treatment is beneficial both in vitro and in vivo during experimental VSV
infection. This inhibition of VSV replication was dependent on the production of 
nitric oxide (NO) by the neuronal isoform of nitric oxide synthase (NOS-1). In
vitro, IL-12 induces the phosphorylation and nuclear localization of STAT4 in
neuroblastoma cell lines. STAT4 expression was not required for host survival or 
clearance of virus during experimental VSV encephalitis. Taken together, these
data suggest that while neurons can respond directly to IL-12 in vitro by
signaling through STAT4, STAT4 is not required for survival. It is likely that
redundant innate host inflammatory cytokine responses compensate for the absence 
of IL-12 signaling.

PMID: 12458040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Infect Immun. 2002 Dec;70(12):6638-45.

Differences in expression of toll-like receptors and their reactivities in
dendritic cells in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice.

Liu T(1), Matsuguchi T, Tsuboi N, Yajima T, Yoshikai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, Research Institute for Disease Mechanism and
Control, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

We have previously reported that differences in early production of interleukin
12 (IL-12) by dendritic cells (DC) underlies the difference between the
susceptibilities to Listeria monocytogenes of C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice. To
elucidate mechanisms for the different abilities of DC to produce cytokine in
C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice, we examined Toll-like receptor (TLR) expression by DC
and their responses in vitro to known microbial ligands for TLRs. We found that
DC isolated from the spleens of naive C57BL/6 mice preferentially expressed TLR9 
mRNA, whereas DC from naive BALB/c mice strongly expressed TLR2, -4, -5, and -6
mRNAs. C57BL/6 DC produced a higher level of IL-12p40 in response to the ligands 
for TLR4 (lipopolysaccharide), TLR2 (lipoprotein), and TLR9 (CpG), whereas BALB/c
DC responded to these ligands by producing a larger amount of monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1. C57BL/6 DC expressed higher levels of CD40 and Stat4
than BALB/c DC did, suggesting that naive C57BL/6 mice contained more-mature
subsets of DC than naive BALB/c mice. Differences in reactivities of DC to
microbial molecules through TLRs may be associated with susceptibility and
resistance to Listeria infection in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice.

PMCID: PMC133006
PMID: 12438336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Blood. 2003 Apr 1;101(7):2877-85. Epub 2002 Nov 14.

Pretreatment of donors with interleukin-18 attenuates acute graft-versus-host
disease via STAT6 and preserves graft-versus-leukemia effects.

Reddy P(1), Teshima T, Hildebrandt G, Williams DL, Liu C, Cooke KR, Ferrara JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Cancer Center, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0942, USA.

Interleukin-18 (IL-18) is a unique cytokine that modulates both T(H)1/T(H)2
responses, but its ability to modulate diseases through induction of T(H)2
cytokines is unclear. It has been shown to play an important role in allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Because immune responses of allogeneic BM
donors may affect acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), we investigated the
effect of pretreating BM transplant donors with IL-18 on the severity of acute
GVHD using a well-characterized experimental BMT model (BALB/c-->B6).
Pretreatment of allogeneic BM transplant donors with IL-18 significantly improved
survival (80% vs 0%; P <.001), and reduced clinical, biochemical, and pathologic 
indices of acute GVHD in BM transplant recipients. IL-18 pretreatment was
associated with reduced interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and greater IL-4 secretion
by donor T cells after BMT. Acute GVHD mortality was reduced when IL-18 was
administered to donors deficient in IFN-gamma and signal transducer and activator
of transcription 4 (STAT4) but not STAT6 signaling molecules, suggesting a
critical role for STAT6 signaling in IL-18's protective effect. IL-18 treatment
did not alter donor CD8(+) cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) activity and preserved
graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) effects after allogeneic BMT (70% vs 10%; P <.01).
Together these data illustrate that pretreatment of donors with IL-18 prior to
allogeneic BMT attenuates acute GVHD in a STAT6-dependent mechanism while
preserving GVL effects.

PMID: 12433681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biomed Sci. 2002 Nov-Dec;9(6 Pt 2):688-96.

CpG DNA induced IL-12 p40 gene activation is independent of STAT1 activation or
production of interferon consensus sequence binding protein.

Bradford M(1), Schroeder A, Morse HC 3rd, Vogel SN, Cowdery JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of Iowa, College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52246, USA.

The host immune system responds to CpG motifs in bacterial DNA by rapidly
producing proinflammatory cytokines. The host response to CpG DNA resembles, in
many ways, the response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). While both agents 
can induce a powerful inflammatory response, CpG DNA promotes Th1 and suppresses 
Th2 immunity. The regulation of macrophage IL-12 p40 secretion in response to
stimulation with LPS and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is dependent on the action 
of a nuclear transacting factor, interferon consensus sequence binding protein
(ICSBP), a STAT1-dependent gene product. We found that CpG DNA induced IL-12 p40 
secretion by macrophages from mice with either disrupted STAT1 or ICSBP genes.
Additionally, CpG DNA did not induce translocation of transcription factors that 
bind to the gamma-activated sequence in the ICSBP gene nor did CpG DNA induce
ICSBP transcription. CpG DNA, which activates macrophages by the TLR9 pathway, is
a strong inducer of IL-12 p40, yet does so independently of IFN-gamma, STAT1 or
ICSBP. Thus, CpG DNA-induced IL-12 p40 secretion is mediated by one or more
signaling elements distinct from those induced by either LPS or IFN-gamma.

Copyright 2002 National Science Council, ROC and S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12432235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Appl Toxicol. 2002 Nov-Dec;22(6):397-403.

Differential stimulation of IgE production, STAT activation and cytokine and CD86
expression by 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene and trimellitic anhydride.

Guo TL(1), Zhang XL, Leffel EK, Peachee VL, Karrow NA, Germolec DR, White KL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298-0613, USA.

It has been reported that dermal exposure to trimellitic anhydride (TMA, 50%), a 
respiratory allergen, induced greater production of serum IgE and expression of
Th2 cytokines than 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB, 1%), a potent contact
sensitizer, in female BALB/C mice. To determine if there is any strain
difference, four strains (B6C3F1, C57BL/6, BDF1 and BALB/C) of female mice were
employed in this study to compare the differential effects of these chemicals on 
the hypersensitivity responses. Serum IgE levels were increased in TMA-treated
B6C3F1, C57BL/6 and BDF1 mice when compared with the DNCB treatment and vehicle
controls; in contrast, no difference was observed between TMA- and DNCB-treated
BALB/C mice, although both chemicals induced greater IgE production than vehicle 
controls. In vitro expression of interleukin 4 (IL-4) and IL-13 mRNA by overnight
concanavalin A (ConA)-stimulated draining lymph node cells was enhanced following
in vivo treatment with TMA but not with DNCB in the B6C3F1, C57BL/6 and BDF1
mice. In contrast, TMA and DNCB induced similar levels of IL-4 and IL-13 mRNA in 
the BALB/C mice. The IL-4 protein levels in the supernatants of overnight
ConA-treated draining lymph node cells were also increased in TMA-treated B6C3F1 
and C57BL/6 mice when compared with the DNCB treatment and vehicle controls.
Further mechanistic evaluation in the B6C3F1 mice indicated that the activation
of STAT6 but not STAT4 by ConA plus IL-2-treated draining lymph node cells was
increased in TMA- but not DNCB-treated mice when compared with the vehicle
controls. Furthermore, surface expression of B7.2 (CD86) by B cells was increased
in both TMA- and DNCB-treated B6C3F1 mice when compared with the vehicles;
however, greater B7.2 expression was observed in TMA-treated compared with
DNCB-treated. Overall, these results demonstrate that a similar pattern of IgE
and cytokine production was observed in these strains of mice except for BALB/C. 
Furthermore, differential activation of STAT6 and expression of CD86 following
exposure to TMA and DNCB may contribute to the differential production of IgE and
cytokines.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12424743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Nature. 2002 Nov 7;420(6911):78-84.

The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, atorvastatin, promotes a Th2 bias and reverses
paralysis in central nervous system autoimmune disease.

Youssef S(1), Stüve O, Patarroyo JC, Ruiz PJ, Radosevich JL, Hur EM, Bravo M,
Mitchell DJ, Sobel RA, Steinman L, Zamvil SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Beckman Center for
Molecular Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Nov 7;420(6911):39-40.

Statins, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors,
which are approved for cholesterol reduction, may also be beneficial in the
treatment of inflammatory diseases. Atorvastatin (Lipitor) was tested in chronic 
and relapsing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a CD4(+) Th1-mediated
central nervous system (CNS) demyelinating disease model of multiple sclerosis.
Here we show that oral atorvastatin prevented or reversed chronic and relapsing
paralysis. Atorvastatin induced STAT6 phosphorylation and secretion of Th2
cytokines (interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and IL-10) and transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta. Conversely, STAT4 phosphorylation was inhibited and secretion of Th1 
cytokines (IL-2, IL-12, interferon (IFN)-gamma and tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha) was suppressed. Atorvastatin promoted differentiation of Th0 cells
into Th2 cells. In adoptive transfer, these Th2 cells protected recipient mice
from EAE induction. Atorvastatin reduced CNS infiltration and major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II expression. Treatment of microglia
inhibited IFN-gamma-inducible transcription at multiple MHC class II
transactivator (CIITA) promoters and suppressed class II upregulation.
Atorvastatin suppressed IFN-gamma-inducible expression of CD40, CD80 and CD86
co-stimulatory molecules. l-Mevalonate, the product of HMG-CoA reductase,
reversed atorvastatin's effects on antigen-presenting cells (APC) and T cells.
Atorvastatin treatment of either APC or T cells suppressed antigen-specific
T-cell activation. Thus, atorvastatin has pleiotropic immunomodulatory effects
involving both APC and T-cell compartments. Statins may be beneficial for
multiple sclerosis and other Th1-mediated autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 12422218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2002 Nov;9(6):1153-9.

Jaks, STATs, Cytokines, and Sepsis.

Scott MJ(1), Godshall CJ, Cheadle WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Price Institute for Surgical Research, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.
mjscot01@gwise.louisville.edu

PMCID: PMC130124
PMID: 12414743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Int Immunol. 2002 Nov;14(11):1343-50.

A regulatory role for suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 in T(h) polarization in 
vivo.

Fujimoto M(1), Tsutsui H, Yumikura-Futatsugi S, Ueda H, Xingshou O, Abe T, Kawase
I, Nakanishi K, Kishimoto T, Naka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-1 is an inhibitory molecule for JAK, and 
its deficiency in mice leads to lymphocyte-dependent multi-organ disease and
perinatal death. Crossing of SOCS-1(-/-) mice on an IFN-gamma(-/-), STAT1(-/-)
and STAT6(-/-) background revealed that the fatal disease of SOCS-1(-/-) mice is 
also dependent on IFN-gamma/STAT1 and IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways. Since
IFN-gamma and IL-4 are representative T(h)1 and T(h)2 cytokines respectively,
here we investigated the role of SOCS-1 in T(h) differentiation. Freshly isolated
SOCS-1(-/-) CD4(+) T cells stimulated with anti-CD3 rapidly produced larger
amounts of IFN-gamma and IL-4 than control cells, suggesting that these mutant T 
cells had already differentiated into T(h)1 and T(h)2 cells in vivo. In addition,
SOCS-1(+/-) CD4(+) T cells cultured in vitro produced significantly larger
amounts of IFN-gamma and IL-4 than SOCS-1(+/+) cells. Similarly, SOCS-1(+/-)
CD4(+) T cells produced more IFN-gamma and IL-4 than SOCS-1(+/+) cells after
infection with Listeria monocytogenes and Nippostrongyrus braziliensis
respectively. Since IL-12-induced STAT4 and IL-4-induced STAT6 activation is
sustained in SOCS-1(-/-) T cells, the enhanced T(h) functions in SOCS-1(-/-) and 
SOCS-1(+/-) mice appear to be due to the enhanced effects of these cytokines.
These results suggest that SOCS-1 plays a regulatory role in both T(h)1 and T(h)2
polarizations.

PMID: 12407025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Int Immunol. 2002 Nov;14(11):1263-71.

Serine phosphorylation of Stat5 proteins in lymphocytes stimulated with IL-2.

Xue HH(1), Fink DW Jr, Zhang X, Qin J, Turck CW, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.

Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates cytokine-induced dimerization of STAT
proteins. Serine phosphorylation has also been found to occur in a number of STAT
proteins, including Stat1, Sat3, Stat4, Stat5a, Stat5b and Stat6, and was shown
to be important for maximal transcriptional activation mediated by Stat1, Stat3
and Stat4, but not for Stat5a or Stat5b. As these latter proteins were studied in
transiently transfected COS-7 cells stimulated with prolactin, we sought to
further investigate the significance of their serine phosphorylation in a more
physiologically based system in response to IL-2. Both Stat5a and Stat5b were
rapidly phosphorylated on serine in response to IL-2 and the phosphorylation site
in Stat5a was mapped to Ser780, which is not conserved in Stat5b. In vitro
studies with reporter constructs, and experiments in which wild-type and mutant
Stat5a retroviruses were used to transduce Stat5a-deficient splenocytes revealed 
that the serine mutant constructs were not diminished in their ability to mediate
IL-2 signaling and if anything exhibited augmented proliferative capability.
Thus, in contrast to the apparent importance of serine phosphorylation for
transcriptional activation by Stat1, Stat3 and Stat4 in response to IFN, IL-6 and
IL-12 respectively, serine phosphorylation of Stat5a does not enhance
Stat5a-mediated signaling in response to IL-2.

PMID: 12407017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Hum Gene Ther. 2002 Sep 20;13(14):1697-709.

Adenovirus-mediated interferon gamma gene therapy for allergic asthma:
involvement of interleukin 12 and STAT4 signaling.

Behera AK(1), Kumar M, Lockey RF, Mohapatra SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Joy McCann Culverhouse Airway Disease
Center, University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.

Allergic asthma is associated with airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness
caused by the dysregulated production of cytokines secreted by allergen-specific 
helper T type 2 (Th2) cells. Allergic subjects produce relatively low amounts of 
interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), a pleiotropic Th1 cytokine that downregulates
Th2-associated responses. In this study, we examined the possibility of
modulating ovalbumin (OVA)-induced inflammation and airway hyperreactivity (AHR) 
by recombinant adenovirus-mediated IFN-gamma (Ad-IFN-gamma) gene transfer.
OVA-sensitized mice treated with Ad-IFN-gamma exhibit significantly lower levels 
of Th2 cytokines interleukin 4 (IL-4) and IL-5, OVA-specific serum IgE, lung
eosinophilia, and AHR in response to methacholine challenge compared with control
mice. The lung sections of the treated mice show less epithelial damage, mucous
plugging, and eosinophil infiltration than controls. In contrast,
Ad-IFN-gamma-treated mice express significantly higher levels of IFN-gamma and
IL-12 when compared with controls. Moreover, administration of Ad-IFN-gamma to
mice with established AHR significantly reduced AHR, Th2 cytokines, and lung
inflammation. The IFN-gamma effects were dependent on IL-12 and STAT4 (signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4), as mice treated with antibodies to 
IL-12 and STAT4 deficient mice show attenuated Ad-IFN-gamma responses. Thus,
these results demonstrate that mucosal Ad-IFN-gamma gene transfer can effectively
attenuate established allergen-induced airway inflammation and AHR, predominantly
through an IL-12- and STAT4-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 12396623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Cell Immunol. 2002 Mar-Apr;216(1-2):31-42.

Administration of two macrophage-derived interferon-gamma-inducing factors (IL-12
and IL-15) induces a lethal systemic inflammatory response in mice that is
dependent on natural killer cells but does not require interferon-gamma.

Biber JL(1), Jabbour S, Parihar R, Dierksheide J, Hu Y, Baumann H, Bouchard P,
Caligiuri MA, Carson W.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

Activation of macrophages by microbes results in the rapid production of
monokines (e.g., interleukin-12 (IL-12), IL-15, and IL-18), which induce
production of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) by natural killer (NK) cells. We
examined the effects of administering IL-15 in combination with IL-12 in a murine
toxicity model to determine how these two cytokines might contribute to the
inflammatory state that accompanies infectious processes. The daily, simultaneous
administration of IL-15 (3 x 10(5)U) and IL-12 (1 microg) to normal mice resulted
in shock and 100% mortality within 3-7 days, whereas minimal toxicity was
observed following the administration of IL-15 or IL-12 alone. Mice treated with 
IL-15 plus IL-12 exhibited lesions of the gastrointestinal tract, elevated serum 
levels of acute phase reactants and pro-inflammatory cytokines, and NK cell
apoptosis. Neutralization of IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, and IL-1beta was not
protective in cytokine-treated mice, however, toxicity and death could be
completely abrogated by depletion of NK cells. Mice deficient in the STAT4
transcription factor also exhibited complete protection while mice deficient in
IFN-gamma or its downstream mediator, STAT1, did not. These findings suggest that
cytokine- stimulated NK cells are able to promote systemic inflammation via the
induction of STAT4-responsive genes other than IFN-gamma or TNF-alpha.

PMID: 12381348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 11;297(5):1245-52.

The human perforin gene is a direct target of STAT4 activated by IL-12 in NK
cells.

Yamamoto K(1), Shibata F, Miyasaka N, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, 113-8519, Tokyo, Japan.

IL-12 activates STAT4 by inducing tyrosine phosphorylation, homo-dimerization,
and nuclear translocation in NK cells and thereby stimulates proliferation and
activation of these cells. The pore-forming protein perforin is a key effector
protein for NK cell- and cytotoxic T lymphocyte-mediated cytolysis. Here we
demonstrate that IL-12 induces the expression of the perforin gene in human NK
cell line, NKL. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using a probe containing
two putative STAT-binding sequences located at -1085 and -1059 in the human
perforin gene showed that STAT4 or STAT5 activated by IL-12 or IL-2,
respectively, in NKL cells binds this region. Further analyses using various
probes with or without mutated STAT-binding sequences showed that, although
either of the two tandem STAT-binding sequences binds STAT4 weakly, the presence 
of both is required for significant binding of activated STAT4 and for formation 
of the STAT4-DNA-binding complex with lower electrophoretic mobility.
Furthermore, mutation of either of the tandem STAT-binding sequences abolished
the IL-12-induced activation of the perforin gene promoter in reporter gene
assays. These results indicate that the IL-12-induced expression of the perforin 
gene in NK cells is directly regulated by STAT4, which binds, most likely as a
homo-tetramer, to the tandem STAT-binding sequences in the perforin gene
promoter.

PMID: 12372421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 15;169(8):4388-98.

Activated STAT4 has an essential role in Th1 differentiation and proliferation
that is independent of its role in the maintenance of IL-12R beta 2 chain
expression and signaling.

Nishikomori R(1), Usui T, Wu CY, Morinobu A, O'Shea JJ, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In this study we demonstrated that CD4(+) T cells from STAT4(-/-) mice exhibit
reduced IL-12R expression and poor IL-12R signaling function. This raised the
question of whether activated STAT4 participates in Th1 cell development mainly
through its effects on IL-12 signaling. In a first approach to this question we
determined the capacity of CD4(+) T cells from STAT4(-/-) bearing an IL-12Rbeta2 
chain transgene (and thus capable of normal IL-12R expression and signaling) to
undergo Th1 differentiation when stimulated by Con A and APCs. We found that such
cells were still unable to exhibit IL-12-mediated IFN-gamma production. In a
second approach to this question, we created Th2 cell lines (D10 cells)
transfected with STAT4-expressing plasmids with various tyrosine-->phenylalanine 
mutations and CD4(+) T cell lines from IL-12beta2(-/-) mice infected with
retroviruses expressing similarly STAT4 mutations that nevertheless express
surface IL-12Rbeta2 chains. We then showed that constructs that were unable to
support STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation (in D10 cells) as a result of mutation
were also incapable of supporting IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production (in
IL-12Rbeta2(-/-) cells). Thus, by two complementary approaches we demonstrated
that activated STAT4 has an essential downstream role in Th1 cell differentiation
that is independent of its role in the support of IL-12Rbeta2 chain signaling.
This implies that STAT4 is an essential element in the early events of Th1
differentiation.

PMID: 12370372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 15;169(8):4279-87.

Coordinated and distinct roles for IFN-alpha beta, IL-12, and IL-15 regulation of
NK cell responses to viral infection.

Nguyen KB(1), Salazar-Mather TP, Dalod MY, Van Deusen JB, Wei XQ, Liew FY,
Caligiuri MA, Durbin JE, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.

NK cell cytotoxicity, IFN-gamma expression, proliferation, and accumulation are
rapidly induced after murine CMV infections. Under these conditions, the
responses were shown to be elicited in overlapping populations. Nevertheless,
there were distinct signaling molecule requirements for induction of functions
within the subsets. IL-12/STAT4 was critical for NK cell IFN-gamma expression,
whereas IFN-alphabeta/STAT1 were required for induction of cytotoxicity. The
accumulation/survival of proliferating NK cells was STAT4-independent but
required IFN-alphabeta/STAT1 induction of IL-15. Taken together, the results
define the coordinated interactions between the cytokines IFN-alphabeta, IL-12,
and IL-15 for activation of protective NK cell responses during viral infections,
and emphasize these factors' nonredundant functions under in vivo physiological
conditions.

PMID: 12370359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 15;169(8):4124-8.

Neonatal tolerance in the absence of Stat4- and Stat6- dependent Th cell
differentiation.

Chang HC(1), Zhang S, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202,
USA.

Neonatal tolerance to specific Ag is achieved by nonimmunogenic exposure within
the first day of life. The mechanism that regulates this tolerance may provide
the basis for successful organ transplantation and has recently been thought to
be immune deviation from the inflammatory Th1 response to a Th2 response. To test
the importance of Th2 cells in the establishment of neonatal tolerance, we
examined neonatal tolerance in Stat4- and Stat6-deficient mice, which have
reduced Th1 and Th2 cell development, respectively. Neonatal tolerance of both
the T and B cell compartments in Stat4- and Stat6-deficient mice was similar to
that observed in wild-type mice. Cytokine production shifted from a Th1 to a Th2 
response in wild-type mice tolerized as neonates. In contrast, tolerance was
observed in Stat6-deficient mice despite maintenance of a Th1 cytokine profile.
These results suggest that cells distinct from Stat6-dependent Th2 cells are
required for the establishment of neonatal tolerance.

PMID: 12370340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Clin Invest. 2002 Oct;110(7):983-92.

IL-12 enhances the natural killer cell cytokine response to Ab-coated tumor
cells.

Parihar R(1), Dierksheide J, Hu Y, Carson WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, The Arthur
G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University College of
Medicine, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The anti-tumor activity of recombinant mAb's directed against tumor cell growth
receptors has generally been considered to result from direct antiproliferative
effects, the induction of apoptosis, or possibly Ab-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity mediated against tumor targets. However, it remains unclear to what 
degree these mechanisms actually aid in the clearance of Ab-coated tumor cells in
vivo. We show here that NK cells secrete a distinct profile of potent
immunostimulatory cytokines in response to dual stimulation with Ab-coated tumor 
cells and IL-12. This response could not be duplicated by costimulation with
other ILs and was significantly enhanced in the presence of monocytes. Cytokine
production was dependent upon synergistic signals mediated by the activating
receptor for the Fc portion of IgG (FcgammaRIII) and the IL-12 receptor expressed
on NK cells. Coadministration of Ab-coated tumor cells and IL-12 to BALB/c mice
resulted in enhanced circulating levels of NK cell-derived cytokines with the
capacity to augment anti-tumor immunity. These findings suggest that, in addition
to mediating cellular cytotoxicity and apoptosis, the anti-tumor activity of
mAb's might also result from activation of a potent cytokine secretion program
within immune effectors capable of recognizing mAb-coated targets.

PMCID: PMC151155
PMID: 12370276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Aug;60 Suppl 8:52-7.

[Knockout mouse in the research of type 1 diabetes].

[Article in Japanese]

Tamemoto H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Medicine, Omiya Medical Center, Jichi Medical
School.

PMID: 12355801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Neuroreport. 2002 Sep 16;13(13):1589-93.

Facial nerve lesion response; strain differences but no involvement of IFN-gamma,
STAT4 or STAT6.

Lidman O(1), Fraidakis M, Lycke N, Olson L, Olsson T, Piehl F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Neuroimmunology Unit, CMM
L08;04, Karolinska Hospital, S171 76 Stockholm.

Facial nerve lesions lead to a retrograde response characterized by activation of
glia surrounding axotomized motoneurons and up-regulation of immunological cell
surface molecules such as major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens.
Cytokines, in particular interferon-gamma, are potent inducers of MHC expression 
and glial activation. We have here tested whether axotomy-induced activation is
changed in transgenic mouse strains lacking components of the IFN-gamma signaling
pathway, STAT4 or STAT6. No differences regarding astrocyte activation,
ss2-microglobulin or MHC class I expression were discernible as compared to wild 
type controls. In contrast, there were conspicuous differences in the reaction
between the examined wild type strains (C57BL/6J, BALB/c and 129/SvJ), suggesting
considerable polymorphisms in the genetic regulation of these events, however,
not involving IFN-gamma, STAT4 or STAT6.

PMID: 12352607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 1;169(7):3744-51.

Physiological mechanisms of regulating alloimmunity: cytokines, CTLA-4, CD25+
cells, and the alloreactive T cell clone size.

Sho M(1), Yamada A, Najafian N, Salama AD, Harada H, Sandner SE, Sanchez-Fueyo A,
Zheng XX, Strom TB, Sayegh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital, Laboratory of Immunogenetics and 
Transplantation, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The mechanisms underlying physiological regulation of alloimmune responses remain
poorly defined. We investigated the roles of cytokines, CTLA-4, CD25(+) T cells, 
and apoptosis in regulating alloimmune responses in vivo. Two murine cardiac
transplant models were used, B10.D2 (minor mismatch) and C57BL/6 (major
mismatch), into BALB/c recipients. Recipients were wild type, STAT4(-/-) (Th1
deficient), or STAT6(-/-) (Th2 deficient) mice. Minor mismatched allografts were 
accepted spontaneously in approximately 70% of wild type and STAT4(-/-) mice. By 
contrast, there was significantly shorter graft survival in minor mismatched
STAT6(-/-) mice. Either the adoptive transfer of STAT4(-/-) splenocytes or the
administration of IL-4Fc fusion protein into STAT6(-/-) mice resulted in long
term graft survival. Blocking CTLA-4 signaling accelerated the rejection in all
recipients, but was more pronounced in the minor combination. This was
accompanied by an increased frequency of alloreactive T cells. Furthermore,
CTLA-4 blockade regulated CD4(+) or CD8(+) as well as Th1 or Th2 alloreactive T
cells. Finally, while anti-CD25 treatment prolonged graft survival in the major
mismatched combination, the same treatment accelerated graft rejection in the
minor mismatched group. The latter was associated with an increased frequency of 
alloreactive T cells and inhibition of T cell apoptosis. These data demonstrate
that cytokine regulation, CTLA-4 negative signaling, and T cell apoptosis play
critical roles in regulating alloimmunity, especially under conditions where the 
alloreactive T cell clone size is relatively small.

PMID: 12244168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 1;169(7):3600-5.

IL-21 up-regulates the expression of genes associated with innate immunity and
Th1 response.

Strengell M(1), Sareneva T, Foster D, Julkunen I, Matikainen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki,
Finland. mari.strengell@ktl.fi

IL-21 is a recently characterized T cell-derived cytokine that regulates NK and T
cell function. IL-21R shares the common gamma-chain (gamma(c)) with the receptors
for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15. Despite the same gamma(c), these cytokines
have different effects on diverse cells. In this study, we have studied IL-15-
and IL-21-induced gene expression in human primary NK and T cells and the NK-92
cell line. Both IL-15 and IL-21 rapidly induced mRNA synthesis for IFN-gamma,
T-bet, IL-2Ralpha, IL-12Rbeta2, IL-18R, and myeloid differentiation factor 88
(MyD88), the genes that are important in activating innate immunity and Th1
response. IL-15 induced STAT5 DNA binding to the IL-2Ralpha IFN-gamma-activated
sequence (GAS), MyD88 GAS, and c-cis-inducible elements, whereas IL-21 induced
STAT3 DNA binding to MyD88 GAS and c-sis-inducible elements. IL-21-induced STAT3 
activation was verified by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting with
anti-phosphotyrosine Ab. In addition, pretreatment of NK-92 cells with IL-15 or
IL-21 strongly enhanced IL-12-induced STAT4 DNA binding to IL-2Ralpha GAS. The
induction of IFN-gamma, T-bet, IL-12Rbeta2, and IL-18R gene expression in NK
cells, along with STAT3 activation, suggests that IL-21 is involved in the
activation of innate immune responses. Moreover, the enhanced transcription of
these genes in T cells establishes a significant role for IL-21 also in the Th1
response.

PMID: 12244150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Science. 2002 Sep 20;297(5589):2063-6.

Critical role for STAT4 activation by type 1 interferons in the interferon-gamma 
response to viral infection.

Nguyen KB(1), Watford WT, Salomon R, Hofmann SR, Pien GC, Morinobu A, Gadina M,
O'Shea JJ, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Biology and
Medicine, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

Interferons (IFNs) are essential for host defense. Although the antiviral effects
of the type 1 IFNs IFN-alpha and IFN-beta (IFN-alpha/beta) have been established,
their immunoregulatory functions, especially their ability to regulate IFN-gamma 
production, are poorly understood. Here we show that IFN-alpha/beta activate
STAT4 directly (STAT, signal transducers and activators of transcription) and
that this is required for IFN-gamma production during viral infections of mice,
in concert with T cell receptor-derived signals. In contrast, STAT1 appears to
negatively regulate IFN-alpha/beta induction of IFN-gamma. Thus, type 1 IFNs, in 
addition to interleukin-12, provide pathways for innate regulation of adaptive
immunity, and their immunoregulatory functions are controlled by modulating the
activity of individual STATs.

PMID: 12242445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):741-2.

c-Rel delivers a one-two punch in Th1 cell differentiation.

Pai SY(1), Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):843-50.

PMCID: PMC151138
PMID: 12235102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):43735-40. Epub 2002 Sep 8.

Negative regulation of interleukin-12 signaling by suppressor of cytokine
signaling-1.

Eyles JL(1), Metcalf D, Grusby MJ, Hilton DJ, Starr R.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical Research and The Cooperative
Research Center for Cellular Growth Factors, PO Royal Melbourne Hospital, VIC
3050, Australia.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS-1) is an inhibitory protein that
regulates responses to cytokines. Previously, we have shown SOCS-1 to be a key
inhibitor of interferon gamma (IFNgamma). Recent data suggest that SOCS-1 may
regulate other cytokines in vivo, in addition to IFNgamma. Uncontrolled responses
to interleukin-12 (IL-12), an inflammatory cytokine, could contribute to
increased IFNgamma production and the development of inflammatory disease in
SOCS-1(-/-) mice. Here, we assess responses of SOCS-1-deficient cells to IL-12.
Both IL-12-induced T cell proliferation and NK cytotoxic activity are enhanced in
SOCS-1-deficient cells, relative to controls. To examine the contribution of
continued IL-12 signaling to the SOCS-1(-/-) disease, we generated mice lacking
both SOCS-1 and signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), an
essential component of the IL-12 signaling pathway. SOCS-1(-/-) STAT4(-/-) mice
have improved survival relative to SOCS-1(-/-) mice, but die between 1 and 2
months of age. We conclude that, in addition to IFNgamma, SOCS-1 regulates
responses to IL-12.

PMID: 12221108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 15;169(6):3345-52.

IL-4 and IL-12 regulate proteoglycan-induced arthritis through Stat-dependent
mechanisms.

Finnegan A(1), Grusby MJ, Kaplan CD, O'Neill SK, Eibel H, Koreny T, Czipri M,
Mikecz K, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's 
Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Alison_Finnegan@rush.edu

IL-4, a well-recognized modulator of macrophage activation, is perceived as an
anti-inflammatory cytokine; however, under certain circumstances IL-4 may
function as a proinflammatory cytokine. We have previously demonstrated that IL-4
treatment of mice with proteoglycan-induced arthritis (PGIA) inhibited the
development of disease. To determine whether the capacity of IL-4 to inhibit
disease is dependent on IL-4-mediated regulation of IL-12, we assessed the
requirement for IL-4 in modulating development of PGIA. Immunization of mice,
lacking IL-4 and Stat6, with proteoglycan results in a significant increase in
arthritis severity in comparison to wild-type controls, suggesting that arthritis
severity is regulated by IL-4 through a Stat6-dependent mechanism. Concomitant
with exacerbated disease in IL-4(-/-) mice, there is a significant increase in
the systemic production of proinflammatory cytokines IL-12, TNF-alpha, and
IFN-gamma and in levels of mRNA transcripts for proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines in joints. Disease is suppressed in Stat4(-/-) mice indicating that
elevated levels of IL-12 contribute to exacerbation of arthritis and that
suppression is accompanied by reduced levels of IFN-gamma production. In support 
of this, IFN-gamma(-/-) mice are protected from PGIA and the degree of
inflammation is similar to Stat4(-/-) mice. The decrease in disease severity in
IFN-gamma(-/-) and Stat4(-/-) mice correlates with diminished TNF-alpha levels
but there is no switch to a Th2-type response. Taken together, these results
suggest that IL-4 regulates the severity of disease in PGIA by controlling IL-12 
production, which in turn regulates the magnitude of IFN-gamma expression through
a Stat4-dependent pathway.

PMID: 12218156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Sep 17;99(19):12281-6. Epub 2002 Sep 4.

STAT4 serine phosphorylation is critical for IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production
but not for cell proliferation.

Morinobu A(1), Gadina M, Strober W, Visconti R, Fornace A, Montagna C, Feldman
GM, Nishikomori R, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal, and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. morinoba@mail.nih.gov

T helper 1 (T(H)1) differentiation and IFN-gamma production are crucial in
cell-mediated immune responses. IL-12 is an important regulator of this process
and mediates its effects through signal transducer and activator of transcription
4 (STAT4). IFN-gamma production is also regulated by the p38 mitogen-activated
kinase pathway, although the mechanisms are ill-defined. We show here that
GADD45-beta and GADD45-gamma can induce STAT4 S721 phosphorylation via the
MKK6/p38 pathway. Thus, STAT4 could be a target that accounts for the defects in 
cell-mediated immunity associated with perturbations in the p38 pathway. To
investigate the biological significance of STAT4 S721 phosphorylation, we
reconstituted primary spleen cells from STAT4-deficient mice with wild-type and
mutated STAT4, by using a retroviral gene transduction. We demonstrated that
expression of wild-type STAT4, but not the S721A mutant, restored normal T(H)1
differentiation and IFN-gamma synthesis. The inability of STAT4 S721 to restore
IFN-gamma production was not caused by decreased IL-12R expression because the
STAT4 S721 mutant also failed to restore IFN-gamma production in STAT4-deficient 
IL-12Rbeta2 transgenic cells. Importantly, STAT4 S721A-transduced cells showed
normal proliferative response to IL-12, illustrating that serine phosphorylation 
is not required for IL-12-induced proliferation. Additionally, the results imply 
the existence of STAT4 serine phosphorylation-dependent and -independent target
genes. We conclude that phosphorylation of STAT4 on both tyrosine and serine
residues is important in promoting normal T(H)1 differentiation and IFN-gamma
secretion.

PMCID: PMC129436
PMID: 12213961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Transplant Proc. 2002 Aug;34(5):1394-5.

Inhibition of IL-12 signaling Stat4/IFN-gamma pathway by rapamycin is associated 
with impaired dendritic [correction of dendritc] cell function.

Chiang PH(1), Wang L, Liang Y, Liang X, Qian S, Fung JJ, Bonham CA, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

PMID: 12176411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Immunol. 2002 Aug 15;169(4):1665-8.

Cutting edge: a murine, IL-12-independent pathway of IFN-gamma induction by
gram-negative bacteria based on STAT4 activation by Type I IFN and IL-18
signaling.

Freudenberg MA(1), Merlin T, Kalis C, Chvatchko Y, Stübig H, Galanos C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Freiburg, Germany.
freudenberg@immunbio.mpg.de

IFN-alphabeta is a potent immunoregulatory cytokine involved in the defense
against viral and bacterial infections. In this study, we describe an as yet
undefined IFN-alphabeta-dependent pathway of IFN-gamma induction in mice. This
pathway is based on a synergism of IFN-alphabeta and IL-18, and is independent of
IL-12 signaling yet dependent on STAT4. In contradiction to current dogma, we
show further that IFN-alphabeta alone induces tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT4
in murine splenocytes of different mouse strains. This pathway participates in
the induction of IFN-gamma by Gram-negative bacteria and is therefore expected to
play a role whenever IFN-alpha or IFN-beta and IL-18 are produced concomitantly
during bacterial, viral, or other infections.

PMID: 12165484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Int Immunol. 2002 Aug;14(8):943-51.

T(h)1/T(h)2 cell differentiation of developing CD4 single-positive thymocytes.

Kikkawa E(1), Yamashita M, Kimura M, Omori M, Sugaya K, Shimizu C, Katsumoto T,
Ikekita M, Taniguchi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

In this study we investigate the stage at which developing T cells in the thymus 
acquire the ability to differentiate into T(h)1 and T(h)2 cells. We addressed
this question by using sorted heat-stable antigen (HSA)(+) and HSA(-) CD4
single-positive (SP) thymocytes prepared from ovalbumin-specific TCRalphabeta
transgenic mice and an in vitro T(h)1/T(h)2 differentiation culture system.
HSA(-) CD4 SP thymocytes show nearly full functional capacity to differentiate
into either T(h)1 or T(h)2 cells. A dramatic difference was observed, however,
between HSA(+) and HSA(-) CD4 SP thymocytes in the efficiency for T(h)1 cell
differentiation. TCR function of HSA(+) CD4 SP thymocytes appeared to be fully
developed because antigen-induced proliferation and IL-2 production were
essentially equivalent to that of HSA(-) CD4 SP thymocytes. However, the levels
in IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) beta2 chain expression following anti-TCR stimulation 
were dramatically low in the HSA(+) CD4 SP thymocytes. Decreased IL-12-induced
STAT4 phosphorylation was also observed. Moreover, IL-12-dependent
transcriptional up-regulation of T-bet and STAT4 was deficient in the HSA(+) CD4 
SP thymocytes. Thus, the poor capacity of HSA(+) CD4 SP thymocytes to proceed to 
T(h)1 cell differentiation appears to be at least partly due to underdeveloped
capacity in IL-12R expression and function.

PMID: 12147631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Chin Med J (Engl). 2002 Jun;115(6):846-50.

Expression of interleukin-12 and its signaling molecules in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in systemic lupus erythematosus patients.

Li Z(1), Li Y, Huang L, Xu H, Yu X, Ye R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Institute of Nephrology, the First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China.
lizhijianlzj@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the in vitro expression of interleukin-12 (IL-12) and its
effect on signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling
molecules in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells in 39 patients with definite systemic
lupus erythematosus and 11 healthy volunteers were collected. Expression of IL-12
P40mRNA in PBMCs was determined with reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Quantity of IL-12 protein supernatant was measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The levels of phosphorylated STAT3 and
STAT4 signaling molecules in PBMCs were detected by immunoblot.
RESULTS: Levels of IL-12 protein and mRNA expression in patients with active or
inactive SLE were significantly higher than those in controls. Phytohemagglutinin
(PHA ) may promote the expression of IL-12. IL-12 alone induced the
phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT4 in PBMCs from patients with SLE, especially in
active SLE. However it had no obvious effect on normal PBMCs. Phosphorylated
STAT3 and STAT4 might be observed in normal PBMCs treated with IL-12 plus PHA.
CONCLUSION: IL-12 is produced aberrantly in patients with SLE. IL-12 might exert 
its biological role in SLE via the aberrantly phosphorylated STAT3 and STAT4
signaling molecules.

PMID: 12123550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Immunity. 2002 Jun;16(6):815-25.

Th1 cells regulate hematopoietic progenitor cell homeostasis by production of
oncostatin M.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Bruns HA, Zhang S, Cooper S, Hangoc G, McKenzie AN, Dent AL,
Schindler U, Naeger LK, Hoey T, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. mkaplan2@iupui.edu

Regulation of hematopoietic progenitor cell homeostasis is crucial for
maintenance of innate immunity and the ability of the body to respond to injury
and infection. In this report, we demonstrate that progenitor cell numbers and
cycling status in vivo are dramatically increased in mice deficient in Stat6 and 
decreased in mice deficient in Stat4, targeted mutations which also alter T
helper cell polarization. Experiments using mice that have T cell restricted
transgenic expression of Stat4 or Stat6 or have been in vivo depleted of T cell
subsets demonstrate that CD4(+) T cells regulate progenitor cell activity.
Injection of the Th1 cytokine Oncostatin M but not other cytokines into
Stat4-deficient mice recovers progenitor cell activity to wild-type levels. Thus,
T helper cells actively regulate hematopoietic progenitor cell homeostasis.

PMID: 12121663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Eur J Immunol. 2002 Jun;32(6):1792-801.

Induction of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 on TCR-stimulated T cells: dependence
on the release from persistent TCR-triggering and requirement for IFN-gamma
stimulation.

Nakajima C(1), Mukai T, Yamaguchi N, Morimoto Y, Park WR, Iwasaki M, Gao P, Ono
S, Fujiwara H, Hamaoka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology (C6), Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan.

The chemokine receptor CXCR3 has been shown to play a key role in the recruitment
of T cells to sites of inflammation such as allografts. Here, we investigated
which signals and conditions areresponsible for CXCR3 induction. CXCR3 was
induced on T cells that were stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 monoclonal
antibodies and then recultured without any external stimuli. CXCR3 expression was
inhibited when TCR stimulation was persistent in the reculture. CXCR3 induction
also depended on the stimulation with IFN-gamma because CXCR3 expression was not 
induced in IFN-gamma-deficient T cells. The induction of another Th1 chemokine
receptor CCR5 absolutely required IL-12 stimulation and STAT4 involvement. In
contrast, CXCR3 was induced on STAT4-deficient T cells independently of IL-12
stimulation as long as IFN-gamma was produced as a result of potent TCR
stimulation. These results show that CXCR3 induction on TCR-triggered T cells
requires the release of these T cells from persistent TCR signaling and the
stimulation with IFN-gamma and also indicate the differential regulatory
mechanisms underlying the induction of two Th1 chemokine receptors.

PMID: 12115663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Arch Dermatol Res. 2002 Jul;294(4):163-7. Epub 2002 Jun 1.

JAK/STAT pathways are not involved in the direct activation of antigen-presenting
cells by contact sensitizers.

Valk E(1), Zahn S, Knop J, Becker D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz,
Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55101 Mainz, Germany. valk@hautklinik.klinik.uni-mainz.de

JAK/STAT pathways are described as the major mechanisms by which cytokine
receptors transduce intracellular signals. The signalling mechanisms in
antigen-presenting cells (APC) in the sensitization phase of contact
hypersensitivity are poorly understood. The aim of this study was to clarify
whether well-established JAK/STAT signalling pathways might be activated directly
by contact sensitizers as described previously for tyrosine kinases and some MAP 
kinases. As a model of epidermal APC, human monocytes and human monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells were stimulated with the structurally unrelated contact
sensitizers MCI/MI, thimerosal, TNCB and formaldehyde. The phosphorylation states
of the transcription factors STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5 and STAT6 were determined
by Western blot analysis using phosphospecific antibodies. In contrast to the
positive controls performed with the cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-10, IFN-alpha,
GM-CSF and IL-4, no significant increase in the phosphorylation of STAT molecules
was recognized in hapten-treated cells. These results suggest that contact
allergens do not directly activate common JAK/STAT pathways. Therefore the
activation of APC in the early sensitization phase of contact hypersensitivity by
haptens does not involve signals normally delivered by JAK-associated cytokine
receptors.

PMID: 12111345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Immunol. 2002 Jul 15;169(2):714-21.

The homeostasis but not the differentiation of T cells is regulated by p27(Kip1).

Shen R(1), Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) is a critical regulator of T cell
proliferation. To further examine the relationship of T cell proliferation and
differentiation, we examined the ability of T cells deficient in p27(Kip1) to
differentiate into Th subsets. We observed increased Th2 differentiation in
p27(Kip1)-deficient cultures. In addition to increases in CD4(+) and CD8(+) T
cells, there is a similar increase in gamma delta T cells in p27(Kip1)-deficient 
mice compared with wild-type mice. The increase in Th2 differentiation is
correlated to an increase of IL-4 secretion by CD4(+)DX5(+)TCR alpha
beta(+)CD62L(low) T cells but not to increased expansion of differentiating Th2
cells. While STAT4- and STAT6-deficient T cells have diminished proliferative
responses to IL-12 and IL-4, respectively, proliferative responses are increased 
in T cells doubly deficient in p27(Kip1) and STAT4 or STAT6. In contrast, the
increased proliferation and differentiative capacity of p27(Kip1)-deficient T
cells has no effect on the ability of STAT4/p27(Kip1)- or
STAT6/p27(Kip1)-deficient CD4(+) cells to differentiate into Th1 or Th2 cells,
respectively. Thus, while p27(Kip1) regulates the expansion and homeostasis of
several T cell subsets, it does not affect the differentiation of Th subsets.

PMID: 12097373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 15;168(12):6506-13.

Curcumin inhibits experimental allergic encephalomyelitis by blocking IL-12
signaling through Janus kinase-STAT pathway in T lymphocytes.

Natarajan C(1), Bright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37212, USA.

Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a CD4(+) Th1 cell-mediated
inflammatory demyelinating autoimmune disease of the CNS that serves as an animal
model for multiple sclerosis (MS). IL-12 is a proinflammatory cytokine that plays
a crucial role in the induction of neural Ag-specific Th1 differentiation and
pathogenesis of CNS demyelination in EAE and MS. Curcumin
(1,7-Bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,6-heptadiene-3,5-dione) is a naturally
occurring polyphenolic phytochemical isolated from the rhizome of the medicinal
plant Curcuma longa. It has profound anti-inflammatory activity and been
traditionally used to treat inflammatory disorders. In this study we have
examined the effect and mechanism of action of curcumin on the pathogenesis of
CNS demyelination in EAE. In vivo treatment of SJL/J mice with curcumin
significantly reduced the duration and clinical severity of active immunization
and adoptive transfer EAE. Curcumin inhibited EAE in association with a decrease 
in IL-12 production from macrophage/microglial cells and differentiation of
neural Ag-specific Th1 cells. In vitro treatment of activated T cells with
curcumin inhibited IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2,
tyrosine kinase 2, and STAT3 and STAT4 transcription factors. The inhibition of
Janus kinase-STAT pathway by curcumin resulted in a decrease in IL-12-induced T
cell proliferation and Th1 differentiation. These findings highlight the fact
that curcumin inhibits EAE by blocking IL-12 signaling in T cells and suggest its
use in the treatment of MS and other Th1 cell-mediated inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 12055272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Gene. 2002 May 1;289(1-2):61-7.

Regulation of bovine IL-12R beta 2 subunit mRNA expression in bovine lymph node
cells.

Waldvogel AS(1), Zakher A, Guionaud CT, Fernandez P, Heussler VT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, University of Berne, Langasstrasse 122,
CH-3012 Berne, Switzerland. andreas.waldvogel@itpa.unibe.ch

The beta 2 subunit of the interleukin (IL)-12 receptor (IL-12R beta 2) has been
shown to play an essential role in differentiation of T helper 1 (Th1) cells in
the murine and human system, and antibodies raised against IL-12R beta 2
recognized this molecule on human Th1 but not Th2 cells. However, while the
cytokines secreted by clones of murine cells allowed the definition of distinct T
helper cell subsets, bovine clones with polarized Th1 and Th2 cytokine profiles
were rarely found. This raised important questions about the regulation of immune
responses in cattle. We therefore cloned bovine IL-12R beta2 (boIL-12R beta 2)
DNA complementary to RNA (cDNA) from the start codon to the 3' end of the mRNA.
Comparison of boIL-12R beta 2 cDNA with human and murine IL-12R beta 2 cDNA
sequences revealed homologies of 85 and 78%, respectively. The deduced protein
sequence showed the hallmark motifs of the cytokine receptor superfamily
including the four conserved cysteine residues, the WSXWS motif and fibronectin
domains in the extracellular part as well as a STAT4 binding site in the
intracellular part of the molecule. Using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, upregulation of mRNA expression of this 
molecule could be demonstrated in cultured bovine lymph node cells stimulated
with phytohemagglutinin. Furthermore, cells with upregulated boIL-12R beta 2 mRNA
responded with enhanced expression of interferon gamma to treatment with
interleukin 12.

PMID: 12036584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):506-8.

Regulation of T(H)1 differentiation--controlling the controllers.

O'Shea JJ, Paul WE.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):549-57.

PMID: 12032561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 1;168(11):5699-708.

A receptor for the heterodimeric cytokine IL-23 is composed of IL-12Rbeta1 and a 
novel cytokine receptor subunit, IL-23R.

Parham C(1), Chirica M, Timans J, Vaisberg E, Travis M, Cheung J, Pflanz S, Zhang
R, Singh KP, Vega F, To W, Wagner J, O'Farrell AM, McClanahan T, Zurawski S,
Hannum C, Gorman D, Rennick DM, Kastelein RA, de Waal Malefyt R, Moore KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, DNAX Research, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

IL-23 is a heterodimeric cytokine composed of the IL-12p40 "soluble receptor"
subunit and a novel cytokine-like subunit related to IL-12p35, termed p19. Human 
and mouse IL-23 exhibit some activities similar to IL-12, but differ in their
capacities to stimulate particular populations of memory T cells. Like IL-12,
IL-23 binds to the IL-12R subunit IL-12Rbeta1. However, it does not use
IL-12Rbeta2. In this study, we identify a novel member of the hemopoietin
receptor family as a subunit of the receptor for IL-23, "IL-23R." IL-23R pairs
with IL-12Rbeta1 to confer IL-23 responsiveness on cells expressing both
subunits. Human IL-23, but not IL-12, exhibits detectable affinity for human
IL-23R. Anti-IL-12Rbeta1 and anti-IL-23R Abs block IL-23 responses of an NK cell 
line and Ba/F3 cells expressing the two receptor chains. IL-23 activates the same
Jak-stat signaling molecules as IL-12: Jak2, Tyk2, and stat1, -3, -4, and -5, but
stat4 activation is substantially weaker and different DNA-binding stat complexes
form in response to IL-23 compared with IL-12. IL-23R associates constitutively
with Jak2 and in a ligand-dependent manner with stat3. The ability of cells to
respond to IL-23 or IL-12 correlates with expression of IL-23R or IL-12Rbeta2,
respectively. The human IL-23R gene is on human chromosome 1 within 150 kb of
IL-12Rbeta2.

PMID: 12023369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 1;168(11):5477-82.

Reduced expression of STAT4 and IFN-gamma in macrophages from BALB/c mice.

Kuroda E(1), Kito T, Yamashita U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

BALB/c mice have been shown to easily induce Th2 type responses in several
infection models. In this study, to examine the mechanisms of Th2 dominant
responses in BALB/c mice, we assessed several macrophage functions using C3H/HeN,
C57BL/6, and BALB/c mouse strains. Peritoneal macrophages from three strains of
mice equally produced IL-12 by stimulation with LPS plus IFN-gamma. However,
IFN-gamma production in response to IL-12 or IL-12 plus IL-18 was much lower in
macrophages from BALB/c mice than other strains. IFN-gamma produced by activated 
macrophages induced IL-12R mRNA expression in T cells and macrophages themselves 
depending on their amount of IFN-gamma; namely, macrophages from BALB/c mice
induced lower expression of IL-12R. Intracellular levels of STAT4 were much lower
in macrophages from BALB/c mice. However, other STATs, such as STAT1 or STAT6,
were expressed similarly in the three mouse strains. STAT4 and IFN-gamma
production by other cell types such as T cells and B cells were equal in C3H/HeN 
and BALB/c mice. These results indicate that macrophages from Th2-dominant BALB/c
mice have different functional characters compared with other mouse strains; that
is, STAT4 expression and IFN-gamma production are reduced, which is one of the
causes to shift to Th2-type responses.

PMID: 12023341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2002 Feb;24(1):17-29.

Participation of contrasting changes in IL-10 and IL-12 production in the
reduction of Th1-predominance by Hachimi-jio-gan in autoimmune MRL/MP-lpr/lpr
mice.

Furuya Y(1), Kawakita T, Nomoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kanebo Kampo (Traditional Japanese Medicine) &
Healthcare Research Laboratories, Takaoka, Japan.

Hachimi-jio-gan (Chinese name: Ba-Wei-Di-Huang-Wan, HMG), a traditional Japanese 
herbal medicine, has been used for disorders accompanying aging. Our previous
studies suggested that HMG ameliorated Thl-predominant autoimmune diseases in
MRL/lpr mice through inhibition of IL-12 production. In the present study, the
oral administration of HMG down-regulated phosphorylated STAT4 and up-regulated
phosphorylated STAT6 in CD4 T cells. In the T cells, IL-12Rbeta1 and IL-12Rbeta2 
mRNA expression levels were suppressed. In antigen-presenting cells (CD45R- MHC
class II+ cells) which control Th1 and Th2 immune responses, the total cell
number and the percentage of cells expressing co-stimulatory molecules decreased 
in the HMG-treated group. In addition, the levels of IL-12 and 18 mRNA expression
increased and conversely, IL-10 mRNA expression decreased. Further, the
production of IL-10 was up-regulated and that of IL-12 was down-regulated by HMG 
in the presence of anti-CD40 antibody. These results suggest that the opposite
effects on IL-10 production and, IL-12 or IL-18 production in antigen-presenting 
cells of oral administration of HMG are due a decline in IL-12R expression, and
consequently, amelioration of MRL/lpr autoimmune diseases occurs through the
suppression of Th1 predominance via STAT4/STAT6 signaling.

PMID: 12022442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Clin Invest. 2002 May;109(10):1271-7.

IFNs and STATs in innate immunity to microorganisms.

Decker T(1), Stockinger S, Karaghiosoff M, Müller M, Kovarik P.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Austria.
decker@gem.univie.ac.at

PMCID: PMC150987
PMID: 12021240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):549-57. Epub 2002 May 13.

T-bet is a STAT1-induced regulator of IL-12R expression in naïve CD4+ T cells.

Afkarian M(1), Sedy JR, Yang J, Jacobson NG, Cereb N, Yang SY, Murphy TL, Murphy 
KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, Box 8118, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):506-8.

T helper type 1 (T(H)1) cell development involves interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
signaling through signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and 
interleukin-12 (IL-12) signaling through STAT4 activation. We examined here T-bet
regulation and evaluated the actions of T-bet in STAT1- and STAT4-dependent T(H)1
development processes. We found that T-bet expression during T cell activation
was strongly dependent on IFN-gamma signaling and STAT1 activation, but was
independent of STAT4. Ectopic T-bet expression strongly increased IFN-gamma
production in T(H)2 cells activated by PMA-ionomycin, but weakly increased
IFN-gamma production in T(H)2 cells stimulated by IL-12 IL-18 or OVA peptide
antigen-presenting cell stimulation. In contrast, IL-12 IL-18 induced IFN-gamma
production remained STAT4-dependent despite ectopic T-bet expression. Ectopic
T-bet expression selectively induced expression of IL-12Rbeta2, but not
IL-18Ralpha, in wild-type and STAT1(-/-) T(H)2 cells, but did not extinguish
expression of GATA-3 and T(H)2 cytokines. Finally, ectopic T-bet did not directly
induce expression of endogenous T- bet independently of IFN-gamma or STAT1. Thus,
T-bet is induced by IFN-gamma and STAT1 signaling during T cell activation. In
addition, T-bet mediates STAT1-dependent processes of T(H)1 development,
including the induction of IL-12Rbeta2.

PMID: 12006974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Immunol. 2002 May 15;168(10):5369-75.

Molecular mechanisms for gender differences in susceptibility to T cell-mediated 
autoimmune diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice.

Bao M(1), Yang Y, Jun HS, Yoon JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Laboratory of Viral and
Immunopathogenesis of Diabetes, Julia McFarlane Diabetes Research Center, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada T2N 4N1.

Nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice spontaneously develop diabetes with a strong female 
prevalence; however, the mechanisms for this gender difference in susceptibility 
to T cell-mediated autoimmune diabetes are poorly understood. This investigation 
was initiated to find mechanisms by which sex hormones might affect the
development of autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice. We examined the expression of
IFN-gamma, a characteristic Th1 cytokine, and IL-4, a characteristic Th2
cytokine, in islet infiltrates of female and male NOD mice at various ages. We
found that the most significant difference in cytokine production between sexes
was during the early stages of insulitis at 4 wk of age. IFN-gamma was
significantly higher in young females, whereas IL-4 was higher in young males.
CD4(+) T cells isolated from lymph nodes of female mice and activated with
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 Abs produced more IFN-gamma, but less IL-4, as compared
with males. Treatment of CD4(+) T cells with estrogen significantly increased,
whereas testosterone treatment decreased the IL-12-induced production of
IFN-gamma. We then examined whether the change in IL-12-induced IFN-gamma
production by treatment with sex hormones was due to the regulation of STAT4
activation. We found that estrogen treatment increased the phosphorylation of
STAT4 in IL-12-stimulated T cells. We conclude that the increased susceptibility 
of female NOD mice to the development of autoimmune diabetes could be due to the 
enhancement of the Th1 immune response through the increase of IL-12-induced
STAT4 activation by estrogen.

PMID: 11994496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Transplantation. 2002 Apr 15;73(7):1142-5.

Promotion of hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury by IL-12 is independent of
STAT4.

Kato A(1), Graul-Layman A, Edwards MJ, Lentsch AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have recently demonstrated a role for interleukin-12 (IL-12) in
the induction and development of hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury. IL-12
mediates its effects through the transcription factor, signal transducer and
activator of transcription-4 (STAT4). Therefore, we investigated the response to 
hepatic ischemia/reperfusion in STAT4-deficient mice.
METHODS: Wild-type and STAT4-deficient mice were subjected to 90 min of partial
hepatic ischemia followed by reperfusion. In some experiments, IL-12 was
neutralized with antibody administered intravenously.
RESULTS: Wild-type mice demonstrated rapid activation of STAT4 in liver after
ischemia/reperfusion, which mirrored hepatic protein expression of IL-12.
Interestingly, STAT4-deficient mice were indistinguishable from wild-type mice in
their response to hepatic ischemia reperfusion. No differences were observed in
serum levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), liver accumulation of
neutrophils, or hepatocellular injury. However, blockade of endogenous IL-12
significantly reduced these parameters in STAT4-knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that IL-12 promotes hepatic inflammation in a
manner that is independent of STAT4 and implicate a novel mechanism for the
pro-inflammatory effects of IL-12.

PMID: 11965047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Clin Invest. 2002 Apr;109(8):1091-9.

Normal myelopoiesis but abnormal T lymphocyte responses in vitamin D receptor
knockout mice.

O'Kelly J(1), Hisatake J, Hisatake Y, Bishop J, Norman A, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of
California-Los Angeles School of Medicine, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles,
CA 90048, USA. okellyj@cshs.org

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a transcription factor that mediates the actions 
of its ligand, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25(OH)(2)D(3)], which can promote
monocyte/macrophage differentiation and inhibit proliferation and cytokine
production by activated T lymphocytes. In this study, VDR knockout (KO) mice were
used to investigate the possible role of VDR in hematopoiesis. The relative
number of red and white peripheral blood cells and the percentage of bone marrow 
macrophages did not differ between VDR KO and wild-type mice.
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, but not 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), induced
differentiation of bone marrow-committed myeloid stem cells from VDR KO mice to
monocytes/macrophages. Production of IL-18, a Th1-promoting cytokine, was reduced
in macrophages from these mice. Antigen-stimulated spleen cells from VDR KO mice 
showed an impaired Th1 cell response and had decreased expression of STAT4, a Th1
cell transcription factor. These results demonstrate the absolute requirement of 
VDR for 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced monocyte/macrophage differentiation but show that
monocyte/macrophage differentiation can occur in the absence of this receptor.
The observed reduction in Th1 population in these mutant mice may be explained by
a loss of macrophage IL-18 production or a suppression of STAT4 expression by
activated splenocytes.

PMCID: PMC150940
PMID: 11956247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Urol. 2002 Apr;167(4):1859-62.

Selective activation of members of the signal transducers and activators of
transcription family in prostate carcinoma.

Ni Z(1), Lou W, Lee SO, Dhir R, DeMiguel F, Grandis JR, Gao AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE: Cytokines, hormones and growth factors use signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathways to control various
biological responses, including development, differentiation, cell proliferation 
and survival. Constitutive activation of STATs has been found in a wide variety
of human tumors. In this study we examined the activity of STATs in primary human
prostate tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: STAT activity was determined in 104 human primary prostate
tissues, including 42 tumors, 42 matched normal prostates adjacent to tumors and 
20 normal prostates from donors without cancer by electromobility shift assay.
RESULTS: Significant levels of activated Stat4 and Stat6 were detected in primary
prostate tissues. However, little or no expression of active Stat1, Stat2 or
Stat5 was detected in primary prostate tissues. Significantly higher levels of
constitutive Stat6 activity were found in prostate carcinomas compared with
levels in normal tissue adjacent to tumors and normal prostates from donors
without prostate cancer. There was no significant difference in Stat6 activity in
normal prostate tissues adjacent to tumors and normal prostates from donors
without prostate cancer. The levels of Stat4 activity varied but failed to yield 
statistically significant differences among tumors, matched normal prostates
adjacent to tumors and normal prostates from donors without cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: We have previously shown that Stat3 is activated in prostate cancer.
The results of the current study demonstrate that in addition to Stat3, Stat6 is 
selectively activated in prostate cancer.

PMID: 11912448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 1;168(7):3181-7.

Suppressors of cytokine signaling proteins are differentially expressed in Th1
and Th2 cells: implications for Th cell lineage commitment and maintenance.

Egwuagu CE(1), Yu CR, Zhang M, Mahdi RM, Kim SJ, Gery I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. emeka@helix.nih.gov

Positive regulatory factors induced by IL-12/STAT4 and IL-4/STAT6 signaling
during T cell development contribute to polarized patterns of cytokine expression
manifested by differentiated Th cells. These two critical and antagonistic
signaling pathways are under negative feedback regulation by a multimember family
of intracellular proteins called suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS).
However, it is not known whether these negative regulatory factors also modulate 
Th1/Th2 lineage commitment and maintenance. We show here that CD4(+) naive T
cells constitutively express low levels of SOCS1, SOCS2, and SOCS3 mRNAs. These
mRNAs and their proteins increase significantly in nonpolarized Th cells after
activation by TCR signaling. We further show that differentiation into Th1 or Th2
phenotype is accompanied by preferential expression of distinct SOCS mRNA
transcripts and proteins. SOCS1 expression is 5-fold higher in Th1 than in Th2
cells, whereas Th2 cells contain 23-fold higher levels of SOCS3. We also
demonstrate that IL-12-induced STAT4 activation is inhibited in Th2 cells that
express high levels of SOCS3 whereas IL-4/STAT6 signaling is constitutively
activated in Th2 cells, but not Th1 cells, with high SOCS1 expression. These
results suggest that mutually exclusive use of STAT4 and STAT6 signaling pathways
by differentiated Th cells may derive in part, from SOCS3- or SOCS1-mediated
repression of IL-12/STAT4- or IL-4/STAT6 signaling in Th2 and Th1 cells,
respectively. Given the strong correlation between distinct patterns of SOCS
expression and differentiation into the Th1 or Th2 phenotype, SOCS1 and SOCS3
proteins are therefore Th lineage markers that can serve as therapeutic targets
for immune modulation therapy.

PMID: 11907070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Nature. 2002 Mar 14;416(6877):190-4.

Involvement of receptor-interacting protein 2 in innate and adaptive immune
responses.

Chin AI(1), Dempsey PW, Bruhn K, Miller JF, Xu Y, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Host defences to microorganisms rely on a coordinated interplay between the
innate and adaptive responses of immunity. Infection with intracellular bacteria 
triggers an immediate innate response requiring macrophages, neutrophils and
natural killer cells, whereas subsequent activation of an adaptive response
through development of T-helper subtype 1 cells (TH1) proceeds during persistent 
infection. To understand the physiological role of receptor-interacting protein 2
(Rip2), also known as RICK and CARDIAK, we generated mice with a targeted
disruption of the gene coding for Rip2. Here we show that Rip2-deficient mice
exhibit a profoundly decreased ability to defend against infection by the
intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. Rip2-deficient macrophages
infected with L. monocytogenes or treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) have
decreased activation of NF-kappaB, whereas dominant negative Rip2 inhibited
NF-kappaB activation mediated by Toll-like receptor 4 and Nod1. In vivo,
Rip2-deficient mice were resistant to the lethal effects of LPS-induced endotoxic
shock. Furthermore, Rip2 deficiency results in impaired interferon-gamma
production in both TH1 and natural killer cells, attributed in part to defective 
interleukin-12-induced Stat4 activation. Our data reflect requirements for Rip2
in multiple pathways regulating immune and inflammatory responses.

PMID: 11894097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 1;168(3):1146-53.

Synergy of IL-12 and IL-18 for IFN-gamma gene expression: IL-12-induced STAT4
contributes to IFN-gamma promoter activation by up-regulating the binding
activity of IL-18-induced activator protein 1.

Nakahira M(1), Ahn HJ, Park WR, Gao P, Tomura M, Park CS, Hamaoka T, Ohta T,
Kurimoto M, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2,
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

IL-12 and IL-18 synergistically enhance IFN-gamma mRNA transcription by
activating STAT4 and AP-1, respectively. However, it is still unknown how
STAT4/AP-1 elicit IFN-gamma promoter activation. Using an IL-12/IL-18-responsive 
T cell clone, we investigated the mechanisms underlying synergistic enhancement
of IFN-gamma mRNA expression induced by these two cytokines. Synergy was observed
in a reporter gene assay using an IFN-gamma promoter fragment that binds AP-1,
but not STAT4. An increase in c-Jun, a component of AP-1, in the nuclear
compartment was elicited by stimulation with either IL-12 or IL-18, but
accumulation of serine-phosphorylated c-Jun was induced only by IL-18 capable of 
activating c-Jun N-terminal kinase. The binding of AP-1 to the relevant promoter 
sequence depended on the presence of STAT4. STAT4 bound with c-Jun, and a
phosphorylated c-Jun-STAT4 complex most efficiently interacted with the
AP-1-relevant promoter sequence. Enhanced cobinding of STAT4 and c-Jun to the
AP-1 sequence was also observed when activated lymph node T cells were exposed to
IL-12 plus IL-18. These results show that STAT4 up-regulates AP-1-mediated
IFN-gamma promoter activation without directly binding to the promoter sequence, 
providing a mechanistic explanation for IL-12/IL-18-induced synergistic
enhancement of IFN-gamma gene expression.

PMID: 11801649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jan;160(1):271-88.

Regulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription and suppressor of 
cytokine-signaling gene expression in the brain of mice with astrocyte-targeted
production of interleukin-12 or experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Maier J(1), Kincaid C, Pagenstecher A, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-12 and interferon (IFN)-gamma are implicated in the pathogenesis
of immune disorders of the central nervous system (CNS). To define the basis for 
the actions of these cytokines in the CNS, we examined the temporal and spatial
regulation of key signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) and 
suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) in the brain of transgenic mice with
astrocyte production of IL-12 or in mice with experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE). In healthy mice, with the exception of STAT4 and STAT6, 
the expression of a number of STAT and SOCS genes was detectable. However, in
symptomatic transgenic mice and in EAE significant up-regulation of STAT1, STAT2,
STAT3, STAT4, IRF9, and SOCS1 and SOCS3 RNA transcripts was observed. Although
the increased expression of STAT1 RNA was widely distributed and included
neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, STAT4 and STAT3 and SOCS1 and SOCS3 RNA was
primarily restricted to the infiltrating mononuclear cell population. The level
and location of the STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4 proteins overlapped with their
corresponding RNA and additionally showed nuclear localization indicative of
activation of these molecules. Thus, in both the glial fibrillary acidic
protein-IL-12 mice and in EAE the CNS expression of key STAT and SOCS genes that 
regulate IL-12 (STAT4) and IFN-gamma (STAT1, SOCS1, and SOCS3) receptor signaling
is highly regulated and compartmentalized. We conclude the interaction between
these positive and negative signaling circuits and their distinct cellular
locations likely play a defining role in coordinating the actions of IL-12 and
IFN-gamma during the pathogenesis of type 1 immune responses in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC1867143
PMID: 11786421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Sci STKE. 2002 Jan 8;2002(114):pe1.

IL-23: a cytokine that acts on memory T cells.

Frucht DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Division of Monoclonal Antibodies, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. frucht@cber.fda.gov

The newly discovered cytokine interleukin (IL)-23 shares some in vivo functions
with IL-12, including the activation of the transcription factor STAT4 (signal
tranducer and activator of transcription-4). Indeed, the receptors for each
appear to share one subunit, but also have at least one distinct subunit. Frucht 
discusses the similarities of IL-12 and IL-23 and the effects that distinguish
one from the other. In contrast to IL-12, IL-23 appears to participate in the
proliferative signal in memory T cells. More functions that distinguish IL-23
from IL-12 are likely to be uncovered as soon as the other component(s) of the
IL-23 receptor are molecularly cloned and characterized.

PMID: 11784889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):15137-42.

T-bet is rapidly induced by interferon-gamma in lymphoid and myeloid cells.

Lighvani AA(1), Frucht DM, Jankovic D, Yamane H, Aliberti J, Hissong BD, Nguyen
BV, Gadina M, Sher A, Paul WE, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Differentiation of naive CD4(+) T cells into IFN-gamma-producing T helper 1
(T(H)1) cells is pivotal for protective immune responses against intracellular
pathogens. T-bet, a recently discovered member of the T-box transcription factor 
family, has been reported to play a critical role in this process, promoting
IFN-gamma production. Although terminal T(H)1 differentiation occurs over days,
we now show that challenge of mice with a prototypical T(H)1-inducing stimulus,
Toxoplasma gondii soluble extract, rapidly induced IFN-gamma and T-bet; T-bet
induction was substantially lower in IFN-gamma-deficient mice. Naive T cells
expressed little T-bet, but this transcription factor was induced markedly by the
combination of IFN-gamma and cognate antigen. Human myeloid antigen-presenting
cells showed T-bet induction after IFN-gamma stimulation alone, and this
induction was antagonized by IL-4 and granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating
factor. Although T-bet was induced rapidly and directly by IFN-gamma, it was not 
induced by IFN-alpha, lipopolysaccharide, or IL-1, indicating that this action of
IFN-gamma was specific. Moreover, T-bet induction was dependent on Stat1 but not 
Stat4. These data argue for a model in which IFN-gamma gene regulation involves
an autocrine loop, whereby the cytokine regulates a transcription factor that
promotes its own production. These findings substantially alter the current view 
of T-bet in IFN-gamma regulation and promotion of cell-mediated immune responses.

PMCID: PMC64996
PMID: 11752460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Circulation. 2001 Dec 18;104(25):3145-51.

Interleukin-12 receptor/STAT4 signaling is required for the development of
autoimmune myocarditis in mice by an interferon-gamma-independent pathway.

Afanasyeva M(1), Wang Y, Kaya Z, Stafford EA, Dohmen KM, Sadighi Akha AA, Rose
NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Md, USA.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-12 exerts a potent proinflammatory effect by
stimulating T-helper (Th) 1 responses. This effect is believed to be mediated
primarily through the activation of STAT4 and subsequent production of interferon
(IFN)-gamma. Methods and Results- We examined the role of IL-12 receptor (IL-12R)
signaling in the development of murine experimental autoimmune myocarditis (EAM) 
induced by cardiac myosin immunization. Both IL-12Rbeta1-deficient mice and
STAT4-deficient mice were resistant to the induction of myocarditis. Treatment
with exogenous IL-12 exacerbated disease. We questioned whether IFN-gamma is
required for the disease-promoting activity of IL-12. On the contrary, we found
that IFN-gamma suppresses EAM. Lack of IFN-gamma due to either depletion with an 
antibody or a genetic deficiency exacerbated myocarditis. Spleens from
IFN-gamma-deficient mice immunized with cardiac myosin showed increased
cellularity; greater numbers of CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, and IL-2-producing cells; and
heightened ability to produce cytokines on stimulation in vitro. Treatment of
mice with recombinant IFN-gamma suppressed the development of myocarditis.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-12/IL-12R/STAT4 signaling promotes the development of EAM. In
contrast, IFN-gamma plays a protective role. The disease-limiting effects of
IFN-gamma might be explained by its ability to control the expansion of activated
T lymphocytes.

PMID: 11748115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Nov;31(11):3228-39.

Human microglial cells express a functional IL-12 receptor and produce IL-12
following IL-12 stimulation.

Taoufik Y(1), de Goër de Herve MG, Giron-Michel J, Durali D, Cazes E, Tardieu M, 
Azzarone B, Delfraissy JF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E-0109, Faculté de Médecine Paris XI, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
yassine.taoufik@kb.u-psud.fr

Microglial cells (MC) are IL-12 producers in the central nervous system. Here, we
found that IL-12 receptor subunits beta1 and beta2 were both constitutively
expressed, and up-regulated by IFN-gamma, in human primary MC. IL-12p70, after
binding to its receptor, is internalized into vesicles that qualify as early
endosomes as indicated by intracellular colocalization with transferrin. IL-12
induced tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT4. IL-12
signaling in human MC also involved members of the NFkappaB family. IL-12p70 and,
more effectively, the combination of IL-12p70 and IFN-gamma, induced IL-12p40
mRNA expression and bioactive IL-12p70 production. Human MC, thus, express a
functional IL-12 receptor and produce bioactive IL-12 following IL-12
stimulation.

PMID: 11745339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 15;167(12):6877-83.

A mandatory role for STAT4 in IL-12 induction of mouse T cell CCR5.

Iwasaki M(1), Mukai T, Nakajima C, Yang YF, Gao P, Yamaguchi N, Tomura M,
Fujiwara H, Hamaoka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology (C6), Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan.

IL-12 was recently shown to induce CCR5 on TCR-triggered mouse T cells.
Considering that STAT4 is the most critical of IL-12 signaling molecules, this
study investigated the role for STAT4 in the induction of CCR5 expression. IL-12R
was induced by stimulation with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 mAb similarly on T cells 
from wild-type (WT) and STAT4-deficient (STAT4(-/-)) mice, but the levels of
IL-12R induced on IFN-gamma-deficient (IFN-gamma(-/-)) T cells were lower
compared with WT T cells. Exposure of TCR-triggered WT T cells to IL-12 induced
CCR5 expression. In contrast, TCR-triggered STAT4(-/-) T cells failed to express 
CCR5 in response to IL-12. IL-12 stimulation induced detectable albeit reduced
levels of CCR5 expression on IFN-gamma(-/-) T cells. Addition of rIFN-gamma to
cultures of IFN-gamma(-/-) T cells, particularly to cultures during TCR
triggering resulted in restoration of CCR5 expression. However, CCR5 expression
was not induced in STAT4(-/-) T cells by supplementation of rIFN-gamma. These
results indicate that for the induction of CCR5 on T cells, 1) STAT4 plays an
indispensable role; 2) such a role is not substituted by simply supplementing
rIFN-gamma; and 3) IFN-gamma amplifies CCR5 induction depending on the presence
of STAT4.

PMID: 11739505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Ital J Anat Embryol. 2001;106(2 Suppl 2):189-97.

Accumulation of transcripts in the mature human sperm nucleus: implication of the
haploid genome in a functional role.

Siffroi JP(1), Dadoune JP.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Etude de la Formation et de la Maturation du Gamète Mâle. Laboratoire
de Cytologie et Histologie UFR Biomédicale des Saints Pères, Paris, France.

The existence of sperm-specific transcripts has been suggested by a number of
studies performed both in man and rodents but their origin and role are not yet
elucidated. For evaluating the functional significance of these mRNAs,
transcripts coding for proteins expressed during spermiogenesis or potentially
implicated in the early steps of zygote development, have been searched in human 
testis and sperm cells by RT-PCR. Furthermore their localization in spermatozoa
has been checked by in situ hybridization. Our results confirm the presence of
basic nucleoproteins (Transition proteins 1 and 2, Protamines 1 and 2)
spermatozoal transcripts which probably represent remnants of previous
transcription. They also reveal the existence of sperm specific mRNAs coding for 
the transcription factor Stat 4, the cyclin B1 and for the testicular isozyme of 
the angiotensin converting enzyme ACE. On the contrary, mRNAs coding for the heat
shock protein Hsp 70 have been found in testis but not in spermatozoa. The
possible roles of these transcripts either during the fertilization process or in
zygote are discussed.

PMID: 11732576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Clin Invest. 2001 Nov;108(10):1475-82.

STAT4 and STAT6 regulate systemic inflammation and protect against lethal
endotoxemia.

Lentsch AB(1), Kato A, Davis B, Wang W, Chao C, Edwards MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Louisville School of Medicine, James
Graham Brown Cancer Center, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.
alentsch@louisville.edu

Members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family are
transcription factors that mediate many of the effects of pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines. The progressive systemic inflammatory response
induced by endotoxin is mediated by overzealous cytokine production. Here we
identify STAT4 and STAT6 as critical regulators of the systemic inflammatory
response to endotoxin. Mice deficient for STAT4 or STAT6 were highly susceptible 
to lethal endotoxemia. In STAT4(-/-) mice, antibody blockade of IL-12 prevented
mortality, suggesting that STAT4 confers protection, while another signaling
pathway mediates the detrimental effects of IL-12. In STAT6(-/-) mice we observed
dysregulated activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB, resulting in
augmented production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Furthermore,
STAT6(-/-) mice displayed increased organ accumulation of leukocytes and
significant hepatocellular injury. These findings demonstrate that STAT4 and
STAT6 confer protection against endotoxin-induced death and that for STAT6 these 
protective effects occur through the regulation of NF-kappaB activation and
subsequent production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines.

PMCID: PMC209422
PMID: 11714739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 15;167(10):5955-62.

Inability of IL-12 to down-regulate IgE synthesis due to defective production of 
IFN-gamma in atopic NC/Nga mice.

Matsumoto M(1), Itakura A, Tanaka A, Fujisawa C, Matsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology, Department of Veterinary Clinic, Faculty of
Agriculture, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan.

NC/Nga mice raised in nonsterile circumstances spontaneously suffer from atopic
dermatitis-like skin lesions with IgE hyperproduction. We investigated effects of
rIL-12 on the IgE production in NC/Nga mice. rIL-12 administration was successful
to suppress the increase of IgE levels in BALB/c mice immunized with OVA and
aluminum hydroxide, but failed to abrogate that in NC/Nga mice. Both in vivo and 
in vitro IFN-gamma production induced by rIL-12 was less in NC/Nga mice than in
BALB/c mice. Addition of rIFN-gamma to rIL-4 and LPS completely abrogated IgE
production by B cells of BALB/c mice, but was insufficient to suppress it by B
cells of NC/Nga mice. In splenic cells pretreated with Con A, STAT4 was
phosphorylated at the tyrosine residue by addition of rIL-12, which was more
weakly inducible in NC/Nga mice than in BALB/c mice. Finally, we examined the
preventive ability of rIL-12 on the clinical aspects of atopic dermatitis in
NC/Nga mice. rIL-12 administration resulted in exacerbation of development of the
skin lesions and IgE production in NC/Nga mice raised in nonsterile
circumstances. These results suggest that defective production of IFN-gamma by T 
cells less sensitive to IL-12 and low responsiveness of B cells to IFN-gamma may 
contribute to IgE hyperproduction in NC/Nga mice, and that IL-12 may have no
ability to improve the clinical aspects of NC/Nga mice.

PMID: 11698474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2001 Nov;8(6):1044-8.

STAT4 is required for antibacterial defense but enhances mortality during
polymicrobial sepsis.

Godshall CJ(1), Lentsch AB, Peyton JC, Scott MJ, Cheadle WG.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Department of Surgery, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription factor 4 (STAT4) pathway
mediates the intracellular effects of interleukin-12 (IL-12), leading to the
production of gamma interferon, induction of a T helper type 1 response, and
increased natural killer cell cytotoxicity. The purpose of this study was to
determine the role of the STAT4 pathway during polymicrobial peritonitis in the
cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model. CLP was performed on STAT4-deficient
(STAT4(-/-)) and wild-type control (BALB/c) mice. At 4 h after CLP, STAT4(-/-)
mice had significantly higher bacterial counts in the peritoneal lavage fluid,
liver, and blood. This difference persisted for 18 h in the peritoneal lavage
fluid and blood. Neutrophil migration to the site of infection and into remote
tissues was unaffected. Despite higher bacterial counts locally and systemically,
STAT4(-/-) mice had a lower mortality rate than BALB/c controls. In contrast,
blockade of IL-12 in BALB/c mice was detrimental to host survival. A blunted
serum IL-12 response at 18 h after CLP was exhibited in STAT4(-/-) mice. These
results suggest several critical roles for the STAT4 pathway in the resolution of
polymicrobial infections. Additionally, the disparate effects observed with IL-12
blockade and STAT4 deficiency on host survival suggest that IL-12 may activate
alternate pathways promoting survival.

PMCID: PMC96223
PMID: 11687437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Infect Immun. 2001 Nov;69(11):6651-9.

Critical role for tumor necrosis factor alpha in controlling the number of
lumenal pathogenic bacteria and immunopathology in infectious colitis.

Gonçalves NS(1), Ghaem-Maghami M, Monteleone G, Frankel G, Dougan G, Lewis DJ,
Simmons CP, MacDonald TT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital,
Southampton SO16 6YD, United Kingdom.

Infection of mice with the intestinal bacterial pathogen Citrobacter rodentium
results in colonic mucosal hyperplasia and a local Th1 inflammatory response
similar to that seen in mouse models of inflammatory bowel disease. In these
latter models, and in patients with Crohn's disease, neutralization of tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is of therapeutic benefit. Since there is no
information on the role of TNF-alpha in either immunity to noninvasive bacterial 
pathogens or on the role of TNF-alpha in the immunopathology of infectious
colitis, we investigated C. rodentium infection in TNFRp55(-/-) mice. In
TNFRp55(-/-) mice, there were higher colonic bacterial burdens, but the organisms
were cleared at the same rate as C57BL/6 mice, showing that TNF-alpha is not
needed for protective antibacterial immunity. The most striking feature of
infection in TNFRp55(-/-) mice, however, was the markedly enhanced pathology,
with increased mucosal weight and thickness, increased T-cell infiltrate, and a
markedly greater mucosal Th1 response. Interleukin-12 p40 transcripts were
markedly elevated in C. rodentium-infected TNFRp55(-/-) mice, and this was
associated with enhanced mucosal STAT4 phosphorylation. TNF-alpha is not
obligatory for protective immunity to C. rodentium in mice; however, it appears
to play some role in downregulating mucosal pathology and Th1 immune responses.

PMCID: PMC100039
PMID: 11598034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 15;167(8):4476-84.

IL-12, STAT4-dependent up-regulation of CD4(+) T cell core 2
beta-1,6-n-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, an enzyme essential for biosynthesis of
P-selectin ligands.

Lim YC(1), Xie H, Come CE, Alexander SI, Grusby MJ, Lichtman AH, Luscinskas FW.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

TCR activation of naive T cells in the presence of IL-12 drives polarization
toward a Th1 phenotype and synthesis of P- and E-selectin ligands.
Fucosyltransferase VII (Fuc-T VII) and core 2
beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (C2GnT) are critical for biosynthesis of
selectin ligands. P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 is the best characterized
ligand for P-selectin and also binds E-selectin. The contributions of TCR and
cytokine signaling pathways to up-regulate Fuc-T VII and C2GnT during
biosynthesis of E- and P-selectin ligands, such as P-selectin glycoprotein ligand
1, are unknown. IL-12 signals via the STAT4 pathway. Here, naive DO11.10 TCR
transgenic and STAT4(-/-) TCR transgenic CD4(+) T cells were stimulated with Ag
and IL-12 (Th1 condition), IL-4 (Th2), or neutralizing anti-IL-4 mAb only (Th0). 
The levels of Fuc-T VII and C2GnT mRNA in these cells were compared with their
adhesive interactions with P- and E-selectin in vitro under flow. The data show
IL-12/STAT4 signaling is necessary for induction of C2GnT, but not Fuc-TVII mRNA,
and that STAT4(-/-) Th1 cells do not traffic normally to sites of inflammation in
vivo, do not interact with P-selectin, and exhibit a partial reduction of
E-selectin interactions under shear stress in vitro. Ag-specific TCR activation
in CD4(+) T cells was sufficient to trigger induction of Fuc-TVII, but not C2GnT,
mRNA and expression of E-selectin, but not P-selectin, ligands. Thus, Fuc-T VII
and C2GnT are regulated by different signals during Th cell differentiation, and 
both cytokine and TCR signals are necessary for the expression of E- and
P-selectin ligands.

PMID: 11591774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Trends Immunol. 2001 Oct;22(10):556-60.

IFN-gamma production by antigen-presenting cells: mechanisms emerge.

Frucht DM(1), Fukao T, Bogdan C, Schindler H, O'Shea JJ, Koyasu S.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The suggestion that antigen-presenting cells (APCs) produce interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma) is controversial because it conflicts with the initial paradigm in
which the production of IFN-gamma was restricted to lymphoid cells. However, some
answers to this skepticism have been provided by recent findings of high-level
production and intracellular expression of IFN-gamma by interleukin-12
(IL-12)-stimulated macrophages and dendritic cells. New data are now emerging to 
explain the mechanism of production of IFN-gamma vby APCs. As in lymphoid cells, 
IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production in APCs requires signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), although the precise molecular events that 
govern the transcription of the gene encoding IFN-gamma are enigmatic still.
Understanding these processes in lymphoid, and now nonlymphoid, cells remains an 
important challenge.

PMID: 11574279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Clin Invest. 2001 Sep;108(5):739-47.

Effect of targeted disruption of STAT4 and STAT6 on the induction of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Chitnis T(1), Najafian N, Benou C, Salama AD, Grusby MJ, Sayegh MH, Khoury SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is mediated by myelin-specific
CD4(+) T cells secreting Th1 cytokines, while recovery from disease is associated
with expression of Th2 cytokines. Investigations into the role of individual
cytokines in disease induction have yielded contradictory results. Here we used
animals with targeted deletion of the STAT4 or STAT6 genes to determine the role 
of these signaling molecules in EAE. The STAT4 pathway controls the
differentiation of cells into a Th1 phenotype, while the STAT6 pathway controls
the differentiation of cells into a Th2 phenotype. We found that mice deficient
in STAT4 are resistant to the induction of EAE, with minimal inflammatory
infiltrates in the central nervous system. In contrast, STAT6-deficient mice,
which have a predominantly Th1 phenotype, experience a more severe clinical
course of EAE as compared with wild-type or STAT4 knockout mice. In addition,
adoptive transfer studies confirm the regulatory functions of a Th2 environment
in vivo. These novel data indicate that STAT4 and STAT6 genes play a critical
role in regulating the autoimmune response in EAE.

PMCID: PMC209380
PMID: 11544280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Leukoc Biol. 2001 Sep;70(3):439-46.

Interleukin-12 increases interleukin 8 production and release by human
polymorphonuclear neutrophils.

Ethuin F(1), Delarche C, Benslama S, Gougerot-Pocidalo MA, Jacob L,
Chollet-Martin S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie and Unité INSERM 479, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France.

Interleukin (IL) 12 is a heterodimeric cytokine mainly produced by
phagocytes-important target cells for IL-12 in particular with a chemotactic
effect-and antigen-presenting cells in response to various microorganisms.
Because IL-8 is a strong chemokine for polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), we
investigated the effect of IL-12 on PMN IL-8 production. IL-12 alone had no
significant effect, but with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) it was additive at both
protein and mRNA levels. Actinomycin D at the beginning of culture inhibited IL-8
mRNA induction, whereas late addition affected IL-8 transcript stability,
suggesting gene transcription involvement. Results with parthenolide and
tyrphostin AG490 suggest that nuclear factor-kappaB and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 play a role. The IL-12 additive effect was
restricted to IL-8 release, with no action on cell-associated IL-8. IL-12
additive effects occurred after 18 h of culture, with no marked up-regulation of 
IL-12 receptor expression, and were blocked by actinomycin D added after 16 h of 
culture. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha and interferon (IFN) gamma had
intermediate roles; their specific inhibition reduced IL-12's effect. IL-12's
chemotactic mechanism seemed mediated by overproduction and release of IL-8 by
human PMNs in the presence of LPS, an effect involving TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma
secretion. These results point to a new role for IL-12 in inflammation, through
an autocrine amplification loop.

PMID: 11527994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Clin Immunol. 2001 Sep;100(3):270-6.

Detection of intracellular phosphorylated STAT-4 by flow cytometry.

Uzel G(1), Frucht DM, Fleisher TA, Holland SM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Service, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

The convergence of innate and adaptive immunity is critical for host defense,
allowing for early protection and the generation of specific responses. STAT-4 is
at that point of convergence, unifying the IFNalpha and IL-12 pathways.
Activation of STAT-4 is crucial to T cell polarization, B cell and NK cell
activation, and the control of intracellular pathogens. However, techniques to
detect phosphorylated STAT-4 are cumbersome and require many cells. We have
developed a flow cytometric detection technique to investigate IL-12 signaling in
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Using different polyclonal antibodies
that recognize either total STAT-4 protein or tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT-4, we 
can easily detect IL-12 and IFNalpha signaling in PHA/IL-2 blasts derived from
peripheral blood lymphocytes. This technique not only allows us to evaluate IL-12
signaling, but it is also less time consuming and labor intensive than
alternative methods. Using this flow cytometry-based method, we should be able to
detect patients with defects in IL-12 receptor signal transduction, who typically
present with disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial infections.

PMID: 11513540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 15;167(4):2106-11.

A point mutation in the IL-12R beta 2 gene underlies the IL-12 unresponsiveness
of Lps-defective C57BL/10ScCr mice.

Poltorak A(1), Merlin T, Nielsen PJ, Sandra O, Smirnova I, Schupp I, Boehm T,
Galanos C, Freudenberg MA.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037. Max-Planck-Institut für
Immunbiologie, Freiburg, Germany.

Lps-defective C57BL/10ScCr (Cr) mice are homozygous for a deletion encompassing
Toll-like receptor 4 that makes them refractory to the biological activity of
LPS. In addition, these mice exhibit an inherited IL-12 unresponsiveness
resulting in impaired IFN-gamma responses to different microorganisms. By
positional cloning methods, we show here that this second defect of Cr mice is
due to a mutation in a single gene located on mouse chromosome 6, in close
proximity to the Igkappa locus. The gene is IL-12Rbeta2. Cr mice carry a point
mutation creating a stop codon that is predicted to cause premature termination
of the translated IL-12Rbeta2 after a lysine residue at position 777. The
truncated beta2 chain can still form a heterodimeric IL-12R that allows
phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2, but, unlike the wild-type IL-12R, can no
longer mediate phosphorylation of STAT4. Because the phosphorylation of STAT4 is 
a prerequisite for the IL-12-mediated induction of IFN-gamma, its absence in Cr
mice is responsible for their defective IFN-gamma response to microorganisms.

PMID: 11489994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Immunol Cell Biol. 2001 Aug;79(4):320-2.

Susceptibility to Leishmania mexicana infection is due to the inability to
produce IL-12 rather than lack of IL-12 responsiveness.

Rodriguez-Sosa M(1), Monteforte GM, Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Almost all inbred mice are highly susceptible to parasites of the Leishmania
mexicana complex that includes L. amazonensis and L. mexicana. Recent studies
have reported that T cells from L. amazonensis-infected mice fail to respond to
IL-12 due to impaired IL-12R expression. Here, we demonstrate that lymph node
cells from L. mexicana-infected C57BL/6 and 129Sv/Ev mice respond efficiently to 
exogenous IL-12 in vitro and produce IFN-gamma. Moreover, we also show that
deletion of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)4 gene in
resistant STAT6-/- mice renders them susceptible to L. mexicana. These findings
indicate that an inability to produce IL-12 rather than unresponsiveness to this 
cytokine is responsible for susceptibility to L. mexicana. Moreover, the data
also demonstrate that the STAT4-mediated pathway is critical for the development 
of protective immunity against cutaneous leishmaniasis, regardless of the species
of Leishmania and/or genetic background of the mice.

PMID: 11488977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Pathol. 2001 Aug;159(2):631-8.

Role of interleukin-12 and stat-4 in the regulation of airway inflammation and
hyperreactivity in respiratory syncytial virus infection.

Tekkanat KK(1), Maassab H, Berlin AA, Lincoln PM, Evanoff HL, Kaplan MH, Lukacs
NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301
Catherine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0602, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a respiratory pathogen that can cause
significant morbidity in infants and young children. Interestingly, the majority 
of children who acquire a RSV infection do not exhibit severe symptoms.
Development of a Th1 response has been associated with resolution of symptoms in 
viral infections and may explain mild RSV illness. The current study investigated
the cytokine response observed in mild disease in C57BL/6 mice that had low
airway resistance and mucus production with little pulmonary inflammation. RSV
infection in these mice was accompanied by a fourfold increase in
interleukin-12(IL-12). Treatment of RSV-infected mice with anti-IL-12 resulted in
an increase in airway hyperreactivity, mucus production, and airway inflammation 
(eosinophilia). Since IL-12 activation is dependent on Stat-4-mediated
intracellular signal transduction, similar experiments were performed in Stat-4
deficient mice and demonstrated similar results to those obtained from anti-IL-12
treated mice. Again, there was an increase in airway hyperreactivity and mucus
production, and goblet cell hypertrophy. These studies support the importance of 
IL-12 in the immune response to RSV infection resulting in resolution of disease 
and protection from inappropriate inflammatory responses.

PMCID: PMC1850534
PMID: 11485921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 31;98(16):9050-5.

An essential role of the JAK-STAT pathway in ischemic preconditioning.

Xuan YT(1), Guo Y, Han H, Zhu Y, Bolli R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Laboratory, Division of Cardiology, University of
Louisville and the Jewish Hospital Heart and Lung Institute, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

The goal of this study was to determine the role of the Janus tyrosine kinase
(JAK)-signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway in the
late phase of ischemic preconditioning (PC). A total of 230 mice were used. At 5 
min after ischemic PC (induced with six cycles of 4-min coronary occlusion/4-min 
reperfusion), immunoprecipitation with anti-phosphotyrosine (anti-pTyr)
antibodies followed by immunoblotting with anti-JAK antibodies revealed increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1 (+257 +/- 53%) and JAK2 (+238 +/- 35%),
indicating rapid activation of these two kinases. Similar results were obtained
by immunoblotting with anti-pTyr-JAK1 and anti-pTyr-JAK2 antibodies. Western
analysis with anti-pTyr-STAT antibodies demonstrated a marked increase in nuclear
pTyr-STAT1 (+301 +/- 61%) and pTyr-STAT3 (+253 +/- 60%) 30 min after ischemic PC,
which was associated with redistribution of STAT1 and STAT3 from the cytosolic to
the nuclear fraction and with an increase in STAT1 and STAT3 gamma-IFN activation
site DNA-binding activity (+606 +/- 64%), indicating activation of STAT1 and
STAT3. No nuclear translocation or tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT2, STAT4,
STAT5A, STAT5B, or STAT6 was observed. Pretreatment with the JAK inhibitor AG-490
20 min before the six occlusion/reperfusion cycles blocked the enhanced tyrosine 
phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2 and the increased tyrosine phosphorylation,
nuclear translocation, and enhanced DNA-binding activity of STAT1 and STAT3. The 
same dose of AG-490 abrogated the protection against myocardial infarction and
the concomitant up-regulation of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) protein and
activity observed 24 h after ischemic PC. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that ischemic PC induces isoform-selective activation of JAK1, JAK2, 
STAT1, and STAT3, and that ablation of this response impedes the up-regulation of
iNOS and the concurrent acquisition of ischemic tolerance. This study
demonstrates that the JAK-STAT pathway plays an essential role in the development
of late PC. The results reveal a signaling mechanism that underlies the
transcriptional up-regulation of the cardiac iNOS gene and the adaptation of the 
heart to ischemic stress.

PMCID: PMC55371
PMID: 11481471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Fertil Steril. 2001 Aug;76(2):258-66.

Members of the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription
(JAK/STAT) pathway are present and active in human sperm.

D'Cruz OJ(1), Vassilev AO, Uckun FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Parker Hughes Institute, St. Paul,
Minnesota 55113, USA. odcruz@ih.org

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether components of the Janus kinase/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway are present and
active in human sperm.
DESIGN: Comparative study.
SETTING: Reproductive biology department.
PATIENT(S): Nine sperm donors.
INTERVENTION(S): Sperm were exposed to interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha), IFN-gamma,
interleukin-12 (IL-12), Ca2+ ionophore (A23187), or progesterone under
capacitating conditions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Cell lysates prepared from sperm and Jurkat T-cell line 
were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
the expression of JAKs (1-3 and TYK 2) and STATs (1-6) was examined by Western
blot analysis. Effect of IFN-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-12, A23187, or progesterone on 
sperm STAT 1 or STAT 4 phosphorylation was determined by phospho-STAT 1 antibody 
or antiphosphotyrosine (APT) Western blot analysis. Indirect immunofluorescence
and confocal laser scanning microscopy was used to confirm the specific staining 
of anti-TYK 2, anti-STAT 1, and anti-STAT 4 antibodies.
RESULT(S): By Western blot analysis, only antibodies to TYK 2 of the JAK family, 
and antibodies to STAT 1 and STAT 4 members of the STAT family specifically
recognized protein bands corresponding to TYK 2, STAT 1, and STAT 4 described in 
other cell types. By confocal microscopy, antibodies to TYK 2 reacted with the
sperm tail as well as the apical region of sperm head, whereas antibodies to STAT
1 and STAT 4 reacted with the apical region of the sperm head. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT 1 in capacitated sperm was enhanced by IFN-alpha and
IFN-gamma, and that of STAT 4 was enhanced by IL-12. Both A23187 and progesterone
markedly inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of sperm STAT 4.
CONCLUSION(S): Members of the JAK/STAT proteins, TYK 2, STAT 1, and STAT 4 are
present and active in human sperm. The localization of STAT 1 and STAT 4 proteins
to the apical region of the sperm head and their activation by IFN-alpha,
IFN-gamma, or IL-12 implicate a role for sperm STAT proteins in fertilization. We
hypothesize that sperm-derived phosphorylated STAT 1 and STAT 4 could contribute 
to the pool of transcription factors during sperm-oocyte fusion as well as
transmit signal to the oocyte nucleus. Therefore, defects in sperm TYK 2 and STAT
1- or STAT 4-mediated signaling pathway may have relevance to male factor
infertility.

PMID: 11476770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2001 Jan;6(1):115-27.

Stat transcription factors in mammary gland development and tumorigenesis.

Watson CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.
cjw53@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

Two members of the Stat family of transcription factors play a vital role in
mouse mammary gland development. Stat5a was originally described as a regulator
of milk protein gene expression and was subsequently shown to be essential for
mammary development and lactogenesis. In contrast, Stat3 is an essential mediator
of apoptosis and post-lactational regression. Other members of the Stat family
may have specific, but as yet undemonstrated, functions in mammary development.
However, since Stat1 activity is regulated during mammary development in a
pattern different from Stats 3 and 5, this factor too may have a functional role.
Although both Stat4 and Stat6 are expressed in mammary tissue, it seems unlikely 
that they will have a significant function as each of these Stats is activated in
response to a limited number of cytokines. Given the essential regulatory roles
of Stat signaling molecules in mammary development, it was not surprising to
discover that constitutively activated Stat factors are a feature of human breast
cancers. Sustained Stat activity has also been described in a variety of tumors
including leukemias. The cause of this sustained activation is not clear but
probably involves mutation of one of the many Stat regulatory proteins or
dysregulation of other signaling pathways which modulate Stat activity. It is now
important to understand the mechanism of constitutive Stat activity and to
develop strategies which will abrogate aberrant Stat signaling in tumors in vivo.

PMID: 11467447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;167(3):1306-12.

An absolute requirement for STAT4 and a role for IFN-gamma as an amplifying
factor in IL-12 induction of the functional IL-18 receptor complex.

Nakahira M(1), Tomura M, Iwasaki M, Ahn HJ, Bian Y, Hamaoka T, Ohta T, Kurimoto
M, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

IL-12 and IL-18 are both proinflammatory cytokines that contribute to promoting
Th1 development and IFN-gamma expression. However, neither IL-12R nor IL-18R is
expressed as a functional complex on most resting T cells. This study
investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the induction of an IL-18R
complex in T cells. Resting T cells expressed IL-18Ralpha chains but did not
exhibit IL-18 binding sites as detected by incubation with rIL-18 followed by
anti-IL-18 Ab, suggesting a lack of IL-18Rbeta expression in resting T cells.
Although they also failed to express IL-12R, stimulation with anti-CD3 plus
anti-CD28 generated IL-12R. Exposure of these cells to IL-12 led not only to
up-regulation of IL-18Ralpha expression but also to induction of IL-18R binding
sites on both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells concomitant with IL-18Rbeta mRNA
expression. The IL-18 binding site represented a functional IL-18R complex
capable of exhibiting IL-18 responsiveness. IL-12 induction of an IL-18R complex 
and IL-18Rbeta mRNA expression was not observed in STAT4-deficient (STAT4(-/-)) T
cells and was substantially decreased in IFN-gamma(-/-) T cells. However, the
failure of STAT4(-/-) T cells to induce an IL-18R complex was not corrected by
IFN-gamma. These results indicate that STAT4 and IFN-gamma play an indispensable 
role and a role as an amplifying factor, respectively, in IL-12 induction of the 
functional IL-18R complex.

PMID: 11466347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Br J Ophthalmol. 2001 Aug;85(8):1001-6.

Single dose intranasal administration of retinal autoantigen generates a rapid
accumulation and cell activation in draining lymph node and spleen: implications 
for tolerance therapy.

Dick AD(1), Sharma V, Liversidge J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Ophthalmology, University of Aberdeen, UK. a.dick@bristol.ac.uk

BACKGROUND/AIMS: A single intranasal delivery of retinal autoantigen suppresses
effectively experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis (EAU). To further unravel
underlying mechanisms the authors wished to determine, firstly, the kinetics of
antigen delivery and, secondly, the early cellular responses involved in the
initial stages of nasal mucosal tolerance induction.
METHODS: Flow cytometry, cell proliferation assays, and microscopy were used to
track antigen following a single, intranasal dose of Alexa-488 labelled retinal
antigen.
RESULTS: A rapid accumulation of antigen within both superficial cervical lymph
nodes (SCLN) and spleen was observed after 30 minutes. Significant proliferative 
responses to IRBP were elicited by 48 hours indicating that systemic priming of
naive T cells to retinal antigen had occurred. Cell activation was further
confirmed by immunoprecipitation studies, which demonstrated phosphorylation of
STAT4 but not STAT6 in both lymph nodes and spleen. However, at 24 hours, STAT4
heterodimerisation with STAT 3 was only observed in spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide novel evidence that following a single
intranasal application rapid transfer of antigen occurs. Resulting T cell
proliferation develops consequent to differential cell signalling in SCLN and
spleen. Further understanding of these underlying cellular mechanisms, in
particular as is inferred by the results the contribution of local versus
systemic tolerance induction, may assist in strategies to clinically apply
mucosal tolerance therapy successfully.

PMCID: PMC1724064
PMID: 11466262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Immunol. 2001 May;31(5):1456-64.

CD28 costimulation is required not only to induce IL-12 receptor but also to
render janus kinases/STAT4 responsive to IL-12 stimulation in TCR-triggered T
cells.

Park WR(1), Park CS, Tomura M, Ahn HJ, Nakahira Y, Iwasaki M, Gao P, Abe R,
Hamaoka T, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Japan.

The activation of resting T cells for the acquisition of various functions
depends on whether CD28 costimulatory signals are provided upon T cell receptor
stimulation. Here, we investigated how CD28 costimulation functions to allow
TCR-triggered resting T cells to acquire IL-12 responsiveness. When T cells are
stimulated with low doses of anti-CD3 mAb, CD28 costimulation was required for
the optimal levels of IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) expression. However, stimulation of
T cells with high doses of anti-CD3 alone induced comparable levels of IL-12R
expression to those induced upon CD28 costimulation. Nevertheless, there was a
substantial difference in IL-12 responsiveness between these two groups of T
cells: compared to anti-CD28-costimulated T cells, T cells that were not
costimulated with anti-CD28 exhibited decreased levels of Janus kinases (JAK)
JAK2/TYK2 and STAT4 phosphorylation and IFN-y production following IL-12
stimulation. Importantly, STAT6 phosphorylation following IL-4 stimulation was
not decreased in anti-CD28-uncostimulated T cells. These resutls indicate that
CD28 costimulation not only contributes to up-regulating IL-12R expression but is
also required to render JAKs/STAT4 responsive to IL-12 stimulation.

PMID: 11465102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Jul;31(7):2236-45.

IFN-alpha and IL-18 synergistically enhance IFN-gamma production in human NK
cells: differential regulation of Stat4 activation and IFN-gamma gene expression 
by IFN-alpha and IL-12.

Matikainen S(1), Paananen A, Miettinen M, Kurimoto M, Timonen T, Julkunen I,
Sareneva T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki,
Finland.

IFN-gamma, a product of NK and T cells, is a key cytokine contributing innate and
adaptive immunity. IFN-gamma production is induced via direct cell-cell contacts 
with APC and IFN-gamma -producing cells or by cytokines. During microbial
infections macrophage-derived IFN-alpha, IL-12, and IL-18 enhance IFN-gamma
production and Th1 response. Here we show that IFN-alpha in combination with
IL-18 very efficiently induces IFN-gamma expression also in primary, nonactivated
NK cells and in NK-92 cell line. Comparison of the kinetics of IFN-gamma mRNA
expression in nonactivated NK cells, NK-92 cells and activated T cells stimulated
with IFN-alpha or IL-12 revealed that, although both of these cytokines directly 
up-regulate IFN-gamma mRNA expression, its levels remain elevated much longer
with IL-12 stimulation. In both NK cells and T cells, Stat4 is known to be
critical in IL-12 and IFN-alpha signaling. We show that Stat4 activation is
transient in cells stimulated with IFN-alpha, whereas IL-12 induces more
long-lasting activation of the transcription factor. This prolonged activation of
IFN-gamma gene by IL-12 may result in more efficient IFN-gamma production
compared to that of IFN-alpha. Our results demonstrate that IFN-alpha and IL-18
are important innate cytokines in inducing NK cell IFN-gamma production.

PMID: 11449378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):855-65.

Unexpected characteristics of the IFN-gamma reporters in nontransformed T cells.

Zhu H(1), Yang J, Murphy TL, Ouyang W, Wagner F, Saparov A, Weaver CT, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Analysis of the IFN-gamma promoter has primarily been conducted by transient
expression of reporter constructs in transformed cells. However, the activity of 
cis elements may differ when expressed transiently compared with their activity
within native chromatin. Furthermore, the transcription factors and signaling
mechanisms in transformed cells may differ from those in normal T cells. To
analyze IFN-gamma promoter regulation in normal T cells, we developed a novel
retroviral bottom-strand reporter system to allow the chromatin integration of
promoter regions in primary developing T cells. As controls, both the IL-2 and
IL-4 promoters were inducible in this system, with the IL-4 reporter having
Th2-specific activity. Strikingly, the IFN-gamma promoter exhibited constitutive 
activity in both Th1 and Th2 subsets, in contrast to the behavior of the
endogenous IFN-gamma gene, which is inducible only in Th1 cells. In mapping this 
activity, we found that the AP-1/GM-CSF site in the distal promoter element is
the most critical element for the constitutive activity. Transgenic reporter
lines for the IFN-gamma promoter confirmed the constitutive behavior of the
isolated IFN-gamma promoter. This constitutive activity was resistant to
inhibition by cyclosporin A and was independent of Stat4 and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase. These results suggest that IFN-gamma promoter
regulation may require cis elements residing either downstream or >3.4 kb
upstream of the transcriptional start site, involving repression of constitutive 
activity.

PMID: 11441092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):779-86.

A role for IL-12 receptor expression and signal transduction in host defense in
leprosy.

Kim J(1), Uyemura K, Van Dyke MK, Legaspi AJ, Rea TH, Shuai K, Modlin RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The generation of cell-mediated immunity against intracellular infection involves
the production of IL-12, a critical cytokine required for the development of Th1 
responses. The biologic activities of IL-12 are mediated through a specific, high
affinity IL-12R composed of an IL-12Rbeta1/IL-12Rbeta2 heterodimer, with the
IL-12Rbeta2 chain involved in signaling via Stat4. We investigated IL-12R
expression and function in human infectious disease, using the
clinical/immunologic spectrum of leprosy as a model. T cells from tuberculoid
patients, the resistant form of leprosy, are responsive to IL-12; however, T
cells from lepromatous patients, the susceptible form of leprosy, do not respond 
to IL-12. We found that the IL-12Rbeta2 was more highly expressed in tuberculoid 
lesions compared with lepromatous lesions. In contrast, IL-12Rbeta1 expression
was similar in both tuberculoid and lepromatous lesions. The expression of
IL-12Rbeta2 on T cells was up-regulated by Mycobacterium leprae in tuberculoid
but not in lepromatous patients. Furthermore, IL-12 induced Stat4 phosphorylation
and DNA binding in M. leprae-activated T cells from tuberculoid but not from
lepromatous patients. Interestingly, IL-12Rbeta2 in lepromatous patients could be
up-regulated by stimulation with M. tuberculosis. These data suggest that Th
response to M. leprae determines IL-12Rbeta2 expression and function in host
defense in leprosy.

PMID: 11441083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):628-31.

Cutting edge: differential requirements for Stat4 in expression of
glycosyltransferases responsible for selectin ligand formation in Th1 cells.

White SJ(1), Underhill GH, Kaplan MH, Kansas GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

A role for Stat4 in IL-12-induced up-regulation of selectin ligands on Th1 cells 
was explored. Th1 cells generated from Stat4(-/-) mice exhibited no
IL-12-inducible P-selectin ligands, no up-regulation of core 2
beta1,6-glucosaminyltransferase I (C2GlcNAcT-I), and low levels of the Th1
transcription factor T-bet. In contrast, Stat4(-/-) Th1 cells exhibited only a
partial defect in expression of IL-12-inducible E-selectin ligands and expressed 
equivalently high levels of alpha1,3-fucosyltransferase VII (FucT-VII) as
wild-type Th1 cells. FucT-VII expression was induced by T cell activation, and
was enhanced by IL-12 independently of Stat4, whereas C2GlcNAcT-I up-regulation
was mediated exclusively by IL-12, acting through Stat4. These data show that
FucT-VII and C2GlcNAcT-I are controlled through distinct pathways and imply the
existence of at least one other IL-12-inducible glycosyltransferase required for 
E-selectin and possibly P-selectin ligand formation in Th1 cells.

PMID: 11441063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2001 Jun;21(6):445-50.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) are detectable in mouse
trigeminal ganglion neurons.

Kriesel JD(1), Jones BB, Hwang IP, Dahms KM, Spruance SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The John A. Moran Eye Center, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. jkriesel@med.utah.edu

We studied signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) expression
in mouse trigeminal ganglia (TG) to gain an understanding of herpes simplex virus
(HSV) infection and reactivation. Mouse TG were harvested and were either frozen 
for Western blot analysis or preserved in 4% paraformaldehyde for subsequent
immunohistochemistry study. The thawed specimens were homogenized, and
nuclear/cytoplasmic extractions were performed for Western blots and
immunoprecipitation. Immunohistochemistry showed that Stat1, Stat3, Stat4,
Stat5b, and phosphotyrosine Stat3 localized to TG neurons, not surrounding
satellite cells. Western blot of TG nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts confirmed
the presence of these Stat at the appropriate molecular weights. Stat2 was
undetectable in TG by these methods. Immunoprecipitation of TG nuclear extracts
did not confirm the presence of Stat-Stat dimers in these specimens. These
studies show that several Stat, including phosphotyrosine Stat3, are present in
TG neurons, the site of HSV latency, where they could act upon latent viral DNA
to effect reactivation.

PMID: 11440643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2001 Jun;21(6):379-88.

The interferon-inducible Stat2:Stat1 heterodimer preferentially binds in vitro to
a consensus element found in the promoters of a subset of interferon-stimulated
genes.

Ghislain JJ(1), Wong T, Nguyen M, Fish EN.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie Moléculaire du Développement, Ecole Normale Superieure, France.

Regulated expression of type I interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISG) requires
the binding of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)
complexes to enhancer elements located in the ISG promoters. These enhancer
elements include the IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) and the palindromic
IFN-gamma activation site (GAS) element. Regulated expression of ISRE containing 
ISG depends on IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), a heterodimer involving
Stat1 and Stat2 in association with a DNA-binding adapter protein, p48/IFN
regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9). Several GAS binding Stat complexes involving Stat1, 
Stat3, Stat4, and Stat5 have been described, but their contribution to
GAS-dependent ISG expression remains to be established. We and others previously 
identified an IFN-alpha-inducible Stat2:1 heterodimer that exhibits binding to
the GAS element of the IRF-1 gene. These previous studies raise the possibility
that Stat2:1 may participate in the transcriptional activation of the subset of
ISG containing GAS elements. To address this question, we performed a
PCR-assisted binding site selection procedure to define the Stat2:1 recognition
sequence. The data reveal that Stat2:1 preferentially binds to a palindromic
sequence similar to the consensus GAS element found in the promoter of several
ISG. Our results establish that in addition to the classic complex formation
involving Stat2, Stat1, and p48 associations, Stat2:1 heterodimers are formed in 
response to IFN treatment that may play an important role in the transcriptional 
regulation of certain ISG.

PMID: 11440635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Anat. 2001 May;198(Pt 5):581-9.

Immunolocalisation of the janus kinases (JAK)--signal transducers and activators 
of transcription (STAT) pathway in human epidermis.

Nishio H(1), Matsui K, Tsuji H, Tamura A, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Medical College, Department of Legal Medicine, Takatsuki, Japan.

The janus kinases (JAK) and signal transducers and activators of the
transcription (STAT) pathway have been shown to be activated by a number of
cytokines or growth factors and to play significant roles in the differentiation 
of various cell types. In the present study, we investigated the distribution of 
the JAK-STAT pathway using immunohistochemistry in the human epidermis. Each
element of the pathway showed abundant and differential expression in the
epidermis. The differential distribution of the elements was most strikingly
observed in the horny keratinised cell and granular layers of the epidermis.
JAK2, JAK3, STAT1 and STAT5 were expressed in high amounts, and JAK1, TYK2,
STAT2, STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6 to a much lesser extent in the horny cell layer.
JAK3, TYK2, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6 were more abundantly expressed in the
granular layer than the lower layers of the epidermis. JAK1, STAT1 and STAT5 were
expressed at almost the same levels in the various layers of the epidermis. These
results show that elements of the JAK-STAT pathway are abundantly and
differentially expressed in the epidermis. It is suggested that each element of
the pathway may play a role at a distinct stage of keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1468247
PMID: 11430697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 1;167(1):221-7.

Positive regulatory role of IL-12 in macrophages and modulation by IFN-gamma.

Grohmann U(1), Belladonna ML, Vacca C, Bianchi R, Fallarino F, Orabona C,
Fioretti MC, Puccetti P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Similar to myeloid dendritic cells, murine macrophages and macrophage cell lines 
were found to express a surface receptor for IL-12. As a result, peritoneal
macrophages could be primed by IL-12 to present an otherwise poorly immunogenic
tumor peptide in vivo. Using binding analysis and RNase protection assay, we
detected a single class of high affinity IL-12 binding sites (K(d) of
approximately 35 pM) whose number per cell was increased by IFN-gamma via
up-regulation of receptor subunit expression. Autocrine production of IL-12 was
suggested to be a major effect of IL-12 on macrophages when the cytokine was
tested alone or after priming with IFN-gamma in vitro. In vivo, combined
treatment of macrophages with IFN-gamma and IL-12 resulted in synergistic effects
on tumor peptide presentation. Therefore, our findings suggest a general and
critical role of IL-12 in potentiating the accessory function of myeloid APC.

PMID: 11418652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Exp Mol Pathol. 2001 Jun;70(3):231-8.

Dysfunction of Stat4 leads to accelerated incidence of chemical-induced thymic
lymphomas in mice.

Zhang SS(1), Welte T, Fu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, 06520-8023, USA.

Stat4 (signal transducer and activator of transcription) can be activated by
specific cytokines, such as IL-12, IFN-alpha, and IL-2. Since IL-12 has been
implicated in tumor surveillance and cancer treatment, we hypothesized that its
signaling mediator, Stat4, may repress tumor growth. Mice lacking Stat4 allowed
us to directly assess the role of Stat4 in tumor surveillance. Lymphomas were
chemically induced by MNU (N-methyl-N-nitrosourea) injection in Stat4-deficient
or wild-type control mice. At the time of termination of the experiment 16 weeks 
after injection, 78% of homozygous Stat4-deficient mice had developed thymic
lymphomas. This tumor induction was dramatically higher than in heterozygous
(14%) and wild-type controls (14%). Lymphoma development occurred 5 weeks earlier
in homozygous knockout mice than in other genotypes. Mice bearing tumors were
fragile and had an increased death rate in the early stages of the experiment.
The tumors displayed a very aggressive phenotype with metastases in multiple
organs. Therefore, the loss of Stat4 predisposes mice to tumor induction and
demonstrates crucial roles of Stat4 in the prevention of tumors.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11418001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Methods Enzymol. 2001;333:138-51.

STAT proteins: signal tranducers and activators of transcription.

Bromberg J(1), Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

PMID: 11400331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Science. 2001 Jun 8;292(5523):1907-10.

Role of T-bet in commitment of TH1 cells before IL-12-dependent selection.

Mullen AC(1), High FA, Hutchins AS, Lee HW, Villarino AV, Livingston DM, Kung AL,
Cereb N, Yao TP, Yang SY, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, USA.

How cytokines control differentiation of helper T (TH) cells is controversial. We
show that T-bet, without apparent assistance from interleukin 12 (IL-12)/STAT4,
specifies TH1 effector fate by targeting chromatin remodeling to individual
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) alleles and by inducing IL-12 receptor beta2
expression. Subsequently, it appears that IL-12/STAT4 serves two essential
functions in the development of TH1 cells: as growth signal, inducing survival
and cell division; and as trans-activator, prolonging IFN-gamma synthesis through
a genetic interaction with the coactivator, CREB-binding protein. These results
suggest that a cytokine does not simply induce TH fate choice but instead may act
as an essential secondary stimulus that mediates selective survival of a lineage.

PMID: 11397944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Virol. 2001 Jul;75(13):5860-9.

Cytokine production by Vgamma(+)-T-cell subsets is an important factor
determining CD4(+)-Th-cell phenotype and susceptibility of BALB/c mice to
coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis.

Huber SA(1), Graveline D, Born WK, O'Brien RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, USA.
shuber@salus.med.uvm.edu

Two coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) variants (H3 and H310A1) differ by a single amino
acid mutation in the VP2 capsid protein. H3 induces severe myocarditis in BALB/c 
mice, but H310A1 is amyocarditic. Infection with H3, but not H310A1,
preferentially activates Vgamma4 Vdelta4 cells, which are strongly positive for
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), whereas Vgamma1 Vdelta4 cells are increased in both
H3 and H310A1 virus-infected animals. Depletion of Vgamma1(+) cells using
monoclonal anti-Vgamma1 antibody enhanced myocarditis and CD4(+)-,
IFN-gamma(+)-cell responses in both H3- and H310A1-infected mice yet decreased
the CD4(+)-, IL-4(+)-cell response. Depleting Vgamma4(+) cells suppressed
myocarditis and reduced CD4(+) IFN-gamma(+) cells but increased CD4(+) IL-4(+) T 
cells. The role of cytokine production by Vgamma1(+) and Vgamma4(+) T cells was
investigated by adoptively transferring these cells isolated from H3-infected
BALB/c Stat4 knockout (Stat4ko) (defective in IFN-gamma expression) or BALB/c
Stat6ko (defective in IL-4 expression) mice into H3 virus-infected wild-type
BALB/c recipients. Vgamma4 and Vgamma1(+) T cells from Stat4ko mice expressed
IL-4 but no or minimal IFN-gamma, whereas these cell populations derived from
Stat6ko mice expressed IFN-gamma but no IL-4. Stat4ko Vgamma1(+) cells (IL-4(+)) 
suppress myocarditis. Stat6ko Vgamma1(+) cells (IFN-gamma(+)) were not
inhibitory. Stat6ko Vgamma4(+) cells (IFN-gamma(+)) significantly enhanced
myocarditis. Stat4ko Vgamma4(+) cells (IL-4(+)) neither inhibited nor enhanced
disease. These results show that distinct gammadelta-T-cell subsets control
myocarditis susceptibility and bias the CD4(+)-Th-cell response. The cytokines
produced by the Vgamma subpopulation have a significant influence on the
CD4(+)-Th-cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC114301
PMID: 11390587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood. 2001 Jun 15;97(12):3860-6.

Specific down-regulation of interleukin-12 signaling through induction of
phospho-STAT4 protein degradation.

Wang KS(1), Zorn E, Ritz J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hematologic Oncology, Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) plays a critical role in modulating the function of T
lymphocytes and natural killer cells. IL-12 has potent antitumor effects in
animal models, mediated primarily by its ability to enhance cytolytic activity
and secretion of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Unfortunately, the antitumor
effect of IL-12 has not been demonstrated in clinical trials. Repeated
administration of IL-12 in humans results in decreasing levels of IFN-gamma
secretion. To understand the mechanism underlying this loss of responsiveness,
the effect of IL-12 on its own signaling in activated human T cells was examined.
These experiments demonstrate that the level of the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) protein, a critical IL-12 signaling
component, is dramatically decreased 24 hours after IL-12 stimulation, whereas
levels of STAT4 messenger RNA are not affected. The decrease of STAT4 protein
appears to be due to specific degradation of phospho-STAT4, possibly through the 
proteasome degradation pathway. Decreased levels of STAT4 protein lead to
decreased STAT4 DNA-binding activity and reduced proliferation and secretion of
IFN-gamma. This down-regulation of STAT4 is specific for IL-12 signaling,
presumably owing to the prolonged activation of STAT4 induced by IL-12. IFN-alpha
stimulation, which leads to transient phosphorylation of STAT4, does not reduce
the level of STAT4 protein. These findings provide new insights into the
regulation of IL-12 signaling in human T cells, where IL-12 promotes T(H)1
responses, but persistent IL-12 stimulation may also limit this response. The
cellular depletion of STAT4 following prolonged IL-12 stimulation may also
explain the loss of responsiveness following the repeated administration of IL-12
in clinical trials. (Blood. 2001;97:3860-3866)

PMID: 11389027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Blood. 2001 Jun 1;97(11):3342-8.

Janus kinase 2 is involved in stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of focal adhesion proteins and migration of hematopoietic
progenitor cells.

Zhang XF(1), Wang JF, Matczak E, Proper JA, Groopman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), the ligand for the CXCR4 receptor, is a
highly efficacious chemoattractant for CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells.
However, the SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling pathways that regulate hematopoiesis are still
not well defined. This study reports that SDF-1alpha can stimulate the tyrosine
phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) and other members of the JAK/signal
transduction and activation of transcription (STAT) family, including JAK1,
tyrosine kinase 2, STAT2, and STAT4 in the human progenitor cell line, CTS.
SDF-1alpha stimulation of these cells also enhanced the association of JAK2 with 
phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase. This enhanced association was abolished by
pretreatment of cells with AG490, a specific JAK2 inhibitor. Furthermore,
pretreatment of CTS cells with AG490 significantly inhibited SDF-1alpha-induced
PI3-kinase activity, and inhibition of JAK2 with AG490 ablated the
SDF-1alpha-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple focal adhesion proteins
(including focal adhesion kinase, related adhesion focal tyrosine kinase,
paxillin, CrkII, CrkL, and p130Cas). Chemotaxis assays showed that inhibition of 
JAK2 diminished SDF-1alpha-induced migration in both CTS cells and CD34(+) human 
bone marrow progenitor cells. Hence, these results suggest that JAK2 is required 
for CXCR4 receptor-mediated signaling that regulates cytoskeletal proteins and
cell migration through PI3-kinase pathways in hematopoietic progenitor cells.
(Blood. 2001;97:3342-3348)

PMID: 11369622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2001 Jun 1;166(11):6776-83.

BALB/c mice bearing a transgenic IL-12 receptor beta 2 gene exhibit a nonhealing 
phenotype to Leishmania major infection despite intact IL-12 signaling.

Nishikomori R(1), Gurunathan S, Nishikomori K, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In BALB/c mice infected with Leishmania major, early secretion of IL-4 leads to a
Th2-type response and nonhealing. We explored the role of IL-4-induced
down-regulation of the IL-12Rbeta2 chain in the establishment of this Th2
response. First, we showed that the draining lymph nodes of resistant C57BL/6
mice infected with L. major were enriched in CD4+/IL-12Rbeta2 chain+ cells
producing IFN-gamma. Next, we demonstrated that BALB/c background mice bearing an
IL-12Rbeta2-chain transgene manifested a nonhealing phenotype similar to
wild-type littermates despite the persistence of their ability to undergo STAT4
activation. Finally, we found that such transgenic mice display more severe
infection than wild-type littermates when treated with IL-12 7 days after
infection, and under this condition, the mice display increased Leishmania
Ag-induced IL-4 secretion. These studies indicate that although CD4+/IL-12Rbeta2 
chain+ T cells are important components of the Th1 response, maintenance of
IL-12Rbeta2 chain expression is not sufficient to change a Th2 response to a Th1 
response in vivo and thus to allow BALB/c mice to heal L. major infection.

PMID: 11359836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Br Med Bull. 2000;56(4):969-84.

Molecular aspects of T-cell differentiation.

Rao A(1), Avni O.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Blood Research, Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School,
Warren Alpert Building, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Differentiated T helper 1 (Th1) and T helper 2 (Th2) T-cells show striking
differences in their patterns of cytokine expression. This process is initiated
by stimulation with antigen and the cytokines IL-12 and IL-4, respectively, and
requires antigen-induced transcription factors such as NFAT and cytokine-induced 
transcription factors such as STAT4, induced by IL-12, and STAT6, induced by
IL-4. This results in induction and maintained expression of subset-specific
transcription factors including T-bet in Th1 cells and GATA3 in Th2 cells, which 
are involved in ensuring the commitment of T-cells to Th1 or Th2 lineages. Here
we review the signalling pathways and transcription factors that mediate T-cell
differentiation, and describe the epigenetic changes in chromatin structure,
locus accessibility and DNA methylation that are known to accompany this process.

PMID: 11359632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Hematol. 2001 Apr;73(3):271-7.

Role of Jak kinases and STATs in cytokine signal transduction.

Leonard WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

The Janus family tyrosine kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Jak-STAT) signaling pathway is broadly used by interferons and type I cytokines.
These cytokines and interferons activate Janus family tyrosine kinases (Jak
kinases), which in turn phosphorylate and thereby activate STAT proteins. Before 
activation, STAT proteins are cytosolic proteins; after activation, however, they
are translocated to the nucleus where they function as transcription factors.
This review summarizes salient features of the Jak-STAT pathway and focuses on
the functional role of the different Jak kinases and STATs in vivo.

PMID: 11345192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Immunol. 2001 May 1;166(9):5720-5.

A heritable defect in IL-12 signaling in B10.Q/J mice. II. Effect on acute
resistance to Toxoplasma gondii and rescue by IL-18 treatment.

Yap GS(1), Ortmann R, Shevach E, Sher A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of. Parasitic Diseases and Immunology, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

This study documents a defect in IL-12-dependent IFN-gamma responses in a
substrain (B10.Q-H2-(q)/SgJ) of B10.Q mice that manifests as an acute
susceptibility to infection by the intracellular protozoan pathogen, Toxoplasma
gondii. Despite robust systemic production of IL-12, infected B10.Q/J animals
fail to mount an early IFN-gamma response after parasite inoculation. Genetic
experiments revealed that the host resistance and IFN-gamma production defects
are determined by a single autosomal recessive locus distinct from the Stat4
gene. Nonetheless, a delayed IL-12-mediated IFN-gamma response emerges in later
stages of acute infection but is unable to prevent host mortality. IL-18
administration restores, in an IL-12-dependent manner, the early IFN-gamma
response and host resistance of B10.Q/J animals. These in vivo studies indicate
that the partially impaired IL-12 responsiveness in B10.Q/J mice can result in
defective host resistance and demonstrate a therapeutic function for IL-18 in
reversing a genetically based immunodeficiency in IL-12-dependent IFN-gamma
production.

PMID: 11313414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Immunol. 2001 May 1;166(9):5712-9.

A heritable defect in IL-12 signaling in B10.Q/J mice. I. In vitro analysis.

Ortmann R(1), Smeltz R, Yap G, Sher A, Shevach EM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of. Immunology and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

B10.Q mice are normally susceptible to the induction of collagen-induced
arthritis. We noted that one subline of B10.Q mice, B10.Q/J, was completely
resistant to disease induction when immunized with collagen in CFA. B10.Q/J mice 
have a global defect in the generation of Th1 responses, and Ag-specific T cells 
derived from this strain failed to produce IFN-gamma. Because T cells from these 
mice could produce normal amounts of IFN-gamma when activated by
IL-12/IL-18-independent stimuli, the defect appeared to be a failure to respond
to IL-12. This defect extended to NK cells, which also failed to produce
IFN-gamma when stimulated by IL-12. The capacity of NK cells, but not activated T
cells, to produce IFN-gamma in response to IL-12 could be partially restored by
IL-18. The expression of the IL-12R beta1- and beta2-chains on T cells and NK
cells from B10.Q/J mice was normal. However, activated T cells from B10.Q/J mice 
did not signal normally through the IL-12R and manifested a defect in their
capacity to phosphorylate Stat4. This defect was partial in that it could be
overcome by increasing both the concentration of IL-12 and the incubation times
in the Stat4 phosphorylation assays. Because Stat4 function is apparently intact 
in B10.Q/J mice, the defect in IL-12 signaling can be localized between the
IL-12R complex and Stat4. This subtle abnormality in IL-12 responsiveness results
in a profound defect in the generation of Th1 cells and the development of
autoimmune disease.

PMID: 11313413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2001 Jan-Mar;124(1-3):117-20.

Reduced interferon-gamma production and mutations of the interleukin-12 receptor 
beta(2) chain gene in atopic subjects.

Kondo N(1), Matsui E, Kaneko H, Fukao T, Teramoto T, Inoue R, Watanabe M,
Kasahara K, Morimoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.
nkondo@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The atopic patient has a predisposition to selective synthesis of IgE
antibodies to common environmental antigens. IgE production is upregulated by
interleukin-4 (IL-4) and downregulated by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). IL-12 is 
a cytokine that induces IFN-gamma production. The signal of IL-12 is transduced
through the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) and Stat4.
METHODS: We examined IFN-gamma production in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) following stimulation with IL-12 or phytohemagglutinin (PHA) in healthy
controls and atopic patients. Moreover, sequences of the IL-12R beta(2) chain
gene were analyzed.
RESULTS: The serum IgE levels were negatively correlated (p < 0.001) with
IFN-gamma production. In 24 out of 75 atopic patients, IFN-gamma production in
PBMCs following stimulation with IL-12 was under the detection limit, but PHA
stimulation elicited detectable IFN-gamma production. Sequence analysis of the
cDNA of IL-12R beta(2) revealed three kinds of distinct genetic mutations (2496
del 91, 1577 A to G and 2799 A to G) in 10 unrelated subjects of the 24 whose
IFN-gamma production following IL-12 stimulation was under the detection limit.
PBMCs cultured with IL-12 and PHA in these 10 subjects showed decreased tyrosine 
phosphorylation of Stat4.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our study indicate that atopic diseases are caused,
in part, by impairment of the IL-12 signal cascade, which downregulates IgE
production, and that the mutation of the IL-12R beta(2) chain gene is one of the 
causative genes for atopy.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11306945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Apr;31(4):1055-65.

IL-12-induced reversal of human Th2 cells is accompanied by full restoration of
IL-12 responsiveness and loss of GATA-3 expression.

Smits HH(1), van Rietschoten JG, Hilkens CM, Sayilir R, Stiekema F, Kapsenberg
ML, Wierenga EA.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Department of Cell Biology
and Histology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

IL-12 is a potent inducer of IFN-gamma production and drives the development of
Th1 cells. Human polarized Th2 cells do not express the signaling beta2-subunit
of the IL-12R and, therefore, do not signal in response to IL-12. The question
was raised as to what extent the loss of the IL-12Rbeta2 chain in Th2 cells has
bearing on the stability of the human Th2 phenotype. In the present report, we
show that restimulation of human fully polarized Th2 cells in the presence of
IL-12 primes for a shift towards Th0/Th1 phenotypes, accompanied by suppression
of GATA-3 expression and induction of T-bet expression. These reversed cells are 
further characterized by a marked IL-12Rbeta2 chain expression and fully restored
IL-12-inducible STAT4 activation. The IL-12-induced phenotypic shift proved to be
stable as a subsequent restimulation in the presence of IL-4 and in the absence
of IL-12 could not undo the accomplished changes. Identical results were obtained
with cells from atopic patients, both with polyclonal Th2 cell lines and
allergen-specific Th2 cell clones. These findings suggest the possibility of
restoring IL-12 responsiveness in established Th2 cells of atopic patients by
stimulation in the presence of IL-12, and that IL-12-promoting immunotherapy can 
be beneficial for Th2-mediated immune disorders, targeting both naive and memory 
effector T cells.

PMID: 11298330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Immunity. 2001 Mar;14(3):205-15.

Early transcription and silencing of cytokine genes underlie polarization of T
helper cell subsets.

Grogan JL(1), Mohrs M, Harmon B, Lacy DA, Sedat JW, Locksley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
94143, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Naive CD4+ T cells activated through TCR/CD28 under Th1 or Th2 conditions
expressed canonical cytokine patterns irrespective of cell division. Only cells
that had divided fewer than four times were capable of reexpressing alternative
cytokines when restimulated under opposing conditions. Although T cells
transcribed both IFN-gamma and IL-4 within hours in a Stat4-/Stat6-independent
manner, neither T-bet nor GATA-3 was induced optimally without Stat signals, and 
polarized cytokine expression was not sustained. Cytokine genes were positioned
apart from heterochromatin in resting T cell nuclei, consistent with rapid
expression. After polarization, the majority of silenced cytokine alleles were
repositioned to heterochromatin. Naive T cells transit through sequential stages 
of cytokine activation, commitment, silencing, and physical stabilization during 
polarization into differentiated effector subsets.

PMID: 11290331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Transplant Proc. 2001 Feb-Mar;33(1-2):214-6.

Role of STAT6 signaling in the induction and long-term maintenance of tolerance
mediated by CTLA4-Ig.

Zhou P(1), Szot G, Guo Z, Kim O, He G, Wang J, Grusby M, Newell K, Thistlethwaite
J, Bluestone J, Alegre M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PMID: 11266784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nat Immunol. 2000 Sep;1(3):199-205.

Dendritic cell regulation of TH1-TH2 development.

Moser M(1), Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moleculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Rue des
Prof. Jeener et Brochet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

Understanding the control exerted by cytokines on T helper cell subsets 1 and 2
(TH1-TH2) development has progressed to a fairly satisfying knowledge of
intracellular signals and transcription factors. Less is understood about the
molecular basis of TH1-TH2 development exerted by other parameters, such as how
the antigen presenting cell can influence this process. Recent work suggests that
dendritic cell subsets contribute significant polarizing influences on T helper
differentiation, but how this comes about is less clear. In some cases known
pathways may be used, as in the dendritic cell subset 1 exerting TH1 polarization
by interleukin 12 (IL-12) production and STAT4 activation. In others, the effects
are still in need of explanation.

PMID: 10973276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Immunol. 2000 Jul;1(1):65-9.

Selective loss of type I interferon-induced STAT4 activation caused by a
minisatellite insertion in mouse Stat2.

Farrar JD(1), Smith JD, Murphy TL, Leung S, Stark GR, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Jul;1(1):15-7.
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Jul;1(1):17-9.

The use of murine systems to model pathogen-induced human diseases presumes that 
general immune mechanisms between these species are conserved. One important
immunoregulatory mechanism involves linkage of innate and adaptive immunity to
direct the development of T helper subsets, for example toward subset 1 (TH1)
development through STAT4 activation. In analyzing type I interferon signaling,
we uncovered a difference between murine and human cells which may affect how
these two species control linkage between innate and adaptive immunity. We show
that in humans, type I interferons induce TH1 development and can activate STAT4 
by recruitment to the IFN-alpha receptor complex specifically via the
carboxy-terminus of STAT2. However, the mouse Stat2 gene harbors a minisatellite 
insertion that has altered the carboxy-terminus and selectively disrupted its
capacity to activate STAT4, but not other STATs. This defect in murine Stat2
suggests that the signals leading to STAT4 activation and TH1 development in CD4+
T cells are different between mice and humans.

PMID: 10881177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nat Immunol. 2000 Jul;1(1):17-9.

Type 1 IFNs and regulation of TH1 responses: enigmas both resolved and emerge.

O'Shea JJ, Visconti R.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Oct;1(4):265.
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Jul;1(1):15-7.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Jul;1(1):65-9.

PMID: 10881168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Exp Med. 2001 Mar 19;193(6):679-88.

Pivotal role of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)4 and
Stat6 in the innate immune response during sepsis.

Matsukawa A(1), Kaplan MH, Hogaboam CM, Lukacs NW, Kunkel SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)4 and Stat6 are
transcription factors that provide type 1 and type 2 response, respectively.
Here, we explored the role of Stat4 and Stat6 in innate immunity during septic
peritonitis. Stat4-/- and Stat6-/- mice were resistant to the lethality compared 
with wild-type (WT) mice. At the mechanistic level, bacterial levels in Stat6-/- 
mice were much lower than in WT mice, which was associated with increased
peritoneal levels of interleukin (IL)-12, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha,
macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC), and C10, known to enhance bacterial
clearance. In Stat4-/- mice, hepatic inflammation and injury during sepsis were
significantly ameliorated without affecting local responses. This event was
associated with increased hepatic levels of IL-10 and IL-13, while decreasing
those of macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-2 and KC. Sepsis-induced renal
injury was also abrogated in Stat4-/- mice, which was accompanied by decreased
renal levels of MIP-2 and KC without altering IL-10 and IL-13 levels. Thus,
Stat6-/- and Stat4-/- mice appeared to be resistant to septic peritonitis by
enhancing local bacterial clearance and modulating systemic organ damage,
respectively, via balancing cytokine responses. These results clearly highlight
an important role of local type 1 and systemic type 2 cytokine response in
protective immunity during sepsis, which can be regulated by Stat proteins.

PMCID: PMC2193416
PMID: 11257135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Immunol. 2001 Apr 1;166(7):4446-55.

Inducible expression of Stat4 in dendritic cells and macrophages and its critical
role in innate and adaptive immune responses.

Fukao T(1), Frucht DM, Yap G, Gadina M, O'Shea JJ, Koyasu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Autocrine activation of APC by IL-12 has recently been revealed; we demonstrate
here that inducible expression of Stat4 in APC is central to this process. Stat4 
is induced in dendritic cells (DC) in a maturation-dependent manner and in
macrophages in an activation-dependent manner. Stat4 levels directly correlate
with IL-12-dependent IFN-gamma production by APC as well as IFN-gamma production 
by DC during Ag presentation. The Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 suppress Stat4
induction in DC and macrophages when present during maturation and activation,
respectively, diminishing IFN-gamma production. In contrast, IL-4 has no effect
on Stat4 levels in mature DC and actually augments IFN-gamma production by DC
during Ag presentation, indicating that IL-4 acts differently in a spatiotemporal
manner. The functional importance of Stat4 is evident in Stat4(-/-) DC and
macrophages, which fail to produce IFN-gamma. Furthermore, Stat4(-/-) macrophages
are defective in NO production in response to IL-12 and are susceptible to
TOXOPLASMA: Autocrine IL-12 signaling is required for high-level IFN-gamma
production by APC at critical stages in both innate and adaptive immunity, and
the control of Stat4 expression is likely an important regulator of this process.

PMID: 11254700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;13(2):211-7.

The Stat family in cytokine signaling.

Ihle JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, Tennessee
38105, USA. james.ihle@stjude.org

During the past few years studies from several laboratories have utilized gene
disruption approaches to define the function of members of the Stat family of
transcription factors. The results have demonstrated that each family member has 
unique, critical, non-redundant functions in signal transduction through members 
of the cytokine receptor superfamily. Many of the family members mediate
functions associated with innate or acquired immunity. With the availability of
mice deficient in one or more of the Stats, critical experiments are possible to 
evaluate the roles of Stat signal transduction pathways in cellular
transformation as well as evaluating their specific roles in a range of cellular 
responses to cytokines.

PMID: 11248555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Neuroimmunol. 2001 Mar 1;114(1-2):40-7.

STAT expression and localization in the central nervous system during autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis in Lewis rats.

Jee Y(1), Kim G, Tanuma N, Matsumoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for
Neuroscience, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan

Autoimmune inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS) is maintained by
secretion of a large number of cytokines. To elucidate its molecular mechanisms, 
we examined the expression and localization of STAT1, STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6
molecules, which are the downstream molecules of the cytokine signal transduction
pathway, in the CNS during acute experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) 
induced in Lewis rats. Western blot analysis demonstrated that STAT1 protein
increased gradually till the recovery stage, whereas STAT4 protein showed abrupt 
increase at the early stage followed by gradual decrease. STAT3 and STAT6 showed 
stable expression throughout the course of the disease. The kinetics of the
phosphorylated form of STAT1 and STAT4 roughly paralleled that of the total
protein although the peak of STAT3 phosphorylation was recognized at the
preclinical stage. Immunohistochemical examinations revealed that STAT3 and
STAT4, but not STAT1 and STAT6, immunoreactivities were mainly expressed in
astrocytes and microglia, respectively, and were closely associated with
inflammatory lesions. Taken together, these findings suggest that STAT3 and STAT4
play an important role in the formation of, and recovery from, autoimmune
inflammation in the CNS.

PMID: 11240014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 9;281(4):907-12.

Differential expression of signal transducers and activators of transcription
during human adipogenesis.

Harp JB(1), Franklin D, Vanderpuije AA, Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA. jharp@sph.unc.edu

Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STATs) display unique
expression patterns upon induction of differentiation of murine 3T3-L1
preadipocytes into adipocytes. During differentiation, expression of STAT1 and
STAT5 increase, while STAT3 and STAT6 remain relatively unchanged. Here, we
determined whether human subcutaneous preadipocytes expressed STATs and if the
pattern of expression changed during adipogenesis. We found by Western blot
analysis that freshly isolated preadipocytes expressed STAT1, STAT3, STAT5, and
STAT6, but not STAT2 and STAT4. Induction of preadipocyte differentiation with
1-methyl-3-isobutylxanthine, dexamethasone, insulin, and BRL49653 decreased
expression of STAT1, and increased expression of STAT3 and STAT5. STAT6
expression did not change during adipogenesis. Changes in expression of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta), C/EBPdelta, C/EBPalpha, and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma were similar to murine cell
lines. These results suggest that unlike the traditional adipogenic transcription
factors, unique differences exist in STAT expression patterns between murine and 
human adipose cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Zh Evol Biokhim Fiziol. 2000 Nov-Dec;36(6):504-8.

[STAT pathway of the intracellular signaling].

[Article in Russian]

Nikol'skii NN, Vasilenko KP.

PMID: 11212528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 1;166(5):3075-82.

The production of IFN-gamma by IL-12/IL-18-activated macrophages requires STAT4
signaling and is inhibited by IL-4.

Schindler H(1), Lutz MB, Röllinghoff M, Bogdan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology, and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

Macrophages release IFN-gamma on combined stimulation with IL-12 and IL-18, but
the signaling requirements of this process and its regulation by other cytokines 
are unknown. Here, we demonstrate that STAT4 is indispensable for
IL-12/IL-18-induced production of IFN-gamma by mouse peritoneal macrophages. Type
2 NO synthase (NOS2), which we previously found to be a prerequisite for
IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production in NK cells, was not required for IFN-gamma
production by these macrophages. IL-12 alone already induced the expression of
IFN-gamma mRNA, but nuclear translocation of STAT4, the release of IFN-gamma
protein, and the subsequent production of NO was strictly dependent on the
simultaneous presence of IL-18. NF-kappa B, which mediates IL-18 effects in T
cells, was only weakly activated by IL-12 and/or IL-18 in macrophages. Known
inhibitors of macrophage functions (e.g., IL-4 and TGF-beta) also suppressed
macrophage IFN-gamma production and the subsequent production of NOS2-derived NO.
The inhibitory effect of IL-4 was paralleled by nuclear translocation of STAT6,
which in EMSAs was able to bind to the same DNA oligonucleotide as STAT4. These
results further define the production of IFN-gamma by macrophages and point to a 
diversity in the signals required for IFN-gamma production by various cell types.

PMID: 11207258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Feb;31(2):384-95.

Differential requirement of CD28 for IL-12 receptor expression and function in
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells.

Elloso MM(1), Scott P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of
Pathobiology, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

IL-12 is a potent inducer of IFN-gamma production and Th1 responses.
Co-stimulation mediated by B7 has been shown to synergize with IL-12 for optimal 
IFN-gamma production and proliferation in vitro. In this study, we examined the
requirement of CD28/B7 interactions for optimal induction of IL-12 receptor(R)
beta1 and beta2 expression and IFN-gamma. IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production and 
STAT4 nuclear translocation were markedly reduced in CD28(-/-) splenocytes
compared to that of wild-type (WT) splenocytes. Analysis of IL-12R expression
revealed that IL-12 induced similar levels of IL-12R beta2 mRNA expression in WT 
and CD28(-/-) cells. In contrast, IL-12R beta1 expression was impaired in
CD28(-/-) cells, indicating that expression of IL-12R beta1 and beta2 is
differentially regulated by CD28. CD28(-/-) CD4(+) but not CD8(+) cells exhibited
a defect in IL-12Rbeta1 expression that was associated with a marked decrease in 
IL-12 binding as well as IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production. IL-2 could restore
IL-12R expression to CD28(-/-) CD4(+) cells, however, this occurred independently
of IL-2-induced proliferation. Thus, these findings identify distinct
requirements for CD28 in the capacity of CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells to respond
maximally to IL-12.

PMID: 11180102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Bioessays. 2001 Feb;23(2):161-9.

Activation of STAT proteins and growth control.

Bromberg JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, NY 10021, USA. bromberj@mskcc.org

This review will discuss how STAT (Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription) proteins, a group of transcription factors that transmit signals
from the extracellular surface of cells to the nucleus, are involved in growth
control. I will discuss the anatomy of a STAT protein, how it works as a
transcription factor, the molecules that regulate its "activity", the phenotypes 
of mice that lack individual STAT proteins and their involvement in growth,
differentiation, apoptosis, and transformation. Finally, a number of examples
will be presented of how dysregulated STAT signaling may be involved in the
pathogenesis of cancer.

PMID: 11169589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 19;280(2):503-12.

The direct effect of IL-12 on tumor cells: IL-12 acts directly on tumor cells to 
activate NF-kappaB and enhance IFN-gamma-mediated STAT1 phosphorylation.

Su W(1), Ito T, Oyama T, Kitagawa T, Yamori T, Fujiwara H, Matsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery (E1), Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan.

IL-12 directly acts on T cells and NK cells to induce IFN-gamma production.
IFN-gamma plays an important role in anti-tumor effect of IL-12. In spite of
various functions of IL-12 on immunocytes, the direct effect of IL-12 on tumor
cells has not been fully clarified. The present study investigated the direct
effect of IL-12 on eight murine tumor cell lines in vitro. IL-12 did not directly
up-regulate expression of MHC class I on tumor cells, but enhanced
IFN-gamma-induced up-regulation of MHC class I expression in MC-38, MCA102,
MCA205 and MCA207 cells. IL-12 alone did not activate STAT1, but IL-12 enhanced
IFN-gamma-mediated STAT1 phosphorylation in MC-38, MCA102, MCA205, MCA207 and
Colon-26-NL-17 cells, which expressed IL-12 receptor beta1 mRNA. In the other
side, Panc-02, B16-BL6 and 266-6 cells were not affected by IL-12, in which
expression of IL-12 receptor beta1 mRNA was not detected. Anti-IL-12 mAb
inhibited the direct effect of IL-12 on MC-38 cells. Moreover, nuclear
localization of NF-kappaB was observed after stimulation of IL-12 or IL-12 p40 in
MC-38 and Colon-26-NL-17 cells, but not in Panc-02 cells. These findings suggest 
that IL-12 directly acts on tumor cells through IL-12 receptor beta1 to activate 
NF-kappaB and enhance IFN-gamma-mediated STAT1 phosphorylation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Immunol. 2001 Feb 15;166(4):2658-64.

A role for IFN-alpha beta in virus infection-induced sensitization to endotoxin.

Doughty L(1), Nguyen K, Durbin J, Biron C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

Underlying viral infections can heighten sensitivity and worsen cytokine-mediated
disease following secondary inflammatory challenges. Mechanisms for this are
poorly understood. The impact of the innate response to lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection on sensitivity to endotoxin (LPS) was
investigated. Compared with uninfected mice, infection with LCMV for
2-days-sensitized mice to LPS by approximately 2-fold for lethality and by 2- to 
6-fold for serum TNF-alpha levels. Priming for LPS-induced TNF-alpha was also
seen with splenic and peritoneal leukocytes isolated from infected mice and
challenged with LPS ex vivo. The effect on TNF-alpha production was present in
the absence of IFN-gamma, its major producers NK and T cells, and the major
pathways for its induction through IL-12 and the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription 4 (STAT4), and therefore was IFN-gamma independent. Early LCMV
infection induces high concentrations of the type 1 IFNs, IFN-alphabeta.
Administration of recombinant IFN-alpha alone heightened the TNF-alpha response
to LPS. Innate IFN-alphabeta and IFN-gamma responses to LCMV exist in a delicate 
balance. To reduce priming for LPS-induced TNF-alpha during LCMV, deficiencies in
both the IFN-alphabeta and IFN-gamma receptors or STAT1, a transcription factor
downstream to both IFNs, were required. These data demonstrate that early viral
infection can enhance sensitivity to bacterial products, and that this
sensitization can occur in part as a result of endogenously expressed
IFN-alphabeta. This work also raises issues about potential complications
associated with IFN-alphabeta therapies.

PMID: 11160329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2000 Nov;38(11):1195-9.

An ex vivo model of tolerance vs. rejection: comparison of different signal
transducers and activators of transcription, STAT1, STAT4, STAT5 and STAT6.

Metcalfe S(1), Moffatt-Bruce S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, UK.
smm1001@cam.ac.uk

An ideal for clinical organ transplantation is for the recipient to develop
graft-specific immune tolerance. Although tolerance may occur, there is no way of
identifying those recipients who are tolerant vs. those still capable of
rejecting their graft. Thus immunosuppressive therapy is normally continued
throughout life with the attendant risks of infection, neoplasia, and unwanted
side effects of the immunosuppressive drugs. A surrogate marker of specific
immune non-responsiveness would permit identification of graft-tolerant
individuals who may then be weaned off all immunosuppression. Here we present a
model which characterises discrete components of a tolerant, vs. aggressive,
immune response. In rodents, new populations of tolerant, regulatory cells can be
generated for a foreign graft if first exposure of the T cell receptor (TCR) to
graft antigen coincides with blockade of the CD4 and CD8 co-receptors of the TCR.
Once established, this type of peripheral tolerance is very robust. We have
exploited an ex vivo model to compare in vivo-derived allo-tolerant lymphocytes
with their counterpart which have been primed to reject the same allo-antigen.
The model has revealed differential STAT (Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription) responses associated with tolerance, vs. rejection, which have not
been previously described. This approach will identify candidate surrogate
markers of immune response status for potential clinical application.

PMID: 11156359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2001 Jan;24(1):74-82.

Reduced interferon-gamma secretion by natural killer cells from rats susceptible 
to postviral chronic airway dysfunction.

Mikus LD(1), Rosenthal LA, Sorkness RL, Lemanske RF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy, Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, and School of
Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

After parainfluenza type 1 (Sendai) virus infection as weanlings, Brown Norway
(BN), unlike Fischer 344 (F344), rats develop an asthma-like phenotype. Reduced
postinfection interferon (IFN)-gamma levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from 
BN weanlings and the prevention of chronic airway sequelae in BN rats by
IFN-gamma treatment led to the hypothesis that cells from BN weanlings have a
reduced ability to secrete IFN-gamma. After stimulation with Sendai virus or
interleukin (IL)-12, splenocytes from uninfected BN weanlings secreted
significantly less IFN-gamma than did splenocytes from F344 weanlings (P <
0.005), as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Because levels of
potential IFN-gamma-secreting cells in the spleen differed between the strains,
natural killer (NK) cells, an important IFN-gamma source during early antiviral
responses, were purified from spleens of uninfected weanlings. When stimulated
with IL-12, BN NK cells secreted significantly less IFN-gamma than did F344 NK
cells (P < 0.001). Incubation of NK cells from either strain with IL-12 and IL-18
resulted in synergistic increases in IFN-gamma production, but BN cells still
secreted significantly less IFN-gamma than did F344 cells (P < 0.05). Similarly, 
after incubation with either IFN-alpha or IFN-alpha plus IL-18, BN NK cells
secreted significantly less IFN-gamma than did F344 NK cells (P < 0.05).
Therefore, reduced IFN-gamma secretion by NK cells in BN weanlings may play a
role in the development of postviral chronic airway dysfunction.

PMID: 11152653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):7234-9.

Up-regulation of the IL-12 receptor beta 2 chain in Crohn's disease.

Parrello T(1), Monteleone G, Cucchiara S, Monteleone I, Sebkova L, Doldo P, Luzza
F, Pallone F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università Magna Graecia di Catanzaro, 
Catanzaro, Italy.

Crohn' s disease (CD) is a chronic intestinal inflammatory disorder characterized
by aberrant mucosal Th1 cell activation and production of IL-12, the major
Th1-driving factor. The T cell response to IL-12 is dependent on the expression
of a specific receptor composed of two subunits, termed IL-12Rbeta1 and
IL-12Rbeta2. The content of IL-12Rbeta2, as measured at the mRNA level, is
crucial in regulating Th1 differentiation. In this study we therefore
investigated IL-12Rbeta2 RNA transcripts in CD. IL-12Rbeta2 expression was
increased in active CD as well as Helicobacter pylori (HP)-associated gastritis
and Salmonella colitis compared with that in inactive CD, ulcerative colitis,
noninflammatory controls, and celiac disease. In contrast, IL-12Rbeta1
transcripts were expressed at comparable levels in all samples. In CD,
IL-12Rbeta2 expression strictly correlated with tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT4, a key component of the IL-12-dependent Th1 polarization. This was
associated with a pronounced expression of IFN-gamma. Transcripts for IL-12/p40
were detected in CD, HP-positive, and Salmonella colitis patients, but not in
celiac disease, indicating that IL-12Rbeta2 up-regulation occurs only in
IL-12-associated Th1 gastrointestinal diseases. Finally, we showed that
stimulation of lamina propria mononuclear cells with IL-12 enhanced IL-12Rbeta2, 
suggesting that IL-12 regulates IL-12Rbeta2 expression in human gastrointestinal 
mucosa. The data show that the signaling pathway used by IL-12 to induce Th1
differentiation is increased at the site of disease in CD, further supporting the
view that IL-12/IL-12R signals contribute to the inflammatory response in this
condition.

PMID: 11120856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):6880-8.

Expression and function of IL-12 and IL-18 receptors on human tonsillar B cells.

Airoldi I(1), Gri G, Marshall JD, Corcione A, Facchetti P, Guglielmino R,
Trinchieri G, Pistoia V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy.
laboncologia@ospedale-gaslini.ge.it

IL-12 activates murine and human B cells, but little information is available as 
to the expression and function of IL-12R on human B lymphocytes. Here we show
that the latter cells, freshly isolated from human tonsils, expressed the
transcripts of both beta1 and beta2 chains of IL-12R and that beta2 chain mRNA
was selectively increased (4- to 5-fold) by incubation with Staphylococcus aureus
Cowan I bacteria or IL-12. B cell stimulation with IL-12 induced de novo
expression of the transcripts of the two chains of IL-18R, i.e., IL-1
receptor-related protein and accessory protein-like. Functional studies showed
that both IL-12 and IL-18 signaled to B cells through the NF-kappaB pathway. In
the case of IL-12, no involvement of STAT transcription factors, and in
particular of STAT-4, was detected. c-rel and p50 were identified as the members 
of NF-kappaB family involved in IL-12-mediated signal transduction to B cells.
IL-12 and IL-18 synergized in the induction of IFN-gamma production by tonsillar 
B cells, but not in the stimulation of B cell differentiation, although either
cytokine promoted IgM secretion in culture supernatants. Finally, naive but not
germinal center or memory, tonsillar B cells were identified as the exclusive
IL-12 targets in terms of induction of NF-kappaB activation and of IFN-gamma
production.

PMID: 11120812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):6803-8.

Stat4 regulates multiple components of IFN-gamma-inducing signaling pathways.

Lawless VA(1), Zhang S, Ozes ON, Bruns HA, Oldham I, Hoey T, Grusby MJ, Kaplan
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Stat4 is activated in response to IL-12. Most functions of IL-12, including the
induction of IFN-gamma, are compromised in the absence of Stat4. Since the
precise role of Stat4 in IFN-gamma induction has not been established,
experiments were conducted to examine Stat4 activation of IFN-gamma and other
genes required for cytokine-induced expression of IFN-gamma. We first examined
IL-12 signaling components. Basal expression of IL-12Rss1 and IL-12Rss2 is
decreased in Stat4-deficient cells compared with that in control cells. However, 
IL-12 was still capable of inducing equivalent phosphorylation of Jak2 and Tyk2
in wild-type and Stat4-deficient activated T cells. We have further determined
that other cytokine signaling pathways that induce IFN-gamma production are
defective in the absence of Stat4. IL-18 induces minimal IFN-gamma production
from Stat4-deficient activated T cells compared with control cells. This is due
to defective IL-18 signaling, which results from the lack of IL-12-induced, and
Stat4-dependent, expression of the IL-18R. Following IL-12 pretreatment to induce
IL-18R, wild-type, but not Stat4-deficient, activated T cells demonstrated
IL-18-induced NF-kappaB DNA-binding activity. In addition, IL-12-pretreated
Stat4-deficient activated T cells have minimal IFN-gamma production followed by
stimulation with IL-18 alone or in combination with IL-12 compared with control
cells. Thus, Stat4 activation by IL-12 is required for the function of multiple
cytokine pathways that result in induction of IFN-gamma.

PMID: 11120802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Immunity. 2000 Nov;13(5):715-25.

Novel p19 protein engages IL-12p40 to form a cytokine, IL-23, with biological
activities similar as well as distinct from IL-12.

Oppmann B(1), Lesley R, Blom B, Timans JC, Xu Y, Hunte B, Vega F, Yu N, Wang J,
Singh K, Zonin F, Vaisberg E, Churakova T, Liu M, Gorman D, Wagner J, Zurawski S,
Liu Y, Abrams JS, Moore KW, Rennick D, de Waal-Malefyt R, Hannum C, Bazan JF,
Kastelein RA.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

A novel sequence discovered in a computational screen appears distantly related
to the p35 subunit of IL-12. This factor, which we term p19, shows no biological 
activity by itself; instead, it combines with the p40 subunit of IL-12 to form a 
novel, biologically active, composite cytokine, which we term IL-23. Activated
dendritic cells secrete detectable levels of this complex. IL-23 binds to IL-12R 
beta 1 but fails to engage IL-12R beta 2; nonetheless, IL-23 activates Stat4 in
PHA blast T cells. IL-23 induces strong proliferation of mouse memory
(CD4(+)CD45Rb(low)) T cells, a unique activity of IL-23 as IL-12 has no effect on
this cell population. Similar to IL-12, human IL-23 stimulates IFN-gamma
production and proliferation in PHA blast T cells, as well as in CD45RO (memory) 
T cells.

PMID: 11114383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Transpl Int. 2000;13 Suppl 1:S474-5.

Allo-tolerance and allorejection responses ex vivo.

Moffatt SD(1), Metcalfe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, Addenbrookes Hospital, UK.

Spleen cells from fully immune competent mice show different intracellular STAT
responses to alloantigen. Cells from mice primed to accept the alloantigen have
low STAT 6 and fragmented STAT 4, compared to cells from mice primed to reject
the same alloantigen.

PMID: 11112057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 1;165(11):6221-8.

IL-12 receptor beta 2 (IL-12R beta 2)-deficient mice are defective in
IL-12-mediated signaling despite the presence of high affinity IL-12 binding
sites.

Wu C(1), Wang X, Gadina M, O'Shea JJ, Presky DH, Magram J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation/Autoimmune Diseases, Hoffmann-LaRoche, Nutley, NJ
07110, USA.

Two subunits of the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R), IL-12R beta 1 and IL-12R beta 2,
have been identified and cloned. Previous studies demonstrated that the IL-12R
beta 1 subunit was required for mouse T and NK cells to respond to IL-12 in vivo.
To investigate the role of IL-12R beta 2 in IL-12 signaling, we have generated
IL-12R beta 2-deficient (IL-12R beta 2(-/-)) mice by targeted mutation in
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Although Con A-activated splenocytes from IL-12R beta 
2(-/-) mice still bind IL-12 with both high and low affinity, no IL-12-induced
biological functions can be detected. Con A-activated splenocytes of IL-12R beta 
2(-/-) mice failed to produce IFN-gamma or proliferate in response to IL-12
stimulation. NK lytic activity of IL-12R beta 2(-/-) splenocytes was not induced 
when incubated with IL-12. IL-12R beta 2(-/-) splenocytes were deficient in
IFN-gamma secretion when stimulated with either Con A or anti-CD3 mAb in vitro.
Furthermore, IL-12R beta 2(-/-) mice were deficient in vivo in their ability to
produce IFN-gamma following endotoxin administration and to generate a type 1
cytokine response. IL-12-mediated signal transduction was also defective as
measured by phosphorylation of STAT4. These results demonstrate that although
mouse IL-12R beta 1 is the subunit primarily responsible for binding IL-12,
IL-12R beta 2 plays an essential role in mediating the biological functions of
IL-12 in mice.

PMID: 11086056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 1;165(11):6015-9.

Cutting edge: STAT6-deficient mice have enhanced tumor immunity to primary and
metastatic mammary carcinoma.

Ostrand-Rosenberg S(1), Grusby MJ, Clements VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD
21250, USA. srosenbe@umbc.edu

STAT4 and STAT6 are essential for the development of CD4(+) Th1 and Th2
development, respectively. Tumor immunologists have hypothesized that Th1 cells
are critical in tumor immunity because they facilitate differentiation of CD8(+) 
T cells, which are potent anti-tumor effectors. We have used STAT4(-/-) and
STAT6(-/-) mice to test this hypothesis. BALB/c and knockout mice were challenged
in the mammary gland with the highly malignant and spontaneously metastatic
BALB/c-derived 4T1 mammary carcinoma. Primary tumor growth and metastatic disease
are reduced in STAT6(-/-) mice relative to BALB/c and STAT4(-/-) mice. Ab
depletions demonstrate that the effect is mediated by CD8(+) T cells, and
immunized STAT6(-/-) mice have higher levels of 4T1-specific CTL than BALB/c or
STAT4(-/-) mice. Surprisingly, Th1 or Th2 cells are not involved, because CD4
depletion does not diminish the anti-tumor effect. Therefore, deletion of the
STAT6 gene facilitates development of potent anti-tumor immunity via a
CD4(+)-independent pathway.

PMID: 11086031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Immunol Today. 2000 Oct;21(10):484-9.

Type I interferons and T helper development.

Farrar JD(1), Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

PMID: 11071526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 15;165(10):5580-7.

Role of STAT4 and STAT6 signaling in allograft rejection and CTLA4-Ig-mediated
tolerance.

Zhou P(1), Szot GL, Guo Z, Kim O, He G, Wang J, Grusby MJ, Newell KA,
Thistlethwaite JR, Bluestone JA, Alegre ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Transplantation, Departments of Surgery, Section of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

STAT4(-/-) mice have impaired type 1 T cell differentiation, whereas STAT6(-/-)
mice fail to generate type 2 responses. The role of type 1 and type 2 T cell
differentiation in acute cardiac allograft rejection and in the induction of
tolerance was examined in wild-type, STAT4(-/-), and STAT6(-/-) recipients. All
recipients rejected the grafts promptly. Analysis of in situ cytokine gene
expression in the allografts confirmed decreased levels of IFN-gamma in
STAT4(-/-) recipients and undetectable levels of IL-4 and IL-5 in STAT6(-/-)
mice. Blockade of the CD28/B7 costimulatory pathway prolonged cardiac graft
survival for >100 days in 100% of wild-type and STAT4(-/-) mice. However, 14% of 
CTLA4-Ig-treated STAT6(-/-) mice rejected their grafts between 20 and 100 days.
Moreover, of those animals followed past 100 days, 60% of the STAT6(-/-) mice
rejected their grafts. Splenocytes harvested on day 145 posttransplant from
CTLA4-Ig-treated rejecting STAT6(-/-) recipients were transfused into syngeneic
SCID mice transplanted with donor or third party cardiac allografts. Both donor
and third party grafts were rejected, indicating that the initial graft loss may 
be due to an immunological rejection. In contrast, when splenocytes from
CTLA4-Ig-treated wild-type or nonrejecting STAT6(-/-) mice were transferred into 
SCID recipients, donor allografts were accepted, but third party hearts were
rejected. Thus, long-term prolongation of cardiac allograft survival by CTLA4-Ig 
is STAT4-independent but, at least in part, STAT6-dependent. These data suggest
that the balance of type 1 and type 2 T lymphocyte differentiation is not
critical for acute rejection but influences the robust tolerance induced by
CD28/B7 blockade in this model.

PMID: 11067913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2000 Oct;20(10):897-905.

Interleukin-12 differentially regulates expression of IFN-gamma and interleukin-2
in human T lymphoblasts.

Dickensheets HL(1), Freeman SL, Donnelly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is known to upregulate expression of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) by activated T cells. However, the effects of IL-12 on production of 
other Th1-type cytokines are less well defined. In this study, we examined the
effects of IL-12 on expression of several cytokines, including IFN-gamma, IL-2,
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and IL-10, by primary human CD3(+) T
cells. Although purified resting T cells were largely nonresponsive to IL-12
stimulation, anti-CD3-activated T cell blasts were strongly responsive, as
demonstrated by the ability of IL-12 to induce Stat4 DNA-binding activity.
Restimulation of T lymphoblasts on immobilized anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies
(mAb) induced rapid expression of TNF-alpha mRNA and more gradual increases in
mRNA levels for IL-2, IFN-gamma, and IL-10. IL-12 markedly upregulated expression
of IFN-gamma and IL-10 but downregulated expression of IL-2 in a dose-dependent
and time-dependent manner. The levels of IL-2 produced by IL-12-treated T cells
correlated inversely with the levels of IL-10. Moreover, neutralization of IL-10 
activity with anti-IL-10 antibodies normalized IL-2 production by IL-12-treated T
cells, confirming that the inhibition of IL-2 production by IL-12 was IL-10
mediated. Thus, IL-12 amplified expression of IFN-gamma and IL-10 and, via its
ability to upregulate production of IL-10, inhibited expression of IL-2. These
findings demonstrate that IL-12 differentially regulates expression of the
Th1-type lymphokines, IFN-gamma and IL-2, in T lymphoblasts.

PMID: 11054278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Trends Biochem Sci. 2000 Oct;25(10):496-502.

STAT proteins and transcriptional responses to extracellular signals.

Horvath CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, Box 1630, East Building Room 12-20D, The Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
curt.horvath@mssm.edu

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) transcription factors are
implicated in programming gene expression in biological events as diverse as
embryonic development, programmed cell death, organogenesis, innate immunity,
adaptive immunity and cell growth regulation in organisms ranging from slime
molds to insects to man. Rapid progress has unearthed much about the activation
of STATs by Janus kinases (JAKs) and other tyrosine kinases and their ability to 
interface with other signaling systems. Once inside the nucleus, the STATs bind
to promoters and join other transcriptional activators in the regulation of gene 
expression.

PMID: 11050435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Immunol. 2000 Oct 1;165(7):4120-6.

Impairment of STAT activation by IL-12 in a patient with atypical mycobacterial
and staphylococcal infections.

Gollob JA(1), Veenstra KG, Jyonouchi H, Kelly AM, Ferrieri P, Panka DJ, Altare F,
Fieschi C, Casanova JL, Frank DA, Mier JW.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. jgollob@caregroup.harvard.edu

IL-12 plays a pivotal role in the stimulation of immune responses against
intracellular infections. This role is manifested in the increased susceptibility
to atypical mycobacterial and salmonella infections among individuals whose
lymphocytes lack expression of IL-12Rbeta1. Here, we report on a patient with
Mycobacterium avium infection, recurrent Staphylococcus aureus sinusitis, and
multiple adverse drug reactions whose T cells were unable to produce IFN-gamma or
proliferate in response to IL-12 despite the expression of wild-type IL-12Rbeta1 
and IL-12Rbeta2. The defect in these functional responses to IL-12 was selective,
as cytolytic activity induced by IL-12 was intact, and lymphocytes were
responsive to stimulation by IL-2. An examination of cytokine signaling revealed 
that STAT4 and extracellular regulated kinase 1 (ERK1) activation by IL-12 was
intact, whereas the activation of STAT1, -3, and -5 by IL-12 was lost. This
impairment of STAT activation was specific for IL-12, as STAT activation by IL-2,
IL-15, and IFN-gamma was unaffected. These findings demonstrate that the
activation of STAT4 alone is not sufficient for IL-12-induced IFN-gamma
production and proliferation and suggest that other STATs play a role in these
responses to IL-12. While the etiology of the impaired IL-12 signaling in this
patient has not yet been elucidated, the absence of mutations in IL-12Rbeta1 or
IL-12Rbeta2 and the preservation of STAT4 activation raise the possibility that
there may be a mutation in an as yet undiscovered component of the IL-12
signaling complex that is normally required for the recruitment and activation of
STAT1, -3, and -5.

PMID: 11034424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetes. 2000 Oct;49(10):1744-7.

NOD Idd5 locus controls insulitis and diabetes and overlaps the orthologous
CTLA4/IDDM12 and NRAMP1 loci in humans.

Hill NJ(1), Lyons PA, Armitage N, Todd JA, Wicker LS, Peterson LB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Mechanisms in Disease, Cambridge
University, UK.

A genome scan for B10-derived loci that reduce the frequency of diabetes and
insulitis in NOD mice demonstrated a large region (34 cM) of linkage on the
proximal end of chromosome 1. This locus was designated Idd5 and encompassed
candidate genes including Il1r1, Il1r2, Stat1, Stat4, Nramp1, and Bcl2. In the
current study, we have confirmed the existence of Idd5 by developing a series of 
congenic mouse strains that are resistant to diabetes and determined that Idd5 is
actually two genes located within a 9.4-cM interval. Idd5.1 is in the proximal
1.5-cM portion of the interval and contains the candidates Casp8, Cflar (FLIP),
Cd28, and Cd152 (CTLA4). Idd5.1 overlaps the orthologous CTLA4/IDDM12 locus in
humans. Idd5.2 is in the distal 5.1-cM portion of the 9.4-cM interval and
contains the candidates Nramp1, which has a functional polymorphism between NOD
and B10, and Cmkar2 (CXCR2, interleukin [IL]-8 receptor alpha). Candidate genes
eliminated by this analysis include Il1r1, Ilr2, Zap70, Orch5, Stat1, Stat4,
Bcl2, Cmkar4 (CXCR4), and Il10. On its own, the Idd5 locus provides a significant
amount of protection from diabetes (50% reduction from parental frequency) and
when combined with another resistance locus (Idd3 on chromosome 3), provides
nearly complete protection from diabetes and insulitis.

PMID: 11016460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39466-73.

Urokinase stimulates human vascular smooth muscle cell migration via a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Tyk2 interaction.

Kusch A(1), Tkachuk S, Haller H, Dietz R, Gulba DC, Lipp M, Dumler I.

Author information: 
(1)Charité-Franz Volhard Clinic and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine,
Humboldt University Berlin, Wiltbergstrasse 50, 13125 Berlin-Buch, Germany.

Janus kinases Jak1 and Tyk2 play an important role in urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator (uPA)-dependent signaling. We have recently demonstrated that both
kinases are associated with the uPA receptor (uPAR) and mediate uPA-induced
activation of signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat1, Stat2,
and Stat4) in human vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). Janus kinases are not
only required for Stat activation but may also interfere with other intracellular
signaling pathways. Here we report that in VSMC, Tyk2 interacts with a downstream
signaling cascade involving phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K). We demonstrate
that uPA induces PI3-K activation, which is abolished in VSMC expressing the
dominant negative form of Tyk2. The regulatory subunit p85 of PI3-K
co-immunoprecipitates with Tyk2 but not with Jak1, Jak2, or Jak3, and uPA
stimulation increases the PI3-K activity in Tyk2 immunoprecipitates. Tyk2
directly binds to either of the two Src homology 2(SH2)p85 domains in a
uPA-dependent fashion. We provide evidence that the Tyk2-mediated PI3-K
activation in response to uPA is required for VSMC migration. Thus, two unrelated
structurally distinct specific inhibitors of PI3-K, wortmannin and LY294002,
prevent VSMC migration induced by uPA. No migratory effect of uPA was observed in
VSMC expressing the dominant negative form of Tyk2. Our results underscore the
versatile function of Tyk2 in uPA-related intracellular signaling and indicate
that PI3-K plays a selective role in the regulation of VSMC migration.

PMID: 10995743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Vet Med Sci. 2000 Aug;62(8):841-7.

Cloning and chromosomal assignment of the porcine interleukin-2 receptor alpha
(IL-2Ralpha) gene.

Kokuho T(1), Hiraiwa H, Yasue H, Watanabe S, Yokomizo Y, Inumaru S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Product, National Institute of Animal Health,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Porcine genomic DNA encoding a 55 kDa subunit of interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R), 
which is termed alpha chain (IL-2Ralpha), was cloned by repeated plaque
hybridization using IL-2Ralpha cDNA as a probe. Two different lambda phage
clones, one of which encoded exon 1 and the 5'-upstream flanking region of
IL-2Ralpha gene and another encoded the sequence from exon 2 to exon 8, were
isolated. By analysis of the 5'-upstream region of the gene, putative binding
motifs for transcription factors such as GATA family proteins, Ikaros, NF-kappaB,
NF-IL2Ralpha and SRF, were found as described in human, murine and bovine genes. 
Two additional motifs for STAT4 binding were also found in this region. Moreover,
using the FISH technique, we assigned the porcine IL-2Ralpha locus to the distal 
end of the long arm of chromosome 10 (10q6-qter) where the vimentin gene had been
assigned nearby.

PMID: 10993181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(19):7121-31.

Role of the Stat4 N domain in receptor proximal tyrosine phosphorylation.

Murphy TL(1), Geissal ED, Farrar JD, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Stat4 is activated by the cytokines interleukin 12 and alpha interferon
(IFN-alpha) and plays a significant role in directing development of naïve CD4(+)
T cells to the Th1 phenotype. Signal transducers and activators of transcription 
(STAT) proteins undergo phosphorylation on a conserved tyrosine residue,
resulting in homo- and heterodimerization, nuclear translocation, and DNA
binding. Stat4 can bind to single IFN-gamma-activated sites (GASs) as a dimer or 
bind two tandem GASs as a pair of STAT dimers, or tetramer, stabilized through
N-terminal domain (N domain) interactions between dimers. We uncovered an
unexpected effect of the Stat4 N domain in controlling the proximal activation of
Stat4 by tyrosine phosphorylation at activated receptor complexes. Mutation of
the N domain at tryptophan residue W37, predicted to interrupt N domain dimer
formation, unexpectedly prevented IFN-alpha-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
the Stat4 monomer, blocking dimer formation and nuclear translocation.
Furthermore, N domains appear to exert private STAT functions, since
interchanging the N domains between Stat1 and Stat4 prevented receptor-mediated
tyrosine phosphorylation in one case and interrupted STAT-specific gene
activation in another. Finally, replacement of the N domain of Stat1 with that of
Stat4 abrogated the normal Stat2 dependence of Stat1 phosphorylation, again
suggesting the domains are not equivalent. Thus, in addition to its role in STAT 
tetramerization, the conserved STAT N domain appears to participate in very
proximal steps of receptor-mediated ligand-induced tyrosine phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC86263
PMID: 10982828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Immunol. 2000 Sep 15;165(6):3324-32.

Salmonella infection does not increase expression and activity of the high
affinity IL-12 receptor.

Elhofy A(1), Marriott I, Bost KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA.

Expression of high affinity IL-12 receptors is required for IL-12-mediated
IFN-gamma production. Activation of this pathway has been shown to be critical in
generating optimal cell-mediated immunity. Therefore, increased IL-12 receptor
expression might be expected in the host response after infection by an
intracellular bacterial pathogen. In the present study, we have made the
surprising discovery that infection with Salmonella results in an early reduction
of high affinity IL-12 receptor expression and activation. After oral inoculation
with Salmonella, the level of mRNA expression encoding IL-12 receptor beta2
(IL-12Rbeta2) subunit was diminished 12 h postinfection in the mesenteric lymph
nodes and subsequently in the spleen. Furthermore, decreased IL-12Rbeta2 mRNA
expression was observed in CD4+ T lymphocytes isolated from the mesenteric lymph 
nodes and spleens of infected mice. Attenuated IL-12Rbeta2 mRNA expression
correlated with reduced receptor signaling, as demonstrated by reduced
IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation in enriched T lymphocytes isolated from the
mesenteric lymph nodes and spleens of Salmonella-infected mice. These in vivo
results were substantiated with an in vitro model system. In this model system, T
lymphocytes cocultured with Salmonella-infected macrophages expressed less
IL-12Rbeta2 mRNA. The cocultured T cells were also less responsive to IL-12 as
assessed by reduced phosphorylation of STAT4 and limited IFN-gamma secretion.
Together, these studies suggest that Salmonella can limit an optimal host immune 
response by reducing the expression and activity of high affinity IL-12
receptors.

PMID: 10975850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Blood. 2000 Sep 1;96(5):1844-52.

Importance of the MKK6/p38 pathway for interleukin-12-induced STAT4 serine
phosphorylation and transcriptional activity.

Visconti R(1), Gadina M, Chiariello M, Chen EH, Stancato LF, Gutkind JS, O'Shea
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1820, USA. viscontr@exchange.nih.gov

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a key immunoregulatory cytokine that promotes Th1
differentiation and cell-mediated immune responses. The transcription factor
STAT4 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 4) is an important
element in mediating IL-12 signals, as evidenced by the fact that STAT4(-/-) mice
display impaired responsiveness to IL-12 and deficient Th1 differentiation. STAT4
is inducibly phosphorylated on tyrosine and serine in response to IL-12, but the 
kinase(s) responsible for the latter event is unknown. Here we show that IL-12
induces STAT4 phosphorylation on serine 721 and that mutation of serine 721
interferes with STAT4 transcriptional activity. In addition, we show that
mutation of tyrosine 693 abrogates IL-12-induced STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation
and transcriptional activity. Although the site surrounding serine 721 is an
optimum consensus sequence for mitogen-activated family of protein kinases
(MAPKs)-mediated phosphorylation, we demonstrate that IL-12 does not induce
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) or c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
activation in T and natural killer (NK) cells and that IL-12-induced STAT4
transcriptional activity is not affected by these kinases. Rather, we show that
IL-12 induces p38 activation. Moreover, we demonstrate that p38alpha and its
upstream activator, MKK6, phosphorylate STAT4 on serine 721, and are required for
STAT4 full transcriptional activity induced by IL-12, establishing the
MKK6/p38alpha/STAT4 pathway as an important mediator of IL-12 actions. (Blood.
2000;96:1844-1852)

PMID: 10961885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Exp Med. 2000 Aug 21;192(4):517-28.

Residual type 1 immunity in patients genetically deficient for interleukin 12
receptor beta1 (IL-12Rbeta1): evidence for an IL-12Rbeta1-independent pathway of 
IL-12 responsiveness in human T cells.

Verhagen CE(1), de Boer T, Smits HH, Verreck FA, Wierenga EA, Kurimoto M, Lammas 
DA, Kumararatne DS, Sanal O, Kroon FP, van Dissel JT, Sinigaglia F, Ottenhoff TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, 2300 RC Leiden
University Medical Center (LUMC), 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Genetic lack of interleukin 12 receptor beta1 (IL-12Rbeta1) surface expression
predisposes to severe infections by poorly pathogenic mycobacteria or Salmonella 
and causes strongly decreased, but not completely abrogated, interferon
(IFN)-gamma production. To study IL-12Rbeta1-independent residual IFN-gamma
production, we have generated mycobacterium-specific T cell clones (TCCs) from
IL-12Rbeta1-deficient individuals. All TCCs displayed a T helper type 1 phenotype
and the majority responded to IL-12 by increased IFN-gamma production and
proliferative responses upon activation. This response to IL-12 could be further 
augmented by exogenous IL-18. IL-12Rbeta2 was found to be normally expressed in
the absence of IL-12Rbeta1, and could be upregulated by IFN-alpha. Expression of 
IL-12Rbeta2 alone, however, was insufficient to induce signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)4 activation in response to IL-12, whereas
IFN-alpha/IFN-alphaR ligation resulted in Stat4 activation in both control and
IL-12Rbeta1-deficient cells. IL-12 failed to upregulate cell surface expression
of IL-18R, integrin alpha6, and IL-12Rbeta2 on IL-12Rbeta1-deficient cells,
whereas this was normal on control cells. IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production in
IL-12Rbeta1-deficient T cells could be inhibited by the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAP) kinase inhibitor SB203580 and the MAP kinase kinase (MEK)
1/2 inhibitor U0126, suggesting involvement of MAP kinases in this alternative,
Stat4-independent, IL-12 signaling pathway.Collectively, these results indicate
that IL-12 acts as a partial agonist in the absence of IL-12Rbeta1. Moreover, the
results reveal the presence of a novel IL-12Rbeta1/Stat4-independent pathway of
IL-12 responsiveness in activated human T cells involving MAP kinases. This
pathway is likely to play a role in the residual type 1 immunity in IL-12Rbeta1
deficiency.

PMCID: PMC2193232
PMID: 10952721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Immunol. 2000 Sep 1;165(5):2619-27.

Identification of STAT4-dependent and independent mechanisms of resistance to
Toxoplasma gondii.

Cai G(1), Radzanowski T, Villegas EN, Kastelein R, Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The capacity of IL-12 to stimulate T and NK cell production of IFN-gamma is
required for resistance to Toxoplasma gondii. To identify the transcription
factors involved in this mechanism of resistance, mice deficient in STAT4, a
protein involved in IL-12 signaling, were infected with T. gondii and their
immune responses were analyzed. STAT4-/- mice were unable to control parasite
replication and died during the acute phase of infection, whereas wild-type mice 
controlled parasite replication and survived this challenge. The susceptibility
of STAT4-/- mice to toxoplasmosis correlated with a defect in their ability to
produce IFN-gamma in response to infection, whereas administration of IFN-gamma
to these mice inhibited parasite replication and delayed time to death.
Interestingly, analysis of infected STAT4-/- mice revealed that these mice did
produce low levels of IFN-gamma during infection, and the ability of splenocytes 
from infected or uninfected STAT4-/- mice to produce IFN-gamma was enhanced by
the addition of IL-2 plus IL-18. Moreover, administration of IL-2 plus IL-18 to
STAT4-/- mice resulted in elevated serum levels of IFN-gamma associated with a
decreased parasite burden and delayed time to death. In vivo depletion studies
demonstrated that the ability of IL-2 plus IL-18 to mediate STAT4-independent
resistance to T. gondii is dependent on NK cell production of IFN-gamma.
Together, these studies identify STAT4 as an important transcription factor
required for development of the innate NK and adaptive T cell responses necessary
for resistance to T. gondii. However, other signaling pathways can be used to
bypass STAT4-dependent production of IFN-gamma and enhance innate resistance to
T. gondii.

PMID: 10946290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Jul;30(7):2101-11.

The effect of TGF-beta1 on immune responses of naïve versus memory CD4+ Th1/Th2 T
cells.

Lúdvíksson BR(1), Seegers D, Resnick AS, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, LCI, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda 20892-1890, USA.

The role of TGF-beta1 in the regulation of T cell responses has been perplexing, 
possibly because it is dependent on the type of T cell being regulated and its
cytokine microenvironment. In the present study, we demonstrate that TGF-beta1
has a profound inhibitory effect on naive CD4+ T cell undergoing differentiation 
under defined neutral, Th1 and Th2 priming conditions. In addition, we show that 
if CD4+ T cells are primed in the presence of TGF-beta1, they exhibit reduced
secondary anti-CD3/anti-CD28-induced and antigen-specific immune responses (even 
when TGF-beta is absent during the secondary response), which is not due to
reduced expression of co-stimulatory molecules or to inadequate IL-2 production. 
Finally, with respect to the effect of TGF-beta on fully differentiated
antigen-specific memory CD4+ T cells, we demonstrate that while antigen-specific 
activation and cytokine secretion by memory Th1 T cells is inhibited by
TGF-beta1, such inhibition is associated with partial down-regulation of IL-12
receptor beta2 chain expression. In contrast, memory Th2 T cells are not subject 
to TGF-beta1 -mediated suppression. In summary, these studies reveal that
TGF-beta1 is a powerful negative regulator of the primary immune response of CD4+
T cells, but only Th1 T cells are subject to such regulation after the memory
stage of T cell differentiation has been reached. Thus, these studies define the 
potential regulatory role of TGF-beta1 in Th1 and Th2 T cell-mediated
autoimmunity.

PMID: 10940900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Immunol. 2000 Aug 1;165(3):1520-5.

Increased susceptibility of Stat4-deficient and enhanced resistance in
Stat6-deficient mice to infection with Trypanosoma cruzi.

Tarleton RL(1), Grusby MJ, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Although Th1-type responses tend to be associated with resistance to Trypanosoma 
cruzi infection, mixed Th1 and Th2 cytokine responses are generally observed in
both resistant and susceptible mice. To help clarify the role of type 1 and type 
2 cytokine responses in immunity to T. cruzi, mice with induced deficiencies in
the Stat4 or Stat6 genes were infected with T. cruzi. As expected, Stat4-/- mice 
deficient in type 1 cytokine responses were highly susceptible to infection,
exhibiting increased parasitemia levels relative to wild-type mice and 100%
mortality. In contrast, parasitemia levels and survival in Stat6-deficient mice
were not different from wild type. The type 1 and type 2 cytokine bias of Stat6- 
and Stat4-deficient mice, respectively, was confirmed by in situ
immunocytochemical analysis of cytokine-producing cells in the tissues of
infected mice and by subclass analysis of anti-T. cruzi serum Abs. Notably, both 
Stat4- and Stat6-deficient mice produced substantial amounts of anti-T. cruzi
Abs. Tissues from chronically infected Stat6-deficient mice had little to no
evidence of inflammation in the heart and skeletal muscle in contrast to
wild-type mice, which exhibited substantial inflammation. In situ PCR analysis of
these tissues provided evidence of the persistence of T. cruzi in wild-type mice,
but no evidence of parasite persistence in Stat6-deficient mice. These data
suggest that type 1 T cells are required for the development of immune control to
T. cruzi, but that type 2 T cells contribute to parasite persistence and
increased severity of disease.

PMID: 10903759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2000 Aug 1;165(3):1374-80.

The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is required for IL-12-induced IFN-gamma 
expression.

Zhang S(1), Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

IL-12 is a central immunoregulatory cytokine that promotes cell-mediated immune
responses and the differentiation of naive CD4+ cells into Th1 cells. We and
others have demonstrated that the Stat4 is critical for IFN-gamma production by
activated T cells and Th1 cells. However, several studies have suggested that
other pathways may be involved in IL-12-stimulated IFN-gamma expression. In this 
report we demonstrate that IL-12 activates mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase 3/6 (MKK) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), but not p44/42 
(ERK) or stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase MAPK. The
activation of p38 MAPK is required for normal induction of IFN-gamma mRNA and
IFN-gamma secretion by IL-12 in activated T cells and Th1 cells. Importantly,
IL-12-stimulated p38 MAPK effector functions occur through a Stat4-independent
mechanism and correlate with increased serine phosphorylation of activating
transcription factor-2. The requirement for p38 MAPK in IL-12 function suggests
that this pathway may be an important in vivo target for the anti-inflammatory
actions of p38 MAPK inhibitors.

PMID: 10903740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Invest. 2000 Jul;106(1):63-72.

The role of CD154-CD40 versus CD28-B7 costimulatory pathways in regulating
allogeneic Th1 and Th2 responses in vivo.

Kishimoto K(1), Dong VM, Issazadeh S, Fedoseyeva EV, Waaga AM, Yamada A, Sho M,
Benichou G, Auchincloss H Jr, Grusby MJ, Khoury SJ, Sayegh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics and Transplantation, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We used signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and STAT6 gene
knockout (-/-) mice as recipients of fully mismatched cardiac allografts to study
the role of T-cell costimulatory pathways in regulating allogeneic T-helper 1
(Th1) versus Th2 responses in vivo. STAT4(-/-) mice have impaired Th1 responses, 
whereas STAT6(-/-) mice do not generate normal Th2 responses. Cardiac allografts 
from C57BL/6 mice were transplanted into normal wild-type (WT), STAT4(-/-), and
STAT6(-/-) BALB/c recipients. STAT4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) mice rejected their
grafts with the same tempo as untreated WT recipients. CD28-B7 blockade by a
single injection of CTLA4Ig induced long-term engraftment and donor-specific
tolerance in all three groups of recipients. CD154 blockade by a single injection
of MR1 was effective in prolonging allograft survival and inducing tolerance in
STAT4(-/-) mice but was only marginally effective in STAT6(-/-) recipients and WT
controls. In addition, a similar protocol of MR1 was ineffective in prolonging
graft survival in CD28(-/-) BALB/c recipients, suggesting that the lack of
efficacy seen in WT and STAT6(-/-) mice is not due to the presence of a
functional CD28-B7 pathway. Furthermore, there was a similar differential effect 
of CD28-B7 versus CD154-CD40 blockade in inhibiting immune responses in animals
immunized with ovalbumin and complete Freund's adjuvant. These novel data
indicate that Th1 and Th2 cells are differentially regulated by CD28-B7 versus
CD154-CD40 costimulation pathways in vivo and may have potential implications for
the development of therapeutic strategies such as T-cell costimulatory blockade
in humans.

PMCID: PMC314364
PMID: 10880049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Immunol. 2000 Jul 15;165(2):632-6.

Cutting edge: Chandra, a novel four-transmembrane domain protein differentially
expressed in helper type 1 lymphocytes.

Venkataraman C(1), Schaefer G, Schindler U.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Development of naive Th cells into Th1 and Th2 effector populations requires
coordinated expression of a complex set of genes. In this study, we have
identified a novel four-transmembrane domain protein, Chandra, that is
differentially expressed in Th1 cells. Chandra expression is observed in STAT4-
and IFN-gamma-deficient mice, indicating that Chandra is not an IL-12- or
IFN-gamma-responsive gene. Interestingly, Chandra mRNA is detected in
anti-CD3-activated T cells from STAT6-deficient mice in the absence of any
differentiation conditions. Furthermore, neutralization of IL-4 signaling is
sufficient to induce transcription of Chandra in anti-CD3-activated T cells from 
wild-type mice, demonstrating that STAT6 signaling is required to repress Chandra
expression in activated T cells and Th2 subsets. This is the first demonstration 
of a differentially expressed four-transmembrane domain protein in Th1 cells.

PMID: 10878334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Immunol. 2000 Jul 1;165(1):59-66.

IL-12 responsiveness and expression of IL-12 receptor in human peripheral blood
monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Nagayama H(1), Sato K, Kawasaki H, Enomoto M, Morimoto C, Tadokoro K, Juji T,
Asano S, Takahashi TA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Processing, Clinical Immunology and AIDS Research Center, 
and Hematology/Oncology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Japan.

We analyzed the expression of IL-12Rbeta1 and IL-12Rbeta2 and the role of IL-12
in the activation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) via
IL-12Rbeta1-mediated signaling events. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that
IL-12Rbeta1 was expressed in T cells, Con A blasts, and monocyte-derived DCs, but
not in monocytes, while its transcript was detected in all of these cell types.
Transcriptional expression of IL-12Rbeta2 was observed in T cells, Con A blasts, 
and monocyte-derived DCs, but not monocytes. The ligation of DCs as well as Con A
blasts by IL-12 induced the production of GM-CSF, IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha, and 
IFN-gamma at the transcription levels. Furthermore, stimulation of DCs with IL-12
induced IL-12p40 transcript, but not IL-12p35 transcript, whereas this
stimulation caused the expressions of both transcripts in Con A blasts.
Stimulation of DCs with IL-12 caused a tyrosine phosphorylation of several
intracellular proteins, and the pattern of these events were distinct from those 
of IL-12-stimulated Con A blasts. IL-12 also induced tyrosine phosphorylation of 
IL-12Rbeta1 as well as recruitment of several tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins to
IL-12Rbeta1 in DCs and Con A blasts. Receptor engagement of DCs as well as Con A 
blasts by IL-12 resulted in activation of Janus kinase 2 and Tyk2 kinases and
Stat3 and Stat4 transcription factors and the association of these proteins to
IL-12Rbeta1. Stimulation with IL-12 caused a tyrosine phosphorylation and
enzymatic activity of a family of mitogen-activated protein kinases, p38mapk.
These results suggest that IL-12 acts directly on DCs to induce their functional 
activation via IL-12Rbeta1-mediated signaling events.

PMID: 10861035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Immunol. 2000 Jul 1;165(1):10-4.

Cutting edge: differential expression of chemokines in Th1 and Th2 cells is
dependent on Stat6 but not Stat4.

Zhang S(1), Lukacs NW, Lawless VA, Kunkel SL, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 46208, USA.

The in vivo function of Th cell subsets is largely dependent on the ability of
differentiated CD4+ T cells to be recruited to specific sites and secrete
restricted sets of cytokines. In this paper we demonstrate that Th1 and Th2 cells
secrete discrete patterns of chemokines, small m.w. cytokines that function as
chemoattractants in inflammatory reactions. Th2 cells secrete macrophage-derived 
chemokine and T cell activation gene 3, and acquisition of this pattern of
expression is dependent on Stat6. In contrast, Th1 cells secrete lymphotactin and
RANTES, though unlike IFN-gamma, expression of these chemokines is independent of
Stat4. We further show that supernatants from activated Th2 cells preferentially 
induce the chemotaxis of Th2 over Th1 cells, corresponding with Stat6-dependent
expression of CCR4 and CCR8 in Th2 cells. These data provide the basis for
restricted and direct T cell-mediated cellular recruitment to sites of
inflammation.

PMID: 10861028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 2000 May 15;19(21):2577-84.

The biology of Stat4 and Stat6.

Wurster AL(1), Tanaka T, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, MA 02115, USA.

IL-4 and IL-12 are cytokines that are important regulators of the proliferation, 
differentiation and functional capacity of lymphocytes. STATs (signal transducers
and activators of transcription) are transcription factors that provide a direct 
link between the cytokine receptors and cytokine induced gene transcription.
Stat6 and Stat4 are two STAT family members that specifically mediate signals
that emanate from the IL-4 and IL-12 receptors, respectively. Recently a great
deal of progress has been made in understanding the specific roles that Stat6 and
Stat4 play in lymphocyte function through in vitro as well as in vivo studies
using Stat6 and Stat4-deficient mice. This report will summarize and describe the
recent advances made in understanding the activation and regulation of Stat6 and 
Stat4 as well as their roles in the development of an immune response. Oncogene
(2000).

PMID: 10851056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Annu Rev Immunol. 2000;18:451-94.

Signaling and transcription in T helper development.

Murphy KM(1), Ouyang W, Farrar JD, Yang J, Ranganath S, Asnagli H, Afkarian M,
Murphy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
murphy@immunology.wustl.edu

The recognition of polarized T cell subsets defined by cytokine production was
followed by a search to define the factors controlling this phenomenon. Suitable 
in vitro systems allowed the development of cytokine "recipes" that induced rapid
polarization of naïve T cells into Th1 or Th2 populations. The next phase of work
over the past several years has begun to define the intracellular processes set
into motion during Th1/Th2 development, particularly by the strongly polarizing
cytokines IL-12 and IL-4. Although somewhat incomplete, what has emerged is a
richly detailed tapestry of signaling and transcription, controlling an important
T cell developmental switch. In addition several new mediators of control have
emerged, including IL-18, the intriguing Th2-selective T1/ST2 product, and
heterogeneity in dendritic cells capable of directing cytokine-independent Th
development.

PMID: 10837066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Eur J Immunol. 2000 May;30(5):1425-34.

IL-12 selectively regulates STAT4 via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and
Ras-independent signal transduction pathways.

Athié-M V(1), Flotow H, Hilyard KL, Cantrell DA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Activation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, GB.

IL-12 is an important immunomodulatory cytokine that induces tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of the signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)4. IL-12 induces sustained activation and nuclear
translocation of STAT4 and this regulatory process is coupled to both tyrosine
and serine phosphorylation of this molecule. IL-12-activated tyrosine kinases are
the Janus kinases Jak2 and Tyk2 but little is known about IL-12 regulation of
serine kinases. The object of the present study was to explore the role of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) Erk1 and Erk2 and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) in STAT4 regulation. Here we show that the IL-12-induced STAT4
serine kinase is not sensitive to inhibitors of the PI3K or MAPK Erk1,2.
Moreover, IL-12 activation of STAT4 in human peripheral blood-derived T cells is 
not accompanied by stimulation of the Ras guanine nucleotide binding cycle or
stimulation of MAPK Erk1,2 or initiation of the PI3K signaling pathways. IL-12 is
unable to initiate the serine phosphorylation of STAT 1 and 3. This reveals that 
the STAT1, 3 and 4 serine kinases are not coordinately regulated in human T cells
and that IL-12 must regulate serine phosphorylation of STAT4 by a kinase network 
distinct to the MAPK Erk1,2 or PI3K pathways.

PMID: 10820390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2000 Sep;11(3):199-207.

STAT family of transcription factors in cytokine-mediated biological responses.

Takeda K(1), Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, and
CREST of Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Osaka University, 3-1
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan. ktakeda@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) family, consisting of
seven members, is involved in cytokine signal transduction. Biological roles of
each STAT family protein have now been elucidated through studies of gene
targeted mice. Stat1 knockout mice are defective in interferon-mediated
functions. Stat4 and Stat6 knockout mice show defective responses to IL-12 and
IL-4, respectively. Analyses of Stat5a and Stat5b knockout mice reveal important 
roles in prolactin-mediated mammary gland development and growth hormone-mediated
induction of sexual dimorphism, respectively. Conditional knockout study of Stat3
demonstrates its critical roles in cytokine-mediated functions in several
tissues, including T cells, macrophages, skin, and mammary gland.

PMID: 10817963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Blood. 2000 May 15;95(10):3183-90.

Interleukin-2 enhances the response of natural killer cells to interleukin-12
through up-regulation of the interleukin-12 receptor and STAT4.

Wang KS(1), Frank DA, Ritz J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hematologic Oncology, Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, and the Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-12 plays a critical role in modulating the activities of natural
killer (NK) cells and T lymphocytes. In animal models, IL-12 has potent antitumor
effects that are likely mediated by its ability to enhance the cytotoxic activity
of NK cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and to induce the production of
interferon (IFN)-gamma by NK and T cells. In addition to IL-12, NK cells are
responsive to IL-2, and may mediate some of the antitumor effects of IL-2. In
this study, we examine the interaction between IL-2 and the signaling events
induced by IL-12 in NK cells. We find that IL-2 not only up-regulates the
expression of IL-12Rbeta1 and IL-12Rbeta2, it also plays an important role in
up-regulating and maintaining the expression of STAT4, a critical STAT protein
involved in IL-12 signaling in NK cells. In contrast to the effects of IL-2
alone, expression of IL-12 receptors and STAT4 are unaffected or decreased by
IL-12 or the combination of IL-2 and IL-12. Through expression of high levels of 
IL-12 receptors and STAT4, IL-2-primed NK cells show enhanced functional
responses to IL-12 as measured by IFN-gamma production and the killing of target 
cells. NK cells from cancer patients who received low-dose IL-2 treatment also
exhibited increased expression of IL-12 receptor chains, suggesting that IL-2 may
enhance the response to IL-12 in vivo. These findings provide a molecular
framework to understand the interaction between IL-2 and IL-12 in NK cells, and
suggest strategies for improving the effectiveness of these cytokines in the
immunotherapy of cancer.

PMID: 10807786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Clin Invest. 2000 May;105(9):1289-98.

Th1 and Th2 mediate acute graft-versus-host disease, each with distinct end-organ
targets.

Nikolic B(1), Lee S, Bronson RT, Grusby MJ, Sykes M.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplantation Section, Transplantation Biology Research Center, 
Surgical Service, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

STAT4 and STAT6 are transcription factors that play crucial roles in responding
to IL-12 and IL-4, respectively. STAT4 gene knockout (STAT4(-/-)) mice have
markedly reduced Th1 responses and enhanced Th2 responses. STAT6(-/-) mice show
the inverse phenotype. We compared the ability of bone marrow transplantation
(BMT) with the inclusion of spleen cells from STAT6(-/-), STAT4(-/-), and
wild-type (WT) mice to produce graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in lethally
irradiated MHC-mismatched recipients. Acute GVHD mortality was more rapid when
induced by cells from STAT6(-/-) mice than when induced by STAT4(-/-) cells.
However, cells from STAT4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) donors both induced delayed GVHD
mortality compared with WT controls, or compared with combined STAT4(-/-) and
STAT6(-/-) cells, indicating a contribution of both Th1 cells and Th2 cells to
acute GVHD. Recipients of STAT6(-/-) BMT showed evidence of acute GVHD with
severe diarrhea and marked weight loss. Recipients of STAT4(-/-) BMT showed signs
of GVHD with only initial transient weight loss and later development of severe
skin GVHD. Histopathology showed that Th2 responses were required for the
induction of both hepatic and severe skin GVHD. In contrast, both Th1 cells and
Th2 cells were capable of causing intestinal pathology of GVHD. Our studies
demonstrate an additive role for Th1 and Th2 cells in producing acute GVHD, and
suggest a cytokine-directed approach to treating end-organ manifestations of
GVHD.

PMCID: PMC315439
PMID: 10792004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Immunol. 2000 Jan-Feb;37(1-2):1-11.

The Jak-STAT pathway.

Imada K(1), Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674, USA.

A variety of important cellular functions are regulated by cytokines. The
Jak-STAT pathway is one of the important signaling pathways downstream of
cytokine receptors. Following binding of a ligand to its cognate receptor,
receptor-associated Jaks are activated. STAT proteins are then in turn activated 
by tyrosine phosphorylation by Jak kinases, allowing their dimerization and
subsequent translocation into the nucleus, where they modulate expression of
target genes. Indispensable functions of Jaks and STATs in cytokine signaling in 
vivo have been revealed through knockout mouse studies. Moreover, the recent
discovery of the CIS/SOCS/JAB/SSI family of inhibitors has contributed to
understanding how this pathway is negatively regulated.

PMID: 10781830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Immunol. 2000 May 1;164(9):4659-64.

Stat4 is expressed in activated peripheral blood monocytes, dendritic cells, and 
macrophages at sites of Th1-mediated inflammation.

Frucht DM(1), Aringer M, Galon J, Danning C, Brown M, Fan S, Centola M, Wu CY,
Yamada N, El Gabalawy H, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Stat4 is a key transcription factor involved in promoting cell-mediated immunity,
whose expression in mature cells has been reported to be restricted to T and NK
cells. We demonstrate here, however, that Stat4 expression is not restricted to
lymphoid cells. In their basal state, monocytes do not express Stat4. Upon
activation, however, IFN-gamma- and LPS-treated monocytes and dendritic cells
express high levels of Stat4. Monocyte-expressed Stat4 in humans is
phosphorylated in response to IFN-alpha, but not IL-12. In contrast, the Th2
cytokines, IL-4 and IL-10, specifically down-regulate Stat4 expression in
activated monocytes, while having little effect on Stat6 expression. Moreover,
macrophages in synovial tissue obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis
express Stat4 in vivo, suggesting a potential role in a prototypical Th1-mediated
human disease. IFN-alpha-induced Stat4 activation in human monocytes represents a
previously unrecognized signaling pathway at sites of Th1 inflammation.

PMID: 10779770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 15;164(6):3056-64.

Dominance of IL-12 over IL-4 in gamma delta T cell differentiation leads to
default production of IFN-gamma: failure to down-regulate IL-12 receptor beta
2-chain expression.

Yin Z(1), Zhang DH, Welte T, Bahtiyar G, Jung S, Liu L, Fu XY, Ray A, Craft J.

Author information: 
(1)Sections of Rheumatology and Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, Department of Pathology, and Section of Immunobiology, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Gamma delta T cells secrete Th1- and Th2-like cytokines that help mediate innate 
and acquired immunity. We have addressed the mechanism whereby murine gamma delta
T cells acquire the capacity to differentially produce such cytokines. Splenic
gamma delta T cells could be polarized into IFN-gamma- or IL-4-secreting cells in
vitro; however, in contrast to CD4+ alpha beta T cells, gamma delta T cells
predominantly produced IFN-gamma, even in the presence of IL-4, a finding
independent of genetic background. Like CD4+ Th1 cells, IFN-gamma-producing cells
expressed the IL-12 receptor beta 2-chain after activation in the presence of
IL-12; however, unlike Th2 cells, IL-4-primed gamma delta T cells also expressed 
this receptor, even in the absence of IFN-gamma and despite the presence of the
transcription factor GATA-3. IL-12 also induced IL-4-primed gamma delta T cells
to proliferate and to translocate Stat3/Stat4, indicating signaling through the
IL-12 receptor. These molecular events can account for the predominant production
of IFN-gamma by gamma delta T cells in the presence of IL-12, despite the
availability of IL-4. Early and predominant production of IFN-gamma by gamma
delta T cells likely is critical for the roles that these cells play in
protection against intracellular pathogens and in tumor immunity.

PMID: 10706694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 15;164(6):2861-5.

Cutting edge: ectopic expression of the IL-12 receptor-beta 2 in developing and
committed Th2 cells does not affect the production of IL-4 or induce the
production of IFN-gamma.

Heath VL(1), Showe L, Crain C, Barrat FJ, Trinchieri G, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304,
USA. Heath@DNAX.org

The IL-12 receptor-beta 2 (IL-12R beta 2) chain is expressed on Th1 cells and
lost upon differentiation to the Th2 phenotype. This has been suggested as the
basis for commitment of Th1 cells, because early differentiated Th2 cells do not 
reverse their phenotype and do not produce IFN-gamma on restimulation in the
presence of IL-12. In this study, we ectopically expressed the IL-12
receptor-beta 2 (IL-12R beta 2) bicistronically with enhanced green fluorescent
protein by retroviral infection in developing and committed Th2 cells.
Restimulation of Th2 cells expressing this ectopic IL-12R beta 2 in the presence 
of IL-12 led to levels of IL-4 production similar to those in control Th2 cells. 
The expression of IL-12R beta 2 in Th2 cells did not lead to significant levels
of IFN-gamma production, although IL-12-mediated STAT signaling and proliferation
were restored. Thus, although the IL-12R beta 2 and IL-12-dependent STAT4
activation are required for Th1 responses, activation of this pathway is not
sufficient to restore a Th1 phenotype in developing or committed Th2 cells.

PMID: 10706670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Exp Med. 2000 Mar 6;191(5):847-58.

T helper type 2 cell differentiation occurs in the presence of interleukin 12
receptor beta2 chain expression and signaling.

Nishikomori R(1), Ehrhardt RO, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1890, USA.

The differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into T helper type 1 (Th1) cells is driven 
by interleukin (IL)-12 through the IL-12 receptor beta2 (IL-12Rbeta2) chain,
whereas differentiation into Th2 cells is driven by IL-4, which downregulates
IL-12Rbeta2 chain. We reexamined such differentiation using IL-12Rbeta2 chain
transgenic mice. We found that CD4(+) T cells from such mice were able to
differentiate into Th2 cells when primed with IL-4 or IL-4 plus IL-12. In the
latter case, the presence of IL-4 suppressed interferon (IFN)-gamma production
10-100-fold compared with cells cultured in IL-12 alone. Finally, in studies of
the ability of IL-12 to convert Th2 cells bearing a competent IL-12R to the Th1
cells, we showed that: (a) T cells bearing the IL-12Rbeta2 chain transgene and
primed under Th2 conditions could not be converted to Th1 cells by repeated
restimulation under Th1 conditions; and (b) established Th2 clones transfected
with the IL-12Rbeta2 chain construct continued to produce IL-4 when cultured with
IL-12. These studies show that IL-4-driven Th2 differentiation can occur in the
presence of persistent IL-12 signaling and that IL-4 inhibits IFN-gamma
production under these circumstances. They also show that established Th2 cells
cannot be converted to Th1 cells via IL-12 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2195855
PMID: 10704465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Circulation. 2000 Mar 7;101(9):1034-9.

Attenuated cardiac allograft vasculopathy in mice with targeted deletion of the
transcription factor STAT4.

Koglin J(1), Glysing-Jensen T, Gadiraju S, Russell ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA. joerg.koglin@med1.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: To study transcription factor signaling pathways that mediate cardiac
allograft vasculopathy, we used mice with targeted gene deletion of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)4 and STAT6 as recipients in our 
mouse cardiac transplant model of chronic rejection.
METHODS AND RESULTS: At day 55 after transplantation, cardiac grafts placed into 
STAT4 -/- (n=10) had reduced frequency (24+/-2%) and severity (9+/-4%) of
vascular occlusion compared with wild-type controls (n=7, frequency 70+/-12%
[P<0.001], severity 25+/-6% [P<0.05]). This decrease was associated with reduced 
intragraft expression ((32)P RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry) of the Th1
signature cytokines interferon-gamma (P<0.001) and interleukin (IL)-2 (P<0.001). 
Furthermore, cardiac grafts in STAT4 -/- had fewer infiltrating CD45(+)
mononuclear cells (99+/-27 cells/mm(3) compared with 551+/-168 cells/mm(3) in
wild-type controls [P<0.05]) and reduced expression of P-selectin (P<0.001) and
E-selectin (P<0.01) ligand, recently shown to regulate Th1 cell recruitment. In
contrast, in grafts placed into STAT6 -/- (n=11), the development of cardiac
allograft vasculopathy (frequency 62+/-8%, severity 28+/-6%) and Th2 cytokine
profiles (IL-4, IL-10) were comparable to those in wild-type controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Hence, we show that immune responses mediated by STAT4, but not
STAT6, contribute to the development of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. We
speculate that when present, STAT4-mediated signaling pathways may promote
cardiac allograft vasculopathy by directing Th1-specific lymphocyte recruitment, 
activation, and effector functions.

PMID: 10704172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Immunol. 1999 Sep-Oct;36(13-14):949-55.

Complement activation and atherosclerosis.

Niculescu F(1), Rus H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore
21201, USA. fnicules@umaryland.edu

Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease mediated through the action of
monocyte/macrophages, complement and T-lymphocytes. C5a and monocyte chemotactic 
factor released during complement activation in the arterial wall may participate
in the initial monocyte recruitment. Assembly of C5b-9 on cells of the arterial
wall may also induce cell lysis. On the other hand, sublytic assembly of C5b-9 on
smooth muscle cells (SMC) and endothelial cells (EC) induces cell activation and 
proliferation. Analysis of mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathways
induced by C5b-9 in aortic SMC revealed that extracellular signal regulated
kinase (ERK) 1, c-jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) 1, and p38 MAPK are all activated
by C5b-9. ERK1 activity was inhibited by wortmannin suggesting that ERK1 pathway 
is activated through phosphatidyl inositol -3 (PI 3-) kinase. Sublytic C5b-9
assembly on the plasma membrane was also able to activate Janus kinase (JAK) 1,
signal transducer and activator (STAT) 3 and STAT4 in EC. JAK1 but not STAT3
activation induced by C5b-9 is dependent on Gi protein activation. New evidence
accumulated during the last decade support the role of complement activation in
both initiation and progression of the atherosclerotic lesions. Complement system
activation is a major component of the chronic inflammatory process associated
with atherosclerosis.

PMID: 10698349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):7343-50.

Regulation of c-myc transcription by interleukin-2 (IL-2). Identification of a
novel IL-2 response element interacting with STAT-4.

Grigorieva I(1), Grigoriev VG, Rowney MK, Hoover RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.
grigorii@slucare1.sluh.edu

Regulation of c-myc expression is known to occur at the level of transcription
initiation. However, the participating promoter elements and their cognate
binding proteins have not been fully characterized. c-myc transcription can be
stimulated by a number of cytokines including interleukin-2 (IL-2). We have
identified a novel IL-2-responsive element, located in the 5'-flanking region of 
the c-myc gene, between nucleotides -1406 and -1387 (relative to the P2
promoter). This element belongs to the family of interferon-gamma activation
site-like responsive elements and has the core sequence TTCCAATAA. We confirmed
that IL-2-mediated signaling involves activation by phosphorylation of Jak2
tyrosine kinase and subsequently STAT4. The transcription factor STAT4 binds the 
TTCCAATAA motif within this responsive element and, therefore, is probably
involved in enhancing c-myc transcription upon IL-2 stimulation. Our results
propose participation of Jak2 and STAT4 in IL-2-induced up-regulation of c-myc.

PMID: 10702306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Immunogenetics. 2000 Jan;51(1):30-6.

Genomic organization of the human interleukin-12 receptor beta2-chain gene.

van Rietschoten JG(1), Smits HH, Westland R, Verweij CL, den Hartog MT, Wierenga 
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Department of Cell Biology
and Histology, P.O. Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The interleukin-12 receptor (IL-12R) is composed of two subunits, referred to as 
beta1 and beta2. Both chains are necessary for high-affinity IL-12 binding and
signalling, although only the IL-12Rbeta2 chain contains the intracellular
tyrosine residues responsible for STAT4 activation. This study presents the
intron-exon organization of the human IL-12Rbeta2-chain gene. Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) primers designed across the cDNA (U46198) were used to trace
introns, by comparing PCR product sizes obtained using cDNA and genomic DNA as
templates. PCR products spanning introns were sequenced to determine the exact
splice sites and flanking regions. The coding region of the gene was found to
consist of 15 exons and 14 introns. All intron-exon boundaries are consistent
with the consensus sequence for splice junctions (5' GT/AG 3'). Comparison of the
intron-exon organization with the human GCSFR gene indicated a remarkably well
conserved genomic organization between these two class I cytokine receptors.
Interestingly, we identified an alternatively spliced mRNA, encoding a putative, 
truncated protein, lacking all signalling potential.

PMID: 10663559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Immunol. 2000 Feb 15;164(4):1768-74.

Inhibition of Th1 immune response by glucocorticoids: dexamethasone selectively
inhibits IL-12-induced Stat4 phosphorylation in T lymphocytes.

Franchimont D(1), Galon J, Gadina M, Visconti R, Zhou Y, Aringer M, Frucht DM,
Chrousos GP, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Glucocorticoids are widely used in the therapy of inflammatory, autoimmune, and
allergic diseases. As the end-effectors of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis, endogenous glucocorticoids also play an important role in suppressing
innate and cellular immune responses. Previous studies have indicated that
glucocorticoids inhibit Th1 and enhance Th2 cytokine secretion. IL-12 promotes
Th1 cell-mediated immunity, while IL-4 stimulates Th2 humoral-mediated immunity. 
Here, we examined the regulatory effect of glucocorticoids on key elements of
IL-12 and IL-4 signaling. We first investigated the effect of dexamethasone on
IL-12-inducible genes and showed that dexamethasone inhibited IL-12-induced
IFN-gamma secretion and IFN regulatory factor-1 expression in both NK and T
cells. This occurred even though the level of expression of IL-12 receptors and
IL-12-induced Janus kinase phosphorylation remained unaltered. However,
dexamethasone markedly inhibited IL-12-induced phosphorylation of Stat4 without
altering its expression. This was specific, as IL-4-induced Stat6 phosphorylation
was not affected, and mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor, as it was
antagonized by the glucocorticoid receptor antagonist RU486. Moreover,
transfection experiments showed that dexamethasone reduced responsiveness to
IL-12 through the inhibition of Stat4-dependent IFN regulatory factor-1 promoter 
activity. We conclude that blocking IL-12-induced Stat4 phosphorylation, without 
altering IL-4-induced Stat6 phosphorylation, appears to be a new suppressive
action of glucocorticoids on the Th1 cellular immune response and may help
explain the glucocorticoid-induced shift toward the Th2 humoral immune response.

PMID: 10657623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. EMBO J. 2000 Feb 1;19(3):392-9.

A small amphipathic alpha-helical region is required for transcriptional
activities and proteasome-dependent turnover of the tyrosine-phosphorylated
Stat5.

Wang D(1), Moriggl R, Stravopodis D, Carpino N, Marine JC, Teglund S, Feng J,
Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA.

Cytokines induce the tyrosine phosphorylation and associated activation of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stat). The mechanisms by which this 
response is terminated are largely unknown. Among a variety of inhibitors
examined, the proteasome inhibitors MG132 and lactacystin affected Stat4, Stat5
and Stat6 turnover by significantly stabilizing the tyrosine-phosphorylated form.
However, these proteasome inhibitors did not affect downregulation of the
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1, Stat2 and Stat3. With Stat5 isoforms, we have
observed that tyrosine-phosphorylated carboxyl-truncated forms of Stat5 proteins 
were considerably more stable than phosphorylated wild-type forms of the protein.
Also, the C-terminal region of Stat5 could confer proteasome-dependent
downregulation to Stat1. With a series of C-terminal deletion mutants, we have
defined a relatively small, potentially amphipathic alpha-helical region that is 
required for the rapid turnover of the phosphorylated Stat5 proteins. The region 
is also required for transcriptional activation, suggesting that the functions
are linked. The results are consistent with a model in which the transcriptional 
activation domain of activated Stat5 is required for its transcriptional activity
and downregulation through a proteasome-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC305576
PMID: 10654938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2693-7.

Recruitment of Stat4 to the human interferon-alpha/beta receptor requires
activated Stat2.

Farrar JD(1), Smith JD, Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Stat4 activation is involved in differentiation of type 1 helper (Th1) T cells.
Although Stat4 is activated by interleukin (IL)-12 in both human and murine T
cells, Stat4 is activated by interferon (IFN)-alpha only in human, but not
murine, CD4(+) T cells. This species-specific difference in cytokine activation
of Stat4 underlies critical differences in Th1 development in response to
cytokines and is important to the interpretation of murine models of
immunopathogenesis. Here, we sought to determine the mechanism of Stat4
recruitment and activation by the human IFN-alpha receptor. Analysis of
phosphopeptide binding analysis suggests that Stat4 does not interact directly
with tyrosine-phosphorylated amino acid residues within the cytoplasmic domains
of either of the subunits of the IFN-alpha receptor complex. Expression of murine
Stat4 in the Stat1-deficient U3A and the Stat2-deficient U6A cell lines shows
that IFN-alpha-induced Stat4 phosphorylation requires the presence of activated
Stat2 but not Stat1. Thus, in contrast to the direct recruitment of Stat4 by the 
IL-12 receptor, Stat4 activation by the human IFN-alpha receptor occurs through
indirect recruitment by intermediates involving Stat2.

PMID: 10644731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 17;463(3):360-4.

Cell swelling activates STAT1 and STAT3 proteins in cultured rat hepatocytes.

Meisse D(1), Dusanter-Fourt I, Husson A, Lavoinne A.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Biochimie et Physiopathologie Digestive et Nutritionnelle (GBPDN),
Institut Fédératif de Recherche Multidisciplinaire sur les Peptides no. 23
(IFRMP), UFR Médecine-Pharmacie de Rouen, 22 boulevard Gambetta, 76183, Rouen,
France.

In this paper, we demonstrated that in cultured rat hepatocytes cell swelling
induced the activation of STAT1 and STAT3 proteins without any effect on STAT4,
STAT5 and STAT6 proteins. Cell swelling induced an activation of STAT proteins
through an increase in the phosphorylation of the tyrosine residue also
phosphorylated by interleukin-6, but without any activation of JAK kinases. The
signaling pathway by which cell swelling activated STAT1 and STAT3 is discussed.

PMID: 10606754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Dec 20;266(2):551-5.

Mutations of the IL-12 receptor beta2 chain gene in atopic subjects.

Matsui E(1), Kaneko H, Fukao T, Teramoto T, Inoue R, Watanabe M, Kasahara K,
Kondo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, 40
Tsukasa-machi, Gifu, 500-8705, Japan.

Interleukin-12(IL-12) promotes cell-mediated Th1 responses and production of
IFN-gamma that downregulates IgE production. The signal of IL-12 is transduced
through the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) and Stat4. Twenty-four of 75 atopic
individuals with high levels of IgE showed insufficient IFN-gamma production by
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) following stimulation with IL-12 but
not that with phytohemagglutinin (PHA). Interestingly, 10 of the above 24
subjects were found to be heterozygous for truncated (2496 del 91) or missense
(1577 A to G and 2799 A to G) mutations of IL-12R beta2 chain gene (IL-12R
beta2). Insufficient phosphorylation of Stat4 was also demonstrated in these 10
individuals. This is the first report showing that reduced IFN-gamma production
following IL-12 stimulation is associated with the heterozygous IL-12R beta2
mutations in atopic subjects.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10600539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 15;163(12):6567-74.

Selective pharmacologic inhibition of murine and human IL-12-dependent Th1
differentiation and IL-12 signaling.

Coon ME(1), Diegel M, Leshinsky N, Klaus SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Cell Therapeutics, Inc., Seattle, WA 98119, USA.

We have previously shown that lisofylline (LSF) inhibits murine Th1-mediated
disease in vivo by blocking IL-12-induced differentiation of Th1 cells. The
cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying this inhibition were further
explored by testing LSF in several IL-12-responsive model systems in vitro.
IL-12-dependent Th1 differentiation was abrogated by LSF and yielded effector T
cells that were deficient in proinflammatory cytokine secretion, including
IFN-gamma, IL-2, and TNF-alpha. The diminished Th1 phenotype resulted from both a
lower frequency of IL-12-derived Th1 clones and a reduced capacity of individual 
clones to secrete IFN-gamma due to lower levels of IFN-gamma mRNA. The arrest in 
Th1 development resulted from a blockade of IL-12 signaling that preceded the Th0
to Th1 transition. Thus, LSF blocked IL-12-enhanced IFN-gamma production in
anti-CD3-stimulated T cells and prevented IL-12-mediated repression of the
transcription factor GATA-3. Lisofylline also inhibited IL-12-induced increases
in STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation, but did not block TCR signaling or inhibit
acquisition of IL-12 responsiveness. These findings were extended to show that
LSF also inhibits IL-12-dependent responses in human T cells. LSF, which has one 
asymmetric chiral center, was selectively inhibitory for IL-12 signaling compared
with its S-enantiomer (1501-S) and the oxidized side chain analog,
pentoxifylline. The results suggest that LSF may be useful as a modulator of
Th1-mediated disease in humans.

PMID: 10586050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Comp Immunol. 1999 Oct-Dec;23(7-8):657-63.

Type I interferons and the Th1/Th2 paradigm.

Sinigaglia F(1), D'Ambrosio D, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Milano Ricerche, Italy. francesco.sinigaglia@roche.com

During the past year significant advances have been made in our understanding of 
the factors contributing to the differentiation of CD4+ T helper cell subsets.
These have been driven, in part, by the realization that cytokines from the
innate immune response, such as interleukin-12 (IL-12) and interferons (IFNs),
play a critical role in T cell subset differentiation. This review covers some of
the most recent data concerning the divergent role that IFNs have in the
differentiation of human versus mouse T helper cell subsets. In this review we
discuss the molecular basis for the specie-specific effect of type I IFN on the
selective induction of Th1 type immune responses. Furthermore, since IFN-beta is 
used in the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS) we discuss the potential effects
of such treatment and the value of the Th1/Th2 paradigm in MS.

PMID: 10579394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Immunol Rev. 1999 Aug;170:65-72.

Regulation of the IL-12/IL-12R axis: a critical step in T-helper cell
differentiation and effector function.

Sinigaglia F(1), D'Ambrosio D, Panina-Bordignon P, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)francesco.sinigaglia@roche.com

Interleukin (IL)-12 is required for the development of T-helper (Th) 1 cells,
which have been shown to be important for protective cell-mediated immune
responses against a variety of intracellular pathogens. Recent studies have
clarified the sources and the regulation of IL-12 production leading to Th1
development against microbes. Expression of IL-12R is necessary for maintaining
IL-12 responsiveness and controlling Th1 lineage commitment. Advances in this
area have included a broader understanding of the factors involved in the
regulation of the IL-12R beta 2 signaling component. Expression of this receptor 
subunit in humans is critically influenced by IL-12 and type I interferons. IL-12
signaling results in STAT4 activation and interferon (IFN)-gamma production.
Recent evidence suggests that IL-12 also modulates a number of genes involved in 
leukocyte trafficking. Thus, IL-12 is not only an important proinflammatory
cytokine, which induces production of IFN-gamma and subsequent activation of
phagocytic cells but also plays a major role in regulating the migration and
proper positioning of effector cells.

PMID: 10566142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Immunol. 1999 Nov 15;163(10):5374-82.

Disruption of the STAT4 signaling pathway protects from autoimmune diabetes while
retaining antiviral immune competence.

Holz A(1), Bot A, Coon B, Wolfe T, Grusby MJ, von Herrath MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, Division of Virology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The role of the STAT4 signaling pathway in autoimmune diabetes was investigated
using the rat insulin promoter lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus model of
virally induced autoimmune diabetes. Abrogation of STAT4 signaling significantly 
reduced the development of CD4+-T cell-dependent but not CD4+-T cell-independent 
diabetes, illustrating the fine-tuned kinetics involved in the pathogenesis of
autoimmunity. However, the absence of STAT4 did not prevent the generation of
autoreactive Th1/Tc1 T cell responses, as well as protective antiviral immunity. 
Protection from insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was associated with decreased
numbers of autoreactive CTL precursors in the pancreas and the spleen and a
general as well as Ag-specific reduction of IFN-gamma secretion by T lymphocytes.
A shift from Th1 to Th2 T cell immunity was not observed. Hence, our results
implicate both CTL and cytokines in beta cell destruction. Selective inhibition
of the STAT4 signal transduction pathway might constitute a novel and attractive 
approach to prevent clinical insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in prediabetic
individuals at risk.

PMID: 10553062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Blood. 1999 Nov 1;94(9):2981-9.

Upregulation of integrin alpha6/beta1 and chemokine receptor CCR1 by
interleukin-12 promotes the migration of human type 1 helper T cells.

Colantonio L(1), Iellem A, Clissi B, Pardi R, Rogge L, Sinigaglia F, D'Ambrosio
D.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Milano Ricerche, and the Human Immunology Unit, DIBIT, Milan, Italy.

CD4(+) T helper 1 (Th1) cells and Th2 cells are distinguished based on the
pattern of cytokines they are able to produce. Selectin ligands and chemokine
receptors are differentially expressed in Th1 and Th2 cells, providing a basis
for tissue-specific recruitment of helper T-cell subsets. However, the modes and 
mechanisms regulating tissue-specific localization of Th1 and Th2 cells are still
largely unknown. Here, we show the preferential expression on Th1 cells of the
integrin alpha6/beta1, which is distinctly regulated by the Th1-inducing
cytokines interleukin-12 (IL-12) and interferon-alfa (IFN-alpha). The pattern of 
integrin alpha6/beta1 regulation closely mirrors that of the chemokine receptor
CCR1. Analysis of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (Stat4)
activation by IL-12 and IFN-alpha shows distinct signaling kinetics by these
cytokines, correlating with the pattern of CCR1 and integrin alpha6/beta1
expression. Unlike IFN-alpha, the ability of IL-12 to generate prolonged
intracellular signals appears to be critical for inducing integrin alpha6/beta1
upregulation in Th1 cells. The expression and upregulation of CCR1 and
alpha6/beta1 integrin promotes the migration of Th1 cells. These findings suggest
that the exquisite regulation of integrin alpha6/beta1 and CCR1 may play an
important role in tissue-specific localization of Th1 cells.

PMID: 10556180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 1999 Oct 15;163(8):4349-59.

Role of IL-12 in intrathymic negative selection.

Lúdvíksson BR(1), Ehrhardt RO, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Bludviksson@atlas.niaid.nih.gov

Cytokines are central regulatory elements in peripheral lymphocyte
differentiation, but their role in T cell ontogeny is poorly defined. In the
present study, we evaluated the role of IL-12 in thymocyte selection more
directly by determining its role in two models of in vivo negative selection. In 
initial studies we demonstrated that abundant intrathymic IL-12 synthesis occurs 
during OVA peptide-induced negative selection of thymocytes in neonatal OVA-TCR
transgenic mice, and such synthesis is associated with increased IL-12R
beta2-chain expression as well as STAT4 intracellular signaling. In further
studies, we showed that this form of negative selection was occurring at the
alphabetaTCRlowCD4lowCD8low stage and was prevented by the coadministration of
anti-IL-12. In addition, the IL-12-dependent thymocyte depletion was occurring
through an intrathymic apoptosis mechanism, also prevented by administration of
anti-IL-12. Finally, we showed that IL-12 p40-/- mice displayed aberrant negative
selection of double positive CD4+CD8+ thymocytes when injected with anti-CD3 mAb.
These studies suggest that intact intrathymic IL-12 production is necessary for
the negative selection of thymocytes occurring in relation to a high "self" Ag
load, possible through its ability to induce the thymocyte maturation and
cytokine production necessary for such selection.

PMID: 10510375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Immunol. 1999 Oct 1;163(7):4073-9.

Depressed IL-12-mediated signal transduction in T cells from patients with Sézary
syndrome is associated with the absence of IL-12 receptor beta 2 mRNA and highly 
reduced levels of STAT4.

Showe LC(1), Fox FE, Williams D, Au K, Niu Z, Rook AH.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Lshowe@wistar.upenn.edu

Sézary syndrome (SS) is the leukemic phase of cutaneous T cell lymphoma
characterized by the proliferation of clonally derived CD4+ T cells that release 
cytokines of the Th2 T cell phenotype (IL-4, IL-5, IL-10), whereas Th1 T cell
cytokines (IL-2, IFN-gamma) are markedly depressed as is expression of IL-12, a
pivotal cytokine for Th1 cell differentiation. Normal Th1 cells express both the 
beta 1 and beta 2 chains of the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) and tyrosine
phosphorylate STAT4 in response to IL-12. Th2 T cells express only the IL-12R
beta 1 and thus do not tyrosine phosphorylate STAT4 in response to IL-12. To
determine whether SS cells are Th2-like at the level of IL-12 signal
transduction, we analyzed RNA from seven patients for the presence of message for
the IL-12R beta 1 and beta 2 genes using RNase protection assays and assessed
whether IL-12 induced tyrosine-phosphorylation of STAT4 by immunoblotting. In PBL
from six of seven SS patients tested, beta 2 message was expressed at low to
undetectable levels and its expression could not be stimulated by either
IFN-alpha or IFN- gamma, which stimulated beta 2 expression in control PBL. The
absence of beta 2 expression is further supportive evidence for the Th2 lineage
of SS cells. However, unlike normal Th2 cells, SS cells also showed severely
reduced levels of STAT4, suggesting that they have a depressed response to any
inducer of the STAT4 signal transduction pathway, including IFN-alpha. This is
the first observation linking STAT4 gene expression with a human disease and
suggests that dysregulation of STAT4 expression may be significant to the
development and/or progression of SS.

PMID: 10491012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Oct;65(4):959-65.

STAT5 signaling in sexually dimorphic gene expression and growth patterns.

Davey HW(1), Wilkins RJ, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New Zealand.
daveyh@agresearch.cri.nz

The past 10 years have seen enormous advances in our understanding of how
cytokine signals are mediated intracellularly. Of particular significance was the
discovery of a family of seven Signal Transducer and Activators of Transcription 
(STAT) proteins. Each of these has now been studied in detail, and appropriate
gene-disrupted mouse models are available for all except STAT2 (Leonard and
O'Shea 1998). Fetal lethality is observed in Stat3-deficient mice, and various
immunodeficiencies characterize mice with disrupted Stat1, Stat4, and Stat6
genes, which is consistent with impaired signaling from the specific cytokines
that activate each of these proteins. The recent characterization of
Stat5-deficient mice has led to several unanticipated findings that point to
diverse biological functions for the two STAT5 forms, STAT5a and STAT5b. These
include roles for one or both STAT5 forms in the immune system, hematopoiesis,
sexually dimorphic growth, mammary development, hair growth, deposition of
adipose tissue, and pregnancy. Here we review the hormone- and cytokine-activated
signaling pathways in which STAT5 participates and the extensive evidence, from
laboratory animals, that these factors are required for sex-specific aspects of
development, including control of body size. Finally, we consider human growth
disorders that may involve defects in STAT5-dependent signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC1288266
PMID: 10486314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Aug;29(8):2524-9.

STAT-4 mediated IL-12 signaling pathway is critical for the development of
protective immunity in cutaneous leishmaniasis.

Stamm LM(1), Satoskar AA, Ghosh SK, David JR, Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that two IL-12 signaling pathways, a STAT 4 -
dependent and STAT4 - independent, are involved in the development of a Th1-like 
response. To determine their roles in the development of protective immunity
against Leishmania major, we monitored progression of cutaneous Leishmania major 
infection in STAT4-deficient mice (STAT4-/-) compared to similarly infected
wild-type (STAT4+/+) mice. Although the onset of lesion growth was delayed in
STAT4-/- mice during the early phase of infection, these mice eventually
developed large, non-healing lesions, whereas STAT4+/+ mice resolved their
lesions. As infection progressed, both STAT4+/+ and STAT4-/- mice infected with
L. major displayed similar titers of Leishmania-specific IgG1 and IgE but later
produced lower IgG2a. On days 20 and 40 post-infection, Leishmania
antigen-stimulated lymphnode cells from STAT4-/- mice produced significantly
lower amounts of IFN-gamma than those from STAT4+/+ mice as measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. There was no significant difference, however, 
in IL-4 and IL-12 production between the two groups. These results indicate that 
STAT4-mediated IL-12 signaling is critical for the development of protective Th1 
response following L. major infection in genetically resistant mice.
Additionally, they demonstrate that, although genetically resistant mice lacking 
STAT4 signaling pathway develop large, non-healing lesions, they do not default
towards a Th2-like response.

PMID: 10458767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Exp Med. 1999 Aug 16;190(4):543-53.

Antigen-specific signaling by a soluble, dimeric peptide/major histocompatibility
complex class II/Fc chimera leading to T helper cell type 2 differentiation.

Casares S(1), Zong CS, Radu DL, Miller A, Bona CA, Brumeanu TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Interaction between a T cell receptor (TCR) and various ligands, i.e. , anti-TCR 
antibodies, superantigens, peptides, or altered peptide ligands in the context of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules can trigger different T helper
cell (Th) effector functions. Herein, we studied the T cell response induced by a
soluble, dimeric peptide/MHC class II chimera, namely hemagglutinin
(HA)110-120/I-E(d)alphabeta/Fcgamma2a (DEF). We have previously demonstrated that
the soluble DEF molecule binds stably and specifically to HA110-120-specific TCRs
expressed by a T cell hybridoma. Administration of DEF in vivo induced
differentiation of resting and activated peptide-specific T cells toward a Th2
response, as indicated by the increase of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, and specific
immunoglobulin (Ig)G1 antibodies and decrease of IL-2, specific IgG2a antibodies,
and cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity. In contrast to HA110-120 peptide presented
by the DEF molecule to T cells, the nominal synthetic peptide induced a
predominant Th1 response, and the PR8 virus-derived HA110-120 peptides induced a 
mixed Th1/Th2 response. Independent of antigen processing, soluble DEF was almost
2 logs more potent in stimulating cognate T cells than the nominal peptide.
Polarization of cognate T cells toward the Th2 response occurred upon interaction
of soluble DEF with TCR and CD4 molecules followed by early activation of
p56(lck) and ZAP-70 tyrosine kinases, and negative signaling of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)4 pathway of Th1 differentiation.
DEF-like molecules may provide a new tool to study the mechanisms of signaling
toward Th2 differentiation and may also provide a potential immunotherapeutic
approach to modulate autoreactive T cells toward protective Th2 immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2195598
PMID: 10449525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 19;262(1):14-9.

Evidence for the involvement of JAK/STAT pathway in the signaling mechanism of
interleukin-17.

Subramaniam SV(1), Cooper RS, Adunyah SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee
37208, USA.

Interleukin-17 is a T-cell-derived pro-inflammatory cytokine, exhibiting multiple
biological activities in a variety of cells and believed to fine tune all general
phases of hematopoietic response. However, the signaling mechanism of this novel 
cytokine remains unknown. Here, we report for the first time that the early
signaling events triggered by interleukin-17 involve tyrosine phosphorylation of 
several members of the JAK and STAT proteins in human U937 monocytic leukemia
cells. Immunoprecipitation with specific antibodies followed by Western blot
analysis with antiphosphotyrosine antibody has shown that in U937 cells,
interleukin-17 induces time-dependent stimulation of tyrosine phosphorylation of 
JAK 1, 2 and 3, Tyk 2 and STAT 1, 2, 3 and 4 within 0.5 to 30 min.
Interleukin-17-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of these proteins strongly
suggests that the JAK/STAT signaling pathway may play a major role in transducing
signals from interleukin-17 receptors to the nucleus.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 20;274(34):24059-65.

Urokinase induces activation and formation of Stat4 and Stat1-Stat2 complexes in 
human vascular smooth muscle cells.

Dumler I(1), Kopmann A, Wagner K, Mayboroda OA, Jerke U, Dietz R, Haller H, Gulba
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Franz Volhard Clinic and Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Virchow
Klinikum-Charité, Humboldt University of Berlin, D-13125 Berlin, Germany.
dumler@fvk-berlin.de

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its specific receptor (uPAR) act
in concert to stimulate cytoplasmic signaling machinery and transcription factors
responsible for cell migration and proliferation. Recently we demonstrated that
uPA activates the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stat1) signaling in human vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells. However,
the important question whether other transcription factors of the Stat family, in
addition to Stat1, are involved in the uPAR-related signaling has not been
addressed. In this study, we demonstrate that Stat4 and Stat2, but not Stat3,
Stat5, or Stat6, are rapidly activated in response to uPA. We demonstrate further
that Stat4 and Stat2 rapidly and transiently translocate to the cell nucleus
where they bind specifically to the regulatory DNA elements. Analysis of Stat
complexes formed in response to uPA revealed a Stat2-Stat1 heterodimer, which
lacks p48, a DNA-binding protein known to combine with Stat1-Stat2. This new
uPA-induced Stat2-Stat1 heterodimer binds to GAS (the interferon-gamma activation
site) distinct from the interferon-stimulated response element to which the p48
protein containing complexes generally bind. We conclude that uPA activates a
specific and unusual subset of latent cytoplasmic transcription factors in human 
vascular smooth muscle cells that suggests a critical role of uPA in these cells.

PMID: 10446176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 15;163(4):1880-7.

Priming MHC-I-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses to exogenous hepatitis 
B surface antigen is CD4+ T cell dependent.

Wild J(1), Grusby MJ, Schirmbeck R, Reimann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Ulm, Germany.

MHC-I (Ld)-restricted, S28-39-specific CTL responses are efficiently primed in
H-2d BALB/c mice injected with low doses of native hepatitis B surface Ag (HBsAg)
lipoprotein particles without adjuvants. Priming of this CTL response by
exogenous HBsAg required CD4+ T cell "help" and IL-12: this CTL response could be
neither induced in mice depleted of CD4+ T cells by in vivo Ab treatment, nor in 
(CD4+ T cell-competent or CD4+ T cell-depleted) IL-12-unresponsive STAT4-/-
knockout BALB/c mice. Codelivery of oligonucleotides (ODN) with immunostimulating
CpG sequences (ISS) with exogenous HBsAg reconstituted the CTL response to
exogenous HBsAg in CD4+ T cell-depleted normal mice and in CD4+ T cell-competent 
and CD4+ T cell-depleted STAT4-/- BALB/c mice. Injection (by different routes) of
"naked" pCI/S plasmid DNA encoding HBsAg into IL-12-responsive or -unresponsive
BALB/c mice efficiently primed the MHC-I-restricted, HBsAg-specific CTL response.
CTL priming was not detectable when CD4+ T cell-depleted animals were subjected
to genetic immunization. In vivo priming of the well-characterized CD8+ CTL
response to HBsAg in "high responder" BALB/c mice either by exogenous surface
lipoprotein particles or by DNA vaccination is thus CD4+ T cell dependent. CTL
priming by exogenous HBsAg, but not by genetic immunization, is IL-12 dependent. 
The dependence of CTL priming by exogenous HBsAg on CD4+ T cells can be overcome 
by codelivering ODN with ISS motifs, and this "adjuvants effect" operates
efficiently in IL-12-unresponsive mice. The data characterize a feature of the
adjuvant effect of ISS-containing ODN on CTL priming that may be of major
interest for the design of CTL-stimulating vaccines with efficacy in
immunodeficiency conditions.

PMID: 10438922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 3;96(16):9339-44.

The Epstein-Barr virus latency BamHI-Q promoter is positively regulated by STATs 
and Zta interference with JAK/STAT activation leads to loss of BamHI-Q promoter
activity.

Chen H(1), Lee JM, Wang Y, Huang DP, Ambinder RF, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

In Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated tumors in nonimmunocompromised patients,
EBV gene expression is highly restricted. EBV-encoded nuclear antigen (EBNA)-1 is
expressed, whereas the immunogenic and proliferative EBNAs are not. This pattern 
of EBNA expression is generated by usage of the BamHI-Q promoter (Qp). We have
determined that the JAK/STAT pathway positively regulates Qp activity. In
transient-transfection assays, a Qp-CAT reporter was activated by cotransfected
JAK-1 and by treatment of cells with the cytokine IL-6. The ability of Qp to bind
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins was directly
demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility-shift assay, and mutation of potential
STAT-binding sites reduced Qp responsiveness to Janus kinase (JAK)-1. Consistent 
with a role for STATs in Qp function, Qp using Burkitt's lymphoma Rael cells and 
cultured nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells contained nuclear STAT protein. We 
investigated whether the inability to maintain EBV-positive NPC cell lines in
culture was related to Qp activity. Passaging of the NPC cell line HK666 led to
activation of expression of BZLF1, which encodes Zta and loss of Qp function.
Transient expression assays linked Zta expression to the down-regulation of Qp.
Cotransfection of Zta reduced Qp activity in reporter assays. This negative
regulation required Zta DNA-binding activity. We provide evidence that Zta
up-regulation of p53 leads to p53-mediated interference with JAK/STAT activation 
of Qp. The data imply that JAK/STAT signaling has a role in EBV-associated
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC17784
PMID: 10430944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Aug 1;368(1):147-55.

Direct interaction of STAT4 with the IL-12 receptor.

Yao BB(1), Niu P, Surowy CS, Faltynek CR.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Products Division, Pharmaceutical Discovery, Abbott Park,
Illinois, 60064, USA. betty.yao@abbott.com

Signal transduction by interleukin-12 (IL-12) requires phosphorylation and
activation of STAT4. Direct interaction of the SH2 domain of STAT4 with a
phosphotyrosine residue in the IL-12 receptor has been proposed to be required
for the subsequent STAT4 phosphorylation. The IL-12 receptor beta2 subunit
contains three tyrosine residues in its cytoplasmic domain. To test the
hypothesis that one of these tyrosines is involved in binding STAT4,
phosphopeptides were synthesized according to the amino acid sequences
surrounding each of these tyrosine residues. Only the phosphopeptide containing
pTyr800 strongly bound to STAT4 in a cell-free binding assay. When this
phosphopeptide was introduced into TALL-104 cells, it blocked IL-12-induced STAT4
phosphorylation by competing with the IL-12 receptor for binding to STAT4. A
series of alanine replacements was performed in this phosphopeptide to elucidate 
which amino acids surrounding the pTyr800 residue are critical for STAT4 binding.
To summarize, the site on the IL-12 receptor which binds STAT4 can be described
as -T-X-X-G-pY(800)-L-, where the core G-pY(800)-L motif is critical for the
binding; the threonine at the pY-4 position has only a minor contribution and X
represents amino acids not critical for the binding. These results demonstrate
that only a small region of the IL-12 receptor is critically involved in binding 
STAT4 and suggest the feasibility that small molecule inhibitors could be
identified which interfere with IL-12 signal transduction for treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10415122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Immunopharmacology. 1999 May;42(1-3):187-93.

Tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of Janus kinase 1 and STAT3 by sublytic
C5b-9 complement complex in aortic endothelial cells.

Niculescu F(1), Soane L, Badea T, Shin M, Rus H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore 
21201, USA. fnicules@umaryland.edu

The pathway involving Janus kinase (JAK) and signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STATs) plays an important role in differentiation and
proliferation of cells initiated by receptor activation. In the present study we 
identified the JAK and STAT proteins activated by C5b-9 in human aortic
endothelial cells (AEC). JAK1 but not JAK2 was tyrosine phosphorylated in
response to sublytic C5b-9. STAT3 was rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated also by
C5b-9. Pertussis toxin inhibited the C5b-9 induced JAK1 activation. However,
phosphorylation of STAT3 was not inhibited by Pertussis toxin, although C5b-9
induced a time-dependent nuclear translocation of STAT3. These observations
indicated that JAK1 is phosphorylated by C5b-9 through activation of trimeric G
proteins of the Gi/Go family. Raf-1 and ERK1 were also activated by C5b-9 in
human AEC in a G protein dependent manner. Therefore, JAK1 activity may be
involved in activation of Raf-1 and ERK1 via G proteins activated by C5b-9. This 
study demonstrates the ability of membrane-inserted C5b-9 to activate JAK1 and
STAT3 proteins, thus defining new signalling pathway by which C5b-9 may regulate 
gene activation.

PMID: 10408379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Immunol. 1999 Jun 15;162(12):7256-62.

IL-12 induces IFN regulating factor-1 (IRF-1) gene expression in human NK and T
cells.

Galon J(1), Sudarshan C, Ito S, Finbloom D, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-12 is a critical immunoregulatory cytokine that promotes cell-mediated immune 
responses and the differentiation of naive CD4+ cells to Th1 cells; however,
relatively few IL-12 target genes have been identified. To better clarify the
molecular basis of IL-12 action, we set out to characterize genes up-regulated by
IL-12, first by contrasting IL-12- and IFN-alpha-inducible genes. We identified
several genes up-regulated by IL-12, namely, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, IL-1RA, and
IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1). IRF-1 is a transcription factor regulated by
IFNs that is also essential for Th1 responses. We demonstrated that IL-12
directly up-regulates IRF-1 to the same extent as IFN-alpha in normal human T
cells and in NK cells. We showed that IL-12 had a direct effect on IRF-1, an
effect not mediated indirectly by the induction of IFN-gamma production.
Furthermore, IL-2 and IL-12 synergistically induced IRF-1, whereas IFN-alpha and 
IL-12 did not. The participation of STAT4 in the regulation of IRF-1 was
demonstrated in two ways. First, STAT4 was required for the IL-12-dependent
transactivation of an IRF-1 reporter construct, and second, STAT4 binding to the 
IRF-1 promoter was shown using EMSA. In contrast to IL-12, no up-regulation of
IRF-1 was found in IL-4-stimulated cells, and IL-4 did not block IL-12-dependent 
up-regulation of IRF-1. Therefore, IRF-1 may be an important contributor to IL-12
signaling, and we speculate that the defective IL-12 responses seen in IRF-1-/-
mice might be attributable, in part, to the absence of this transcription factor.

PMID: 10358173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Stem Cells. 1999;17(3):138-46.

Functional roles of STAT family proteins: lessons from knockout mice.

Akira S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, CREST of Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya.

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are activated 
in response to a large number of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. Upon
activation following the binding of ligands to their receptors, STAT proteins
dimerize, translocate to the nucleus, and bind to the promoters of specific
target genes. To date, seven mammalian members of the STAT family have been
identified. Although some cytokines and growth factors can activate multiple STAT
proteins, some STATs are activated with considerable specificity. The
physiological role of each individual STAT protein is now being examined through 
the study of "knockout" mice, harboring a null allele for the particular gene.
STAT1-deficient mice exhibit a selective signaling defect in response to
interferons. STAT4 and STAT6 are essential for Thl-and Th2-responses,
respectively. STAT5a-deficient mice exhibit defective mammary gland development. 
A study of STAT5b-deficient mice indicates that STAT5b mediates the sexually
dimorphic effects of growth hormone in the liver. STAT5a and 5b also play
different biological roles in the immune system. STAT3-deficient mice die during 
early embryogenesis, but the role of STAT3 in adult tissues can be assessed by
utilizing the CreloxP recombination system to ablate the gene later in life.
Analyses of tissue-specific STAT3-deficient mice indicate that STAT3 plays a
crucial role in a variety of biological functions, including cell growth,
suppression of apoptosis, and cell motility.

PMID: 10342556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Science. 1999 May 7;284(5416):951-5.

Requirement for type 2 NO synthase for IL-12 signaling in innate immunity.

Diefenbach A(1), Schindler H, Röllinghoff M, Yokoyama WM, Bogdan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene, Universität
Erlangen, Wasserturmstrasse 3, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Science 1999 Jun 11;284(5421):1776.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) and type 2 NO synthase (NOS2) are crucial for defense
against bacterial and parasitic pathogens, but their relationship in innate
immunity is unknown. In the absence of NOS2 activity, IL-12 was unable to prevent
spreading of Leishmania parasites, did not stimulate natural killer (NK) cells
for cytotoxicity or interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) release, and failed to activate 
Tyk2 kinase and to tyrosine phosphorylate Stat4 (the central signal transducer of
IL-12) in NK cells. Activation of Tyk2 in NK cells by IFN-alpha/beta also
required NOS2. Thus, NOS2-derived NO is a prerequisite for cytokine signaling and
function in innate immunity.

PMID: 10320373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Immunol. 1999 May 15;162(10):6255-62.

Tyrphostin B42 inhibits IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of 
Janus kinase-2 and prevents experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.

Bright JJ(1), Du C, Sriram S.

Author information: 
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Research Center, Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37212, USA.

IL-12 is a macrophage-derived cytokine that induces proliferation, cytokine
production, and cytotoxic activity of T and NK cells. Signaling through its
receptor, IL-12 induces these cellular responses by tyrosine phosphorylation and 
activation of Janus kinase-2 (Jak-2), Tyk-2, Stat3, and Stat4. We have used
tyrphostin B42 (AG490), a Jak-2 inhibitor, to determine the role of Jak-2 kinase 
in IL-12 signaling and IL-12-induced T cell functions. Treatment of activated T
cells with tyrphostin B42 inhibited the IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation
and activation of Jak-2 without affecting Tyk-2 kinase. In contrast, treatment
with tyrphostin A1 inhibited the tyrosine phosphorylation of Tyk-2 but not that
of Jak-2 kinase. Inhibition of either Jak-2 or Tyk-2 leads to a decrease in the
IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat3, but not of Stat4, protein. While
inhibition of Jak-2 lead to programmed cell death, the inhibition of Jak-2 or
Tyk-2 resulted a decrease in IFN-gamma production. We have further tested the in 
vivo effects of tyrphostin B42 in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, a Th1 
cell-mediated autoimmune disease. In vivo treatment with tyrphostin B42 decreased
the proliferation and IFN-gamma production of neural Ag-specific T cells.
Treatment of mice with tyrphostin B42 also reduced the incidence and severity of 
active and passive EAE. These results suggest that tyrphostin B42 prevents EAE by
inhibiting IL-12 signaling and IL-12-mediated Th1 differentiation in vivo.

PMID: 10229872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Immunol. 1999 May 1;162(9):5143-8.

Orally induced peripheral nonresponsiveness is maintained in the absence of
functional Th1 or Th2 cells.

Shi HN(1), Grusby MJ, Nagler-Anderson C.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown
02129, USA.

Intragastric administration of soluble protein Ags results in peripheral
tolerance to the fed Ag. To examine the role of cytokine regulation in the
induction of oral tolerance, we fed OVA to mice deficient in Th1 (Stat 4-/-) and 
Th2 (Stat 6-/-) cells and compared their response to that of normal BALB/c
controls. We found that, in spite of these deficiencies, OVA-specific peripheral 
cell-mediated and humoral nonresponsiveness was maintained in both Stat 4-/- and 
Stat 6-/- mice. In the mucosa, both Peyer's patch T cell proliferative responses 
and OVA-specific fecal IgA were reduced in Stat 4-/- and Stat 6-/- mice fed OVA
but not in normal BALB/c controls. Mucosal, but not peripheral, nonresponsiveness
was abrogated by the inclusion of a neutralizing Ab to TGF-beta in the culture
medium. Our results show that, in the periphery, tolerance to oral Ag can be
induced in both a Th1- or Th2-deficient environment. In the mucosa, however, the 
absence of Th1 and Th2 cytokines can markedly affect this response, perhaps by
regulation of TGF-beta-secreting cells.

PMID: 10227985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Exp Med. 1999 Apr 19;189(8):1355-60.

Lineage-specific requirement for signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Stat)4 in interferon gamma production from CD4(+) versus CD8(+) T cells.

Carter LL(1), Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells exhibit important differences in their major effector
functions. CD8(+) T cells provide protection against pathogens through cytolytic 
activity, whereas CD4(+) T cells exert important regulatory activity through
production of cytokines. However, both lineages can produce interferon
(IFN)-gamma, which can contribute to protective immunity. Here we show that
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells differ in their regulation of IFN-gamma production.
Both lineages require signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)4
activation for IFN-gamma induced by interleukin (IL)-12/IL-18 signaling, but only
CD4(+) T cells require Stat4 for IFN-gamma induction via the TCR pathway. In
response to antigen, CD8(+) T cells can produce IFN-gamma independently of IL-12,
whereas CD4(+) T cells require IL-12 and Stat4 activation. Thus, there is a
lineage-specific requirement for Stat4 activation in antigen-induced IFN-gamma
production based on differences in TCR signaling between CD4(+) and CD8(+) T
cells.

PMCID: PMC2193026
PMID: 10209051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 30;96(7):3888-93.

The Ets transcription factor ERM is Th1-specific and induced by IL-12 through a
Stat4-dependent pathway.

Ouyang W(1), Jacobson NG, Bhattacharya D, Gorham JD, Fenoglio D, Sha WC, Murphy
TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Interleukin 12 (IL-12)-induced T helper 1 (Th1) development requires Stat4
activation. However, antigen-activated Th1 cells can produce interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma) independently of IL-12 and Stat4 activation. Thus, in differentiated 
Th1 cells, factors regulated by IL-12 and Stat4 may be involved in IFN-gamma
production. Using subtractive cloning, we identified ERM, an Ets transcription
factor, to be a Th1-specific, IL-12-induced gene. IL-12-induction of ERM occurred
in wild-type and Stat1-deficient, but not Stat4-deficient, T cells, suggesting
ERM is Stat4-inducible. Retroviral expression of ERM did not restore IFN-gamma
production in Stat4-deficient T cells, but augmented IFN-gamma expression in
Stat4-heterozygous T cells. Ets factors frequently regulate transcription via
cooperative interactions with other transcription factors, and ERM has been
reported to cooperate with c-Jun. However, in the absence of other transcription 
factors, ERM augmented expression of an IFN-gamma reporter by only 2-fold. Thus, 
determining the requirement for ERM in Th1 development likely will require gene
targeting.

PMCID: PMC22390
PMID: 10097133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Immunol. 1999 Mar 15;162(6):3702-10.

Colitis-inducing potency of CD4+ T cells in immunodeficient, adoptive hosts
depends on their state of activation, IL-12 responsiveness, and CD45RB surface
phenotype.

Claesson MH(1), Bregenholt S, Bonhagen K, Thoma S, Möller P, Grusby MJ,
Leithäuser F, Nissen MH, Reimann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Anatomy, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
m.h.claesson@mai.ku.dk

We studied the induction, severity and rate of progression of inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD) induced in SCID mice by the adoptive transfer of low numbers of the
following purified BALB/c CD4+ T cell subsets: 1) unfractionated, peripheral,
small (resting), or large (activated) CD4+ T cells; 2) fractionated, peripheral, 
small, or large, CD45RBhigh or CD45RBlow CD4+ T cells; and 3) peripheral
IL-12-unresponsive CD4+ T cells from STAT-4-deficient mice. The adoptive transfer
into SCID host of comparable numbers of CD4+ T cells was used to assess the
colitis-inducing potency of these subsets. Small CD45RBhigh CD4+ T lymphocytes
and activated CD4+ T blasts induced early (6-12 wk posttransfer) and severe
disease, while small resting and unfractionated CD4+ T cells or CD45RBlow T
lymphocytes induced a late-onset disease 12-16 wk posttransfer. SCID mice
transplanted with STAT-4-/- CD4+ T cells showed a late-onset IBD manifest > 20 wk
posttransfer. In SCID mice with IBD transplanted with IL-12-responsive CD4+ T
cells, the colonic lamina propria CD4+ T cells showed a mucosa-seeking
memory/effector CD45RBlow Th1 phenotype abundantly producing IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha. In SCID mice transplanted with IL-12-unresponsive STAT-4-/- CD4+ T
cells, the colonic lamina propria, mesenteric lymph node, and splenic CD4+ T
cells produced very little IFN-gamma but abundant levels of TNF-alpha. The
histopathologic appearance of colitis in all transplanted SCID mice was similar. 
These data indicate that CD45RBhigh and CD45RBlow, IL-12-responsive and
IL-12-unresponsive CD4+ T lymphocytes and lymphoblasts have IBD-inducing
potential though of varying potency.

PMID: 10092833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cytokine. 1999 Feb;11(2):111-7.

Gene expression during differentiation of human dendritic cells from cord blood
cd34 stem cells.

Fisher GM(1), Iqball S, Knight SC.

Author information: 
(1)Antigen Presentation Research Group, Imperial College of Science Technology & 
Medicine, Northwick Part Institute for Medical Research, Harrow, HA1 3UJ,
Middlesex, UK. g.fisher@ic.ac.uk

Human cord blood CD34(+)stem cells were allowed to differentiate in the presence 
of cytokines stem cell factor (SCF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) into functional
CD1a+dendritic cells (DC). A maximum of 1.9 x 10(6) CD1a+ cells were separated
from the cells generated from 1.2 x 10(6) CD34(+) stem cells from an individual
donor. The percentage of CD1a+cells separated rose to a maximum of 27% at day 11 
and fell to 8% at 21 days. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
analysis showed that interleukin 2 receptor, interleukin 3 receptor, interleukin 
6 receptor, interleukin 12 receptor (IL-12R) and signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT) 3, STAT 4 mRNA was expressed in all CD1a+cell populations
throughout and appears to be constitutive. Expression of IL-12RmRNA was
unexpected in CD1a+DC normally considered to be of myeloid lineage. Expression of
interleukin 12 (IL-12) p40 subunit mRNA was not detected. Intermittent expression
of the IL-12p35 subunit and IL-4R mRNA suggested that gene expression is
inducible, but not obviously correlated with progressive DC development.
Expression of mRNA for a spectrum of cytokine receptors indicates that CD1a+DC
have the potential to respond to a variety of maturational signals.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10089131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1999;238:13-26.

T helper differentiation proceeds through Stat1-dependent, Stat4-dependent and
Stat4-independent phases.

Murphy KM(1), Ouyang W, Szabo SJ, Jacobson NG, Guler ML, Gorham JD, Gubler U,
Murphy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pathology, Center for
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Much of our focus in understanding Th1/Th2 development has been on the signals
delivered by IL-12 and IL-4 as final determinants of terminal T cell
differentiation. Because extinction of IL-12 signaling in early Th2 development
could potentially be important in imprinting a more permanent Th2 phenotype on a 
population of T cells, we have also examined various parameters regulating the
IL-12 signaling pathway. Whereas IL-4 appears to repress functional IL-12
signaling through inhibition of IL-12R beta 2 expression, IFN-gamma in the mouse,
and IFN-alpha in the human appear to induce IL-12R beta 2 expression and promote 
IL-12 responsiveness. We propose that Th1 development can be considered in two
stages, capacitance and development. Capacitance would simply involve expression 
of IL-12R beta 1 and beta 2 subunits, regulated by TCR, IL-4 and IFNs. The second
stage, development, we propose is the true IL-12 induced developmental stage,
involving expression of Stat4 inducible proteins. In the human, this may also
occur via IFN-alpha, which is able to activate Stat4. It is perhaps possible that
all of Stat4 actions on Th1 development may be exert directly by Stat4 at the
IFN-gamma gene, however we suggest that, more likely, Stat4 may act to induce Th1
development through the induction of other non-cytokine genes, whose stable
expression maintains the transcriptional state of a Th1 cell.

PMID: 10087648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Immunol. 1999 Mar 1;162(5):2974-81.

TGF-beta does not inhibit IL-12- and IL-2-induced activation of Janus kinases and
STATs.

Sudarshan C(1), Galon J, Zhou Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. sudarshc@exchange.nih.gov

The immune system is an important target for the cytokine TGF-beta1, whose
actions on lymphocytes are largely inhibitory. TGF-beta has been reported to
inhibit IL-12- and IL-2-induced cell proliferation and IFN-gamma production by T 
cells and NK cells; however, the mechanisms of inhibition have not been clearly
defined. It has been suggested by some studies that TGF-beta blocks
cytokine-induced Janus kinase (JAK) and STAT activation, as in the case of IL-2. 
In contrast, other studies with cytokines like IFN-gamma have not found such an
inhibition. The effect of TGF-beta on the IL-12-signaling pathway has not been
addressed. We examined this and found that TGF-beta1 did not have any effect on
IL-12-induced phosphorylation of JAK2, TYK2, and STAT4 although TGF-beta1
inhibited IL-2- and IL-12-induced IFN-gamma production. Similarly, but in
contrast to previous reports, we found that TGF-beta1 did not inhibit
IL-2-induced phosphorylation of JAK1, JAK3, and STAT5A. Furthermore, gel shift
analysis showed that TGF-beta1 did not prevent activated STAT4 and STAT5A from
binding to DNA. Our results demonstrate that the inhibitory effects of TGF-beta
on IL-2- and IL-12-induced biological activities are not attributable to
inhibition of activation of JAKs and STATs. Rather, our data suggest the
existence of alternative mechanisms of inhibition by TGF-beta.

PMID: 10072548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 1999 Jan-Jul;19(1-4):75-120.

The Jak-STAT pathway: cytokine signalling from the receptor to the nucleus.

Heim MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.

The Jak-STAT pathway was originally discovered through the study of interferon
induced intracellular signal transduction. Meanwhile, a large number of
cytokines, hormones and growth factors have been found to activate Jaks and
STATs. Jaks (Janus Kinases) are a unique class of tyrosine kinases that associate
with cytokine receptors. Upon ligand binding, they activate members of the Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STAT) family through phosphorylation
on a single tyrosine. Activated STATs form dimers, translocate to the nucleus,
bind to specific response elements in promotors of target genes, and
transcriptionally activate these genes. Both positive and negative regulations of
the Jak-STAT pathway have been identified. In a positive feedback loop,
interferons transcriptionally activate the genes for components of the interferon
stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). A number of cytokines that activate the
Jak-STAT pathway, e.g. IL-6, IL-4, LIF, G-CSF, have been shown to upregulate the 
expression of SOCS-JABs-SSIs, a recently discovered class of STAT inhibitors.
Targeted disruption of genes for a number of Jaks and STATs in mice have revealed
specific biological functions for many of them. Although most of the STATs are
activated in cell culture by many different ligands, STAT knockout mice mostly
show defects in a single or a few cytokine dependent processes. STAT1 knockout
mice have an impaired interferon signalling, STAT4 knockouts impaired IL-12
signalling, STAT5a knockouts impaired prolactin signalling, STAT5b knockouts
impaired growth hormone signalling, and STAT6 knockout impaired IL-4 and IL-13
signalling. Defects in the Jak-STAT pathway have already been identified in a
number of human diseases. Prominent amongst them are leukaemias, lymphomas and
inherited immunodeficiency syndromes. It can be expected that additional Jak-STAT
related diseases will be identified over the next years. To date, specific STAT
inhibitory drugs are not known, but a number of specific protein-protein
interactions in the Jak-STAT pathway are potential targets for pharmaceutical
interventions.

PMID: 10071751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Blood. 1999 Mar 15;93(6):1980-91.

Interferon-alpha activates multiple STAT proteins and upregulates
proliferation-associated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in human T cells.

Matikainen S(1), Sareneva T, Ronni T, Lehtonen A, Koskinen PJ, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
sampsa.matikainen@ktl.fi

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) is a pleiotropic cytokine that has antiviral,
antiproliferative, and immunoregulatory functions. There is increasing evidence
that IFN-alpha has an important role in T-cell biology. We have analyzed the
expression of IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in anti-CD3-activated human T
lymphocytes. The induction of these genes is associated with interleukin-2
(IL-2)-induced T-cell proliferation. Treatment of T lymphocytes with IFN-alpha,
IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 upregulated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 gene expression. 
IFN-alpha also sensitized T cells to IL-2-induced proliferation, further
suggesting that IFN-alpha may be involved in the regulation of T-cell
mitogenesis. When we analyzed the nature of STAT proteins capable of binding to
IL-2Ralpha, pim-1, and IRF-1 GAS elements after cytokine stimulation, we observed
IFN-alpha-induced binding of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4, but not STAT5 to all of
these elements. Yet, IFN-alpha was able to activate binding of STAT5 to the
high-affinity IFP53 GAS site. IFN-alpha enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, and STAT5b. IL-12 induced STAT4 and IL-2 and IL-15
induced STAT5 binding to the GAS elements. Taken together, our results suggest
that IFN-alpha, IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 have overlapping activities on human T
cells. These findings thus emphasize the importance of IFN-alpha as a T-cell
regulatory cytokine.

PMID: 10068671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Feb;29(2):548-55.

Induction of interferon-gamma production in Th1 CD4+ T cells: evidence for two
distinct pathways for promoter activation.

Yang J(1), Murphy TL, Ouyang W, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

IFN-gamma produced by CD4+ T helper 1 (Th1) cells promotes protection against
intracellular pathogens. Antigen activation of Th1 cells is an important mode of 
IFN-gamma induction, but here we analyze a second, antigen-nonspecific pathway
capable of inducing full IFN-gamma transcription. IL-12 or IL-18 alone do not
induce IFN-gamma mRNA, and only modestly augment antigen-induced IFN-gamma mRNA
from Th1 cells. However, IL-12 and IL-18 together fully induce IFN-gamma
transcription independently of TCR-activated signals, by a mechanism that does
not simply involve Stat4 and NF-kappaB activation, but requires additional
protein synthesis. Cyclosporin A inhibits TCR-induced IFN-gamma production, but
not IL-12/IL-18-induced IFN-gamma production, biochemically discriminating
between these pathways. These results suggest that the two pathways induce
IFN-gamma production through functionally segregated but spatially overlapping
cis-acting elements, similar to other genes under the control of two or more
promoters.

PMID: 10064070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Clin Exp Allergy. 1999 Feb;29(2):207-16.

IFN-gamma is only partially restored by co-stimulation with IL-12, IL-2, IL-15,
IL-18 or engagement of CD28.

Jung T(1), Witzak K, Dieckhoff K, Zachmann K, Heidrich S, Aversa G, Neumann C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Although it is well established that T cells derived from patients
with atopic diseases produce low levels of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), the
mechanisms responsible for this phenomenon are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: To elucidate whether IFN-gamma production may be restored by
co-stimulatory molecules known to increase IFN-gamma production in vitro.
Further, to investigate whether deficient IFN-gamma production is associated with
disease activity.
METHODS: Purified peripheral T cells obtained from patients with severe atopic
dermatitis (AD), individuals with a history but no symptoms of AD and healthy
control subjects were activated with anti-CD3 MoAbs in the presence or absence of
anti-CD28 MoAbs, interleukin (IL-) 12, IL-2, IL-15 or IL-18. IFN-gamma production
was determined at the single cell level by flow cytometry, as well as by ELISA.
RESULTS: Activated T cells from patients with severe AD produced less IFN-gamma
than T cells from healthy control individuals. IL-12 or engagement of CD28
enhanced IFN-gamma production in both healthy and atopic T cells. However,
absolute values of IFN-gamma were still different. IL-2, IL-15 and IL-18 did not 
restore IFN-gamma production. T cells from individuals with a history of AD
produced more IFN-gamma than those from subjects with severe AD, but less than T 
cells from healthy individuals. Atopic T cells expressed regular levels of CD3,
CD28 and Stat4, the main signal transducer and activator of transcription for
IL-12. IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-beta production by T cells were not different between 
healthy and atopic individuals.
CONCLUSION: IFN-gamma deficiency in atopic T cells is not due to a lack of
responsiveness to CD28, IL-12, IL-2, IL-15 or IL-18. T cell-derived cytokines
able to antagonize IFN-gamma do not contribute to decreased IFN-gamma production.
The extent of IFN-gamma deficiency seems to be dependent on disease activity.

PMID: 10051725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Blood. 1999 Mar 1;93(5):1448-55.

Downregulation of interleukin-12 (IL-12) responsiveness in human T cells by
transforming growth factor-beta: relationship with IL-12 signaling.

Pardoux C(1), Ma X, Gobert S, Pellegrini S, Mayeux P, Gay F, Trinchieri G,
Chouaib S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Cytokines et Immunologie des Tumeurs Humaines, INSERM U487,
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; INSERM U363, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a cytokine that plays a central role in the control of 
cell-mediated immunity. We have previously shown that transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta) inhibitory effects on human primary allogeneic
cytotoxicity and proliferative responses interfere with IL-12 pathway. The
present study was undertaken to further elucidate the biochemical basis of the
functional interaction between these two cytokines and to define the site of
TGF-beta action on the signaling pathway activated by IL-12. Our data indicate
that TGF-beta induced an inhibition of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) production
without affecting the IL-12Rbeta1 and IL-12Rbeta2 subunits mRNA expression by
activated T cells. We further show that TGF-beta has a significant inhibitory
effect on the early signal transduction events following interaction of IL-12
with its receptor on activated T cells, resulting in the inhibition of both JAK2 
and Tyk2 phosphorylation. In addition, TGF-beta was found to significantly
inhibit IL-12-induced phosphorylation of the STAT4 transcription factor.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that TGF-beta induced a decrease
in IL-12-induced STAT4 DNA binding activity in T lymphocytes. This study suggests
that TGF-beta influences IL-12 responsiveness at least in part by inhibiting
early signaling events essential to gene induction in IL-12-activated T cells.

PMID: 10029570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Immunol. 1999 Feb 15;162(4):1884-8.

Cutting edge: chronic intestinal inflammation in STAT-4 transgenic mice:
characterization of disease and adoptive transfer by TNF- plus
IFN-gamma-producing CD4+ T cells that respond to bacterial antigens.

Wirtz S(1), Finotto S, Kanzler S, Lohse AW, Blessing M, Lehr HA, Galle PR,
Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I. Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, Germany.

We generated transgenic mice for STAT-4, a regulatory protein specifically
associated with IL-12 signaling, under the control of a CMV promoter. These mice 
expressed strikingly increased nuclear STAT-4 levels in lamina propria CD4+ T
lymphocytes upon systemic administration of dinitrophenyl-keyhole limpet
hemocyanin and developed chronic transmural colitis characterized by infiltrates 
of mainly CD4+ T lymphocytes. The latter cells produced predominantly TNF and
IFN-gamma but not IL-4 upon activation with alphaCD3/CD28 or autologous bacterial
Ags, consistent with a Th1-type cell response. Furthermore, chronic colitis in
STAT-4 transgenic mice could be adoptively transferred to SCID mice by colonic
and splenic CD4+ T cells that were activated with Ags from autologous bacterial
flora. These data establish a critical molecular signaling pathway involving
STAT-4 for the pathogenesis of chronic intestinal inflammation, and targeting of 
this pathway may be relevant for the treatment of colitis in humans.

PMID: 9973454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):1875-8.

Identification of a STAT4 binding site in the interleukin-12 receptor required
for signaling.

Naeger LK(1), McKinney J, Salvekar A, Hoey T.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, Inc., South San Francisco, California 94080, USA.

The specificity of the various STAT SH2 domains for different tyrosine-containing
peptides enables cytokines to activate different signaling pathways and to induce
distinct patterns of gene expression. We show that STAT4 has a unique peptide
specificity and binds to the peptide sequence pYLPSNID (where pY represents
phosphotyrosine). This motif is found at tyrosine residue 800 in the beta2
subunit of the interleukin-12 receptor and is required for DNA binding and
transcriptional activity of STAT4. Our data demonstrate that transfection of
interleukin-12 receptor beta1 and beta2 subunits is sufficient for STAT4
activation but not for STAT1 or STAT3 activation.

PMID: 9890938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Immunol. 1999 Jan 1;162(1):299-304.

IL-2 induces STAT4 activation in primary NK cells and NK cell lines, but not in T
cells.

Wang KS(1), Ritz J, Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

IL-2 exerts potent but distinct functional effects on two critical cell
populations of the immune system, T cells and NK cells. Whereas IL-2 leads to
proliferation in both cell types, it enhances cytotoxicity primarily in NK cells.
In both T cells and NK cells, IL-2 induces the activation of STAT1, STAT3, and
STAT5. Given this similarity in intracellular signaling, the mechanism underlying
the distinct response to IL-2 in T cells and NK cells is not clear. In this
study, we show that in primary NK cells and NK cell lines, in addition to the
activation of STAT1 and STAT5, IL-2 induces tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT4, a 
STAT previously reported to be activated only in response to IL-12 and IFN-alpha.
This activation of STAT4 in response to IL-2 is not due to the autocrine
production of IL-12 or IFN-alpha. STAT4 activated in response to IL-2 is able to 
bind to a STAT-binding DNA sequence, suggesting that in NK cells IL-2 is capable 
of activating target genes through phosphorylation of STAT4. IL-2 induces the
activation of Jak2 uniquely in NK cells, which may underlie the ability of IL-2
to activate STAT4 only in these cells. Although the activation of STAT4 in
response to IL-2 occurs in primary resting and activated NK cells, it does not
occur in primary resting T cells or mitogen-activated T cells. The unique
activation of the STAT4-signaling pathway in NK cells may underlie the distinct
functional effect of IL-2 on this cell population.

PMID: 9886399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Immunol. 1998 Dec 15;161(12):6567-74.

The role of Stat4 in species-specific regulation of Th cell development by type I
IFNs.

Rogge L(1), D'Ambrosio D, Biffi M, Penna G, Minetti LJ, Presky DH, Adorini L,
Sinigaglia F.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Milano Ricerche, Milan, Italy. lars.rogge@roche.com

Type I IFNs (IFN-alpha/beta), in addition to IL-12, have been shown to play an
important role in the differentiation of human, but not mouse, Th cells. We show 
here that IFN-alpha/beta act directly on human T cells to drive Th1 development, 
bypassing the need for IL-12-induced signaling, whereas IFN-alpha cannot
substitute IL-12 for mouse Th1 development. The molecular basis for this species 
specificity is that IFN-alpha/beta activate Stat4 in differentiating human, but
not mouse, Th cells. Unlike IL-12, which acts only on Th1 cells, IFN-alpha/beta
can activate Stat4 not only in human Th1, but also in Th2 cells. However,
restimulation of human Th2 lines and clones in the presence of IFN-alpha does not
induce the production of IFN-gamma. These results suggest that activation of
Stat4, which is necessary for the differentiation of naive T cells into polarized
Th1 cells, is not sufficient to induce phenotype reversal of human Th2 cells.

PMID: 9862683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Immunity. 1998 Nov;9(5):745-55.

Inhibition of Th1 development mediated by GATA-3 through an IL-4-independent
mechanism.

Ouyang W(1), Ranganath SH, Weindel K, Bhattacharya D, Murphy TL, Sha WC, Murphy
KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

Recently, the transcription factor GATA-3 was shown to be selectively expressed
in Th2 but not Th1 cells and to augment Th2-specific cytokines. Here, we show
that loss of GATA-3 expression by developing Th1 cells requires IL-12 signaling
through Stat4 and does not simply result from an absence of IL-4. Moreover, we
demonstrate a novel role for GATA-3 in directly repressing Th1 development
distinct from its positive actions on Th2-specific cytokines. GATA-3 inhibits Th1
cytokines by a cell-intrinsic mechanism that is not dependent on IL-4 and that
may involve repression of IL-12 signaling. Thus, GATA-3 expression and IL-12
signaling are mutually antagonistic, which facilitates rapid dominance of one
pathway during early Th development, producing a stable divergence in cytokine
profiles.

PMID: 9846495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Immunol. 1998 Dec 1;161(11):5893-900.

Requirement for distinct Janus kinases and STAT proteins in T cell proliferation 
versus IFN-gamma production following IL-12 stimulation.

Ahn HJ(1), Tomura M, Yu WG, Iwasaki M, Park WR, Hamaoka T, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Japan.

While IL-12 is known to activate JAK2 and TYK2 and induce the phosphorylation of 
STAT4 and STAT3, little is known regarding how the activation of these signaling 
molecules is related to the biologic effects of IL-12. Using an IL-12-responsive 
T cell clone (2D6), we investigated their requirements for proliferation and
IFN-gamma production of 2D6 cells. 2D6 cells could be maintained with either
IL-12 or IL-2. 2D6 lines maintained with IL-12 (2D6(IL-12)) or IL-2 (2D6(IL-2))
exhibited comparable levels of proliferation, but produced large or only small
amounts of IFN-gamma, respectively, when restimulated with IL-12 after starvation
of either cytokine. 2D6(IL-12) induced TYK2 and STAT4 phosphorylation. In
contrast, their phosphorylation was marginally induced in 2D6(IL-2). The reduced 
STAT4 phosphorylation was due to a progressive decrease in the amount of STAT4
protein along with the passages in IL-2-containing medium. 2D6(IL-12) and
2D6(IL-2) similarly proliferating in response to IL-12 induced comparable levels 
of JAK2 activation and STAT5 phosphorylation. JAK2 was associated with STAT5, and
IL-12-induced STAT5 phosphorylation was elicited in the absence of JAK3
activation. These results indicate that IL-12 has the capacity to induce/maintain
STAT4 and STAT5 proteins, and that TYK2 and JAK2 activation correlate with STAT4 
phosphorylation/IFN-gamma induction and STAT5 phosphorylation/cellular
proliferation, respectively.

PMID: 9834069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Immunol. 1998 Dec 1;161(11):5821-4.

Differentiation of human NK cells into NK1 and NK2 subsets.

Peritt D(1), Robertson S, Gri G, Showe L, Aste-Amezaga M, Trinchieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Human NK cells cultured in the presence of IL-12 or IL-4 differentiate into cell 
populations with distinct patterns of cytokine secretion similar to Th1 and Th2
cells. NK cells grown in IL-12 (NK1) produce IL-10 and IFN-gamma, whereas NK
cells grown in IL-4 (NK2) produce IL-5 and IL-13. Although these NK cell subsets 
do not differ in cytotoxic activity, NK1 cells express higher levels of cell
surface CD95 (Fas) Ag than NK2 cells and are more sensitive to Ab or chemically
induced apoptosis. Like Th1 cells, NK1 cells accumulate much higher levels of the
IL-12Rbeta2-chain mRNA and are significantly more responsive to IL-12 than NK2
cells at the level of activation of STAT4 transcription factor. The
identification of NK cell subsets that are analogous to T cell subsets suggests a
new role for NK cells in innate inflammatory responses and in their effect on
adaptive immunity.

PMID: 9834059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Curr Opin Immunol. 1998 Oct;10(5):507-12.

The use of antibodies against the IL-2 receptor in transplantation.

Waldmann TA(1), O'Shea J.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA. tawald@helix.nih.gov

Humanized monoclonal antibodies that recognize the alpha chain of the IL-2
receptor (e.g. daclizumab) have been used to prevent allograft rejection, since
this chain is expressed by T cells participating in allograft rejection but not
by resting T cells. In a randomized trial, when added to standard
cyclosporin-based immunosuppression, daclizumab significantly reduced the
frequency of acute rejection of renal transplants.

PMID: 9794841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Immunity. 1998 Sep;9(3):315-23.

IL-12 acts directly on DC to promote nuclear localization of NF-kappaB and primes
DC for IL-12 production.

Grohmann U(1), Belladonna ML, Bianchi R, Orabona C, Ayroldi E, Fioretti MC,
Puccetti P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Italy.

We analyzed the expression of an IL-12 receptor by fresh dendritic cells (DC) and
a DC line. Using RT-PCR, RNAse protection, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assay analysis, we found that DC possess an IL-12 receptor with beta1 subunit
(downstream box 1)-related differences from that on T cells. IL-12 signaling
through this receptor involved members of the NF-KB but not STAT family. The
unique properties of the IL-12 receptor on DC, characterized by a single class of
binding sites with a Kd of about 325 pM, may underlie rather unique effects, such
as IFNgamma-independent augmentation of class II antigen expression and priming
for LPS-induced production of IL-12.

PMID: 9768751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Exp Med. 1998 Sep 21;188(6):1191-6.

A signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)4-independent pathway
for the development of T helper type 1 cells.

Kaplan MH(1), Wurster AL, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The differentiation of T helper (Th) cells is regulated by members of the signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family of signaling molecules.
We have generated mice lacking both Stat4 and Stat6 to examine the ability of Th 
cells to develop in the absence of these two transcription factors. Stat4,
Stat6(-/-) lymphocytes fail to differentiate into interleukin (IL)-4-secreting
Th2 cells. However, in contrast to Stat4(-/-) lymphocytes, T cells from Stat4,
Stat6(-/-) mice produce significant amounts of interferon (IFN)-gamma when
activated in vitro. Although Stat4, Stat6(-/-) lymphocytes produce less IFN-gamma
than IL-12-stimulated control lymphocytes, equivalent numbers of
IFN-gamma-secreting cells can be generated from cultures of Stat4, Stat6(-/-)
lymphocytes activated under neutral conditions and control lymphocytes activated 
under Th1 cell-promoting conditions. Moreover, Stat4, Stat6(-/-) mice are able to
mount an in vivo Th1 cell-mediated delayed-type hypersensitivity response. These 
results support a model of Th cell differentiation in which the generation of Th2
cells requires Stat6, whereas a Stat4-independent pathway exists for the
development of Th1 cells.

PMCID: PMC2212539
PMID: 9743537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Aug;64(2):245-58.

Characterization of cytokine differential induction of STAT complexes in primary 
human T and NK cells.

Yu CR(1), Young HA, Ortaldo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, National Institutes of Health, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Cytokines, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-12, and IL-15 are key regulators of human
peripheral blood T and NK cell activation and differentiation but the precise
mechanisms that give rise to their differential activities within these cells are
not clear. Recent studies reveal that a family of transcription factors, signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) directly mediate many
cytokine signals. We analyzed the activation of STATs in primary human T and NK
cells by a variety of specific cytokines. We demonstrate that IL-12 induces STAT4
only in freshly isolated primary NK cells, but not in primary T cells, consistent
with the lack of the IL-12 receptor in resting T cells. In contrast, IL-4 induces
different C epsilon GAS DNA-protein binding complexes in both T and NK cells.
Moreover, IL-4 costimulation with IL-2 or IL-12 does not alter their own
preferential GAS-like DNA binding patterns when C epsilon-, Fc gamma RI-, and SIE
GAS motif containing oligonucleotide probes are compared, suggesting that
induction of GAS-like DNA-protein binding complexes by IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12 is
highly selective and represents one important factor in determining specific gene
activation. In addition, IL-6 and IL-2 synergistically induce homo- and
heterodimerized STAT1 alpha and STAT3 in both NK and T cells, consistent with
their reported synergism in modulating perforin gene expression. We further
demonstrated that IL-2, -7, and -15 induce multiple STAT proteins, including
STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT1 alpha, STAT3, and another unidentified Fc gamma RI GAS
DNA-binding protein. Finally, we observed that activated STAT5a and STAT5b
proteins form distinct Fc gamma RI GAS binding patterns in T and NK cells,
suggesting that they might have different roles in gene regulation. Our data
provide evidence that the differential responses in gene expression and cell
activation seen in primary NK and T cells on direct stimulation with different
cytokines may be a direct result of distinct activation of STAT transcription
factors.

PMID: 9715265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Gen Virol. 1998 Aug;79 ( Pt 8):2007-12.

Biological efficacy and signal transduction through STAT proteins of recombinant 
duck interferon in duck hepatitis B virus infection.

Heuss LT(1), Heim MH, Schultz U, Wissmann D, Offensperger WB, Staeheli P, Blum
HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Germany.

The aim of this study was to characterize the interferon induced intracellular
signals in duck hepatocytes and to investigate the effects of duck interferon on 
virus replication in duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) infected ducks. Interestingly,
duck interferon was found to activate intracellular signal transduction pathways 
similar to those of its mammalian counterparts. An interferon stimulated gel
shift activity like that of gene factor 3 is induced, as well as serum inducible 
element binding factors homologous to serum inducible factor A (SIF-A), SIF-B and
SIF-C. Duck interferon induced signal transducer and activator of transcription
activation is not inhibited by DHBV infection of hepatocytes. DHBV infected ducks
treated for 10 days with recombinant duck interferon show a decrease in viral DNA
in hepatocytes, and in many cases disappearance of viraemia. These findings
confirm the usefulness of the DHBV infection model for the study of human
hepatitis B virus infection.

PMID: 9714251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 15;161(4):1772-7.

TGF-beta inhibits IL-12-induced activation of Jak-STAT pathway in T lymphocytes.

Bright JJ(1), Sriram S.

Author information: 
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Research Laboratory, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37212, USA.

IL-12 is a macrophage-derived heterodimeric cytokine, capable of inducing
proliferation, cytokine production, and cytotoxic activity of NK cells and T
cells, and is critical for the development of Th1 responses. TGF-beta is an
immunosuppressive cytokine that inhibits IL-12-mediated responses in NK and T
cells. To determine the mechanism of action of TGF-beta, we examined its
inhibitory effect on IL-12 signal-transduction pathway in T cells. Stimulation of
activated T cells with IL-12 leads to tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of 
Jak-2 and Tyk-2 kinases and STAT3 and STAT4 transcription factors. Treatment of
activated T cells with TGF-beta blocked IL-12-induced tyrosine phosphorylation
and activation of both Jak-2 and Tyk-2 kinases. Furthermore, inhibition of Jak
kinases by TGF-beta was associated with a decrease in tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT3 and STAT4 proteins. Abrogation of IL-12-induced Jak-Stat pathway by
TGF-beta resulted in decreased T cell proliferation and IFN-gamma production, and
increased apoptotic cell death. These findings highlight that TGF-beta inhibits
IL-12-mediated responses by blocking IL-12 signal transduction in T cells.

PMID: 9712043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):18701-4.

Activation of Raf-1 by interferon gamma and oncostatin M requires expression of
the Stat1 transcription factor.

Stancato LF(1), Yu CR, Petricoin EF 3rd, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, NCI, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

A primary signaling cascade responsible for the expression of cytokine-stimulated
immediate early genes involves the activation of the Jak/Stat pathway. In
addition to being tyrosine-phosphorylated, several signal transducers and
activators of transcription (Stats), including Stat1alpha, Stat3, and Stat4, are 
phosphorylated on a conserved serine residue, which is a consensus
phosphorylation site for mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). Serine
phosphorylation of Stat1alpha is required for maximal transcriptional activation 
of early response genes by interferon gamma (IFNgamma) as well as the antiviral
and antigrowth actions of this cytokine. Incubation of cells with either IFNgamma
or oncostatin M (OSM) activates Raf-1, a serine/threonine kinase responsible for 
the ultimate activation of p42 MAPK. To examine whether any of the signaling
components that are required for activation of the Jak/Stat pathway are also
necessary for activation of Raf-1 by IFNs and OSM, we examined activation of
Raf-1 in cell lines that are deficient in either Stat1alpha or Stat2.
Unexpectedly, incubation of Stat1-deficient, but not Stat2-deficient cells with
IFNgamma or OSM for 5 min displayed no increase in Raf-1 activity. In peripheral 
blood lymphocytes Raf-1 was associated with Stat1, and this interaction was
disrupted after incubation of cells with IFNgamma. Stat1-negative cells
reconstituted with either Stat1alpha or Stat1alpha with a point mutation in the
site where it is serine-phosphorylated displayed normal activation of Raf-1 by
IFNgamma and OSM. However, activation of Raf-1 was not observed in lines that
expressed Stat1alpha containing a mutation in its tyrosine phosphorylation site
or in its SH2 domain. These results provide the first example of a novel role of 
Stat1alpha not as a transcription factor, but as a protein which may function to 
scaffold signaling components required for activation of the distinct
Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling cascade.

PMID: 9668040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Jul;64(1):2-5.

Regulation of T helper cell differentiation by STAT molecules.

Kaplan MH(1), Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

It is now well appreciated that the cytokines interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-4 are
important for the generation of Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. Only recently,
however, have the molecular mechanisms by which these cytokines affect Th cell
differentiation begun to be defined. Previous work from our laboratory has
demonstrated that members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) gene family are critical for the differentiation of Th cell subsets. In
particular, Stat4-deficient mice show an impairment in the generation of Th1
cells, whereas Stat6-deficient animals do not generate Th2 cells. We have now
generated Stat4-Stat6 double-deficient mice to determine whether STAT-independent
pathways exist for the development of Th cell subsets. It is surprising that Th1 
but not Th2 cells can be generated from double-deficient mice in vitro and these 
animals are able to mount an in vivo Th1 cell-mediated immune response. These
results suggest a model of Th cell differentiation in which Stat4 and Stat6 have 
different roles in the development of Th cell subsets.

PMID: 9665267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 3;273(27):17109-14.

The amino-terminal domain of human STAT4. Overproduction, purification, and
biophysical characterization.

Baden HA(1), Sarma SP, Kapust RB, Byrd RA, Waugh DS.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Engineering Group, ABL Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

The multifunctional signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins relay signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus in response to
cytokines and growth factors. STAT4 becomes activated when cells are treated with
interleukin-12, a key cytokine regulator of cell-mediated immunity. Upon
activation, dimers of STAT4 bind cooperatively to tandem interferon-gamma
activation sequences (GAS elements) near the interferon-gamma gene and stimulate 
its transcription. The amino-terminal domain of STAT4 (STAT4(1-124)) is required 
for cooperative binding interactions between STAT4 dimers and activation of
interferon-gamma transcription in response to interleukin-12. We have
overproduced this domain of human STAT4 (hSTAT4(1-124)) in Escherichia coli and
purified it to homogeneity for structural studies. The circular dichroism
spectrum of hSTAT4(1-124) indicates that it has a well ordered conformation in
solution. The translational diffusion constant of hSTAT4(1-124) was determined by
nuclear magnetic resonance methods and found to be consistent with that of a
dimer. The rotational correlation time (tauc) of hSTAT4(1-124) was estimated from
15N relaxation to be 16 ns; this value is consistent with a 29-kDa dimeric
protein. These results, together with the number of signals observed in the
two-dimensional 1H-15N heteronuclear single quantum coherence spectrum of
uniformly 15N-labeled protein, indicate that hSTAT4(1-124) forms a stable,
symmetric homodimer in solution. Cooperativity in native STAT4 probably results
from a similar or identical interaction between the amino-terminal domains of
adjacent dimers bound to DNA.

PMID: 9642277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Exp Med. 1998 Apr 20;187(8):1225-34.

T cell-mediated pathology in two models of experimental colitis depends
predominantly on the interleukin 12/Signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)-4 pathway, but is not conditional on interferon gamma
expression by T cells.

Simpson SJ(1), Shah S, Comiskey M, de Jong YP, Wang B, Mizoguchi E, Bhan AK,
Terhorst C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The requirements for interleukin (IL)-12/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)-4 signaling and induction of T cell-specific interferon
(IFN)-gamma expression in the development of T helper cell (Th)1-type pathology
were examined in two different models of experimental colitis. In each model,
abnormal reconstitution of the T cell compartment in immunodeficient mice by
adoptive cell transfer leads to a wasting syndrome and inflammation of the colon,
induced by IFN-gamma and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-producing T cells. We 
show here that treatment with anti-IL-12 antibodies in one of the models, or
reconstitution with T cells from Stat-4-deficient (Stat-4(null)) mice in both
models resulted in a milder disease in the majority of recipient animals,
compared with those that were left untreated or that had been reconstituted with 
wt cells. Protected mice in each group also harbored lower frequencies of
IFN-gamma-producing T cells than did diseased mice, suggesting that effects on
wasting and colitis resulted from the attenuation of IFN-gamma expression by T
cells. To test whether the development of pathogenic T cells in the two colitis
models was directly dependent on T cell-specific IFN-gamma expression,
IFN-gammanull donors were used for T cell reconstitution in each system.
Surprisingly, large numbers of IFN-gammanull-reconstituted mice developed wasting
and colitis, which in many cases was of comparable severity to that seen in
animals reconstituted with wt cells. Furthermore, T cells from these animals
expressed TNF-alpha, demonstrating that they had retained the ability to produce 
another proinflammatory cytokine. Taken together, these results demonstrate that 
in some forms of chronic experimental colitis the development of pathogenic T
cells is influenced predominantly, though not exclusively, by IL-12 via the
actions of Stat-4 proteins. Furthermore, our data suggest that in the models of
colitis studied here the effects of IL-12/Stat-4 or other Th1 promoting pathways 
are not limited to the induction of IFN-gamma gene expression in T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2212228
PMID: 9547334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):9898-905.

A role for the insulin-interleukin (IL)-4 receptor motif of the IL-4 receptor
alpha-chain in regulating activation of the insulin receptor substrate 2 and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 pathways. Analysis by
mutagenesis.

Wang HY(1), Zamorano J, Keegan AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Jerome Holland Labs, American Red Cross, Rockville, 
Maryland 20855, USA.

The interleukin (IL)-4 receptor alpha-chain (IL-4Ralpha) contains a sequence
motif (488PLVIAGNPAYRSFSD) termed the insulin IL-4 receptor motif (I4R motif).
Mutation of the central Tyr497 to Phe blocks the tyrosine phosphorylation of the 
insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) and diminishes proliferation in response to
IL-4. Recent data suggest that the I4R motif encodes binding sites for several
protein tyrosine binding (PTB) domain-containing proteins such as IRS1 and Shc
and potentially for the Src homology 2 domain of signal transducer and activator 
of transcription 6 (STAT6). To analyze the function of the I4R motif in
regulating IL-4 signaling, we changed conserved residues upstream and downstream 
of the central Tyr to Ala in the human IL-4Ralpha. We analyzed the ability of
these constructs to signal the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2 and STAT6, the
induction of DNA binding activity, and CD23 induction in response to human IL-4
(huIL-4) in transfected M12.4.1 cells. Mutagenesis of residues downstream of
Tyr497, such as Arg498 or Phe500, to Ala had no effect on any of these responses,
suggesting that the I4R motif may not be important for functional Src homology 2 
domain interactions. However, mutagenesis of Pro488 to Ala (P488A) greatly
diminished the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2 and abolished tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT6, induction of DNA binding activity, and CD23 induction
in response to huIL-4. By contrast, a P488G mutant signaled these responses to
huIL-4. Mutagenesis of hydrophobic amino acids previously shown to contact the
PTB domain of IRS1, Leu489 or Ile491, to Ala had only minimal effects on
responses to huIL-4. However, changing both Leu498 and Ile491 to Ala greatly
diminished the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2 and abolished STAT6 activation.
Taken together, these results indicate the important role of the I4R motif in
regulating IRS docking and suggest that I4R docking to a PTB domain-containing
protein regulates activation of the STAT6 pathway.

PMID: 9545332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Immunol. 1998 May 1;160(9):4322-9.

IL-15 enhances the response of human gamma delta T cells to nonpeptide
[correction of nonpetide] microbial antigens.

García VE(1), Jullien D, Song M, Uyemura K, Shuai K, Morita CT, Modlin RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Human gamma delta T cells have the ability to rapidly expand and produce
IFN-gamma in response to nonpeptide Ags of microbial pathogens, in particular a
class of compounds known as the prenyl phosphates. We investigated the ability of
IL-15, a T cell growth factor, to modulate prenyl phosphate-induced gamma delta T
cell proliferation and cytokine production. IL-15 significantly enhanced the
expansion of gamma delta T cells in the peripheral blood after stimulation in
vitro with isopentenyl pyrophosphate. Moreover, using gamma delta T cell clones, 
we determined that IL-15-induced T cell proliferation was dependent on the IL-2R 
beta chain but not the IL-2R alpha chain. We therefore studied the IL-15R alpha
chain expression in human gamma delta T cells in the presence or absence of
nonpeptide Ags. We found IL-15R alpha mRNA expression in IL-15-stimulated and
Ag-stimulated human gamma delta T cells but not in resting gamma delta T cells.
Although IL-15 itself had little effect on the production of IFN-gamma, IL-15
plus IL-12 acted synergistically to augment IFN-gamma production by gamma delta T
cells. Moreover, we showed that this increase in IFN-gamma could be explained by 
the dual activation of STAT1 and STAT4 by IL-15 and IL-12, respectively. Taken
together, these results suggest that IL-15 may contribute to activation of human 
gamma delta T cells in the immune response to microbial pathogens.

PMID: 9574535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Immunol. 1998 Apr 15;160(8):3642-7.

IL-12 and IL-18 differentially regulate the transcriptional activity of the human
IFN-gamma promoter in primary CD4+ T lymphocytes.

Barbulescu K(1), Becker C, Schlaak JF, Schmitt E, Meyer zum Büschenfelde KH,
Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I. Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, Germany.

We analyzed the molecular mechanisms by which IL-12 and IL-18 induce
transcriptional activity of the IFN-gamma promoter in primary human CD4+ T cells.
In transfection experiments, we found that IL-18 directly induces IFN-gamma
promoter activity, whereas significant activation with IL-12 required
costimulation with alphaCD3/CD28. Furthermore, IL-12 caused in vivo protection of
a STAT4 (-236) binding site, whereas stimulation with IL-18 or IL-12 plus
alphaCD3/CD28 induced occupancy of a downstream AP-1 site. Mutation of this AP-1 
site abrogated both IL-12- and IL-18-mediated promoter activation, whereas
mutation of the STAT site inhibited IL-12-dependent activation. These data
suggest that both AP-1 and STAT4 are required for IL-12-dependent IFN-gamma
promoter activity, whereas IL-18 causes direct activation via AP-1. This
differential activation of the IFN-gamma promoter gives further insights into
molecular pathways governing Th1 T cell development and differentiation.

PMID: 9558063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Immunol. 1998 Apr 1;160(7):3385-92.

Activation of STAT proteins and cytokine genes in human Th1 and Th2 cells
generated in the absence of IL-12 and IL-4.

Moriggl R(1), Kristofic C, Kinzel B, Volarevic S, Groner B, Brinkmann V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg,
Germany.

We have shown previously that human CD4+ 45RO- T cells could be primed for a Th2 
phenotype independent of IL-4 if they were activated by anti-CD28 mAb plus IL-2. 
If additional TCR signals were provided, the cells differentiated toward Th1
independent of IL-12. Here we show that anti-CD28/IL-2-primed Th2 cells expressed
high levels of activated STAT6, but no cytokine mRNA. Moreover, both Th1 and Th2 
cells expressed active STAT1 and -3, but not STAT2, -4, and -5. Restimulation of 
Th1 or Th2 cells via CD3 plus CD28 induced production of IFN-gamma or IL-4,
respectively, but did not alter the activation status/DNA binding activity of
STATs. Addition of IL-4 (or anti-IL-4 mAb) to restimulated Th2 cells did not
modulate STAT6 activation or IL-4 expression, confirming the full commitment.
However, Th2 cells remained responsive to IL-12, which repressed STAT6 DNA
binding but activated STAT4, and this coincided with a suppression of IL-4/IL-5
and an induction of IFN-gamma. In Th1 cells, IL-12 activated both STAT6 and
STAT4, and IL-4 activated STAT6, but in both cases the Th1 phenotype remained.
Together the data show that CD28/IL-2-dependent Th2 priming activated STAT6
without inducing IL-4 expression. The primed Th cells resembled memory cells and 
produced IL-4 upon the first CD3/CD28 costimulus without detectable modulation of
STATs. Th2 cells remained responsive to IL-12, which repressed STAT6 DNA binding 
and activated STAT4, and switched the cells to Th1. The effects of IL-12 may
depend on the commitment of the cells, since IL-12 phosphorylated STAT6 in Th1
and dephosphorylated STAT6 in Th2 cells.

PMID: 9531298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):1996-2003.

Stat proteins control lymphocyte proliferation by regulating p27Kip1 expression.

Kaplan MH(1), Daniel C, Schindler U, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The proliferation of lymphocytes in response to cytokine stimulation is essential
for a variety of immune responses. Recent studies with signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6 (Stat6)-deficient mice have demonstrated that this
protein is required for the normal proliferation of lymphocytes in response to
interleukin-4 (IL-4). In this report, we show that the impaired IL-4-induced
proliferative response of Stat6-deficient lymphocytes is not due to an inability 
to activate alternate signaling pathways, such as those involving insulin
receptor substrates, or to a failure to upregulate IL-4 receptor levels. Cell
cycle analysis showed that the percentage of Stat6-deficient lymphocytes that
transit from the G1 to the S phase of the cell cycle following IL-4 stimulation
is lower than that of control lymphocytes. Although the regulation of many genes 
involved in the control of cytokine-induced proliferation is normal in
Stat6-deficient lymphocytes, protein levels of the cdk inhibitor p27Kip1 were
found to be markedly dysregulated. p27Kip1 is expressed at significantly higher
levels in Stat6-deficient lymphocytes than in control cells following IL-4
stimulation. The higher level of p27Kip1 expression seen in IL-4-stimulated
Stat6-deficient lymphocytes correlates with decreased cdk2-associated kinase
activity and is the result of the increased accumulation of protein rather than
altered mRNA expression. Similarly, higher levels of p27Kip1 protein expression
are also seen following IL-12 stimulation of Stat4-deficient lymphocytes than are
seen following stimulation of control cells. These data suggest that Stat
proteins may control the cytokine-induced proliferative response of activated T
cells by regulating the expression of cell cycle inhibitors so that cyclin-cdk
complexes may function to promote transition from the G1 to the S phase of the
cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC121429
PMID: 9528771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Immunol. 1998 Mar 15;160(6):2742-50.

Induction of Jak/STAT signaling by activation of the type 1 TNF receptor.

Guo D(1), Dunbar JD, Yang CH, Pfeffer LM, Donner DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

Cellular responses to TNF are initiated by either of two cell surface receptors, 
the type 1 TNF receptor (TNFR1) and the type 2 TNF receptor (TNFR2). Although
neither receptor contains an intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase, such activity has
been implicated in TNF action. In this study, we show that murine TNF induces the
tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of the intracellular Janus tyrosine
kinases Jak1, Jak2, and Tyk2 in murine 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Activation of Jak
kinases by TNF was associated with tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT3,
STAT5, and STAT6, but not STAT2 or STAT4, showing that TNF acts on a specific
subset of these latent cytoplasmic transcription factors in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
Agonist antiserum to TNFR1 induced Jak kinase and STAT protein phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation of Jak proteins was also induced by human TNF, which selectively 
binds to TNFR1 on murine cells. 35S-labeled Jak kinases were precipitated from a 
cell-free system and from lysates of 3T3-L1 adipocytes by a glutathione
S-transferase fusion protein containing the cytoplasmic domain of TNFR1. These
results suggest that the cytoplasmic domain of TNFR1 can directly interact with
and form signaling complexes with Jak kinases. Jak2 was precipitated from HeLa
cells by antiserum to TNFR1, directly demonstrating their association in vivo.
Thus, TNF activates a Jak/STAT signal-transduction cascade by acting through
TNFR1.

PMID: 9510175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Mar;83(3):911-6.

Interleukin-12 and its free p40 subunit regulate immune recognition of
endometrial cells: potential role in endometriosis.

Mazzeo D(1), Viganó P, Di Blasio AM, Sinigaglia F, Vignali M, Panina-Bordignon P.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Milano Ricerche, Milan, Italy.

An alteration of immune recognition and killing of misplaced endometrial cells,
refluxed with menstrual debris in ectopic sites, has been claimed to be
responsible for the initiation and progression of endometriosis. In particular,
current evidence emphasizes the role of natural killer (NK) cells as potential
effectors of peritoneal immune surveillance. Interleukin-12 (IL-12), a
heterodimeric cytokine composed of p40 and p35 chains, has potent regulatory
effects on NK cell growth and function. The purpose of this study was to evaluate
whether this cytokine may also have a role in the specific cytolytic NK cell
response toward endometrial antigens. To this aim, concentrations of IL-12 and
its free p40 subunit were determined in peritoneal fluid of 33 patients with
endometriosis and 40 women without laparoscopic evidence of the disease. Similar 
concentrations of IL-12, but significantly higher levels of free p40, were
present in peritoneal fluid of patients with endometriosis compared to those in
women without the disease. We also observed that the IL-12 plus free p40/IL-12
ratio increased with the severity of the disease. Moreover, we investigated
whether incubation of NK cells with heterodimeric IL-12 and/or p40 has any effect
on NK cell-mediated lysis of endometrial cells. NK cells pretreated with
heterodimeric IL-12 exhibited an enhanced cytotoxic response toward endometrial
targets. This IL-12-induced cytotoxicity could be abrogated by the p40 subunit in
a specific and dose-dependent manner. The p40 inhibitory effect was mediated by
down-regulation of IL-12 high affinity binding sites on NK cells, as we observed 
inhibition of surface IL-12 receptor beta1-chain expression, a decrease in
IL-12-binding capacity, and inhibition of phosphorylation of STAT4 (signal
transducer and activator of transcription) protein. These data suggest that the
excess of p40 present in peritoneal fluid of patients with endometriosis may be
related to the NK cell defect associated with the disease. Moreover, IL-12 could 
be a potential specific agent able to correct the p40-induced defect in vivo.

PMID: 9506747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Science. 1998 Feb 13;279(5353):1048-52.

Structure of the amino-terminal protein interaction domain of STAT-4.

Vinkemeier U(1), Moarefi I, Darnell JE Jr, Kuriyan J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics,
The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) are a family of
transcription factors that are specifically activated to regulate gene
transcription when cells encounter cytokines and growth factors. The crystal
structure of an NH2-terminal conserved domain (N-domain) comprising the first 123
residues of STAT-4 was determined at 1.45 angstroms. The domain consists of eight
helices that are assembled into a hook-like structure. The N-domain has been
implicated in several protein-protein interactions affecting transcription, and
it enables dimerized STAT molecules to polymerize and to bind DNA cooperatively. 
The structure shows that N-domains can interact through an extensive interface
formed by polar interactions across one face of the hook. Mutagenesis of an
invariant tryptophan residue at the heart of this interface abolished cooperative
DNA binding by the full-length protein in vitro and reduced the transcriptional
response after cytokine stimulation in vivo.

PMID: 9461439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Blood. 1998 Feb 15;91(4):1341-54.

Altered interleukin-12 responsiveness in Th1 and Th2 cells is associated with the
differential activation of STAT5 and STAT1.

Gollob JA(1), Murphy EA, Mahajan S, Schnipper CP, Ritz J, Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T-cell activation in response to interleukin-12 (IL-12) is mediated through
signaling events that include the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT4. IL-12
responsiveness and the ability of IL-12 to activate STAT4 is different in T cells
induced to differentiate into a Th1 or Th2 phenotype. In this report, we show
that STAT5, STAT1alpha, and STAT1beta, in addition to STAT4, are tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to IL-12 in phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-activated human T
cells. To understand how the activation of these STATs contributes to T-cell
IL-12 responsiveness, we analyzed the IL-12-induced activation of STAT5 and STAT1
in T cells stimulated to undergo Th1 or Th2 differentiation. The IL-12-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 and STAT1, but not STAT4, is augmented in T
cells activated into Th1 cells with PHA + interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) compared
with T cells activated with PHA alone. STAT5 DNA binding induced by IL-12 is also
augmented in T cells activated with PHA + IFN-gamma compared with T cells
activated with PHA alone, whereas STAT4 DNA binding is not increased. In
contrast, the IL-12-induced activation of these STATs is inhibited in T cells
activated into Th2 cells with PHA + IL-4. The enhancement of IL-12 signaling by
IFN-gamma is not a direct effect of IFN-gamma on T cells, but rather is mediated 
by IL-12 that is produced by antigen-presenting cells in response to IFN-gamma.
This positive autoregulatory effect of IL-12 on the activation of select STATs
correlates with an increase in T-cell IFN-gamma production in response to IL-12. 
These findings suggest that the activation of STAT5 and STAT1 may augment select 
STAT4-dependent functional responses to IL-12 in Th1 cells.

PMID: 9454765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Oncogene. 1998 Jan 29;16(4):505-15.

Activation of Stat5 by platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is dependent on
phosphorylation sites in PDGF beta-receptor juxtamembrane and kinase insert
domains.

Valgeirsdóttir S(1), Paukku K, Silvennoinen O, Heldin CH, Claesson-Welsh L.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Biomedical Center, Uppsala, Sweden.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stats) are known to transduce
signals from the cell surface to the nucleus in cytokine receptor signaling. We
examined the capacity of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor to
interact with and activate Stat molecules. Activation of the PDGF beta-receptor
led to tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1, Stat3 and Stat5, which was accompanied 
by specific DNA-binding activities. These events were only weakly stimulated by
the activated PDGF alpha-receptor. In cells expressing PDGF beta-receptors
mutated at Tyr579, Tyr581 or Tyr775, tyrosine phosphorylation as well as
DNA-binding activity of Stat5 was reduced. Immobilized peptides containing
phosphorylated Tyr579, Tyr581 or Tyr775 bound Stat5, suggesting direct binding of
Stat5 to these tyrosine residues of the PDGF beta-receptor. Members of the Janus 
kinase family were also shown to interact with the PDGF beta-receptor, and to a
lesser extent with the alpha-receptor, but their importance for PDGF-induced Stat
activation remains to be determined.

PMID: 9484840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Immunol. 1998 Feb 15;160(4):1850-6.

Th2 cells are required for the Schistosoma mansoni egg-induced granulomatous
response.

Kaplan MH(1), Whitfield JR, Boros DL, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The development of Schistosoma mansoni ova-induced granulomas is regulated by
cytokines secreted by distinct Th cell subsets. To determine the importance of
Th1 and Th2 cells in granuloma formation, we have studied the immune response to 
S. mansoni ova in Stat4- and Stat6-deficient mice, which lack Th1 and Th2 cells, 
respectively. Lymphocytes from both naive and infected Stat6-deficient mice
produced minimal levels of Th2 cell cytokines and Ag-specific IgG1 and IgE, but
showed enhanced production of IFN-gamma and Ag-specific IgG2a and IgG2b following
schistosome egg injection. This shift away from a Th2 cell-mediated immune
response was coupled with the development of pulmonary and hepatic granulomas
that were greatly decreased in size compared with those in control littermates.
Hepatic granulomas in Stat6-deficient mice were composed of predominantly
mononuclear cells with very sparse appearance of eosinophils, and their
diminished size was accompanied by decreased amounts of liver hydroxyproline
content as a measure of collagen deposition. In contrast, lymphocytes from
infected Stat4-deficient mice produced Th2 cell cytokines in amounts comparable
to those produced by control littermates, but low levels of IFN-gamma. While
infected Stat4-deficient mice developed pulmonary granulomas following
schistosome egg injection that were modestly impaired in size, the granuloma size
and amount of collagen deposition in the liver were equivalent to those seen in
control littermates. These studies demonstrate that Th2 cells are required for
the full development of the granulomas and tissue-destructive fibrotic pathology 
associated with the immune response to S. mansoni ova.

PMID: 9469446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):1058-63.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-activated signaling pathways in 
human neutrophils. Selective activation of Jak2, Stat3, and Stat5b.

Al-Shami A(1), Mahanna W, Naccache PH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Rhumatologie et Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du
CHUL, and Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Ste-Foy,
Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) regulates many of the
biological functions of human neutrophils. This includes the stimulation of
protein synthesis and the tyrosine phosphorylation of various proteins among
which is JAK2. The present study was aimed at characterizing in detail the
pattern of activation by GM-CSF of the JAK/STAT pathway in human neutrophils. The
results obtained show that the stimulation of human neutrophils by GM-CSF
specifically led to tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and had no effect on JAK1,
JAK3, or TYK2. Furthermore, GM-CSF induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 
and STAT5 but not of STAT1, STAT2, STAT4, or STAT6. Tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT3 was transient reaching its maximum at 15 min. STAT5 presented a different
pattern of tyrosine phosphorylation. The anti-STAT5 antibodies identified two
proteins at 94 and 92 kDa. The 94-kDa STAT5 was constitutively tyrosine
phosphorylated and showed no change upon GM-CSF stimulation. On the other hand,
the 92-kDa STAT5 was tyrosine phosphorylated within 1 min of GM-CSF treatment and
this was maintained for at least 30 min. By the use of specific antibodies, it
was determined that only STAT5B, and not STAT5A, was tyrosine phosphorylated in
GM-CSF-treated neutrophils. Furthermore, GM-CSF treatment induced an increase in 
the ability of STAT3 and STAT5B, but not STAT5A, to bind DNA probes. The
specificity of the pattern of activation of the JAK/STAT pathway suggests that it
may be directly linked to the modulation of the functions of mature nondividing, 
human neutrophils by GM-CSF.

PMID: 9422769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Reprod Immunol. 1997 Nov 15;35(2):111-33.

Histological studies of gene-ablated mice support important functional roles for 
natural killer cells in the uterus during pregnancy.

Croy BA(1), Ashkar AA, Foster RA, DiSanto JP, Magram J, Carson D, Gendler SJ,
Grusby MJ, Wagner N, Muller W, Guimond MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Ont., Canada.
acroy@ovcnet.uoguelph.ca

Maternal lymphocytes having a large and granulated morphology accumulate at
healthy implantation sites in normal mice. Insight into the functions of these
cells has come from a previous study of two independent lines of mice deficient
in natural killer (NK) cells. In pregnant Tg epsilon 26 mice, vascular pathology 
was found that led to the major complications of either fetal death or
intrauterine growth retardation. In pregnant p56lck null x IL-2R beta null mice, 
extensive distension of the decidua was observed that separated the placenta from
the myometrium and appeared to be interstitial edema. To strengthen assignment of
uterine large granulated lymphocytes to the NK cell lineage and to understand
which aspects of NK cell biology may be important for a uterine-based,
pregnancy-associated subset, mid-gestation implantation sites from a new series
of mice having gene deletions which alter NK cells (IL-2R gamma null, Stat4 null,
IL-12 p40 null, beta 7 integrin null and Muc-1 null) have been examined
histologically. The findings support the assignment of pregnancy-associated large
granulated cells of mice to the NK cell lineage and suggest that the primary
functions of these tissue-based NK cells are to support normal development of the
decidua and/or its vasculature using pathways that involve IL-12 mediated signal 
transduction.

PMID: 9421796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Eur J Clin Invest. 1997 Nov;27(11):948-55.

Specific activation of AP-1 but not Stat3 in regenerating liver in mice.

Heim MH(1), Gamboni G, Beglinger C, Gyr K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital, Basle, Switzerland.

Liver regeneration following partial hepatectomy is regulated by hepatotrophic
factors whose precise roles are still elusive. In cell culture studies, some of
them have been shown to activate members of the family of the signal transducers 
and activators of transcription (Stat). To test this contention in vivo, nuclear 
extracts were isolated from livers of partially hepatectomized and sham-operated 
mice killed at 30 different time points between zero and 108 h after surgery.
Stat3 DNA binding is rapidly induced after surgery in both partially
hepatectomized and sham-operated mice. Maximum activation of Stat3 is achieved
4-6 h after resection, and elevated Stat3 activation is detected as late as 60 h 
after surgery in both groups. Activated Stat5 is found sporadically in both
sham-operated and resected mice but appears to be absent in the first 12 h after 
partial hepatectomy. Neither Stat1, Stat2, Stat4 nor Stat6 is induced during the 
time of observation. In contrast, AP-1 DNA binding activity is specifically
induced in regenerating mouse liver.

PMID: 9395792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Immunity. 1997 Oct;7(4):571-81.

IGIF does not drive Th1 development but synergizes with IL-12 for
interferon-gamma production and activates IRAK and NFkappaB.

Robinson D(1), Shibuya K, Mui A, Zonin F, Murphy E, Sana T, Hartley SB, Menon S, 
Kastelein R, Bazan F, O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

In these studies, IFN gamma-inducing factor (IGIF), unlike IL-12, did not drive
Th1 development in BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice, but like IL-1alpha, potentiated
IL-12-driven Th1 development in BALB/c mice. IGIF and IL-12 synergized for IFN
gamma production from Th1 cells. Unlike IL-1alpha, IGIF had no effect on Th2
cells. IGIF signaled through IRAK, IL-1 receptor-associated kinase, to induce
nuclear translocation of p65/p50 NFkappaB in Th1 cells. IL-1alpha had no effect
on proliferation, cytokine production, or NFkappaB activation in Th1 cells but
activated NFkappaB and proliferation in Th2 cells. Thus, Th1 and Th2 cells may
differ in responsiveness and receptor expression for IL-1 family molecules. IGIF 
and IL-1alpha may differentially amplify Th1 and Th2 effector responses,
respectively.

PMID: 9354477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Immunol. 1997 Nov 1;159(9):4150-3.

Regulation of C-C chemokine production by murine T cells by CD28/B7
costimulation.

Herold KC(1), Lu J, Rulifson I, Vezys V, Taub D, Grusby MJ, Bluestone JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.
kherold@uic.edu

C-C chemokines play an important role in recruitment of T lymphocytes to
inflammatory sites. T lymphocytes secrete chemokines, but the activation
requirements for chemokine production by T cells are uncertain. We studied the
regulation of C-C chemokine production by CD28 costimulatory signals by murine T 
lymphocytes. Splenocytes from BALB/c mice cultured with anti-CD3 mAb expressed
macrophage-inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha mRNA and secreted MIP-1alpha, which 
was inhibited by anti-B7-1 plus anti-B7-2 mAbs. MIP-1alpha production by
Ag-stimulated T cells from DO.11.10 TCR transgenic mice was augmented by
anti-CD28 mAb and increased compared with DO.11.10/CD28(-/-) cells. When T cell
costimulation was provided by IL-2, MIP-1alpha was not enhanced. Studies with
IL-2, IL-4, STAT4, and STAT6 knock-out mice suggested that chemokine production
is controlled by pathways different from those regulating T cell differentiation.
Thus, CD28 costimulation may amplify an immune response by stimulating T cell
survival, proliferation, and production of chemokines that recruit T cells to
inflammatory sites.

PMID: 9379007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Immunol. 1997 Aug 15;159(4):1767-74.

T cell genetic background determines maintenance of IL-12 signaling: effects on
BALB/c and B10.D2 T helper cell type 1 phenotype development.

Güler ML(1), Jacobson NG, Gubler U, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

In this report, we examined the molecular basis underlying the genetic difference
between BALB/c and B10.D2 T cells for T helper phenotype development in vitro. We
found a strain-dependent difference in early maintenance of IL-12 responsiveness 
by T cells developing in vitro in unmanipulated (neutral) conditions. Thus, when 
activated without addition of exogenous cytokines or neutralization of endogenous
cytokines, B10.D2, but not BALB/c, T cells remain responsive to IL-12 when
activated for 7 days. The pattern of IL-12 responsiveness correlated with
expression of the IL-12R signaling subunit, IL-12R beta2, and with IL-12-induced 
STAT4 phosphorylation. When activated under neutral conditions, BALB/c T cells
rapidly lose IL-12R beta2 expression, STAT4 phosphorylation, and functional IL-12
responsiveness. More efficient maintenance of IL-12R beta2 expression by B10.D2 T
cells activated under neutral conditions may explain the previously observed
increase in IFN-gamma production relative to that of BALB/c. This difference
could potentially provide greater protection from certain pathogens that do not
immediately elicit strong Th1-inducing conditions via activation of the innate
immune system.

PMID: 9257839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Cell Sci. 1997 Jul;110 ( Pt 14):1543-53.

The mouse transcription factor Stat4 is expressed in haploid male germ cells and 
is present in the perinuclear theca of spermatozoa.

Herrada G(1), Wolgemuth DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, The Center for Reproductive Sciences, 
Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) proteins have been shown 
to be essential transcription factors which mediate biological effects of
cytokines. Although most of the STATs have been shown to be widely expressed,
Stat4 mRNA has been detected in only a few tissues, including the testis. In the 
present study, immunoblot analysis confirmed that the presence of Stat4 protein
was similarly restricted, with the highest level observed in testis. In situ
hybridization, immunoblot, and immunohistochemistry analyses revealed that in the
testis, Stat4 was abundantly and exclusively expressed in male germ cells which
have completed meiosis, at the round and elongating spermatid stages.
Cytolocalization at various times of spermatid differentiation showed that the
level of Stat4 protein increased in parallel in both cytoplasm and nuclei. No
specific nuclear translocation that would have been an indicator of Stat4
activation was observed at any stage of spermatogenic differentiation.
Interestingly, the Stat4 transcription factor was localized to the condensing
perinuclear theca of spermatids, a localization that was confirmed by selective
biochemical extraction of thecal proteins. Since the theca is known to
depolymerize in the cytoplasm of the oocyte during the hours following
fertilization, we hypothesized that sperm Stat4 would represent an original
paternal contribution to the fertilized egg which may be involved in the onset of
zygotic transcription.

PMID: 9247188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jun 27;235(3):587-92.

Prolactin-mediated inhibition of 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene
expression and the tyrosine kinase system.

Zhong L(1), Parmer TG, Robertson MC, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
60612, USA.

The rat luteal 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase plays a key role at
catabolizing progesterone and at decreasing the level of this steroid secreted by
the ovaries. Throughout pregnancy and before parturition neither the mRNA nor the
protein for this enzyme could be detected. In this investigation we set to
examine whether PRL and PRL-like hormone from placental origin silence the
expression of this gene and whether PRL action involves tyrosine kinase activity 
and/or de novo protein synthesis. The results revealed that PRL and PRL-like
hormone from rat placental origin (rPL-1 and rPL-2), but not rat growth hormone, 
caused a rapid and profound inhibition of 20alpha-HSD mRNA expression in highly
luteinized granulosa cells. Immunoprecipition and western blot analysis indicate 
that PRL-R associates with JAK2 and Stat5, and this association is increased
within 30 seconds with PRL treatment. Although both JAK2 and Stat5 were
phosphorylated on tyrosine upon PRL treatment, the PRL mediated inhibition of
20alpha-HSD was not reversed by either tyrosine kinase inhibitors, AG18 and
genistein, but was largely reversed by the protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide. In summary, results of this investigation indicate that although
PRL can activate the JAK2/Stat5 system in the corpus luteum, the down regulation 
of 20alpha-HSD mRNA by PRL does not appear to involve tyrosine kinase activity
but depends on de novo synthesis of protein(s).

PMID: 9207201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 24;94(13):6764-9.

Constitutive activation of a slowly migrating isoform of Stat3 in mycosis
fungoides: tyrphostin AG490 inhibits Stat3 activation and growth of mycosis
fungoides tumor cell lines.

Nielsen M(1), Kaltoft K, Nordahl M, Röpke C, Geisler C, Mustelin T, Dobson P,
Svejgaard A, Odum N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Section A, University of
Copenhagen, 2200 N Copenhagen, Denmark. M.Nielsen@SB.IMMI.KU.DK

Mycosis fungoides (MF) is a low-grade cutaneous T cell lymphoma of unknown
etiology. In this report, the Jak/Stat (Janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription) signaling pathway was investigated in tumor cell
lines established from skin biopsy specimens from a patient with MF. Jaks link
cytokine receptors to Stats, and abnormal Jak/Stat signaling has been observed in
some hemopoietic cancers. In MF tumor cells, a slowly migrating isoform of Stat3,
Stat3(sm), was found to be constitutively activated, i.e., (i) Stat3(sm) was
constitutively phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, and tyrosine phosphorylation 
was not enhanced by growth factor stimulation; (ii) band shift assays and
immunoprecipitations of DNA/Stat complexes showed constitutive DNA-binding
properties of Stat3(sm); and (iii) Stat3(sm) was constitutively associated with
Jak3. The abnormal activation of Stat3(sm) was highly specific. Thus, neither the
fast migrating isoform of Stat3 (Stat3(fm)) nor other Stats (Stat1, Stat2, and
Stat4 through Stat6) were constitutively activated. The Jak kinase inhibitor,
tyrphostin AG490, blocked the constitutive activation of Stat3(sm) and inhibited 
spontaneous as well as interleukin 2-induced growth of MF tumor cells. In
conclusion, we have provided evidence for an abnormal Jak/Stat signaling and
growth regulation in tumor cells obtained from affected skin of an MF patient.

PMCID: PMC21232
PMID: 9192639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hum Gene Ther. 1997 Jun 10;8(9):1125-35.

Construction and biological characterization of an interleukin-12 fusion protein 
(Flexi-12): delivery to acute myeloid leukemic blasts using adeno-associated
virus.

Anderson R(1), Macdonald I, Corbett T, Hacking G, Lowdell MW, Prentice HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, Hampstead, 
London, UK.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a cytokine that exhibits pleiotropic effects on
lymphocytes and natural killer cells and has been shown to have promise for the
immunotherapy of cancer. The combination of the immune costimulatory molecule
B7.1 and IL-12 has been shown to be synergistic for T cell activation. By
transfecting tumor cells with both IL-12 and B7.1 cDNAs, it may be possible to
use these modified targets as vaccines. A major obstacle in designing a vector to
deliver these genes results from the structure of IL-12. Functional IL-12 is a
heterodimer composed of two distinct subunits that are encoded by separate genes 
on different chromosomes. Production of functional IL-12 requires the coordinated
expression of both genes. This presents several problems in vectors, particularly
those in which additional genes, either a co-stimulatory gene or a selectable
marker, are inserted. Therefore, we have constructed a single cDNA that encodes a
single-chain protein, called Flexi-12, which retains all of the biological
characteristics of recombinant IL-12 (rIL-12). The monomeric polypeptide Flexi-12
is able to induce the proliferation of phytohemagglutinin (PHA) blasts, induce
PHA blasts to secrete interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and additionally, by
preincubation, enhance the killing of K562 targets by PBLs. These phenomena are
in a dose-dependent manner comparable to that seen with rIL-12. We have also
shown that tyrosine phosphorylation of the STAT 4 transcription factor, which has
been shown to be unique to the IL-12 signaling pathway, occurs with Flexi-12 at
levels similar to those seen with rIL-12. We have packaged Flexi-12 into a
recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) and used this vector to infect acute
myeloid leukemic (AML) blasts. Infected AML blasts produced between 2 and 6 ng of
IL-12/10(6) cells per ml per 48 hr. These studies also confirm that AAV is an
efficient delivery vehicle for cytokines to leukemic cells. Direct analysis of
these modified cells acting as tumor vaccines is underway.

PMID: 9189770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biochem Soc Trans. 1997 May;25(2):359-60.

Stat4- and Stat6-deficient mice as models for manipulating T helper cell
responses.

Grusby MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, Department of Cancer Biology, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

PMID: 9191117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 7;233(1):126-32.

Binding sequence of STAT4: STAT4 complex recognizes the IFN-gamma activation site
(GAS)-like sequence (T/A)TTCC(C/G)GGAA(T/A).

Yamamoto K(1), Miura O, Hirosawa S, Miyasaka N.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Bunkyo-ku, Japan.

Studies of transcriptional activation by interferons and various cytokines have
led to the identification of a family of proteins that serve as signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT). STAT4 is phosphorylated
following interleukin (IL)-12 stimulation and is required for IL-12 signal
transduction. By immunoprecipitation and PCR amplification, a specific consensus 
sequence for DNA binding of the STAT4 complex was determined. The binding
sequence of the STAT4 complex, (T/A)TTCC(C/G)GGAA(T/A), proved to be palindromic 
and similar to the IFN-gamma activated site (GAS)-like sequence. The first (T/A) 
and last (T/A) sites of the consensus sequence were critical for the binding
affinity of the STAT4 complex.

PMID: 9144409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:152-4.

Pathogenesis of Friend leukemia virus.

Ikawa Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Retroviral Regulation, Tokyo Medical and Dental University
Medical Research Division, Japan.

Friend leukemia virus complex (FLV) consists of replication-defective, Friend
spleen focus-forming virus (F-SFFV) and replication-competent, Friend murine
leukemia virus (F-MuLV). We produced transgenic mice possessing F-SFFV gp55 gene 
and clarified that the gp55 glycoprotein encoded by F-SFFV env-related gene is,
by itself, responsible for the initiation of erythroleukemia. The occurrence of
erythroleukemia, however, is sporadic in these mice. Erythroleukemia cell lines
established from these mice possessed mutations in the p53 allele. One had a
temperature-sensitive mutant p53 allele, p53Val-135 and showed induction of
apoptosis by expressing a wild-type p53 protein at 32 degrees C. Superinfection
of the mice with Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV) conferred 100% induction
of erythroleukemia, mutating p53 gene or activating Spfi-1 gene by insertional
events. Activation of the JAK/STAT pathway, which is involved in cytokine
signaling, was investigated in the gp55 signaling mediated by the erythropoietin 
receptor. JAK1 and STAT5 were constitutively tyrosine-phosphorylated but the DNA 
binding activity of STAT5 was not induced.

PMID: 9209327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Exp Med. 1997 Mar 3;185(5):825-31.

Selective expression of an interleukin-12 receptor component by human T helper 1 
cells.

Rogge L(1), Barberis-Maino L, Biffi M, Passini N, Presky DH, Gubler U, Sinigaglia
F.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Milano Ricerche, Italy.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12), a heterodimeric cytokine produced by activated monocytes 
and dendritic cells, plays a crucial role in regulating interferon (IFN)-gamma
production and in the generation of IFN-gamma-producing T helper 1 (Th1) cells.
Here we show that the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) beta 2 subunit, a recently cloned
binding and signal transducing component of the IL-12R, is expressed on human Th1
but not Th2 clones and is induced during differentiation of human naive cells
along the Th1 but not the Th2 pathway. IL-12 and type I but not type II
interferons induce expression of the IL-12R beta 2 chain during in vitro T cell
differentiation after antigen receptor triggering. The selective expression and
regulation of the IL-12R beta 2 subunit may help to understand the basis of
Th1/Th2 differentiation and may provide therapeutic options for altering the
Th1/Th2 balance in several immuno-pathological conditions such as autoimmune
diseases and allergies.

PMCID: PMC2196163
PMID: 9120388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Exp Med. 1997 Mar 3;185(5):817-24.

Regulation of the interleukin (IL)-12R beta 2 subunit expression in developing T 
helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells.

Szabo SJ(1), Dighe AS, Gubler U, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

The developmental commitment to a T helper 1 (Th1)- or Th2-type response can
significantly influence host immunity to pathogens. Extinction of the IL-12
signaling pathway during early Th2 development provides a mechanism that allows
stable phenotype commitment. In this report we demonstrate that extinction of
IL-12 signaling in early Th2 cells results from a selective loss of IL-12
receptor (IL-12R) beta 2 subunit expression. To determine the basis for this
selective loss, we examined IL-12R beta 2 subunit expression during Th cell
development in response to T cell treatment with different cytokines. IL-12R beta
2 is not expressed by naive resting CD4+ T cells, but is induced upon antigen
activation through the T cell receptor. Importantly, IL-4 and IFN-gamma were
found to significantly modify IL-12 receptor beta 2 expression after T cell
activation. IL-4 inhibited IL-12R beta 2 expression leading to the loss of IL-12 
signaling, providing an important point of regulation to promote commitment to
the Th2 pathway. IFN-gamma treatment of early developing Th2 cells maintained
IL-12R beta 2 expression and restored the ability of these cells to functionally 
respond to IL-12, but did not directly inhibit IL-4 or induce IFN-gamma
production. Thus, IFN-gamma may prevent early Th cells from premature commitment 
to the Th2 pathway. Controlling the expression of the IL-12R beta 2 subunit could
be an important therapeutic target for the redirection of ongoing Th cell
responses.

PMCID: PMC2196166
PMID: 9120387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Eur J Immunol. 1997 Mar;27(3):647-52.

Interferon-gamma and interleukin-4 regulate T cell interleukin-12 responsiveness 
through the differential modulation of high-affinity interleukin-12 receptor
expression.

Gollob JA(1), Kawasaki H, Ritz J.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. jared_gollob@macmailgw.dfci.harvard.edu

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) are mutually antagonistic
cytokines that stimulate CD4+ T cells to develop into either Th1 or Th2 cells.
One feature of Th2 differentiation in mice is the loss of IL-12-induced Jak2 and 
Stat4 activation, which is accompanied by the inability to produce IFN-gamma in
response to IL-12. In this report, we show that freshly isolated human T cells
activated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) in the presence of IL-4 exhibit a greatly
diminished response to IL-12, whereas the IL-12 response of T cells activated
with PHA plus IFN-gamma is enhanced. Radiolabeled IL-12 binding studies
demonstrate that the impairment of T cell IL-12 responsiveness by IL-4 is
associated with the down-regulation of high-affinity IL-12 receptor expression.
In contrast, the enhancement of IL-12 responsiveness by IFN-gamma is associated
with the upregulation of high-affinity IL-12 receptor expression. Through the use
of a newly synthesized neutralizing antibody to the low-affinity IL-12 receptor
beta subunit (IL-12Rbeta), we show that neither IL-4 nor IFN-gamma affect the
expression of IL-12Rbeta, which we determine to be one of at least two
low-affinity subunits required for high-affinity IL-12 binding. These findings
suggest that IL-4 and IFN-gamma exert opposite effects on T cell IL-12
responsiveness by differentially modulating the expression of low-affinity IL-12 
receptor subunits that are distinct from IL-12Rbeta and required, together with
IL-12Rbeta, for high-affinity IL-12 binding and IL-12 responsiveness. This
provides a basis for understanding the interplay between different cytokines at
the level of cytokine receptor expression, and offers insight into one of the
mechanisms governing Th1 and Th2 development.

PMID: 9079804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 28;272(9):6073-7.

Differential associations between the cytoplasmic regions of the interleukin-12
receptor subunits beta1 and beta2 and JAK kinases.

Zou J(1), Presky DH, Wu CY, Gubler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation/Autoimmune Diseases, Hoffmann-La Roche Inc.,
Nutley, New Jersey 07110-1199, USA.

The role of the cytoplasmic regions of interleukin-12 receptors (IL-12R) beta1
and beta2 in stimulating proliferation was examined. The transmembrane and
cytoplasmic regions of IL-12Rbeta1 or IL-12Rbeta2 were fused to the extracellular
domain of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, yielding chimeric receptors
E12R1 and E12R2, respectively. These chimeras were stably transfected into BaF3
cells, a factor-dependent murine pro-B cell line. Only E12R2 or E12R1+E12R2
transfectants were capable of EGF-dependent proliferation. EGF-dependent
phosphorylation of E12R2, JAK2, Tyk2, and STAT3 was observed. JAK2 was
phosphorylated in E12R1-, E12R2-, and E12R1+E12R2-expressing cells. However,
direct associations were detectable only between E12R2 and JAK2. Tyk2
phosphorylation was observed only in cells expressing E12R1 or E12R1+E12R2. In
parallel with this activation pattern, direct interactions only between Tyk2 and 
E12R1 were demonstrable. Phosphorylation of STAT3 was observed in cells
expressing E12R1, E12R2, and E12R1+E12R2. The expression levels of STAT4 protein 
in BaF3 cells are undetectable by the methods employed here; therefore, STAT4
phosphorylation was not observed. Taken together, the data indicate that
differential interactions take place between the cytoplasmic regions of the two
IL-12R subunits and JAK2/Tyk2 and that the cytoplasmic region of IL-12Rbeta2
alone is capable of delivering a proliferative signal.

PMID: 9038232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Stem Cells. 1997;15 Suppl 1:105-11; discussion 112.

Jaks and Stats in cytokine signaling.

Ihle JN(1), Nosaka T, Thierfelder W, Quelle FW, Shimoda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.

Hematopoiesis is regulated through the binding of cytokines to receptors of the
cytokine receptor superfamily. Although lacking catalytic domains, members of the
cytokine receptor superfamily mediate ligand-dependent activation of protein
tyrosine phosphorylation through their association and activation of members of
the Janus kinase (Jak) family of protein tyrosine kinases. The activated Jaks
phosphorylate the receptors which creates docking sites for SH2-containing
signaling proteins which are tyrosine phosphorylated following their association 
with the complex. Among the substrates of tyrosine phosphorylation are members of
the signal transducers and activators of the transcription family of proteins
(Stats). Various cytokines induce the tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of 
one or more of the seven family members. The pattern of Stat activation provides 
a level of cytokine individuality that is not observed in the activation of other
signaling pathways. The role of various Stats in the biological responses to
cytokines has been assessed through the analysis of receptor mutations which
disrupt Stat activation and more recently by disruption of the genes in mice. Our
results have demonstrated that the activation of Stat5a and Stat5b by
erythropoietin is critical for the activation of a number of immediate early
genes but is not required for a mitogenic response. Mice in which the genes for
Stat4 and Stat6 are disrupted are viable but lack functions that are mediated by 
interleukin 12 (IL-12) or IL-4, respectively, suggesting that these Stats perform
very specific functions in immune responses.

PMID: 9368330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1997;77(3-4):207-10.

cDNA cloning, expression and chromosome mapping of the human STAT4 gene: both
STAT4 and STAT1 genes are mapped to 2q32.2-->q32.3.

Yamamoto K(1), Kobayashi H, Arai A, Miura O, Hirosawa S, Miyasaka N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan. kohyamamoto.med1@med.tmd.ac.jp

Studies of transcriptional activation by interferons and a variety of cytokines
have led to the identification of a family of proteins that serve as signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT). STAT4 is phosphorylated
following interleukin (IL)-12 stimulation and is essential for IL-12 signal
transduction. The human STAT4 cDNA was cloned, and both STAT4 and STAT1 genes
were mapped to human chromosome bands 2q32.2-->q32.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. These results suggest that STAT4 and STAT1 may have arisen via a
tandem gene duplication. However, human STAT1 is expressed ubiquitously, whereas 
human STAT4 is expressed in several tissues including spleen, heart, brain,
peripheral blood cells, and testis.

PMID: 9284918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Immunol. 1996 Dec 1;157(11):4781-9.

Activation of STAT4 by IL-12 and IFN-alpha: evidence for the involvement of
ligand-induced tyrosine and serine phosphorylation.

Cho SS(1), Bacon CM, Sudarshan C, Rees RC, Finbloom D, Pine R, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The immunoregulatory cytokine IL-12 plays a central role in cell-mediated immune 
responses through its effects on NK cells and T lymphocytes. While IL-12 is known
to share some functions with other cytokines, such as IFN-alpha, it also
maintains distinct roles, such as its ability to induce Th1 differentiation. The 
molecular basis for these unique and overlapping functions is not well
understood. IL-12 has previously been shown to induce tyrosine phosphorylation
and DNA-binding of STAT3 and STAT4, members of the signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) family. Because STAT4 has only been shown to
be activated in response to IL-12, this specificity has been suggested to be a
basis for the unique actions of IL-12. In this study, we demonstrated that STAT4 
activation by IL-12 is not unique; IL-12 and IFN-alpha, but not IFN-gamma,
induced tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding of STAT4. Since tyrosine and
serine phosphorylation of STAT1 have previously been shown to be important in
IFN-alpha-mediated signaling, we also investigated IL-12- and IFN-alpha-induced
serine phosphorylation of STAT4. We demonstrated that both cytokines induced
serine phosphorylation. This modification was not required for DNA binding, but
may be important in STAT-mediated transcription. Thus, STAT4 activation was not
IL-12 specific, and IL-12 and IFN-alpha activated STAT4 through both tyrosine and
serine phosphorylation. These findings have significant implications for
understanding the role of STAT4 in mediating biologic functions; specifically,
the data argue that the unique effects of IL-12 cannot be solely explained by
STAT4 activation.

PMID: 8943379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Immunol. 1996 Nov 15;157(10):4316-21.

Lack of IL-12 signaling in human allergen-specific Th2 cells.

Hilkens CM(1), Messer G, Tesselaar K, van Rietschoten AG, Kapsenberg ML, Wierenga
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

IL-12 is a powerful skewer of CD4+ T cell responses toward the Th1 phenotype by
inducing IFN-gamma production in naive Th cells. In the present study we
addressed the question of whether IL-12 can reverse established Th2 responses
into Th1/Th0 responses by inducing IFN-gamma production in memory Th2 cells. To
this aim, allergen-specific CD4+ T cell clones (TCC) were generated from the
peripheral blood of three atopic patients, and their cytokine profiles were
analyzed. The majority of these TCC exhibited a strongly polarized Th2 cytokine
profile, and the production of IFN-gamma could not be induced by exogenous IL-12.
Only those TCC with low IFN-gamma levels in the absence of IL-12 responded to
IL-12 by additional enhancement of IFN-gamma production. The IL-12
nonresponsiveness of the Th2 clones was further evident by the total lack of
IL-12-induced phosphorylation of STAT4 (signal transducer and activator of
transcription-4), a transcription factor that is typically involved in IL-12
signaling. Consequently, IL-12 also failed to induce the DNA-binding activity of 
STAT4-containing complexes in the nuclei of these Th2 clones. All TCC expressed
equal levels of the low-affinity IL-12R beta1 subunit. Our results indicate that 
human allergen-specific Th cells with strongly polarized Th2 cytokine profiles do
not respond to IL-12 and, therefore, cannot be induced to produce IFN-gamma. The 
apparent high frequency of IL-12-nonresponsive Th cells within the
allergen-specific populations in atopic patients predicts a limited skewing
potential of IL-12 in the case of established Th2 responses, but only affecting
newly recruited naive Th cells.

PMID: 8906805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Oct 31;795:41-59.

Signal transduction by interleukin-12 and interleukin-2. A comparison and
contrast.

Bacon CM(1), Cho SS, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

PMID: 8958916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nat Med. 1996 Sep;2(9):968-9.

STATs and cytokine specificity.

Leonard WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

PMID: 8782447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Science. 1996 Aug 9;273(5276):750-1.

STATs find that hanging together can be stimulating.

Leung S(1), Li X, Stark GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 1996 Aug 9;273(5276):794-7.

PMID: 8701326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Science. 1996 Aug 9;273(5276):794-7.

Cooperative DNA binding and sequence-selective recognition conferred by the STAT 
amino-terminal domain.

Xu X(1), Sun YL, Hoey T.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, Two Corporate Drive, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1996 Aug 9;273(5276):750-1.

STAT proteins (signal transducers and activators of transcription) activate
distinct target genes despite having similar DNA binding preferences. The
transcriptional specificity of STAT proteins was investigated on natural STAT
binding sites near the interferon-gamma gene. These sites are arranged in
multiple copies and required cooperative interactions for STAT binding. The
conserved amino-terminal domain of STAT proteins was required for cooperative DNA
binding, although this domain was not essential for dimerization or binding to a 
single site. Cooperative binding interactions enabled the STAT proteins to
recognize variations of the consensus site. These sites can be specific for the
different STAT proteins and may function to direct selective transcriptional
activation.

PMID: 8670419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nature. 1996 Jul 11;382(6587):174-7.

Impaired IL-12 responses and enhanced development of Th2 cells in Stat4-deficient
mice.

Kaplan MH(1), Sun YL, Hoey T, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Interactions between cytokine and receptor lead to the activation of multiple
signalling molecules, including the family of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription (STAT) proteins. STAT4 is one member of this family, and is
activated only in response to the cytokine interleukin (IL)-12 (refs 5, 6). By
gene targeting, we have generated mice deficient in STAT4 to determine whether
the function of this transcription factor is redundant with other signalling
molecules activated by IL-12. IL-12-induced increases in the production of
interferon (IFN)-gamma cellular proliferation and natural killer (NK) cell
cytotoxicity are abrogated in lymphocytes from STAT4-deficient mice. The
development of Th1 cells in response to either IL-12 of Listeria monocytogenes is
also impaired in the absence of Stat4. Furthermore, Stat4-deficient lymphocytes
demonstrate a propensity towards the development of Th2 cells. These results
demonstrate that Stat4 is essential for mediating responses to IL-12 in
lymphocytes, and regulating the differentiation of both Th1 and Th2 cells.

PMID: 8700209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nature. 1996 Jul 11;382(6587):171-4.

Requirement for Stat4 in interleukin-12-mediated responses of natural killer and 
T cells.

Thierfelder WE(1), van Deursen JM, Yamamoto K, Tripp RA, Sarawar SR, Carson RT,
Sangster MY, Vignali DA, Doherty PC, Grosveld GC, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are activated by
tyrosine phosphorylation in response to cytokines and mediate many of their
functional responses. Stat4 was initially cloned as a result of its homology with
Stat1 (refs 4, 5) and is widely expressed, although it is only
tyrosine-phosphorylated after stimulation of T cells with interleukin (IL)-12
(refs 6,7). IL-12 is required for the T-cell-independent induction of the
cytokine interferon (IFN)-gamma, a key step in the initial suppression of
bacterial and parasitic infections. IL-12 is also important for the development
of a Th1 response, which is critical for effective host defence against
intracellular pathogens. To determine the function of Stat4 and its role in IL-12
signalling, we have produced mice that lack Stat4 by gene targeting. The mice
were viable and fertile, with no detectable defects in haematopoiesis. However,
all IL-12 functions tested were disrupted, including the induction of IFN-gamma, 
mitogenesis, enhancement of natural killer cytolytic function and Th1
differentiation.

PMID: 8700208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Immunol. 1996 Jul 1;157(1):126-37.

Differential utilization of Janus kinase-signal transducer activator of
transcription signaling pathways in the stimulation of human natural killer cells
by IL-2, IL-12, and IFN-alpha.

Yu CR(1), Lin JX, Fink DW, Akira S, Bloom ET, Yamauchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-2-, IL-12-, and IFN-alpha-mediated signaling pathways were analyzed in primary
NK cells and in the NK3.3 cell line. Gel mobility shift and immunoprecipitation
analyses revealed that in addition to activating STAT3 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription-3) and STAT5, IL-2 induced tyrosine and serine
phosphorylation of STAT1 alpha, which formed IFN-gamma-activated sequence-binding
complexes by itself and with STAT3. Although IL-2 and IFN-alpha activated STAT1
alpha and STAT5, IL-2 predominantly activated STAT5, while IFN-alpha
predominantly activated STAT1 alpha. IL-2 induced less STAT1 alpha activation and
IFN-alpha induced greater STAT5 activation in NK3.3 cells compared with
preactivated primary NK cells. In NK3.3 cells, IL-2 induced comparable formation 
of c-fos promoter sis-inducible element IFN-gamma-activated sequence-binding
complexes containing STAT3 alone with complexes containing STAT3 and STAT1 alpha,
while in preactivated primary NK cells, it preferentially induced complexes
containing STAT3 and STAT1 alpha. Thus, signaling in NK3.3 cells is not always
identical with that in primary NK cells. In contrast to IL-2 and IFN-alpha, IL-12
induced strong tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT4 and variable weak
phosphorylation of STAT3. However, supershift analyses using the c-fos promoter
sis-inducible element probe showed that IL-12 activated STAT4, STAT1 alpha, and
STAT3, and induced complexes containing STAT4 only, STAT4 with STAT1 alpha, STAT3
with STAT1 alpha, or STAT1 alpha only in preactivated primary NK cells. STAT1
alpha activation by IL-12 correlated with increased phosphorylation of serine,
but not tyrosine. Finally, IL-2 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1 and
JAK3, while IL-12 induced phosphorylation of JAK2 and TYK2 in both preactivated
primary NK and NK3.3 cells. Differential phosphorylation and consequent
differential activation of both separate and overlapping STAT proteins by IL-2,
IL-12, and IFN-alpha may provide a molecular basis for the similarities and
differences in the actions of these cytokines on NK cells.

PMID: 8683106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Immunol. 1996 Apr 15;156(8):2754-60.

Herpesvirus saimiri immortalized gamma delta T cell line activated by IL-12.

Klein JL(1), Fickenscher H, Holliday JE, Biesinger B, Fleckenstein B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

IL-12 is a novel heterodimeric cytokine important for the regulation and
differentiation of lymphocytes and NK cells. Like other cytokines, IL-12 mediates
its biologic activity through high-affinity receptors expressed on responsive
cells. To date, a large number of receptors for IL-12 have been found only on
PBMC following activation with PHA or IL-2. To gain further knowledge of the
IL-12R complex and the IL-12 signal transduction pathway in cytotoxic T cells, we
studied a number of human T cell lines that had been transformed to permanent
growth with Herpesvirus saimiri, an oncogenic virus of nonhuman primates. This
paper reports the expression of IL-12R on a human gamma delta T cell line that
responds to IL-12 with enhanced cytolytic activity and increased expression of
cytolytic effector molecules granzyme B and perforin. Using these T cells as a
model of IL-12 signal transduction, we confirmed that these events involve
members of the Janus kinase family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases JAK2, TYK2,
and signal transducer and activator of transcription 4.

PMID: 8609393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1996;409:61-73.

Regulation of interleukin-12 signalling during T helper phenotype development.

Jacobson NG(1), Szabo SJ, Güler ML, Gorham JD, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

The experiments described above have allowed us to define the molecular events in
IL-12 signalling. Within minutes after IL-12 treatment of responsive cells,
Stat1, Stat3, and Stat4 are tyrosine phosphorylated. These molecules form nuclear
DNA-binding complexes consisting of homodimeric Stat1 and heterodimeric
Stat3-Stat4 complexes. In a murine in vitro phenotype development model, T cells 
rapidly and selectively lose their capacity to respond to IL-12 upon acquisition 
of the Th2 phenotype. This hyporesponsiveness is manifested by the inability of
IL-12 to induce IFN gamma production in differentiated Th2 cells, as well as the 
inability of IL-12 to induce the activation of Stat4. Despite the functional
defect of IL-12 signalling in Th2 cells, all known components of the IL-12 signal
transduction pathway are present. We speculate that in Th2 cells, the second
receptor chain may be absent or one of the other components may be modified.
Genetic experiments in Balb/c and B10.D2 strains of mice have demonstrated
several differences in T helper differentiation in vitro. Stimulation of T cells 
under neutral conditions results in a bias of Balb/c T cells toward the Th2
extreme and B10 T cells toward the Th1 extreme of cytokine production. Following 
stimulation under neutral conditions, B10 T cells retain the ability to respond
to IL-12 while Balb/c T cells lose IL-12 responsiveness. Mating experiments have 
demonstrated that the B10 genetic effect is dominant in F1 mice. Analysis of
backcrossed animals has suggested that the ability to respond to IL-12 in the
secondary stimulation may be controlled by a single dominant B10 gene. The
results we describe may have profound implications for allergy. Since allergic
responses are largely due to the activation of the Th2 subset of T lymphocytes, a
better understanding of T cell phenotype development may reveal multiple targets 
for therapeutic intervention. First, a better understanding of Th1 phenotype
induction in response to IL-12 may allow prevention of in vivo allergic responses
using pharmacological tools which bias allergen-specific responses to the Th1
subset. Second, a molecular explantation of why Th2 cells fail to reverse
phenotype in response to IL-12 may allow treatment of atopic individuals to
remove the disease-promoting T lymphocyte compartment. Finally, a better
understanding of the basis for genetic differences in murine T helper cell
differentiation may allow us to identify a causative genetic element in humans,
yielding better diagnostic and therapeutic methods.

PMID: 9095224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Adv Immunol. 1996;61:147-99.

Interleukin-2 receptor signaling mechanisms.

Karnitz LM(1), Abraham RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

PMID: 8834496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Aug 15;92(17):7779-83.

Interleukin 2 signaling involves the phosphorylation of Stat proteins.

Frank DA(1), Robertson MJ, Bonni A, Ritz J, Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

One of the most important cytokines involved in immune response regulation is
interleukin 2 (IL-2), a potent activator of the proliferation and function of T
lymphocytes and natural killer cells. The mechanisms by which the effects of IL-2
are propagated within cells are not understood. While the binding of IL-2 to its 
receptor was recently shown to lead to the activation of two kinases, Jak-1 and
Jak-3, subsequent steps in the signaling pathway to the nucleus that lead to the 
activation of specific genes had not been characterized. Since many cytokines
that activate Jak kinases also lead to the tyrosine phosphorylation and
activation of members of the Stat family of transcription factors, the ability of
IL-2 to trigger Stat phosphorylation was examined. Exposure of activated human T 
lymphocytes or of a natural killer cell line (NKL) to IL-2 leads to the
phosphorylation of Stat1 alpha, Stat1 beta, and Stat3, as well as of two
Stat-related proteins, p94 and p95. p94 and p95 share homology with Stat1 at the 
phosphorylation site and in the Src homology 2 (SH2) domain, but otherwise are
immunologically distinct from Stat1. These Stat proteins were found to
translocate to the nucleus and to bind to a specific DNA sequence. These findings
suggest a mechanism by which IL-2 binding to its receptor may activate specific
genes involved in immune cell function.

PMCID: PMC41229
PMID: 7544001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Aug 1;92(16):7307-11.

Interleukin 12 induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STAT4 in human 
lymphocytes.

Bacon CM(1), Petricoin EF 3rd, Ortaldo JR, Rees RC, Larner AC, Johnston JA,
O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Interleukin 12 (IL-12) is an important immunoregulatory cytokine whose receptor
is a member of the hematopoietin receptor superfamily. We have recently
demonstrated that stimulation of human T and natural killer cells with IL-12
induces tyrosine phosphorylation of the Janus family tyrosine kinase JAK2 and
Tyk2, implicating these kinases in the immediate biochemical response to IL-12.
Recently, transcription factors known as STATs (signal transducers and activators
of transcription) have been shown to be tyrosine phosphorylated and activated in 
response to a number of cytokines that bind hematopoietin receptors and activate 
JAK kinases. In this report we demonstrate that IL-12 induces tyrosine
phosphorylation of a recently identified STAT family member, STAT4, and show that
STAT4 expression is regulated by T-cell activation. Furthermore, we show that
IL-12 stimulates formation of a DNA-binding complex that recognizes a DNA
sequence previously shown to bind STAT proteins and that this complex contains
STAT4. These data, and the recent demonstration of JAK phosphorylation by IL-12, 
identify a rapid signal-transduction pathway likely to mediate IL-12-induced gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC41328
PMID: 7638186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. EMBO J. 1995 Jun 15;14(12):2847-56.

Thrombopoietin activates a STAT5-like factor in hematopoietic cells.

Pallard C(1), Gouilleux F, Bénit L, Cocault L, Souyri M, Levy D, Groner B,
Gisselbrecht S, Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)U363 INSERM, ICGM, Hopital Cochin, Paris, France.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is a newly cloned cytokine which is the major regulator of
circulating platelet levels, acting on both proliferation and differentiation of 
megakaryocytes. We have investigated the ability of TPO to activate the JAK/STAT 
pathway in megakaryocytic cell lines. We used either the granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)- and/or erythropoietin (EPO)-dependent UT7
cell line in which the murine TPO receptor (mumpl) had been transfected
(mumpl-UT7 transfectants) or the MO7E and DAMI cells which express endogenous
human TPO receptors. We demonstrated that TPO activates the kinase JAK2 and a
STAT5-like transcriptional factor but not STAT1, STAT2, STAT3 or STAT4, in a very
rapid and transient manner. In order to better ascertain the specificity of the
activation of STAT5-related factor by TPO, we investigated the effect of other
cytokines/growth factors. Both GM-CSF and EPO activated the STAT5-like factor. In
contrast, neither interferon (IFN)-gamma nor the mitogenic stem cell factor (SCF)
activated STAT5, although IFN-gamma did activate STAT1 in those cells. The
hematopoietic DNA binding activity related to STAT5 was identified as a p97
tyrosine-phosphorylated protein band which exhibited identical gel mobility to
the mammary STAT5. Because v-mpl, a truncated form of the TPO receptor c-mpl, was
shown to be oncogenic, we tested the activity of v-mpl on STAT5 and found STAT5
constitutively activated in two different v-mpl-expressing cells, the transiently
transfected Cos7 cells and the stable v-mpl-UT7 transfectants. Overall, our data 
indicate that STAT5 is widely expressed in hematopoietic cells and activated by a
number of cytokines, including TPO, GM-CSF and EPO, but not by IFN-gamma or SCF.

PMCID: PMC398403
PMID: 7796811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Immunity. 1995 Jun;2(6):665-75.

Developmental commitment to the Th2 lineage by extinction of IL-12 signaling.

Szabo SJ(1), Jacobson NG, Dighe AS, Gubler U, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Developmental-commitment to Th1 or Th2 responses critically influences host
susceptibility to particular pathogens. We describe a novel mechanism governing
stable commitment to Th2 differentiation. Naive T cells develop strongly
polarized Th1 and Th2 profiles by 7 days after activation. However, commitment of
these developing cells differs substantially. Although IL-4 reverses early Th1
differentiation, IL-12 cannot reverse early Th2 differentiation. Th1
reversibility results from maintenance of IL-4 signal transduction, whereas Th2
commitment results from rapid loss of IL-12 signaling. The IL-12 signaling defect
in Th2 cells results in failure to phosphorylate Jak2, Stat3, and Stat4. Since
Th2 cells express the mRNA for the cloned murine IL-12 receptor beta subunit, the
signaling defect may involve expression or function of unidentified receptor
components. The rapid extinction of IL-12 signaling in Th2 cells provides a
demonstration of a mechanism for the stable commitment to a T helper phenotype.

PMID: 7796298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):3336-43.

Cloning of murine Stat6 and human Stat6, Stat proteins that are tyrosine
phosphorylated in responses to IL-4 and IL-3 but are not required for
mitogenesis.

Quelle FW(1), Shimoda K, Thierfelder W, Fischer C, Kim A, Ruben SM, Cleveland JL,
Pierce JH, Keegan AD, Nelms K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

By searching a database of expressed sequences, we identified a member of the
signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) family of proteins.
Human and murine full-length cDNA clones were obtained and sequenced. The
sequence of the human cDNA was identical to the recently published sequence for
interleukin-4 (IL-4)-Stat (J. Hou, U. Schindler, W.J. Henzel, T.C. Ho, M.
Brasseur, and S. L. McKnight, Science 265:1701-1706, 1994), while the murine
Stat6 amino acid and nucleotide sequences were 83 and 84% identical to the human 
sequences, respectively. Using Stat6-specific antiserum, we demonstrated that
Stat6 is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated following stimulation of appropriate
cell lines with IL-4 or IL-3 but is not detectably phosphorylated following
stimulation with IL-2, IL-12, or erythropoietin. In contrast, IL-2, IL-3, and
erythropoietin induce the tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5 while IL-12 uniquely 
induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat4. Inducible tyrosine phosphorylation
of Stat6 requires the membrane-distal region of the IL-4 receptor alpha chain.
This region of the receptor is not required for cell growth, demonstrating that
Stat6 tyrosine phosphorylation does not contribute to mitogenesis.

PMCID: PMC230567
PMID: 7760829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Exp Med. 1995 May 1;181(5):1755-62.

Interleukin 12 signaling in T helper type 1 (Th1) cells involves tyrosine
phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)3 and
Stat4.

Jacobson NG(1), Szabo SJ, Weber-Nordt RM, Zhong Z, Schreiber RD, Darnell JE Jr,
Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Interleukin 12 (IL-12) initiates the differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to T
helper type 1 (Th1) cells critical for resistance to intracellular pathogens such
as Leishmania major. To explore the basis of IL-12 action, we analyzed induction 
of nuclear factors in Th1 cells. IL-12 selectively induced nuclear DNA-binding
complexes that contained Stat3 and Stat4, recently cloned members of the family
of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs). While Stat3
participates in signaling for several other cytokines, Stat4 was not previously
known to participate in the signaling pathway for any natural ligand. The
selective activation of Stat4 provides a basis for unique actions of IL-12 on Th1
development. Thus, this study presents the first identification of the early
events in IL-12 signaling in T cells and of ligand activation of Stat4.

PMCID: PMC2191986
PMID: 7722452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Receptor. 1995 Summer;5(2):105-16.

Characterization of growth hormone-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in
mouse cells that express GH receptors.

Xu BC(1), Wang X, James C, Kopchick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens 45701, USA.

Following the growth hormone (GH) and GH receptor (R) interaction, the receptor
and Janus tyrosine kinase 2 (JAK2) become tyrosine phosphorylated along with
other intracellular proteins. Previously, we reported that GH induces tyrosine
phosphorylation of intracellular proteins with molecular masses of approx 95 kDa 
(pp95) in mouse 3T3-F442A preadipocytes and in mouse L-cells that express
recombinant GHRs. We have studied this GH-induced phosphorylation event in
greater detail. Three proteins with apparent molecular masses of 93, 95, and 96
kDa showed increased tyrosine phosphorylation in a time-dependent manner
following GH treatment of cells that express GH receptors. GH-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of these proteins is independent of activation of protein kinase 
C (PKC). Cell fractionation studies revealed that the majority of
tyrosine-phosphorylated pp95/96 is located in the cytoplasm. pp95 and pp96 have
pIs of approx 6.2. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses revealed that
pp93 and pp95/96 are not immunologically related with Stat1, Stat3, Stat4, JAK2, 
and GHR. Thus, pp93 and pp95/96 may be important GH signal transducers
independent of PKC activation and different from the characterized members in the
JAK-STAT pathway.

PMID: 7580936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Annu Rev Biochem. 1995;64:621-51.

Transcriptional responses to polypeptide ligands: the JAK-STAT pathway.

Schindler C(1), Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, N.Y.,
USA.

Cytokines and growth factors regulate multiple aspects of cell growth through
their interactions with specific receptors. These receptors initiate signals
directed at both the cytoplasmic and the nuclear compartments. Many of the
nuclear signals culminate in the induction of new genes. Characterization of the 
ability of IFN-alpha to rapidly induce new genes has led to the identification of
a new signaling paradigm, the JAK-STAT (Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription) pathway. In the IFN-alpha pathway, two receptor associated
tyrosine kinases from the JAK family, Jak1 and Tyk2, mediate the activation of
two latent cytoplasmic transcription factors, Stat1 and Stat2. More recent
studies have not only determined that this pathway is used extensively, but have 
led to the identification of additional components (e.g., Jak2, Jak3, Stat3,
Stat4, Stat5, and Stat6). This review will examine how these components mediate
the transduction of signal directly from receptor to nucleus.

PMID: 7574495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jan;15(1):12-8.

Growth hormone rapidly activates rat serine protease inhibitor 2.1 gene
transcription and induces a DNA-binding activity distinct from those of Stat1,
-3, and -4.

Thomas MJ(1), Gronowski AM, Berry SA, Bergad PL, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110.

Transcriptional regulation by growth hormone (GH) represents the culmination of
signal transduction pathways that are initiated by the cell surface GH receptor
and are targeted to the nucleus. Recent studies have demonstrated that the
activated GH receptor can stimulate Stat1, a cytoplasmic transcription factor
that becomes tyrosine phosphorylated and translocates to the nucleus, where it
can interact with specific DNA sequences to modulate gene expression. GH also has
been found to induce protein binding to a portion of the rat serine protease
inhibitor (Spi) 2.1 gene promoter that is required for GH-induced transcription
of Spi 2.1. Using GH-deficient hypophysectomized rats as a model, we show that GH
treatment rapidly and potently induces both nuclear Spi 2.1 mRNA expression in
the liver and specific nuclear protein binding to a 45-bp segment of the Spi 2.1 
gene promoter. A GH-inducible gel-shifted complex appears within 15 min of
systemic hormone administration and can be inhibited by an antiphosphotyrosine
monoclonal antibody but is not blocked by a polyclonal antiserum to Stat1, Stat3,
or Stat4, even though the nucleotide sequence contains two gamma
interferon-activated sequence-like elements that could interact with STAT
proteins. By Southwestern (DNA-protein) blot analysis, approximately 41- and
35-kDa GH-inducible proteins were detected in hepatic nuclear extracts with the
Spi 2.1 DNA probe. Thus, a GH-activated signaling pathway stimulates Spi 2.1 gene
expression through a unique mechanism that does not appear to involve known
members of the STAT family of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC231902
PMID: 7528325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 1;13(23):5605-15.

Activation of JAK kinases and STAT proteins by interleukin-2 and interferon
alpha, but not the T cell antigen receptor, in human T lymphocytes.

Beadling C(1), Guschin D, Witthuhn BA, Ziemiecki A, Ihle JN, Kerr IM, Cantrell
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Activation Laboratory, London, UK.

The activation of Janus protein tyrosine kinases (JAKs) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) proteins by interleukin (IL)-2, the T cell
antigen receptor (TCR) and interferon (IFN) alpha was explored in human
peripheral blood-derived T cells and the leukemic T cell line Kit225. An
IL-2-induced increase in JAK1 and JAK3, but not JAK2 or Tyk2, tyrosine
phosphorylation was observed. In contrast, no induction of tyrosine
phosphorylation of JAKs was detected upon stimulation of the TCR. IFN alpha
induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1 and Tyk2, but not JAK2 or JAK3. IFN 
alpha activated STAT1, STAT2 and STAT3 in T cells, but no detectable activation
of these STATs was induced by IL-2. However, IL-2 regulates the DNA binding and
tyrosine phosphorylation of two STAT-like protein complexes which do not include 
STAT1, STAT2 or STAT3. STAT4 is not activated by IL-2. The activation of STAT5
cannot be excluded, so the IL-2-activated complexes most probably include at
least one novel STAT. No STAT activity was detected in TCR-stimulated
lymphocytes, indicating that the JAK/STAT pathway defined in this study
constitutes an IL-2R-mediated signaling event which is not shared by the TCR.
Finally, in other cell types the correlation between JAK1 activation and the
induction of STAT1 has suggested that JAK1 may activate STAT1. The observation
that IL-2 and IFN alpha activate JAK1 to a comparable degree, but only IFN alpha 
activates STAT1, indicates that JAK1 activation is not the only determining
factor for STAT1 activation. Moreover, the data show that JAK1 stimulation is
also not sufficient for STAT3 activation.

PMCID: PMC395525
PMID: 7988557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4342-9.

Stat4, a novel gamma interferon activation site-binding protein expressed in
early myeloid differentiation.

Yamamoto K(1), Quelle FW, Thierfelder WE, Kreider BL, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA,
Copeland NG, Silvennoinen O, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105.

Interferon regulation of gene expression is dependent on the tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of the DNA-binding activity of two related
proteins of 91 kDa (STAT1) and/or 113 kDa (STAT2). Recent studies have suggested 
that these proteins are substrates of Janus kinases and that proteins related in 
STAT1 are involved in a number of signalling pathways, including those activated 
in myeloid cells by erythropoietin and interleukin-3 (IL-3). To clone
STAT-related proteins from myeloid cells, degenerate oligonucleotides were used
in PCRs to identify novel family members expressed in myeloid cells. This
approach allowed the identification and cloning of the Stat4 gene, which is 52%
identical to STAT1. Unlike STAT1, Stat4 expression is restricted but includes
myeloid cells and spermatogonia. In the erythroid lineage, Stat4 expression is
differentially regulated during differentiation. Functionally, Stat4 has the
properties of other STAT family genes. In particular, cotransfection of
expression constructs for Stat4 and Jak1 and Jak2 results in the tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat4 and the acquisition of the ability to bind to the gamma 
interferon (IFN-gamma)-activated sequence of the interferon regulatory factor 1
(IRF-1) gene. Stat4 is located on mouse chromosome 1 and is tightly linked to the
Stat1 gene, suggesting that the genes arose by gene duplication. Unlike Stat1,
neither IFN-alpha nor IFN-gamma activates Stat4. Nor is Stat4 activated in
myeloid cells by a number of cytokines, including erythropoietin, IL-3,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, stem cell factor, colon-stimulating factor
1, hepatocyte growth factor, IL-2, IL-4, and IL-6.

PMCID: PMC358805
PMID: 8007943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 24;91(11):4806-10.

Stat3 and Stat4: members of the family of signal transducers and activators of
transcription.

Zhong Z(1), Wen Z, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

The deduced amino acid sequence of two members of the signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) family from the mouse are described.
Comparison with the deduced protein sequence of the two previously described
genes (Stat91 and Stat113), discovered because of their activation as
transcription factors after interferon-induced tyrosine phosphorylation, shows
several highly conserved regions, including the putative SH3 and SH2 domains. The
conserved amino acid stretches likely point to conserved domains that enable
these proteins to carry out the several required functions they are known and
proposed to carry out. While Stat1 and Stat3 are widely expressed, Stat4
expression is restricted to testis, thymus, and spleen. Antiserum to Stat3
detects a major approximately 92-kDa protein and a minor approximately 89-kDa
protein, while antiserum to Stat4 precipitates one major protein of approximately
89 kDa.

PMCID: PMC43877
PMID: 7545930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Ann Clin Biochem. 1978 Jul;15(4):208-12.

Discrepancies in thyroxine measurement in pregnancy between radioimmunoassay and 
competitive protein binding (Oxford StaT4).

Baird SG, Thomson JE, Thomson JA, Watson R, Logue F, Beastall GH.

The StaT4 test is a technically simple test of thyroxine measurement, which
apparently gives results in good agreement with those derived by radioimmunoassay
in most patients. In pregnancy, however, falsely low serum thyroxine values were 
found with the StaT4 test when compared with either a radioimmunoassay or the
Thyopac-4 test. Detailed studies showed that the discrepancy resulted from the
extraction technique used in the StaT4 test, which appears to allow the patient's
thyroxine binding proteins to remain in the assay system. Similar method
discrepancies were observed in other clinical conditions associated with elevated
thyroxine binding globulin concentration. This study, as well as being of
practical clinical importance, has implications for the design of competitive
protein binding tests of thyroid function.

PMID: 697309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Vutr Boles. 1978;17(3):24-8.

[Total thyroxine level in human serum].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Zakharieva B.

Eighteen healthy subjects and 42 patients with diseases of the thyroid gland were
examined. Total thyroxin in serum was determined in all, by past StaT4 (Oxford
laboratories) and according to the method of Murphy and Pattee, modified by
Benotty and Peno. Thyroxin values obtained, by the two methods, were similar and 
correlated well with the subjects' clinical state. Certain advantages of paste
StaT4 were established, making it more applicable in clinical practice as
compared with the procedure of the modified method of Murphy and Pattee.

PMID: 676293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


