
1. Oncol Rep. 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4727. [Epub ahead of print]

Suppression of STAT5b in pancreatic cancer cells leads to attenuated gemcitabine 
chemoresistance, adhesion and invasion.

Sumiyoshi H(1), Matsushita A(1), Nakamura Y(1), Matsuda Y(2), Ishiwata T(2),
Naito Z(3), Uchida E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal and Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Nippon
Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan
Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of
Integrated Diagnostic Pathology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal solid
malignancies, and there is an urgent need for new therapeutic strategies based on
the molecular biology of PDAC. Signal transducers and activators of transcription
5 (STAT5) are known to be activated in a variety of malignancies and involved in 
tumor proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion, whereas the expression and
biological role of STAT5b in PDAC are less clearly defined. In the present study,
we examined the expression and role of STAT5b in human pancreatic cancer cell
lines. Expressions of STAT5b mRNA and protein were detected in eight kinds of
pancreatic cancer cells. Confocal microscopy and western blot analysis indicated 
that STAT5b is localized in both cytoplasm and nuclei. Immunoprecipitation
analysis revealed tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b in pancreatic cancer cells. 
These results indicate that STAT5b in pancreatic cancer cells is constitutively
activated. STAT5b shRNA clones in PANC-1 cells, which express relatively high
levels of STAT5b, exhibited reduced chemoresistance against gemcitabine, adhesion
and invasion compared to sham. On the other hand, AsPC-1 and BxPC3 cells, which
express relatively low levels of STAT5b, exhibited reduced chemoresistance
compared to PANC-1 cells. Moreover, STAT5b overexpression clones in AsPC-1 cells 
exhibited increased chemoresistance compared to sham. STAT5b shRNA clones in
PANC-1 cells were more sensitive to the proapoptotic actions of gemcitabine, as
evidenced by PARP and cleaved caspase-3 activation. Gemcitabine also
significantly reduced Bcl-xL levels in the STAT5b shRNA-expressing cells. We also
investigated the clinicopathological characteristics of STAT5b expression of
PDAC. Although a significant correlation between STAT5b expression and overall
survival rates was not observed, a significant correlation with main pancreatic
duct invasion was observed. These findings suggest that STAT5b confers
gemcitabine chemoresistance and promotes cell adherence and invasiveness in
pancreatic cancer cells. Targeting STAT5b may lead to novel therapeutic
strategies for PDAC.

PMID: 27035235  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Elife. 2016 Mar 21;5. pii: e08384. doi: 10.7554/eLife.08384. [Epub ahead of
print]

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) paralog dose governs T
cell effector and regulatory functions.

Villarino A(1), Laurence A(1), Robinson GW(2), Bonelli M(1), Dema B(1), Afzali
B(1), Shih HY(1), Sun HW(1), Brooks SR(1), Hennighausen L(2), Kanno Y(1), O'Shea 
JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
United States. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
United States.

The transcription factor STAT5 is fundamental to the mammalian immune system.
However, the relationship between its two paralogs, STAT5A and STAT5B, and the
extent to which they are functionally distinct, remains uncertain. Using mouse
models of paralog deficiency, we demonstrate that they are not equivalent for
CD4(+) 'helper' T cells, the principal orchestrators of adaptive immunity.
Instead, we find that STAT5B is dominant in both effector and regulatory (Treg)
responses and, therefore, uniquely necessary for immunological tolerance.
Comparative analysis of genomic distribution and transcriptomic output reveals
that STAT5B has greater transcriptional output but, surprisingly, our data point 
towards asymmetric expression (i.e. paralog dose), rather than distinct
functional properties, as the key distinguishing feature. Thus, we propose a
quantitative model of STAT5 paralog activity whereby relative abundance imposes
functional specificity (or dominance) in the face of widespread structural
homology.

PMID: 26999798  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinicopathologic Characterization of Aggressive Natural Killer Cell Leukemia
Involving Different Tissue Sites.

Gao LM(1), Zhao S, Liu WP, Zhang WY, Li GD, Küçük C, Hu XZ, Chan WC, Tang Y, Ding
WS, Yan JQ, Yao WQ, Wang JC.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China †Department of Pathology, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, CA ‡Izmir
International Biomedicine and Genome Institute (iBG-izmir) §Department of Medical
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey.

Aggressive natural killer cell leukemia (ANKL) is a rare disease with an
extremely aggressive clinical course. The etiology of ANKL is unclear with few
genetic/epigenetic aberrations described to date. Moreover, misdiagnosis of ANKL 
is a frequent problem. Clinicopathologic characteristics of 35 retrospective
cases of ANKL were investigated with the aim of improving diagnosis and to find
the genetic/epigenetic aberrations associated with ANKL etiology. Because of the 
relatively low number of leukemic cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow, 
diagnosis of ANKL can be missed; therefore, it is important to perform biopsy on 
solid tissues, if necessary. We describe the pathology of ANKL in the lymph
nodes, bone marrow, spleen, liver, and skin, with focus on diagnosis and
differentiated diagnosis. We observed young male predominance in our cohort, and 
the clinical course was more aggressive than reported previously. Low lactate
dehydrogenase (<712 IU/L), chemotherapy or L-asparaginase administration were
found to be associated with more favorable outcomes. SH2 domains of STAT5B and
STAT3 also were screened for the presence of activating mutations. Moreover, CpG 
island methylation status of HACE1, a candidate tumor-suppressor gene, was
determined in ANKL samples. We observed activating STAT5B mutations (1/5) and
hypermethylation of HACE1 (3/4) in ANKL cases, suggesting that these aberrations 
may contribute to ANKL pathogenesis.

PMID: 26975038  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Apr 15;472(4):624-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.013. Epub 2016 Mar 10.

Inhibition of the acetyl lysine-binding pocket of bromodomain and extraterminal
domain proteins interferes with adipogenesis.

Goupille O(1), Penglong T(2), Kadri Z(1), Granger-Locatelli M(1), Fucharoen S(3),
Maouche-Chrétien L(4), Prost S(1), Leboulch P(2), Chrétien S(5).

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies (IMETI),
Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay, UMR-E 007, France. (2)CEA,
Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies (IMETI),
Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay, UMR-E 007, France; Thalassemia
Research Center, Mahidol University, Thailand. (3)Thalassemia Research Center,
Mahidol University, Thailand. (4)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases and
Innovative Therapies (IMETI), Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay,
UMR-E 007, France; INSERM, Paris, France. (5)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases 
and Innovative Therapies (IMETI), Fontenay-aux-Roses and Université Paris-Saclay,
UMR-E 007, France; INSERM, Paris, France. Electronic address:
stany.chretien@cea.fr.

The bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) domain family proteins are epigenetic
modulators involved in the reading of acetylated lysine residues. The first BET
protein inhibitor to be identified, (+)-JQ1, a thienotriazolo-1, 4-diazapine,
binds selectively to the acetyl lysine-binding pocket of BET proteins. We
evaluated the impact on adipogenesis of this druggable targeting of chromatin
epigenetic readers, by investigating the physiological consequences of epigenetic
modifications through targeting proteins binding to chromatin. JQ1 significantly 
inhibited the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes into white and brown
adipocytes by down-regulating the expression of genes involved in adipogenesis,
particularly those encoding the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR-<U+03B3>), the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPa) and, STAT5A and B. The
expression of a constitutively activated STAT5B mutant did not prevent inhibition
by JQ1. Thus, the association of BET/STAT5 is required for adipogenesis but STAT5
transcription activity is not the only target of JQ1. Treatment with JQ1 did not 
lead to the conversion of white adipose tissue into brown adipose tissue (BAT).
BET protein inhibition thus interferes with generation of adipose tissue from
progenitors, confirming the importance of the connections between epigenetic
mechanisms and specific adipogenic transcription factors.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26972250  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 9;11(3):e0148308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148308.
eCollection 2016.

Disruption of STAT5b-Regulated Sexual Dimorphism of the Liver Transcriptome by
Diverse Factors Is a Common Event.

Oshida K(1), Vasani N(1), Waxman DJ(2), Corton JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, NHEERL/ORD, US-EPA, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27711, United States of America. (2)Division of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Department of Biology and Bioinformatics Program, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215, United States of America.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) is a growth hormone 
(GH)-activated transcription factor and a master regulator of sexually dimorphic 
gene expression in the liver. Disruption of the GH hypothalamo-pituitary-liver
axis controlling STAT5b activation can lead to metabolic dysregulation,
steatosis, and liver cancer. Computational approaches were developed to identify 
factors that disrupt STAT5b function in a mouse liver gene expression compendium.
A biomarker comprised of 144 STAT5b-dependent genes was derived using comparisons
between wild-type male and wild-type female mice and between STAT5b-null and
wild-type mice. Correlations between the STAT5b biomarker gene set and a test set
comprised of expression datasets (biosets) with known effects on STAT5b function 
were evaluated using a rank-based test (the Running Fisher algorithm). Using a
similarity p-value = 10-4, the test achieved a balanced accuracy of 99% and 97%
for detection of STAT5b activation or STAT5b suppression, respectively. The
STAT5b biomarker gene set was then used to identify factors that activate
(masculinize) or suppress (feminize) STAT5b function in an annotated mouse liver 
and primary hepatocyte gene expression compendium of ~1,850 datasets. Disruption 
of GH-regulated STAT5b is a common phenomenon in liver in vivo, with 5% and 29%
of the male datasets, and 11% and 13% of the female datasets, associated with
masculinization or feminization, respectively. As expected, liver STAT5b
activation/masculinization occurred at puberty and suppression/feminization
occurred during aging and in mutant mice with defects in GH signaling. A total of
70 genes were identified that have effects on STAT5b activation in genetic models
in which the gene was inactivated or overexpressed. Other factors that affected
liver STAT5b function were shown to include fasting, caloric restriction and
infections. Together, these findings identify diverse factors that perturb the
hypothalamo-pituitary-liver GH axis and disrupt GH-dependent STAT5b activation in
mouse liver.

PMCID: PMC4784905
PMID: 26959975  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 9;11(3):e0150284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150284.
eCollection 2016.

Chemical and Hormonal Effects on STAT5b-Dependent Sexual Dimorphism of the Liver 
Transcriptome.

Oshida K(1), Waxman DJ(2), Corton JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, National Health and Environmental
Effects Research Laboratory/ Office of Research and Development, United States
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United
States of America. (2)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of
Biology and Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, United
States of America.

The growth hormone (GH)-activated transcription factor signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) is a key regulator of sexually dimorphic
gene expression in the liver. Suppression of hepatic STAT5b signaling is
associated with lipid metabolic dysfunction leading to steatosis and liver
cancer. In the companion publication, a STAT5b biomarker gene set was identified 
and used in a rank-based test to predict both increases and decreases in liver
STAT5b activation status/function with high (= 97%) accuracy. Here, this
computational approach was used to identify chemicals and hormones that activate 
(masculinize) or suppress (feminize) STAT5b function in a large, annotated mouse 
liver and primary hepatocyte gene expression compendium. Exposure to
dihydrotestosterone and thyroid hormone caused liver masculinization, whereas
glucocorticoids, fibroblast growth factor 15, and angiotensin II caused liver
feminization. In mouse models of diabetes and obesity, liver feminization was
consistently observed and was at least partially reversed by leptin or
resveratrol exposure. Chemical-induced feminization of male mouse liver gene
expression profiles was a relatively frequent phenomenon: of 156 gene expression 
biosets from chemically-treated male mice, 29% showed feminization of liver
STAT5b function, while <1% showed masculinization. Most (93%) of the biosets that
exhibited feminization of male liver were also associated with activation of one 
or more xenobiotic-responsive receptors, most commonly constitutive activated
receptor (CAR) or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARa).
Feminization was consistently associated with increased expression of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg) but not other lipogenic
transcription factors linked to steatosis. GH-activated STAT5b signaling in mouse
liver is thus commonly altered by diverse chemicals, and provides a linkage
between chemical exposure and dysregulated gene expression associated with
adverse effects on the liver.

PMCID: PMC4784907
PMID: 26959237  [PubMed - in process]


7. Br J Haematol. 2016 Feb 25. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13952. [Epub ahead of print]

Genes encoding members of the JAK-STAT pathway or epigenetic regulators are
recurrently mutated in T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia.

López C(1), Bergmann AK(1,)(2), Paul U(1), Murga Penas EM(1), Nagel I(1), Betts
MJ(3), Johansson P(4,)(5), Ritgen M(6), Baumann T(7), Aymerich M(8), Jayne S(9), 
Russell RB(3), Campo E(8), Dyer MJ(9), Dürig J(4,)(10), Siebert R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University
Hospital Schleswig Holstein, Kiel, Germany. (2)Department of Paediatrics,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University Hospital Schleswig Holstein,
Kiel, Germany. (3)Cell Networks, Bioquant, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany. (4)Department of Haematology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Cell Biology
(Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (6)Second
Department of Medicine, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Department of Haematology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigaciones
Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. (8)Haematopathology
Unit, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigaciones Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer 
(IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Ernest and Helen Scott
Haematological Research Institute, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(10)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.

T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL) is an aggressive leukaemia. The primary
genetic alteration in T-PLL are the inv(14)(q11q32)/t(14;14)(q11;q32) leading to 
TRD/TRA-TCL1A fusion, or the t(X;14)(q28;q11) associated with TRD/TRA-MTCP1
fusion. However, additional cooperating abnormalities are necessary for emergence
of the full neoplastic phenotype. Though the pattern of secondary chromosomal
aberrations is remarkably conserved, targets of the changes are largely unknown. 
We analysed a cohort of 43 well-characterized T-PLL for hotspot mutations in the 
genes JAK3, STAT5B and RHOA. Additionally, we selected a subset of 23 T-PLL cases
for mutational screening of 54 genes known to be recurrently mutated in T-cell
and other haematological neoplasms. Activating mutations in the investigated
regions of the JAK3 and STAT5B genes were detected in 30% (13/43) and 21% (8/39) 
of the cases, respectively, and were mutually exclusive. Further, we identified
mutations in the genes encoding the epigenetic regulators EZH2 in 13% (3/23),
TET2 in 17% (4/23) and BCOR in 9% (2/23) of the cases. We confirmed that the
JAK-STAT pathway is a major mutational target, and identified epigenetic
regulators recurrently mutated in T-PLL. These findings complement the mutational
spectrum of secondary aberrations in T-PLL and underscore the potential
therapeutical relevance of epigenetic regulators in T-PLL.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26917488  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Jan;37(1):68-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2016.01.014.

[Acute promyelocytic leukemia with stat5b- RARa fusiongene: a case report and
literatures review].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu LR, Chen SN, Tan JF, Shi PF, Chen K, Gao DQ, Huang XL, Xie YP, Xu Y, Yang F, 
Qian SX.

PMID: 26876258  [PubMed - in process]


9. Leukemia. 2016 Feb 8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2016.13. [Epub ahead of print]

JAK-STAT and G-protein-coupled receptor signaling pathways are frequently altered
in epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma.

Nairismägi ML(1), Tan J(1,)(2,)(3), Lim JQ(1), Nagarajan S(2,)(3), Ng CC(2,)(3), 
Rajasegaran V(2,)(3), Huang D(2,)(3), Lim WK(1), Laurensia Y(1), Wijaya
GC(2,)(3), Li ZM(2,)(3), Cutcutache I(3,)(4), Pang WL(1), Thangaraju S(2,)(3), Ha
J(1), Khoo LP(1), Chin ST(1), Dey S(5), Poore G(6), Tan LH(7), Koh HK(8), Sabai
K(8), Rao HL(9), Chuah KL(10), Ho YH(10), Ng SB(5,)(11,)(12), Chuang SS(13,)(14),
Zhang F(15), Liu YH(15), Pongpruttipan T(16), Ko YH(17), Cheah PL(18), Karim
N(19), Chng WJ(5,)(20), Tang T(21), Tao M(21), Tay K(21), Farid M(21), Quek
R(21), Rozen SG(3,)(4), Tan P(3,)(5,)(22), Teh BT(2,)(3,)(5,)(23), Lim
ST(1,)(21,)(24), Tan SY(7,)(11,)(12,)(15,)(18,)(23), Ong CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Genomic Translational Research Laboratory, Division of Medical
Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Laboratory
of Cancer Epigenome, Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer Centre
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology,
Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (4)Centre for Computational
Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (5)Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Advanced Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Singapore Health Services, Singapore,
Singapore. (9)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China. (10)Department of Pathology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore. (11)Department of Pathology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (12)Department of Pathology,
National University Hospital, National University Health System, Singapore,
Singapore. (13)Department of Pathology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan.
(14)Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical University and National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (15)Department of Pathology, Guangdong General
Hospital, Guangzhou, China. (16)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. (17)Department of
Pathology, Samsung Medical Centre, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. (18)Department of Pathology, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (19)Department of Pathology, Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun,
Ipoh, Malaysia. (20)Department of Haematology-Oncology, National University
Hospital, National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore. (21)Division
of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(22)Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore. (23)Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore. (24)Office of
Education, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.

Epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma (EITL, also known as type II
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma) is an aggressive intestinal disease with 
poor prognosis and its molecular alterations have not been comprehensively
characterized. We aimed to identify actionable easy-to-screen alterations that
would allow better diagnostics and/or treatment of this deadly disease. By
performing whole-exome sequencing of four EITL tumor-normal pairs, followed by
amplicon deep sequencing of 42 tumor samples, frequent alterations of the
JAK-STAT and G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling pathways were discovered
in a large portion of samples. Specifically, STAT5B was mutated in a remarkable
63% of cases, JAK3 in 35% and GNAI2 in 24%, with the majority occurring at known 
activating hotspots in key functional domains. Moreover, STAT5B locus carried
copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity resulting in the duplication of the mutant
copy, suggesting the importance of mutant STAT5B dosage for the development of
EITL. Dysregulation of the JAK-STAT and GPCR pathways was also supported by gene 
expression profiling and further verified in patient tumor samples. In vitro
overexpression of GNAI2 mutants led to the upregulation of pERK1/2, a member of
MEK-ERK pathway. Notably, inhibitors of both JAK-STAT and MEK-ERK pathways
effectively reduced viability of patient-derived primary EITL cells, indicating
potential therapeutic strategies for this neoplasm with no effective treatment
currently available.Leukemia advance online publication, 1 March 2016;
doi:10.1038/leu.2016.13.

PMID: 26854024  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17321-32. eCollection 2015.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes based on microarray data of glioma.

Jiang CM(1), Wang XH(1), Shu J(1), Yang WX(2), Fu P(3), Zhuang LL(1), Zhou GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 
Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001,
China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Affiliated 
Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province
310003, China.

Glioma represents one of the main causes of cancer-related death worldwide.
Unfortunately, its exact molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood, which
limits the prognosis and therapy. This study aimed to identify the critical
genes, transcription factors and the possible biochemical pathways that may
affect glioma progression at transcription level. After downloading micro-array
data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between glioma and normal samples were screened. We predicted novel
glioma-related genes and carried on online software DAVID to conduct GO
enrichment and transcription factor analysis of these selected genes. String
software was applied to construct a PPI protein interaction network, as well as
to find the key genes and transcription factors in the regulation of glioma. A
total of 97 DEGs were identified associated with cancer, the GO enrichment
analysis indicated these DEGs were mainly relevant to immune responses as well as
regulation of cell growth. In addition, the transcription factor analysis showed 
these DEGs were regulated by the binding sites of transcription factors GLI2,
SP1, SMAD7, SMAD3, RELA, STAT5B, CTNNB1, STAT5A, TFAP2A and SP3. PPI protein
interaction network analysis demonstrated the hub nodes in the interaction
network were EGFR, TGFB1, FN1 and MYC. The hub DEGs may be the most critical in
glioma and could be considered as drug targets for glioma therapy after further
exploration. Besides, with the identification of regulating transcription
factors, the pathogenesis of glioma at transcription level might be brought to
light.

PMCID: PMC4694224
PMID: 26770324  [PubMed]


11. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Jan 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Impaired phosphorylation of JAK2-STAT5b signaling in fibroblasts from uremic
children.

Ugarte F(1), Irarrazabal C(1), Oh J(2), Dettmar A(2), Ceballos ML(3), Rojo A(3), 
Ibacache MJ(3), Suazo C(1), Lozano M(1), Delgado I(4), Cavada G(1), Azocar M(3), 
Delucchi A(3), Cano F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Molecular Physiology Laboratory and
Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de los Andes,
Santiago, Chile. (2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Medical Center
Hamburg/Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Luis
Calvo Mackenna Children's Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile. (4)Department of Biostatistics, Universidad del Desarrollo,
Santiago, Chile. (5)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Luis Calvo Mackenna
Children's Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. 
fcanosch@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) in children is characterized by severe
growth failure. The growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 (GH/IGF-1) axis
in uremic animals shows a post-receptor impaired phosphorylation of Janus kinase 
2/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) proteins. The
objective of our study was to characterize the intracellular phosphorylation of
JAK-STAT signaling in fibroblasts from children with CKD on chronic peritoneal
dialysis (PD).
METHODS: Serum GH-binding protein (GHBP), IGF-1 and IGFBP3 were measured in 15
prepubertal CKD stage-5 children on PD. Cytoplasmic JAK2, cytoplasmic/nuclear
STAT5b and nuclear IGFBP3, acid-labile subunit (ALS) and IGF-1 mRNA expression
were quantified in fibroblasts obtained from skin biopsies before and after
stimulation with 200 ng/ml recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH).
Phosphorylation activity at both the cytoplasmic and nuclear level was expressed 
as the ratio phosphorylated (p)/total (t) abundance of the product (p/t) at 30
and 60 min. Fifteen healthy children were recruited as the control group. Values 
were expressed in arbitrary units (AU) and normalized for comparison.
Significance was defined as p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05.
RESULTS: Thirty minutes after rhGH stimulus, the cytoplasmic (p/t)JAK2 ratio was 
significantly lower in patients than in controls [median and interquartile range 
(IQR):<U+2009>7.4 (4.56) vs. 20.5 (50.06) AU]. At 60 min after rhGH stimulation, median 
JAK2 phosphorylation activity was still significantly lower in the patients [7.14
(IQR 3.8) vs. 10.2 (IQR 29.8) AU; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05]. The increase in the cytoplasmic
(p/t)STAT5b/ß-actin ratio was lower at both measurement points in the patients
compared to the controls, without reaching statistical significance between
groups. Median IGFBP3 mRNA abundance was significantly decreased in fibroblasts
from uremic patients 24 h after rhGH stimulation compared to the healthy controls
[1.27 (IQR 0.83) vs. 2.37 (IQR 0.80) AU]. Median ALS and IGF-1 mRNA expression
changed in response to rhGH stimuli at 24 and 48 h.
CONCLUSION: In this study, children with CKD undergoing PD therapy showed an
impaired phosphorylation of JAK2/STAT5b signaling in fibroblasts after GH
stimulation, as well as impaired IGFBP3 mRNA abundance. Both impairments may be
partially responsible for the observed resistance to the growth-promoting actions
of GH in chronic kidney failure.

PMID: 26747624  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 30;10(12):e0145142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145142.
eCollection 2015.

How Intrinsic Molecular Dynamics Control Intramolecular Communication in Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription Factor STAT5.

Langenfeld F(1,)(2), Guarracino Y(1), Arock M(1), Trouvé A(2), Tchertanov L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Cachan, France. (2)Centre de Mathématiques
et de Leurs applications, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, CNRS, Université
Paris-Saclay, Cachan, France.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription STAT5 is a key mediator of cell 
proliferation, differentiation and survival. While STAT5 activity is tightly
regulated in normal cells, its constitutive activation directly contributes to
oncogenesis and is associated with a broad range of hematological and solid tumor
cancers. Therefore the development of compounds able to modulate pathogenic
activation of this protein is a very challenging endeavor. A crucial step of drug
design is the understanding of the protein conformational features and the
definition of putative binding site(s) for such modulators. Currently, there is
no structural data available for human STAT5 and our study is the first footprint
towards the description of structure and dynamics of this protein. We
investigated structural and dynamical features of the two STAT5 isoforms, STAT5a 
and STAT5b, taken into account their phosphorylation status. The study was based 
on the exploration of molecular dynamics simulations by different analytical
methods. Despite the overall folding similarity of STAT5 proteins, the MD
conformations display specific structural and dynamical features for each
protein, indicating first, sequence-encoded structural properties and second,
phosphorylation-induced effects which contribute to local and long-distance
structural rearrangements interpreted as allosteric event. Further examination of
the dynamical coupling between distant sites provides evidence for alternative
profiles of the communication pathways inside and between the STAT5 domains.
These results add a new insight to the understanding of the crucial role of
intrinsic molecular dynamics in mediating intramolecular signaling in STAT5. Two 
pockets, localized in close proximity to the phosphotyrosine-binding site and
adjacent to the channel for communication pathways across STAT5, may constitute
valid targets to develop inhibitors able to modulate the function-related
communication properties of this signaling protein.

PMCID: PMC4696835
PMID: 26717567  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Dec 30. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT5 in Cancer and Immunity.

Rani A(1), Murphy JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Westminster , London, United 
Kingdom .

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5a and STAT5b) are
highly homologous proteins that are encoded by 2 separate genes and are activated
by Janus-activated kinases (JAK) downstream of cytokine receptors. STAT5 proteins
are activated by a wide variety of hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cytokines
and growth factors, all of which use the JAK-STAT signalling pathway as their
main mode of signal transduction. STAT5 proteins critically regulate vital
cellular functions such as proliferation, differentiation, and survival. The
physiological importance of STAT5 proteins is underscored by the plethora of
primary human tumors that have aberrant constitutive activation of these
proteins, which significantly contributes to tumor cell survival and malignant
progression of disease. STAT5 plays an important role in the maintenance of
normal immune function and homeostasis, both of which are regulated by specific
members of IL-2 family of cytokines, which share a common gamma chain (<U+03B3>c) in
their receptor complex. STAT5 critically mediates the biological actions of
members of the <U+03B3>c family of cytokines in the immune system. Essentially, STAT5
plays a critical role in the function and development of Tregs, and consistently 
activated STAT5 is associated with a suppression in antitumor immunity and an
increase in proliferation, invasion, and survival of tumor cells. Thus,
therapeutic targeting of STAT5 is promising in cancer.

PMID: 26716518  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2015 Dec 10. pii: S1096-6374(15)30044-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ghir.2015.12.006. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT5B deficiency: Impacts on human growth and immunity.

Hwa V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Center for Growth Disorders, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, 45229, United States. Electronic address:
vivian.hwa@cchmc.org.

Growth hormone (GH) promotes postnatal human growth primarily by regulating
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production through activation of the GH
receptor (GHR)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5B
signaling cascade. The critical importance of STAT5B in human IGF-I production
was confirmed with the identification of the first homozygous, autosomal
recessive, STAT5B mutation in a young female patient who phenotypically resembled
patients with classical growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) syndrome (Laron
syndrome) due to mutations in the GHR gene, presenting with severe postnatal
growth failure and marked IGF-I deficiency. Of note, the closely related STAT5A, 
which shares >95% amino acid identity with STAT5B, could not compensate for loss 
of functional STAT5B. To date, 7 homozygous, inactivating, STAT5B mutations in 10
patients have been reported. STAT5B deficient patients, unlike patients deficient
in GHR, can also present with a novel, potentially fatal, primary
immunodeficiency, which can manifest as chronic pulmonary disease. STAT5B
deficiency may be underestimated in endocrine, immunology and pulmonary clinics.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26703237  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2015 Nov 30. pii: S1096-6374(15)30037-X. doi:
10.1016/j.ghir.2015.11.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Atypical defects resulting in growth hormone insensitivity.

Wit JM(1), de Luca F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.m.wit@lumc.nl. (2)Section of Endocrinology and
Diabetes, St. Christopher's Hospital for Children, Drexel University, College of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Besides four well-documented genetic causes of GH insensitivity (GHI) (GHR,
STAT5B, IGF1, IGFALS defects), several other congenital and acquired conditions
are associated with GHI. With respect to its anabolic actions, GH induces
transcription of IGF1, IGFBP3 and IGFALS through a complex regulatory cascade
including GH binding to its receptor (GHR), activation of JAK2 and
phosphorylation of STAT5b, which then trafficks to the nucleus. GH also activates
the MAPK and PI3K pathways. The synthesis of GHR can be reduced by estrogen
deficiency or corticosteroid excess, and is possibly decreased in African
pygmies. An increased degradation of GHRs because of overexpression of
cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) was suggested for some children
with idiopathic short stature. Effects on several downstream components of GH
signaling were observed for FGF21, cytokines, sepsis, fever and chronic renal
failure. In Noonan syndrome and other "rasopathies" the activation of the
RAS-RAF-MAPK-ERK pathway leads to inhibition of the JAK/STAT pathway. In
contrast, fibroblasts from tall patients with Sotos syndrome showed a
downregulation of this axis. Experimental and clinical evidence suggests that the
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway plays a role in GH signaling. In a patient with an I<U+03BA>Ba mutation
presenting with short stature, GHI, severe immune deficiency and other features, 
NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear transportation and STAT5 and PI3K expression and activity were
reduced. A patient with a mosaic de novo duplication of 17q21-25 presented with
several congenital anomalies, GHI and mild immunodeficiency. Studies in blood
lymphocytes showed disturbed signaling of the CD28 pathway, involving NF-<U+03BA>B and
related proteins. Functional studies on skin fibroblasts revealed that NF-<U+03BA>B
activation, PI3K activity and STAT5 phosphorylation in response to GH were
suppressed, while the sensitivity to GH in terms of MAPK phosphorylation was
increased. The expression of one of the duplicated genes, PRKCA, was
significantly higher than in control cells, which might be the cause of this
clinical syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26670721  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2016;29(2):293-314. doi:
10.13075/ijomeh.1896.00528.

Expression of cytochrome P450 2C and 3A in female rat liver after long-term
administration of gonadoliberin analogs.

Skowronek R(1), Czekaj P(2), Suszka-Switek A(3), Czech E(3), Wiaderkiewicz A(3), 
Plewka D(1), Bryzek A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland (School of Medicine in
Katowice, Chair of Histology and Embryology, Department of Cytophysiology).
(2)Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland (School of Medicine in
Katowice, Chair of Histology and Embryology, Department of Cytophysiology).
pcz@sum.edu.pl. (3)Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland (School of
Medicine in Katowice, Chair of Histology and Embryology, Department of
Histology).

OBJECTIVES: Gonadoliberin (GnRH) analogs may be expected to indirectly modify
growth hormone (GH) total concentration and its 24-h secretion profile. As a
consequence, changes in the levels of GH may modify the mechanism of sexdependent
cytochromes P450 (CYP450) synthesis, including the expression of transcriptional 
factors. The aim of the study has been to evaluate the effect of long-term
administration of a low dose of GnRH analogs on hepatic expression of CYP2C and
CYP3A isoforms, and the transcription factors: pregnane X receptor (PXR),
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), HNF6 and signal transducers and activators 
of transcription 5b (STAT5b).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study was carried out on adult female Sprague-Dawley
rats during a 3-month treatment with dalarelin (GnRH agonist) and cetrorelix
(GnRH antagonist), at a daily intraperitoneal injection (<i>i.p.</i>) dose of 6
µg/kg body weight/day, and 1, 2, and 4 weeks after treatment discontinuation. The
concentrations of ovarian hormones and GH in the blood serum were determined by
radioimmunoassay and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method,
respectively. Then, the expression of hepatic CYP450s (reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction - RT-PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry) and
transcription factors (RT-PCR) was evaluated.
RESULTS: We have found that cetrorelix induces changes in the circadian pattern
of GH secretion and enhances GH blood concentrations. These changes may cause
increased expression of both, female-specific CYP450s (especially CYP3A9), and
HNF4a/HNF6 transcription factors. Decrease in GH blood concentrations, resulting 
from the effect of dalarelin, may promote inhibition of female-specific CYP2C12
and CYP3A9 isoforms as well as STAT5b transcription factor. Slight changes in
sex-independent CYP3A1 protein expression caused by GnRH analogs were also
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In adult female rats, HNF4a/HNF6 and STAT5b seem to be crucial for
the regulation of GnRH antagonist/GH- and GnRH agonist/GH-dependent pattern of
CYP450 expression, respectively.

This work is available in Open Access model and licensed under a CC BY-NC 3.0 PL 
license.

PMID: 26670357  [PubMed - in process]


17. Int J Oncol. 2016 Feb;48(2):836-42. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3277. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Methylsulfonylmethane inhibits HER2 expression through STAT5b in breast cancer
cells.

Kang DY(1), Darvin P(1), Yoo YB(2), Joung YH(1), Sp N(1), Byun HJ(1), Yang YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women globally. The factors that
increase risk include: late age at <U+FB01>rst birth, alcohol, radiation exposure,
family history of breast cancer, and postmenopausal hormone therapy. Numerous
drugs are being developed to treat breast cancer. Among them, Herceptin is used
for the treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive
cases and targets HER2 effectively and efficiently, but it is very expensive.
Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is an organic sulfur-containing natural compound
having no reported toxicity. We examined MSM in breast cancer cell lines and
found it inhibited the proliferation of estrogen receptor-positive and
HER2-positive breast cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. It also suppressed 
the activation of STAT5b and expression of HER2 in breast cancer cells. We
determined the STAT5b binding site (GAS element) in the HER2 gene. Detailed
analysis showed that MSM decreased the ability of STAT5b to bind the promoter of 
the HER2 gene and a luciferase assay demonstrated reduced activity. We confirmed 
that MSM can effectively regulate STAT5b, and thereby decrease HER2 expression.
Therefore, we recommend the use of MSM as an inhibitor for the management of
HER2-positive breast cancers.

PMID: 26648017  [PubMed - in process]


18. Mamm Genome. 2016 Feb;27(1-2):81-97. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9613-8. Epub 2015
Nov 27.

Targeted imputation of sequence variants and gene expression profiling identifies
twelve candidate genes associated with lactation volume, composition and calving 
interval in dairy cattle.

Raven LA(1,)(2,)(3), Cocks BG(1,)(2,)(3), Kemper KE(4), Chamberlain AJ(1), Vander
Jagt CJ(1), Goddard ME(1,)(3,)(4), Hayes BJ(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Research Division, Department of Economic Development, Jobs,
Transport and Resources, 5 Ring Road, Bundoora, 3086, Australia. (2)Biosciences
Research Centre, LaTrobe University, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia. (3)Dairy
Futures Co-operative Research Centre, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia. (4)Faculty 
of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
3052, Australia. (5)Biosciences Research Division, Department of Economic
Development, Jobs, Transport and Resources, 5 Ring Road, Bundoora, 3086,
Australia. ben.hayes@ecodev.vic.gov.au. (6)Biosciences Research Centre, LaTrobe
University, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia. ben.hayes@ecodev.vic.gov.au. (7)Dairy
Futures Co-operative Research Centre, Bundoora, VIC, 3086, Australia.
ben.hayes@ecodev.vic.gov.au.

Dairy cattle are an interesting model for gaining insights into the genes
responsible for the large variation between and within mammalian species in the
protein and fat content of their milk and their milk volume. Large numbers of
phenotypes for these traits are available, as well as full genome sequence of key
founders of modern dairy cattle populations. In twenty target QTL regions
affecting milk production traits, we imputed full genome sequence variant
genotypes into a population of 16,721 Holstein and Jersey cattle with excellent
phenotypes. Association testing was used to identify variants within each target 
region, and gene expression data were used to identify possible gene candidates. 
There was statistical support for imputed sequence variants in or close to BTRC, 
MGST1, SLC37A1, STAT5A, STAT5B, PAEP, VDR, CSF2RB, MUC1, NCF4, and GHDC
associated with milk production, and EPGN for calving interval. Of these
candidates, analysis of RNA-Seq data demonstrated that PAEP, VDR, SLC37A1, GHDC, 
MUC1, CSF2RB, and STAT5A were highly differentially expressed in mammary gland
compared to 15 other tissues. For nine of the other target regions, the most
significant variants were in non-coding DNA. Genomic predictions in a third dairy
breed (Australian Reds) using sequence variants in only these candidate genes
were for some traits more accurate than genomic predictions from 632,003 common
SNP on the Bovine HD array. The genes identified in this study are interesting
candidates for improving milk production in cattle and could be investigated for 
novel biological mechanisms driving lactation traits in other mammals.

PMID: 26613780  [PubMed - in process]


19. Clin Immunol. 2016 Jan;162:74-83. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.11.006. Epub 2015 Nov 
18.

The role of icaritin in regulating Foxp3/IL17a balance in systemic lupus
erythematosus and its effects on the treatment of MRL/lpr mice.

Liao J(1), Liu Y(1), Wu H(1), Zhao M(1), Tan Y(1), Li D(1), Long H(1), Dai Y(2), 
Yung S(3), Chan TM(3), Lu Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Epigenetic Research Center, Second Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, PR China. (2)Clinical
Medical Research Center, the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University 
(Shenzhen People's Hospital), Shenzhen, Guangdong 518020, PR China. (3)Division
of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary
Hospital, Hong Kong, China. (4)Department of Dermatology and Epigenetic Research 
Center, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan
410011, PR China. Electronic address: qianlu5860@gmail.com.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a female predominant autoimmune disease
characterized by multi-organ dysfunctions. However, current available therapies
control the disease at the cost of many potential adverse effects. The
development of safer and more effective therapies for SLE is a critical unmet
need. Icaritin (ICT) is an active monomer extracted from Chinese herbals named
the Epimedium genus. In this study, we found that ICT exhibited the capacity of
regulating Foxp3/IL17a balance, enhancing Treg cell suppressive activities, and
inhibiting over-activation of CD4(+)T cells from SLE. We also observed that ICT
regulated Foxp3/IL17a balance by increasing STAT5b expression and histone
methylation modification. Subsequent experiments further confirmed that
ICT-treated mice exhibited amelioration of renal damages and suggested that ICT
may be a potential new drug for the treatment of SLE.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26604013  [PubMed - in process]


20. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2016 Mar;107(2):116-124. doi: 10.1016/j.ad.2015.09.013.
Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Differential Diagnosis of Genetic Disorders Associated with Moderate to Severe
Refractory Eczema and Elevated Immunoglobulin E.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Arjona Aguilera C(1), Albarrán Planelles C(2), Tercedor Sánchez J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Dermatología y Venereología, Hospital
Universitario Puerta del Mar, Servicio Andaluz de Salud, Cádiz, España.
Electronic address: cintiaarjona@hotmail.com. (2)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de
Dermatología y Venereología, Hospital Universitario Puerta del Mar, Servicio
Andaluz de Salud, Cádiz, España. (3)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Dermatología y
Venereología, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Servicio Andaluz de
Salud, Granada, España.

The association of moderate to severe eczema and elevated plasma levels of
immunoglobulin E is a characteristic not only of atopic dermatitis but also of
various genodermatoses: hyperimmunoglobulin E syndromes, Omenn syndrome,
Netherton syndrome, peeling skin syndrome type B, severe dermatitis, multiple
allergies, and metabolic wasting syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, prolidase
deficiency, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, IPEX syndrome, STAT5B deficiency, and pentasomy
X. The clinical presentation of these genodermatoses -typically in children- is
consistent with severe atopic dermatitis. Immunoglobulin E is elevated from birth
and response to conventional treatments is poor. Diagnosis is further complicated
by the fact that these genodermatoses often share other clinical manifestations
and laboratory findings. We present practical guidelines for differentiating
among these various entities, with the aim of helping physicians decide what type
of genetic test should be carried out -and when- in order to establish a
definitive diagnosis.

Copyright © 2015 AEDV. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26593686  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016 Apr;174(4):R145-73. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0937. Epub 2015
Nov 17.

MECHANISMS IN ENDOCRINOLOGY: Novel genetic causes of short stature.

Wit JM(1), Oostdijk W(2), Losekoot M(2), van Duyvenvoorde HA(2), Ruivenkamp
CA(2), Kant SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of PaediatricsClinical GeneticsLeiden University Medical Center,
PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands j.m.wit@lumc.nl. (2)Departments of
PaediatricsClinical GeneticsLeiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300
RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

The fast technological development, particularly single nucleotide polymorphism
array, array-comparative genomic hybridization, and whole exome sequencing, has
led to the discovery of many novel genetic causes of growth failure. In this
review we discuss a selection of these, according to a diagnostic classification 
centred on the epiphyseal growth plate. We successively discuss disorders in
hormone signalling, paracrine factors, matrix molecules, intracellular pathways, 
and fundamental cellular processes, followed by chromosomal aberrations including
copy number variants (CNVs) and imprinting disorders associated with short
stature. Many novel causes of GH deficiency (GHD) as part of combined pituitary
hormone deficiency have been uncovered. The most frequent genetic causes of
isolated GHD are GH1 and GHRHR defects, but several novel causes have recently
been found, such as GHSR, RNPC3, and IFT172 mutations. Besides well-defined
causes of GH insensitivity (GHR, STAT5B, IGFALS, IGF1 defects), disorders of NF<U+03BA>B
signalling, STAT3 and IGF2 have recently been discovered. Heterozygous IGF1R
defects are a relatively frequent cause of prenatal and postnatal growth
retardation. TRHA mutations cause a syndromic form of short stature with elevated
T3/T4 ratio. Disorders of signalling of various paracrine factors (FGFs, BMPs,
WNTs, PTHrP/IHH, and CNP/NPR2) or genetic defects affecting cartilage
extracellular matrix usually cause disproportionate short stature. Heterozygous
NPR2 or SHOX defects may be found in ~3% of short children, and also rasopathies 
(e.g., Noonan syndrome) can be found in children without clear syndromic
appearance. Numerous other syndromes associated with short stature are caused by 
genetic defects in fundamental cellular processes, chromosomal abnormalities,
CNVs, and imprinting disorders.

© 2016 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26578640  [PubMed - in process]


22. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 4;10(11):e0141906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141906.
eCollection 2015.

Concurrent Mutations in ATM and Genes Associated with Common <U+03B3> Chain Signaling in
Peripheral T Cell Lymphoma.

Simpson HM(1,)(2), Khan RZ(1,)(2), Song C(1,)(2), Sharma D(1,)(2), Sadashivaiah
K(1,)(2), Furusawa A(1,)(2), Liu X(3), Nagaraj S(3), Sengamalay N(3), Sadzewicz
L(3), Tallon LJ(3), Chen QC(4), Livak F(1,)(5), Rapoport AP(1), Kimball A(1),
Banerjee A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Oncology, Greenebaum Cancer Center, Department of Medicine,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States of
America. (2)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, University
of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.
(3)Genome Resource Center, Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States of America. (4)Department of
Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United
States of America. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.

Peripheral T cell lymphoma (PTCL) is a heterogeneous malignancy with poor
response to current therapeutic strategies and incompletely characterized
genetics. We conducted whole exome sequencing of matched PTCL and non-malignant
samples from 12 patients, spanning 8 subtypes, to identify potential oncogenic
mutations in PTCL. Analysis of the mutations identified using computational
algorithms, CHASM, PolyPhen2, PROVEAN, and MutationAssessor to predict the impact
of these mutations on protein function and PTCL tumorigenesis, revealed 104
somatic mutations that were selected as high impact by all four algorithms. Our
analysis identified recurrent somatic missense or nonsense mutations in 70 genes,
9 of which contained mutations predicted significant by all 4 algorithms: ATM,
RUNX1T1, WDR17, NTRK3, TP53, TRMT12, CACNA2D1, INTS8, and KCNH8. We observed
somatic mutations in ATM (ataxia telangiectasia-mutated) in 5 out of the 12
samples and mutations in the common gamma chain (<U+03B3>c) signaling pathway (JAK3,
IL2RG, STAT5B) in 3 samples, all of which also harbored mutations in ATM. Our
findings contribute insights into the genetics of PTCL and suggest a relationship
between <U+03B3>c signaling and ATM in T cell malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4633051
PMID: 26536348  [PubMed - in process]


23. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.405. [Epub ahead of print]

Sleeping Beauty transposon screen identifies signaling modules that cooperate
with STAT5 activation to induce B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Heltemes-Harris LM(1,)(2,)(3), Larson JD(3,)(4), Starr TK(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Hubbard
GK(1,)(2,)(3), Sarver AL(3), Largaespada DA(3,)(6,)(7), Farrar MA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (3)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (4)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Women's Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(6)Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. 
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activation occurs
frequently in human progenitor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). To
identify gene alterations that cooperate with STAT5 activation to initiate
leukemia, we crossed mice expressing a constitutively active form of STAT5
(Stat5b-CA) with mice in which a mutagenic Sleeping Beauty transposon (T2/Onc)
was mobilized only in B cells. Stat5b-CA mice typically do not develop B-ALL (<2%
penetrance); in contrast, 89% of Stat5b-CA mice in which the T2/Onc transposon
had been mobilized died of B-ALL by 3 months of age. High-throughput sequencing
approaches were used to identify genes frequently targeted by the T2/Onc
transposon; these included Sos1 (74%), Kdm2a (35%), Jak1 (26%), Bmi1 (19%),
Prdm14 or Ncoa2 (13%), Cdkn2a (10%), Ikzf1 (8%), Caap1 (6%) and Klf3 (6%).
Collectively, these mutations target three major cellular processes: (i) the
Janus kinase/STAT5 pathway (ii) progenitor B-cell differentiation and (iii) the
CDKN2A tumor-suppressor pathway. Transposon insertions typically resulted in
altered expression of these genes, as well as downstream pathways including
STAT5, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) and p38. Importantly,
expression of Sos1 and Kdm2a, and activation of p38, correlated with survival,
further underscoring the role these genes and associated pathways have in
B-ALL.Oncogene advance online publication, 26 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.405.

PMID: 26500062  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Dec 15;289(3):495-506. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.10.011. Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Effects of sexually dimorphic growth hormone secretory patterns on arachidonic
acid metabolizing enzymes in rodent heart.

Zhang F(1), Yu X(1), He C(2), Ouyang X(1), Wu J(1), Li J(1), Zhang J(1), Duan
X(1), Wan Y(3), Yue J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430071, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430071, China. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China. Electronic address:
yuejiang@whu.edu.cn.

The arachidonic acid (AA) metabolizing enzymes are the potential therapeutic
targets of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). As sex differences have been shown in 
the risk and outcome of CVDs, we investigated the regulation of heart AA
metabolizing enzymes (COXs, LOXs, and CYPs) by sex-dependent growth hormone (GH) 
secretory patterns. The pulsatile (masculine) GH secretion at a physiological
concentration decreased CYP1A1 and CYP2J3 mRNA levels more efficiently in the
H9c2 cells compared with the constant (feminine) GH secretion; however, CYP1B1
mRNA levels were higher following the pulsatile GH secretion. Sex differences in 
CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and CYP2J11 mRNA levels were observed in both the wild-type and
GHR deficient mice. No sex differences in the mRNA levels of COXs, LOXs, or
CYP2E1 were observed in the wild-type mice. The constant GH infusion induced
heart CYP1A1 and CYP2J11, and decreased CYP1B1 in the male C57/B6 mice constantly
infused with GH (0.4 µg/h, 7 days). The activity of rat Cyp2j3 promoter was
inhibited by the STAT5B protein, but was activated by C/EBPa (CEBPA). Compared
with the constant GH administration, the levels of the nuclear phosphorylated
STAT5B protein and its binding to the rat Cyp2j3 promoter were higher following
the pulsatile GH administration. The constant GH infusion decreased the binding
of the nuclear phosphorylated STAT5B protein to the mouse Cyp2j11 promoter. The
data suggest the sexually dimorphic transcription of heart AA metabolizing
enzymes, which might alter the risk and outcome of CVDs. GHR-STAT5B signal
transduction pathway may be involved in the sex difference in heart CYP2J levels.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26493931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Dec;47(12):634-43. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00082.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Intrauterine growth restriction perturbs nucleosome depletion at a growth
hormone-responsive element in the mouse IGF-1 gene.

McKnight RA(1), Yost CC(2), Yu X(2), Wiedmeier JE(2), Callaway CW(2), Brown
AS(2), Lane RH(3), Fung CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah; and robert.mcknight@hsc.utah.edu. (2)Division 
of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, 
Salt Lake City, Utah; and. (3)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is a common human pregnancy complication. 
IUGR offspring carry significant postnatal risk for early-onset metabolic
syndrome, which is associated with persistent reduction in IGF-1 protein
expression. We have previously shown that preadolescent IUGR male mice have
decreased hepatic IGF-1 mRNA and circulating IGF-1 protein at postnatal day 21,
the age when growth hormone (GH) normally upregulates hepatic IGF-1 expression.
Here we studied nucleosome occupancy and CpG methylation at a putative growth
hormone-responsive element in intron 2 (in2GHRE) of the hepatic IGF-1 gene in
normal, sham-operated, and IUGR mice. Nucleosome occupancy and CpG methylation
were determined in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and in liver at postnatal days 14,
21, and 42. For CpG methylation, additional time points out to 2 yr were
analyzed. We confirmed the putative mouse in2GHRE was GH-responsive, and in
normal mice, a single nucleosome was displaced from the hepatic in2GHRE by
postnatal day 21, which exposed two STAT5b DNA binding sites. Nucleosome
displacement correlated with developmentally programmed CpG demethylation.
Finally, IUGR significantly altered the nucleosome-depleted region (NDR) at the
in2GHRE of IGF-1 on postnatal day 21, with either complete absence of the NDR or 
with a shifted NDR exposing only one of two STAT5b DNA binding sites. An NDR
shift was also seen in offspring of sham-operated mothers. We conclude that
prenatal insult such as IUGR or anesthesia/surgery could perturb the proper
formation of a well-positioned NDR at the mouse hepatic IGF-1 in2GHRE necessary
for transitioning to an open chromatin state.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26487705  [PubMed - in process]


26. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Dec 18;10(12):2884-90. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00817. Epub 
2015 Oct 28.

Phosphorylation of Capsaicinoid Derivatives Provides Highly Potent and Selective 
Inhibitors of the Transcription Factor STAT5b.

Elumalai N(1), Berg A(1), Rubner S(1), Berg T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Leipzig , Johannisallee 29,
04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Design approaches for inhibitors of protein-protein interactions are rare, but
highly sought after. Here, we report that O-phosphorylation of simple derivatives
of the natural products dihydrocapsaicin and N-vanillylnonanamide leads to
inhibitors of the SH2 domain of the transcription factor STAT5b. The most potent 
molecule is obtained from dihydrocapsaicin in only three synthetic steps. It has 
submicromolar affinity for the SH2 domain of STAT5b (Ki = 0.34 µM), while
displaying 35-fold selectivity over the highly homologous STAT5a (Ki = 13.0 µM). 
The corresponding pivaloyloxymethyl ester inhibits STAT5b with selectivity over
STAT5a in human tumor cells. Importantly, it inhibits cell viability and induces 
apoptosis in human tumor cells in a STAT5-dependent manner. Our data validate
O-phosphorylation of appropriately preselected natural products or natural
product derivatives as a semirational design approach for small molecules that
selectively inhibit phosphorylation-dependent protein-protein interaction domains
in cultured human tumor cells.

PMID: 26469307  [PubMed - in process]


27. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 5;5:14705. doi: 10.1038/srep14705.

Parturition failure in mice lacking Mamld1.

Miyado M(1), Miyado K(2), Katsumi M(1), Saito K(1), Nakamura A(2), Shihara D(1), 
Ogata T(1,)(3), Fukami M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute of Child
Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (2)Department of Reproductive
Biology, National Research Institute of Child Health and Development, Tokyo
157-8535, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

In mice, the onset of parturition is triggered by a rapid decline in circulating 
progesterone. Progesterone withdrawal occurs as a result of functional
luteolysis, which is characterized by an increase in the enzymatic activity of
20a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20a-HSD) in the corpus luteum and is mediated
by the prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a) signaling. Here, we report that the genetic
knockout (KO) of Mamld1, which encodes a putative non-DNA-binding regulator of
testicular steroidogenesis, caused defective functional luteolysis and subsequent
parturition failure and neonatal deaths. Progesterone receptor inhibition induced
the onset of parturition in pregnant KO mice, and MAMLD1 regulated the expression
of Akr1c18, the gene encoding 20a-HSD, in cultured cells. Ovaries of KO mice at
late gestation were morphologically unremarkable; however, Akr1c18 expression was
reduced and expression of its suppressor Stat5b was markedly increased. Several
other genes including Prlr, Cyp19a1, Oxtr, and Lgals3 were also dysregulated in
the KO ovaries, whereas PGF2a signaling genes remained unaffected. These results 
highlight the role of MAMLD1 in labour initiation. MAMLD1 likely participates in 
functional luteolysis by regulating Stat5b and other genes, independent of the
PGF2a signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4592954
PMID: 26435405  [PubMed - in process]


28. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2015 Dec;10(4):429-37. doi: 10.1007/s11899-015-0289-7.

Molecular Pathogenesis of Peripheral T Cell Lymphoma.

Sakata-Yanagimoto M(1), Chiba S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan. sakatama-tky@umin.net. (2)Department
of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan.

Understanding the molecular pathogenesis of peripheral T cell lymphomas (PTCLs)
has lagged behind that of B cell lymphomas due to disease rarity. However, novel 
approaches are gradually clarifying these mechanisms, and gene profiling has
identified specific signaling pathways governing PTCL cell survival and growth.
For example, genetic alterations have been discovered, including signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3 and STAT5b mutations in several
PTCLs, disease-specific ras homolog family member A (RHOA) mutations in
angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma (AITL), and recurrent translocations at the
dual specificity phosphatase 22 (DUSP22) locus in anaplastic lymphoma receptor
tyrosine kinase (ALK)-negative anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCLs).
Intriguingly, some PTCL-relevant mutations are seen in apparently normal blood
cells as well as tumor cells, while others are confined to tumor cells. These
data have dramatically changed our understanding of PTCL origins: once considered
to originate from mature T lymphocytes, some PTCLs are now believed to emerge
from immature hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMID: 26431836  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Neurosci Res. 2016 Jan;94(1):99-108. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23673. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Identification of STAT3 and STAT5 proteins in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus and
the Day/Night difference in astrocytic STAT3 phosphorylation in response to
lipopolysaccharide.

Moravcová S(1), Cervená K(1), Pacesová D(1), Bendová Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins regulate many 
aspects of cellular physiology from growth and differentiations to immune
responses. Using immunohistochemistry, we show the daily rhythm of STAT3 protein 
in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), with low but significant amplitude
peaking in the morning. We also reveal the strong expression of STAT5A in
astrocytes of the SCN and the STAT5B signal in nonastrocytic cells.
Administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) acutely induced phosphorylation of
STAT3 on Tyr705 during both the day and the night and induced phosphorylation on 
Ser727 but only after the daytime application. The LPS-induced phospho-STAT3
(Tyr705) remained elevated for 24 hr after the daytime application but declined
within 8 hr when LPS was applied at night.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26420542  [PubMed - in process]


30. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32774-89. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5192.

miR-134 in extracellular vesicles reduces triple-negative breast cancer
aggression and increases drug sensitivity.

O'Brien K(1), Lowry MC(1), Corcoran C(1), Martinez VG(1), Daly M(1), Rani S(1),
Gallagher WM(2), Radomski MW(1), MacLeod RA(3), O'Driscoll L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences & Trinity Biomedical Sciences
Institute, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. (2)Cancer Biology and Therapeutics
Laboratory, Conway Institute, UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, 
Dublin, Ireland. (3)Leibniz Institute DSMZ, German Collection of Human and Animal
Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Exosomes (EVs) have relevance in cell-to-cell communication carrying
pro-tumorigenic factors that participate in oncogenesis and drug resistance and
are proposed to have potential as self-delivery systems. Advancing on our studies
of EVs in triple-negative breast cancer, here we more comprehensively analysed
isogenic cell line variants and their EV populations, tissues cell line variants 
and their EV populations, as well as breast tumour and normal tissues. Profiling 
384 miRNAs showed EV miRNA content to be highly representative of their cells of 
origin. miRNAs most substantially down-regulated in aggressive cells and their
EVs originated from 14q32. Analysis of miR-134, the most substantially
down-regulated miRNA, supported its clinical relevance in breast tumours compared
to matched normal breast tissue. Functional studies indicated that miR-134
controls STAT5B which, in turn, controls Hsp90. miR-134 delivered by direct
transfection into Hs578Ts(i)8 cells (in which it was greatly down-regulated)
reduced STAT5B, Hsp90, and Bcl-2 levels, reduced cellular proliferation, and
enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Delivery via miR-134-enriched EVs also
reduced STAT5B and Hsp90, reduced cellular migration and invasion, and enhanced
sensitivity to anti-Hsp90 drugs. While the differing effects achieved by
transfection or EV delivery are likely to be, at least partly, due to specific
amounts of miR-134 delivered by these routes, these EV-based studies identified
miRNA-134 as a potential biomarker and therapeutic for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741729
PMID: 26416415  [PubMed - in process]


31. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 29;6:8470. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9470.

Genomic analyses reveal recurrent mutations in epigenetic modifiers and the
JAK-STAT pathway in Sézary syndrome.

Kiel MJ(1), Sahasrabuddhe AA(1), Rolland DC(2), Velusamy T(1), Chung F(1),
Schaller M(1), Bailey NG(1), Betz BL(1), Miranda RN(3), Porcu P(4), Byrd JC(4),
Jeffrey Medeiros L(3), Kunkel SL(1), Bahler DW(5), Lim MS(2), Elenitoba-Johnson
KS(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman
School of Medicine at University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA. (3)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)Division of Hematology, Department
of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, The University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA. (6)Center for Personalized Diagnostics, Perelman
School of Medicine at University of Pennsylvania., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Sézary syndrome (SS) is an aggressive leukaemia of mature T cells with poor
prognosis and limited options for targeted therapies. The comprehensive genetic
alterations underlying the pathogenesis of SS are unknown. Here we integrate
whole-genome sequencing (n=6), whole-exome sequencing (n=66) and array
comparative genomic hybridization-based copy-number analysis (n=80) of primary SS
samples. We identify previously unknown recurrent loss-of-function aberrations
targeting members of the chromatin remodelling/histone modification and trithorax
families, including ARID1A in which functional loss from nonsense and frameshift 
mutations and/or targeted deletions is observed in 40.3% of SS genomes. We also
identify recurrent gain-of-function mutations targeting PLCG1 (9%) and JAK1,
JAK3, STAT3 and STAT5B (JAK/STAT total ~11%). Functional studies reveal
sensitivity of JAK1-mutated primary SS cells to JAK inhibitor treatment. These
results highlight the complex genomic landscape of SS and a role for inhibition
of JAK/STAT pathways for the treatment of SS.

PMCID: PMC4598843
PMID: 26415585  [PubMed - in process]


32. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Oct;139(10):1308-13. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0345-RS.

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: A Review and Discussion of Variant Translocations.

Adams J(1), Nassiri M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis.

The majority of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) manifest the
t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.2) translocation; however, a minor but significant proportion 
of patients with APL harbor complex, cryptic, or variant translocations, which
typically involve RARA. With the exception of ZBTB16/RARA, these variants have
similar morphologic and immunophenotypic features as classic APL. Study of the
variant forms of APL not only gives insight into the pathogenesis of APL but also
allows us to understand the mechanism of retinoid therapy. It is important to
identify these cryptic and variant translocations because certain variants,
including ZBTB16/RARA and STAT5B/RARA, are resistant to treatment with all-trans 
retinoic acid, arsenic trioxide, and anthracyclines.

PMID: 26414475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncol Rep. 2015 Dec;34(6):2953-60. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4293. Epub 2015 Sep 18.

ABL-N may induce apoptosis of human prostate cancer cells through suppression of 
KLF5, ICAM-1 and Stat5b, and upregulation of Bax/Bcl-2 ratio: An in vitro and in 
vivo study.

Zhang Y(1), Liu K(1), Zhang Y(1), Qi J(1), Lu B(1), Shi C(1), Yin Y(1), Cai W(1),
Li W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang 050000, P.R. China.

Identification of novel botanicals that can selectively induce apoptosis and
arrest growth of cancer cells without producing cytotoxic effects is highly
appreciable for cancer therapy. The present study aimed to investigate the
possibility of acetylbritannilactone (ABL) derivative
5-(5-(ethylperoxy)pentan-2-yl)-6-methyl-3-methylene-2-oxo-2,3,3a,4,7,7a-hexahydro
ben-zofuran-4-yl2-(6-methoxynaphthalen-2-yl) propanoate (ABL-N) as a therapeutic 
agent in human prostate cancer and potential mechanisms. Human prostate cancer
cells were treated with ABL-N of different concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 30 and
40 µmol/l). Cell viability, migration and apoptosis were determined. Activities
of caspases were assayed, as well as protein expression of cancer-related
proteins KLF5, Stat5b and ICAM-1 in PC3 cells. The therapeutic effect of ABL-N
was further evaluated in our tumor xenografts. ABL-N inhibited growth of prostate
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner, without obvious effect on normal human
prostate epithelial PrEC cells. ABL-N administration induced apoptosis of
PC3 cells in a dose-dependent manner, along with the enhanced activity of
caspases and increased Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. Expression of KLF5, Stat5b and ICAM-1 was
significantly downregulated in PC3 cells. Our in vivo study further confirmed
that ABL-N significantly inhibited the tumor growth of PC3 cells in the xenograft
mouse model. ABL-N induces apoptosis of prostate cancer cells through activation 
of caspases, increasing the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2, as well as suppression of KLF5,
Stat5b and ICAM-1 expressions. The present study indicated that ABL-N may be a
potential therapeutic drug for human prostate cancer, and our data supported
further studies to explore the therapeutic potential of ABL-N in other types of
human cancer.

PMID: 26397390  [PubMed - in process]


34. Cell Signal. 2015 Dec;27(12):2434-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.09.010. Epub
2015 Sep 22.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B (STAT5B) modulates adipocyte 
differentiation via MOF.

Gao P(1), Zhang Y(2), Liu Y(3), Chen J(4), Zong C(5), Yu C(6), Cui S(7), Gao
W(8), Qin D(9), Sun W(10), Li X(11), Wang X(12).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 
250012, China. Electronic address: gaopengts@163.com. (2)The Department of Cell
Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China; Center for 
Reproductive Medicine, National Research Center for Assisted reproductive
Technology and Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for Reproductive
Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Jinan 250021, China. Electronic address:
yc.zhang@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Endocrinology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital,
Qingdao 266071, China. Electronic address: sduliuyuantao@163.com. (4)The
Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012,
China. Electronic address: chenjc1988@126.com. (5)The Department of Cell Biology,
Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: 
zongchen1203@163.com. (6)The Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: yc-1127@163.com.
(7)The Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 
250012, China. Electronic address: csup123@yeah.net. (8)The Department of Cell
Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic 
address: weinana0398@163.com. (9)The Department of Cell Biology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address:
18364135491@163.com. (10)Department of Nephrology, the Second Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan 250033, China. Electronic address:
sunwenchuan111@163.com. (11)The Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address:
lixia1666@sdu.edu.cn. (12)The Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China; Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences for
Chronic Degenerative Diseases in Universities of Shandong (Shandong University), 
Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: xdongw@sdu.edu.cn.

The role and mechanism of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B
(STAT5B) in adipogenesis remain unclear. In this study, our data showed that
Males absent on the first (MOF) protein expression was increased during 3 T3-L1
preadipocytes differentiation accompanied with STAT5B expression increasing.
Over-expression STAT5B enhanced MOF promoter trans-activation in HeLa cells.
Mutagenesis assay and ChIP analysis exhibited that STAT5B was able to bind MOF
promoter. Knocking-down STAT5B in 3 T3-L1 preadipocytes led to decreased
expression of MOF, but resulted in increased expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a
(C/EBPa) and fatty acid-binding protein 4 (Fabp4), which were important factors
or enzymes for adipogenesis. We also found that knocking-down MOF in 3 T3-L1
preadipocytes resulted in increased expression of PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa and Fabp4, which 
was in the same trend as STAT5B knocking-down. Over-expression MOF resulted in
reduced promoter trans-activation activity of C/EBPa. These results suggest that 
STAT5B and MOF work as negative regulators in adipogenesis, and STAT5B modulates 
preadipocytes differentiation partially by regulating MOF expression.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26388045  [PubMed - in process]


35. Leuk Res. 2015 Sep 11. pii: S0145-2126(15)30379-9. doi:
10.1016/j.leukres.2015.09.004. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT transcript levels in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: STAT1 and STAT3
transcript correlations.

Adamaki M(1), Tsotra M(1), Vlahopoulos S(1), Zampogiannis A(1), Papavassiliou
AG(2), Moschovi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit, First Department of Pediatrics, University
of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sofia" Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens,
Greece. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Athens Medical
School, 11527 Athens, Greece. (3)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit, First
Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sofia"
Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece. Electronic address:
mmoschov@med.uoa.gr.

We investigated the transcript levels of genes STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A and STAT5B in
the diagnostic samples of childhood ALL patients and compared them to those of
healthy controls in order to characterize STAT gene expression in childhood ALL. 
As compared to controls, ALL patients exhibit markedly decreased transcript
levels in all four genes investigated. STAT1 and STAT3 are significantly
correlated in ALL patients as opposed to controls (P<0.0005). Patients with low
transcript levels of STAT1 and STAT3 survive, regardless of minimal residual
disease status and relapse. Lower transcript levels appear in association with a 
particularly high survival outcome in the ALL patients. The identification of
aberrant expression profiles provides insight into the role of STAT genes in the 
development of childhood ALL and enables development of patient-tailored
therapeutic approaches in cases of resistant disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26385310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Dec;39(12):1719-29. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000503.

Primary CNS T-cell Lymphomas: A Clinical, Morphologic, Immunophenotypic, and
Molecular Analysis.

Menon MP(1), Nicolae A, Meeker H, Raffeld M, Xi L, Jegalian AG, Miller DC,
Pittaluga S, Jaffe ES.

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD †Department of Pathology
and Anatomical Sciences, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, MO.

Primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphomas are relatively rare with the most 
common subtype being diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Primary CNS T-cell lymphomas 
(PCNSTL) account for <5% of CNS lymphomas. We report the clinical, morphologic,
immunophenotypic, and molecular characteristics of 18 PCNSTLs. Fifteen cases were
classified as peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified, 2 of which
were of <U+03B3>d T-cell derivation and 1 was TCR silent; there was 1 anaplastic large
cell lymphoma, ALK-positive and 2 anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-negative.
Median age was 58.5 years (range, 21 to 81 y), with an M:F ratio of 11:7. Imaging
results showed that 15 patients had supratentorial lesions. Regardless of
subtype, necrosis and perivascular cuffing of tumor cells were frequently
observed (11/18 cases). CD3 was positive in all cases but 1; 10/17 were
CD8-positive, and 5/17 were CD4-positive. Most cases studied had a cytotoxic
phenotype with expression of TIA1 (13/15) and granzyme-B (9/13). Polymerase chain
reaction analysis of T-cell receptor <U+03B3> rearrangement confirmed a T-cell clone in 
14 cases with adequate DNA quality. Next-generation sequencing showed somatic
mutations in 36% of cases studied; 2 had >1 mutation, and none showed overlapping
mutations. These included mutations in DNMT3A, KRAS, JAK3, STAT3, STAT5B, GNB1,
and TET2 genes, genes implicated previously in other T-cell neoplasms. The
outcome was heterogenous; 2 patients are alive without disease, 4 are alive with 
disease, and 6 died of disease. In conclusion, PCNSTLs are histologically and
genomically heterogenous with frequent phenotypic aberrancy and a cytotoxic
phenotype in most cases.

PMCID: PMC4644095 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26379152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 Oct;69:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.07.011. Epub
2015 Jul 17.

Down-regulation of PRKCB1 expression in Han Chinese patients with subsyndromal
symptomatic depression.

Guo X(1), Li Z(2), Zhang C(2), Yi Z(2), Li H(2), Cao L(2), Yuan C(2), Hong W(2), 
Wu Z(2), Peng D(2), Chen J(2), Xia W(2), Zhao G(2), Wang F(2), Yu S(3), Cui D(3),
Xu Y(3), Golam CM(4), Smith AK(5), Wang T(6), Fang Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mood Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department of Cellular and
Molecular Physiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, United States;
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06511, United States. (2)Division of Mood Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health
Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China. (4)Magnetic Resonance Research Center, Department of
Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, United
States. (5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University
School of Medicine, 101 Woodruff Circle, Suite 4000, Atlanta, GA 30322, United
States. (6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06511, United States. (7)Division of Mood Disorders, Shanghai Mental
Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: yirufang@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Subsyndromal symptomatic depression (SSD) is a common disease with
significant social dysfunction. However, SSD is still not well understood and the
pathophysiology of it remains unclear.
METHODS: We classified 48 candidate genes for SSD according to our previous study
into clusters and pathways using DAVID Bioinformatics Functional Annotation Tool.
We further replicated the result by using real-time Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
studies to examine the expression of identified genes (i.e., STAT5b, PKCB1, ABL1 
and NRAS) in another group of Han Chinese patients with SSD (n = 50). We further 
validated the result by examining PRKCB1 expression collected from MDD patients
(n = 20). To test whether a deficit in PRKCB1 expression leads to dysregulation
in PRKCB1 dependent transcript networks, we tested mRNA expression levels for the
remaining 44 genes out of 48 genes in SSD patients. Finally, the power of
discovery was improved by incorporating information from Quantitative Trait
(eQTL) analysis.
RESULTS: The results showed that the PRCKB1 gene expression in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) was 33.3% down-regulated in SSD patients (n = 48,
t = 3.202, p = 0.002), and a more dramatic (n = 17, 49%) down-regulation in MDD
patients than control (n = 49, t = 2.114, p = 0.001). We also identified 37 genes
that displayed a strong correlation with PRKCB1 mRNA expression levels in SSD
patients. The expression of PRKCB1 was regulated by multiple single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) both at the transcript level and exon level.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we first found a significant decrease of PRCKB1 mRNA 
expression in SSD, suggesting PRKCB1 might be the candidate gene and biomarker
for SSD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26343587  [PubMed - in process]


38. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Nov;47(11):559-68. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00062.2015. Epub 2015 Sep 1.

Identifying growth hormone-regulated enhancers in the Igf1 locus.

Alzhanov D(1), Mukherjee A(1), Rotwein P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon; and. (2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Paul L. 
Foster School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso,
Texas peter.rotwein@ttuhsc.edu.

Growth hormone (GH) plays a central role in regulating somatic growth and in
controlling multiple physiological processes in humans and other vertebrates. A
key agent in many GH actions is the secreted peptide, IGF-I. As established
previously, GH stimulates IGF-I gene expression via the Stat5b transcription
factor, leading to production of IGF-I mRNAs and proteins. However, the precise
mechanisms by which GH-activated Stat5b promotes IGF-I gene transcription have
not been defined. Unlike other GH-regulated genes, there are no Stat5b sites near
either of the two IGF-I gene promoters. Although dispersed GH-activated Stat5b
binding elements have been mapped in rodent Igf1 gene chromatin, it is unknown
how these distal sites might function as potential transcriptional enhancers.
Here we have addressed mechanisms of regulation of IGF-I gene transcription by GH
by generating cell lines in which the rat Igf1 chromosomal locus has been
incorporated into the mouse genome. Using these cells we find that physiological 
levels of GH rapidly and potently activate Igf1 gene transcription while
stimulating physical interactions in chromatin between inducible Stat5b-binding
elements and the Igf1 promoters. We have thus developed a robust experimental
platform for elucidating how dispersed transcriptional enhancers control Igf1
gene expression under different biological conditions.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4629005 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26330488  [PubMed - in process]


39. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3427-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402856. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

The Transcription Factor Ehf Is Involved in TGF-ß-Induced Suppression of FceRI
and c-Kit Expression and FceRI-Mediated Activation in Mast Cells.

Yamazaki S(1), Nakano N(2), Honjo A(1), Hara M(3), Maeda K(3), Nishiyama C(4),
Kitaura J(3), Ohtsuka Y(5), Okumura K(3), Ogawa H(3), Shimizu T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan;
and. (2)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; nbnakano@juntendo.ac.jp. (3)Atopy (Allergy)
Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421,
Japan; (4)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; Department of Biological Science and Technology,
Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo 
125-8585, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan; and.

FceRI, which is composed of a, ß, and <U+03B3> subunits, plays an important role in
IgE-mediated allergic responses. TGF-ß1 has been reported to suppress FceRI and
stem cell factor receptor c-Kit expression on mast cell surfaces and to suppress 
mast cell activation induced by cross-linking of FceRI. However, the molecular
mechanism by which these expressions and activation are suppressed by TGF-ß1
remains unclear. In this study, we found that the expression of Ets homologous
factor (Ehf), a member of the Ets family transcriptional factors, is upregulated 
by TGF-ß/Smad signaling in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs). Forced
expression of Ehf in BMMCs repressed the transcription of genes encoding FceRIa, 
FceRIß, and c-Kit, resulting in a reduction in cell surface FceRI and c-Kit
expression. Additionally, forced expression of Ehf suppressed FceRI-mediated
degranulation and cytokine production. Ehf inhibited the promoter activity of
genes encoding FceRIa, FceRIß, and c-Kit by binding to these gene promoters.
Furthermore, the mRNA levels of Gata1, Gata2, and Stat5b were lower in BMMCs
stably expressing Ehf compared with control cells. Because GATA-1 and GATA-2 are 
positive regulators of FceRI and c-Kit expression, decreased expression of GATAs 
may be also involved in the reduction of FceRI and c-Kit expression. Decreased
expression of Stat5 may contribute to the suppression of cytokine production by
BMMCs. In part, mast cell response to TGF-ß1 was mimicked by forced expression of
Ehf, suggesting that TGF-ß1 suppresses FceRI and c-Kit expression and suppresses 
FceRI-mediated activation through upregulation of Ehf.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26297757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2015 Jun;15 Suppl:S161-6. doi:
10.1016/j.clml.2015.02.012.

Investigating the Role of JAK/STAT Pathway on Dasatinib-Induced Apoptosis for CML
Cell Model K562.

Dalgiç CT(1), Kaymaz BT(2), Özkan MC(3), Dalmizrak A(2), Sahin F(3), Saydam G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir,
Turkey. Electronic address: dr_ceydat@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Medical
Biology, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey. (3)Department of
Hematology, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey.

We aimed to evaluate the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of dasatinib
(BMS-354825) on K562 chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells and to examine the
roles of STAT genes on dasatinib-induced apoptosis. The results showed that
dasatinib decreased proliferation and induced apoptosis in K562 cells in a dose- 
and time-dependent manner. mRNA and protein levels of STAT5A and STAT5B genes
were significantly reduced in dasatinib-treated K562 cells. These data indicated 
that STAT inhibition by dasatinib might be therapeutic in JAK/STAT
pathway-associated malignancies after confirmation with clinical studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297271  [PubMed - in process]


41. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 15;43(18):8774-89. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv776. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Loss of EZH2 results in precocious mammary gland development and activation of
STAT5-dependent genes.

Yoo KH(1), Oh S(2), Kang K(3), Hensel T(1), Robinson GW(1), Hennighausen L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA Department of Nanobiomedical Science and BK21 PLUS NBM Global Research Center
for Regenerative Medicine, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714,
Republic of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes 
of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, 
Chungnam 330-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology,
National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA lotharh@mail.nih.gov.

Establishment and differentiation of mammary alveoli during pregnancy are
controlled by prolactin through the transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B
(STAT5), which also regulate temporal activation of mammary signature genes. This
study addressed the question whether the methyltransferase and transcriptional
co-activator EZH2 controls the differentiation clock of mammary epithelium.
Ablation of Ezh2 from mammary stem cells resulted in precocious differentiation
of alveolar epithelium during pregnancy and the activation of mammary-specific
STAT5 target genes. This coincided with enhanced occupancy of these loci by
STAT5, EZH1 and RNA Pol II. Limited activation of differentiation-specific genes 
was observed in mammary epithelium lacking both EZH2 and STAT5, suggesting a
modulating but not mandatory role for STAT5. Loss of EZH2 did not result in overt
changes in genome-wide and gene-specific H3K27me3 profiles, suggesting
compensation through enhanced EZH1 recruitment. Differentiated mammary epithelia 
did not form in the combined absence of EZH1 and EZH2. Transplantation
experiments failed to demonstrate a role for EZH2 in the activity of mammary stem
and progenitor cells. In summary, while EZH1 and EZH2 serve redundant functions
in the establishment of H3K27me3 marks and the formation of mammary alveoli, the 
presence of EZH2 is required to control progressive differentiation of milk
secreting epithelium during pregnancy.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2015.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4605299
PMID: 26250110  [PubMed - in process]


42. Immunity. 2015 Aug 18;43(2):240-50. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.06.023. Epub 2015 
Jul 28.

Out-of-Sequence Signal 3 Paralyzes Primary CD4(+) T-Cell-Dependent Immunity.

Sckisel GD(1), Bouchlaka MN(1), Monjazeb AM(2), Crittenden M(3), Curti BD(3),
Wilkins DE(4), Alderson KA(4), Sungur CM(1), Ames E(1), Mirsoian A(1), Reddy
A(1), Alexander W(5), Soulika A(6), Blazar BR(7), Longo DL(8), Wiltrout RH(9),
Murphy WJ(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California,
Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. (2)Department of Radiation-Oncology, School of 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. (3)Earle A.
Chiles Research Institute, Robert W. Franz Cancer Center, Providence Portland
Medical Center, Portland, OR 97213, USA; The Oregon Clinic, Portland, OR 97220,
USA. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Nevada, Reno
School of Medicine, Reno, NV 89557, USA. (5)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3050, Australia. (6)Department of
Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA 
95817, USA; Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriner's Hospitals
for Children - Northern California, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. (7)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation and the University of
Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. (8)Laboratory of Genetics,
National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (9)Cancer and Inflammation
Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (10)Department of
Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA 
95817, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. Electronic address:
wmjmurphy@ucdavis.edu.

Primary T cell activation involves the integration of three distinct signals
delivered in sequence: (1) antigen recognition, (2) costimulation, and (3)
cytokine-mediated differentiation and expansion. Strong immunostimulatory events 
such as immunotherapy or infection induce profound cytokine release causing
"bystander" T cell activation, thereby increasing the potential for
autoreactivity and need for control. We show that during strong stimulation, a
profound suppression of primary CD4(+) T-cell-mediated immune responses ensued
and was observed across preclinical models and patients undergoing high-dose
interleukin-2 (IL-2) therapy. This suppression targeted naive CD4(+) but not
CD8(+) T cells and was mediated through transient suppressor of cytokine
signaling-3 (SOCS3) inhibition of the STAT5b transcription factor signaling
pathway. These events resulted in complete paralysis of primary CD4(+) T cell
activation, affecting memory generation and induction of autoimmunity as well as 
impaired viral clearance. These data highlight the critical regulation of naive
CD4(+) T cells during inflammatory conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4770886 [Available on 2016-08-18]
PMID: 26231116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1061-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.3358. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Exome sequencing identifies somatic mutations of DDX3X in natural killer/T-cell
lymphoma.

Jiang L(1), Gu ZH(1), Yan ZX(1), Zhao X(1), Xie YY(1), Zhang ZG(1), Pan CM(1), Hu
Y(2), Cai CP(2), Dong Y(3), Huang JY(1), Wang L(1), Shen Y(1), Meng G(1), Zhou
JF(4), Hu JD(5), Wang JF(6), Liu YH(7), Yang LH(8), Zhang F(9), Wang JM(10), Wang
Z(11), Peng ZG(12), Chen FY(13), Sun ZM(14), Ding H(15), Shi JM(16), Hou J(17),
Yan JS(18), Shi JY(1), Xu L(1), Li Y(1), Lu J(1), Zheng Z(1), Xue W(1), Zhao
WL(1,)(19), Chen Z(1,)(19), Chen SJ(1,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) School of Medicine and
Collaborative Innovation Center of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Rui Jin Hospital, SJTU School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. (4)Department of
Hematology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Tongji Hospital, Wuhan, China. (5)Fujian Institute of Hematology,
Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China. (6)Department of
Pathology, Shanxi Oncology Hospital, Taiyuan, China. (7)Department of Oncology,
Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing, China. (8)Department of Hematology, Second
Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China. (9)Department
of Hematology, Anhui Oncology Hospital, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, China.
(10)Department of Hematology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China. (11)Department of Hematology, Beijing Friendship
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (12)Department of
Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
China. (13)Department of Hematology, Renji Hospital, SJTU School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (14)Department of Hematology, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei, 
China. (15)Department of Radiation Oncology, Eye and ENT Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (16)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(17)Department of Hematology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China. (18)Department of Hematology, Second Hospital of
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. (19)Pôle de Recherches Sino-Français en
Science du Vivant et Génomique, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Shanghai,
China.

Natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTCL) is a malignant proliferation of CD56(+)
and cytoCD3(+) lymphocytes with aggressive clinical course, which is prevalent in
Asian and South American populations. The molecular pathogenesis of NKTCL has
largely remained elusive. We identified somatic gene mutations in 25 people with 
NKTCL by whole-exome sequencing and confirmed them in an extended validation
group of 80 people by targeted sequencing. Recurrent mutations were most
frequently located in the RNA helicase gene DDX3X (21/105 subjects, 20.0%), tumor
suppressors (TP53 and MGA), JAK-STAT-pathway molecules (STAT3 and STAT5B) and
epigenetic modifiers (MLL2, ARID1A, EP300 and ASXL3). As compared to wild-type
protein, DDX3X mutants exhibited decreased RNA-unwinding activity, loss of
suppressive effects on cell-cycle progression in NK cells and transcriptional
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK pathways. Clinically, patients with DDX3X mutations 
presented a poor prognosis. Our work thus contributes to the understanding of the
disease mechanism of NKTCL.

PMID: 26192917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:747645. doi: 10.1155/2015/747645. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

IFI16 Expression Is Related to Selected Transcription Factors during B-Cell
Differentiation.

Piccaluga PP(1), Agostinelli C(1), Fuligni F(1), Righi S(1), Tripodo C(2), Re
MC(3), Clò A(3), Miserocchi A(3), Morini S(3), Gariglio M(4), Ferri GG(5),
Rinaldi-Ceroni A(5), Piccin O(5), De Andrea M(6), Pileri SA(1), Landolfo S(6),
Gibellini D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Hematopathology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (2)Department of Human Pathology, University of Palermo,
90127 Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty
Medicine, Bologna University Medical School Unit of Microbiology, S. Orsola
Malpighi Hospital, 40138 Bologna, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Medical School of Novara, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Otolaryngology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (6)Department of Public Health and Microbiology, University
of Turin, 10126 Turin, Italy. (7)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic,
University of Verona, 35124 Verona, Italy.

The interferon-inducible DNA sensor IFI16 is involved in the modulation of
cellular survival, proliferation, and differentiation. In the hematopoietic
system, IFI16 is consistently expressed in the CD34+ stem cells and in peripheral
blood lymphocytes; however, little is known regarding its regulation during
maturation of B- and T-cells. We explored the role of IFI16 in normal B-cell
subsets by analysing its expression and relationship with the major transcription
factors involved in germinal center (GC) development and plasma-cell (PC)
maturation. IFI16 mRNA was differentially expressed in B-cell subsets with
significant decrease in IFI16 mRNA in GC and PCs with respect to naïve and memory
subsets. IFI16 mRNA expression is inversely correlated with a few master
regulators of B-cell differentiation such as BCL6, XBP1, POU2AF1, and BLIMP1. In 
contrast, IFI16 expression positively correlated with STAT3, REL, SPIB, RELA,
RELB, IRF4, STAT5B, and STAT5A. ARACNE algorithm indicated a direct regulation of
IFI16 by BCL6, STAT5B, and RELB, whereas the relationship between IFI16 and the
other factors is modulated by intermediate factors. In addition, analysis of the 
CD40 signaling pathway showed that IFI16 gene expression directly correlated with
NF-<U+03BA>B activation, indicating that IFI16 could be considered an upstream modulator
of NF-<U+03BA>B in human B-cells.

PMCID: PMC4491573
PMID: 26185770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Anim Genet. 2015 Aug;46(4):371-80. doi: 10.1111/age.12306. Epub 2015 Jul 7.

Association study of single nucleotide polymorphisms in JAK2 and STAT5B genes and
their differential mRNA expression with mastitis susceptibility in Chinese
Holstein cattle.

Usman T(1,)(2), Wang Y(1), Liu C(1), Wang X(1), Zhang Y(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of
Agriculture & National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, College of
Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193,
P.R. China. (2)College of Veterinary Sciences and Animal Husbandry, Abdul Wali
Khan University Mardan, Mardan, 23200, Pakistan.

The JAK-STAT pathway plays a key role in mediating immune responses. The genetic 
effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in JAK2 and STAT5B were
investigated for serum cytokines, mastitis indicators and productions traits in a
population of 468 Chinese Holstein cattle. Pooled DNA sequencing revealed one SNP
(BTA8:g.39645396A>G) in JAK2 and two SNPs (BTA19:g.43673888A>G and
BTA19:g.43660093T>C) in STAT5B. A fixed effect model considering the effects of
SNPs, parity, herd, season and year of calving was used by way of the general
linear model procedure of sas. Genotype frequencies of these SNPs in the
population were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P > 0.05). A novel SNP
(g.39645396A>G) in JAK2 was predicted to change the amino acid from lysine to
asparagine and was significantly associated with the somatic cell count (SCC) and
somatic cell score (SCS), whereas g.43673888A>G in STAT5B was significantly
associated with SCC, SCS and interleukin-4 (IL-4) (P < 0.05). The dominant effect
of g.39645396A>G in JAK2 was significant for SCS, and its additive effect was
significant for SCC, whereas the dominant effect of g.43673888A>G in STAT5B was
significant for SCS and IL-4 (P < 0.05). The combination of g.39645396A>G in JAK2
and g.43673888A>G in STAT5B showed a significant effect on SCC, SCS, IL-4 and
TNF-a (P < 0.05). As for mRNA expression analysis, the AA genotype g.39645396A>G 
and GG genotype g.43673888A>G indicated higher mRNA expression level and were
significantly different from other genotypes (P < 0.05). The results imply that
JAK2 and STAT5B genes could be useful candidate genes, and the identified
polymorphisms might potentially be strong genetic markers for selection of dairy 
cattle against mastitis development.

© 2015 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

PMID: 26154111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Cancer. 2015 Sep 15;137(6):E10-1. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29552.

Erratum: nuclear EGFRvIII-STAT5b complex contributes to glioblastoma cell
survival by direct activation of the Bcl-XL promoter.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 1;132(3):509-20.

PMID: 26153644  [PubMed]


47. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0130497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130497.
eCollection 2015.

Genome Scan for Selection in Structured Layer Chicken Populations Exploiting
Linkage Disequilibrium Information.

Gholami M(1), Reimer C(1), Erbe M(1), Preisinger R(2), Weigend A(3), Weigend
S(3), Servin B(4), Simianer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Breeding and Genetics Group, Department of Animal Sciences,
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (2)LOHMANN Tierzucht GMBH,
Cuxhaven, Germany. (3)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics (ING),
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Neustadt, Germany. (4)Laboratoire Génétique,
Physiologie et Systèmes d'Elevage, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique,
Castanet-Tolosan, France.

An increasing interest is being placed in the detection of genes, or genomic
regions, that have been targeted by selection because identifying signatures of
selection can lead to a better understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships.
A common strategy for the detection of selection signatures is to compare samples
from distinct populations and to search for genomic regions with outstanding
genetic differentiation. The aim of this study was to detect selective signatures
in layer chicken populations using a recently proposed approach, hapFLK, which
exploits linkage disequilibrium information while accounting appropriately for
the hierarchical structure of populations. We performed the analysis on 70
individuals from three commercial layer breeds (White Leghorn, White Rock and
Rhode Island Red), genotyped for approximately 1 million SNPs. We found a total
of 41 and 107 regions with outstanding differentiation or similarity using hapFLK
and its single SNP counterpart FLK respectively. Annotation of selection
signature regions revealed various genes and QTL corresponding to productions
traits, for which layer breeds were selected. A number of the detected genes were
associated with growth and carcass traits, including IGF-1R, AGRP and STAT5B. We 
also annotated an interesting gene associated with the dark brown feather color
mutational phenotype in chickens (SOX10). We compared FST, FLK and hapFLK and
demonstrated that exploiting linkage disequilibrium information and accounting
for hierarchical population structure decreased the false detection rate.

PMCID: PMC4494984
PMID: 26151449  [PubMed - in process]


48. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jun 19;15:474. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1445-0.

The combination of methylsulfonylmethane and tamoxifen inhibits the Jak2/STAT5b
pathway and synergistically inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in ER-positive
breast cancer xenografts.

S P N(1), Darvin P(2), Yoo YB(3), Joung YH(4), Kang DY(5), Kim DN(6), Hwang
TS(7), Kim SY(8), Kim WS(9), Lee HK(10), Cho BW(11), Kim HS(12), Park KD(13),
Park JH(14), Chang SH(15), Yang YM(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
nipinsp@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute 
of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
pramoddarvin@gmail.com. (3)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea. 0117652771@kuh.ac.kr. (4)Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical Science and
Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea. adada76@nate.com.
(5)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
kdy6459@naver.com. (6)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute 
of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
don1106@nate.com. (7)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute
of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
tshwang@kuh.ac.kr. (8)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute 
of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
sangyoon.kim@kku.ac.kr. (9)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and
Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul,
143-701, Korea. wskim@kuh.ac.kr. (10)Genomic Informatics Center, Hankyong
National University, Anseong, Korea. breedlee@empal.com. (11)Department of Animal
Science, College of Life Sciences, Pusan National University, Pusan, Korea.
bwcho@pusan.ac.kr. (12)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural
Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan, Korea. khs307@pusan.ac.kr.
(13)Genomic Informatics Center, Hankyong National University, Anseong, Korea.
doobalo@hknu.ac.kr. (14)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and
Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul,
143-701, Korea. nihpark@yahoo.com. (15)Department of Preventive Medicine, School 
of Medicine, Konkuk University, Chungju, 380-701, Korea. schang@kku.ac.kr.
(16)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.
ymyang@kku.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy, which reduces the dosage intensity of the
individual drugs while increasing their efficacy, is not a novel approach for the
treatment of cancer. Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is an organic sulfur compound
shown to act against tumor cells. Tamoxifen is a commercially available
therapeutic agent for breast malignancies.
METHODS: In the current study, we analyzed the combinatorial effect of MSM and
tamoxifen on the suppression of ER-positive breast cancer xenograft growth and
metastasis. Additionally, we also validated the molecular targets by which the
drug combination regulated tumor growth and metastasis.
RESULTS: We observed that the combination of MSM and tamoxifen regulated cell
viability and migration in vitro. The intragastric administration of MSM and
subcutaneous implantation of tamoxifen tablets led to tumor growth suppression
and inhibition of the Janus kinase 2 (Jak2)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b) pathway. Our study also assessed the regulation of
signaling molecules implicated in the growth, progression, differentiation, and
migration of cancer cells, such as Jak2, STAT5b, insulin-like growth factor-1Rß, 
and their phosphorylation status.
CONCLUSIONS: Study results indicated that this combination therapy inhibited
tumor growth and metastasis. Therefore, this drug combination may have a
synergistic and powerful anticancer effect against breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4472404
PMID: 26084564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;173(3):291-6. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0398. Epub 2015 Jun 
1.

STAT5B mutations in heterozygous state have negative impact on height: another
clue in human stature heritability.

Scalco RC(1), Hwa V(1), Domené HM(1), Jasper HG(1), Belgorosky A(1), Marino R(1),
Pereira AM(1), Tonelli CA(1), Wit JM(1), Rosenfeld RG(1), Jorge AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia GeneticaLaboratorio de Endocrinologia Celular e
Molecular LIM/25, Disciplina de Endocrinologia da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Avenida Dr Arnaldo, 455 5° Andar Sala 5340, 01246-903 
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, BrazilDivision of EndocrinologyCincinnati Center for Growth
Disorders, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229,
USACentro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas 'Dr César Bergadá' (CEDIE)CONICET -
FEI - División de Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, C1425EFD
Buenos Aires, ArgentinaEndocrine ServiceHospital de Pediatria Garrahan, Ciudad
Autonoma de Buenos Aires Pozos 1881, 1245 Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDivision of
EndocrinologyDepartment of Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC
Leiden, The NetherlandsUniversidade do Extremo Sul Catarinense88806-000 Criciúma,
Santa Catarina, BrazilDepartment of PediatricsLeiden University Medical Center,
2300 RC Leiden, The NetherlandsDepartment of PediatricsOregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. (2)Unidade de Endocrinologia
GeneticaLaboratorio de Endocrinologia Celular e Molecular LIM/25, Disciplina de
Endocrinologia da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Avenida Dr 
Arnaldo, 455 5° Andar Sala 5340, 01246-903 Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, BrazilDivision
of EndocrinologyCincinnati Center for Growth Disorders, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USACentro de Investigaciones
Endocrinológicas 'Dr César Bergadá' (CEDIE)CONICET - FEI - División de
Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, C1425EFD Buenos Aires,
ArgentinaEndocrine ServiceHospital de Pediatria Garrahan, Ciudad Autonoma de
Buenos Aires Pozos 1881, 1245 Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDivision of
EndocrinologyDepartment of Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC
Leiden, The NetherlandsUniversidade do Extremo Sul Catarinense88806-000 Criciúma,
Santa Catarina, BrazilDepartment of PediatricsLeiden University Medical Center,
2300 RC Leiden, The NetherlandsDepartment of PediatricsOregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA alexj@usp.br alexj@pq.cnpq.br.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: GH insensitivity with immune dysfunction caused by STAT5B 
mutations is an autosomal recessive condition. Heterozygous mutations in other
genes involved in growth regulation were previously associated with a mild height
reduction. Our objective was to assess for the first time the phenotype of
heterozygous STAT5B mutations.
METHODS: We genotyped and performed clinical and laboratory evaluations in 52
relatives of two previously described Brazilian brothers with homozygous STAT5B
c.424_427del mutation (21 heterozygous). Additionally, we obtained height data
and genotype from 1104 adult control individuals from the same region in Brazil
and identified five additional families harboring the same mutation (18
individuals, 11 heterozygous). Furthermore, we gathered the available height data
from first-degree relatives of patients with homozygous STAT5B mutations (17
individuals from seven families). Data from heterozygous individuals and
non-carriers were compared.
RESULTS: Individuals carrying heterozygous STAT5B c.424_427del mutation were 0.6 
SDS shorter than their non-carrier relatives (P = 0.009). Heterozygous subjects
also had significantly lower SDS for serum concentrations of IGF1 (P = 0.028) and
IGFBP3 (P = 0.02) than their non-carrier relatives. The 17 heterozygous
first-degree relatives of patients carrying homozygous STAT5B mutations had an
average height SDS of -1.4 ± 0.8 when compared with population-matched controls
(P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: STAT5B mutations in the heterozygous state have a significant
negative impact on height (~ 3.9 cm). This effect is milder than the effect seen 
in the homozygous state, with height usually within the normal range. Our results
support the hypothesis that heterozygosity of rare pathogenic variants
contributes to normal height heritability.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26034074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;173(3):283-90. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-1157. Epub 2015 Jun
1.

GH signaling in human adipose and muscle tissue during 'feast and famine':
amplification of exercise stimulation following fasting compared to glucose
administration.

Vendelbo MH(1), Christensen B(2), Grønbæk SB(3), Høgild M(3), Madsen M(2),
Pedersen SB(3), Jørgensen JO(3), Jessen N(2), Møller N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Endocrinology and Internal MedicineNuclear Medicine and PET
CenterResearch Laboratory for Biochemical PathologyAarhus University Hospital,
Nørrebrogade 44, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark Departments of Endocrinology and Internal
MedicineNuclear Medicine and PET CenterResearch Laboratory for Biochemical
PathologyAarhus University Hospital, Nørrebrogade 44, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark
Mikkel.Vendelbo@ki.au.dk. (2)Departments of Endocrinology and Internal
MedicineNuclear Medicine and PET CenterResearch Laboratory for Biochemical
PathologyAarhus University Hospital, Nørrebrogade 44, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark
Departments of Endocrinology and Internal MedicineNuclear Medicine and PET
CenterResearch Laboratory for Biochemical PathologyAarhus University Hospital,
Nørrebrogade 44, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark. (3)Departments of Endocrinology and
Internal MedicineNuclear Medicine and PET CenterResearch Laboratory for
Biochemical PathologyAarhus University Hospital, Nørrebrogade 44, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Fasting and exercise stimulates, whereas glucose suppresses GH
secretion, but it is uncertain how these conditions impact GH signaling in
peripheral tissues. To test the original 'feast and famine hypothesis' by
Rabinowitz and Zierler, according to which the metabolic effects of GH are
predominant during fasting, we specifically hypothesized that fasting and
exercise act in synergy to increase STAT-5b target gene expression.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Eight healthy men were studied on two occasions in relation
to a 1 h exercise bout: i) with a concomitant i.v. glucose infusion ('feast') and
ii) after a 36 h fast ('famine'). Muscle and fat biopsy specimens were obtained
before, immediately after, and 30 min after exercise.
RESULTS: GH increased during exercise on both examination days and this effect
was amplified by fasting, and free fatty acid (FFA) levels increased after
fasting. STAT-5b phosphorylation increased similarly following exercise on both
occasions. In adipose tissue, suppressors of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) and
SOCS2 were increased after exercise on the fasting day and both fasting and
exercise increased cytokine inducible SH2-containing protein (CISH). In muscle,
SOCS2 and CISH mRNA were persistently increased after fasting. Muscle SOCS1,
SOCS3, and CISH mRNA expression increased, whereas SOCS2 decreased after exercise
on both examination days.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that fasting and exercise act in tandem to
amplify STAT-5b target gene expression (SOCS and CISH) in adipose and muscle
tissue in accordance with the 'feast and famine hypothesis'; the adipose tissue
signaling responses, which hitherto have not been scrutinized, may play a
particular role in promoting FFA mobilization.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26034073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Aug;14(8):1777-93. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0883. Epub
2015 May 29.

Structure-Based Screen Identifies a Potent Small Molecule Inhibitor of Stat5a/b
with Therapeutic Potential for Prostate Cancer and Chronic Myeloid Leukemia.

Liao Z(1), Gu L(1), Vergalli J(1), Mariani SA(1), De Dominici M(1), Lokareddy
RK(2), Dagvadorj A(1), Purushottamachar P(3), McCue PA(4), Trabulsi E(5), Lallas 
CD(5), Gupta S(6), Ellsworth E(1), Blackmon S(1), Ertel A(1), Fortina P(1), Leiby
B(7), Xia G(1), Rui H(8), Hoang DT(1), Gomella LG(5), Cingolani G(2), Njar V(3), 
Pattabiraman N(9), Calabretta B(1), Nevalainen MT(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of Pathology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (5)Department of
Urology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. (6)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Medical
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (7)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (8)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Pathology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(9)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Oncology, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, District of
Columbia. (10)Department of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Urology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. mnevalainen@mcw.edu.

Bypassing tyrosine kinases responsible for Stat5a/b phosphorylation would be
advantageous for therapy development for Stat5a/b-regulated cancers. Here, we
sought to identify small molecule inhibitors of Stat5a/b for lead optimization
and therapy development for prostate cancer and Bcr-Abl-driven leukemias. In
silico screening of chemical structure databases combined with medicinal
chemistry was used for identification of a panel of small molecule inhibitors to 
block SH2 domain-mediated docking of Stat5a/b to the receptor-kinase complex and 
subsequent phosphorylation and dimerization. We tested the efficacy of the lead
compound IST5-002 in experimental models and patient samples of two known
Stat5a/b-driven cancers, prostate cancer and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The 
lead compound inhibitor of Stat5-002 (IST5-002) prevented both Jak2 and
Bcr-Abl-mediated phosphorylation and dimerization of Stat5a/b, and selectively
inhibited transcriptional activity of Stat5a (IC50 = 1.5µmol/L) and Stat5b (IC50 
= 3.5 µmol/L). IST5-002 suppressed nuclear translocation of Stat5a/b, binding to 
DNA and Stat5a/b target gene expression. IST5-002 induced extensive apoptosis of 
prostate cancer cells, impaired growth of prostate cancer xenograft tumors, and
induced cell death in patient-derived prostate cancers when tested ex vivo in
explant organ cultures. Importantly, IST5-002 induced robust apoptotic death not 
only of imatinib-sensitive but also of imatinib-resistant CML cell lines and
primary CML cells from patients. IST5-002 provides a lead structure for further
chemical modifications for clinical development for Stat5a/b-driven solid tumors 
and hematologic malignancies.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4547362 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26026053  [PubMed - in process]


52. Int J Nanomedicine. 2015 Apr 28;10:3231-44. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S81754. eCollection 
2015.

Gold nanoparticle-based beacon to detect STAT5b mRNA expression in living cells: 
a case optimized by bioinformatics screen.

Deng D(1), Li Y(1), Xue J(1), Wang J(1), Ai G(1), Li X(1), Gu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Messenger RNA (mRNA), a single-strand ribonucleic acid with functional gene
information is usually abnormally expressed in cancer cells and has become a
promising biomarker for the study of tumor progress. Hairpin DNA-coated gold
nanoparticle (hDAuNP) beacon containing a bare gold nanoparticle (AuNP) as
fluorescence quencher and thiol-terminated fluorescently labeled stem-loop-stem
oligonucleotide sequences attached by Au-S bond is currently a new nanoscale
biodiagnostic platform capable of mRNA detection, in which the design of the loop
region sequence is crucial for hybridizing with the target mRNA. Hence, in this
study, to improve the sensitivity and selectivity of hDAuNP beacon
simultaneously, the loop region of hairpin DNA was screened by bioinformatics
strategy. Here, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) mRNA
was selected and used as a practical example. The results from the combined
characterizations using optical techniques, flow cytometry assay, and cell
microscopic imaging showed that after optimization, the as-prepared hDAuNP beacon
had higher selectivity and sensitivity for the detection of STAT5b mRNA in living
cells, as compared with our previous beacon. Thus, the bioinformatics method may 
be a promising new strategy for assisting in the designing of the hDAuNP beacon, 
extending its application in the detection of mRNA expression and the resultant
mRNA-based biological processes and disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4422291
PMID: 25987838  [PubMed - in process]


53. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2015 May-Jun;29(3):182-7. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2015.29.4170.

Increased phosphorylation of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, in nasal polyps.

Linke R(1), Pries R, Könnecke M, Bruchhage KL, Böscke R, Gebhard M, Wollenberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Facial Plastic Surgery, University of 
Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) is a recurrent,
benign, extensively proliferating disease that is triggered by inflammation. The 
signaling pathways in sinusitis and the regulation by intracellular signaling
peptides and proteins are not fully understood. Signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) 5a and STAT5b are two closely related phosphokinases
involved in the regulation of diverse cellular functions, including proliferation
and apoptosis.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to investigate the expression,
activation, and distribution of STAT5 Transcription factor in CRSwNP.
METHODS: We studied these transcription factors in tissue samples of nasal polyps
and inferior turbinates from a total of 35 patients with CRSwNP and compared them
with healthy nasal mucosa. The samples were analyzed by using a DNA microarray,
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, a protein array, immunoblot,
immunoprecipitation and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We found equivalent overall expression of STAT5a in all tissue types. We
observed an increase in the expression of STAT5b protein in both polyps and
turbinates of patients with CRSwNP. In addition, STAT5b, but not STAT5a, was
activated by phosphorylation in nasal polyps. Phosphorylated STAT5a/b was not
detectable in the epithelium of turbinates from either patients with CRSwNP or
patients with healthy mucosa, but it was clearly expressed in the epithelium of
nasal polyps.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of these data indicates distinct expression and activation
of STAT5a and STAT5b in nasal polyps, particularly the activation of STAT5b. It
is possible that STAT5b may contribute to the development of nasal polyps.

PMID: 25975249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):2033-8. eCollection 2015.

STAT3 and STAT5b polymorphism contributes to breast cancer risk and clinical
outcomes.

Zhao L(1), Zhang Q(1), Luan X(1), Huang X(1), Zhao S(1), Zhao H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Tumor Hospital of Harbin Medical
University Harbin 150040, China.

We conducted a case-control study in a Chinese population, and investigated the
role of STAT3 rs4796793 and STAT5b rs6503691 polymorphisms in the risk and
clinical outcome of breast cancer. STAT5b rs6503691 polymorphisms and STAT3
rs4796793 polymorphisms were genotyped by TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays on the ABI
7500 fast real-time PCR platform. Unconditional logistic regression analyses
showed that subjects carrying the GG genotype of STAT3 rs4796793 had a
significantly increased risk of breast cancer, with an adjusted OR (95% CI) of
0.35 (0.12-0.95). In the Cox proportional hazards model, we observed that
individuals carrying CG+GG genotype of STAT3 rs4796793 was associated with
reduced risk of death from breast cancer when compared with CC genotype (HR =
0.43, 95% CI = 0.20-0.93). Our study found that STAT3 rs4796793 polymorphism
plays an important role in influence the development and overall survival of
breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4396226
PMID: 25973100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. APMIS. 2015 Jun;123(6):515-22. doi: 10.1111/apm.12381. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Nucleophosmin overexpression is associated with poor survival in astrocytoma.

Kuo YH(1,)(2), Chen YT(1,)(3), Tsai HP(1), Chai CY(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Kwan
AL(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (7)Department of Neurosurgery, University 
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

The multiple functions of the protein nucleophosmin (NPM) include the regulation 
and balance of cell growth, proliferation, and apoptosis. Many cancers have
suspected associations with overexpression of NPM or with mutation of the NPM
gene. Although NPM and anaplastic lymphoma kinase fusion proteins are known to be
related to the Janus Kinase/Signal Transduction and Activator of Transcription
(JAK/STAT) signaling pathway, the relationships of NPM, JAK2, and STAT5 to
astrocytoma remain unclear. Therefore, this study performed histochemical
analyses of expressions of NPM, p-JAK2, and STAT5B proteins in patients with
astrocytoma. The results showed that high NPM expression was significantly
associated with high tumor grade (p = 0.000), old age (p = 0.000), low Karnofsky 
Performance Scale (KPS) score (p = 0.000), and tumor recurrence (p = 0.045). High
p-JAK2 expression was significantly associated with old age (p = 0.000), high
tumor grade (p = 0.000), low KPS score (p = 0.000), and tumor recurrence (p =
0.036). Expression of STAT5B was significantly correlated with tumor grade (p =
0.018) and KPS score (p = 0.002). High expressions of NPM, p-JAK2, and STAT5B
were associated with a short survival time (p = 0.035, 0.003 and 0.002,
respectively). In multivariable analysis, STAT5B expression was a significant
predictor of survival time (p = 0.003). In conclusion, NPM and p-JAK2/STAT5B may 
have important roles in tumor progression, and STAT5B is an independent
prognostic marker of astrocytoma.

© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25907517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Reprod Sci. 2015 Nov;22(11):1358-66. doi: 10.1177/1933719115578923. Epub 2015 Apr
9.

STAT5 is Activated by Epidermal Growth Factor and Induces Proliferation and
Invasion in Trophoblastic Cells.

Ospina-Prieto S(1), Chaiwangyen W(1), Pastuschek J(1), Schleussner E(1), Markert 
UR(2), Morales-Prieto DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Placenta-Lab, Bachstraße, 
Jena, Germany. (2)Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena,
Placenta-Lab, Bachstraße, Jena, Germany markert@med.uni-jena.de.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is expressed by decidual and trophoblast cells and 
influences manifold cellular functions during embryo implantation. Thus far,
signaling of EGF via Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5 (STAT5)
has been only partially investigated. STAT5 stimulates proliferation and cell
cycle progression in several cell types. Its dysregulation is associated with
pregnancy. The aim of this study was to investigate STAT5 activation and function
mediated by EGF in 2 trophoblastic cell lines, namely, HTR8/SVneo and JAR.
Additionally, expression of STAT5B messenger RNA (mRNA) in trophoblast models has
been compared to that of primary cells isolated from term placentas. Our results 
demonstrate the highest STAT5B mRNA expression in isolated trophoblast cells,
lower expression in HTR8/SVneo cells, and the significantly lowest in JAR cells. 
Moreover, EGF-mediated STAT5 activation increases cell proliferation and
viability in both cell lines. The STAT5 knockdown results in significant decrease
in cell viability induced by EGF. Only in HTR8/SVneo cells, invasion decreases
after STAT5 silencing and this effect cannot be rescued by further addition of
EGF. These results demonstrate that STAT5 activated by EGF constitutes an
important cascade for the regulation of cell proliferation and invasion in
trophoblast cells.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25862676  [PubMed - in process]


57. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 9;10(4):e0122935. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122935.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome markers of viral persistence in naturally-infected andes virus
(bunyaviridae) seropositive long-tailed pygmy rice rats.

Campbell CL(1), Torres-Perez F(2), Acuna-Retamar M(3), Schountz T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arthropod-borne and Infectious Diseases Laboratory, Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, United States of America. (2)Instituto de Biología, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile. (3)Facultad de Cs
Veterinarias y Pecuarias, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Long-tailed pygmy rice rats (Oligoryzomys longicaudatus) are principal reservoir 
hosts of Andes virus (ANDV) (Bunyaviridae), which causes most hantavirus
cardiopulmonary syndrome cases in the Americas. To develop tools for the study of
the ANDV-host interactions, we used RNA-Seq to generate a de novo transcriptome
assembly. Splenic RNA from five rice rats captured in Chile, three of which were 
ANDV-infected, was used to generate an assembly of 66,173 annotated transcripts, 
including noncoding RNAs. Phylogenetic analysis of selected predicted proteins
showed similarities to those of the North American deer mouse (Peromyscus
maniculatus), the principal reservoir of Sin Nombre virus (SNV). One of the
infected rice rats had about 50-fold more viral burden than the others,
suggesting acute infection, whereas the remaining two had levels consistent with 
persistence. Differential expression analysis revealed distinct signatures among 
the infected rodents. The differences could be due to 1) variations in viral
load, 2) dimorphic or reproductive differences in splenic homing of immune cells,
or 3) factors of unknown etiology. In the two persistently infected rice rats,
suppression of the JAK-STAT pathway at Stat5b and Ccnot1, elevation of Casp1,
RIG-I pathway factors Ppp1cc and Mff, and increased FC receptor-like transcripts 
occurred. Caspase-1 and Stat5b activation pathways have been shown to stimulate T
helper follicular cell (TFH) development in other species. These data are also
consistent with reports suggestive of TFH stimulation in deer mice experimentally
infected with hantaviruses. In the remaining acutely infected rice rat, the
apoptotic pathway marker Cox6a1 was elevated, and putative anti-viral factors
Abcb1a, Fam46c, Spp1, Rxra, Rxrb, Trmp2 and Trim58 were modulated. Transcripts
for preproenkephalin (Prenk) were reduced, which may be predictive of an
increased T cell activation threshold. Taken together, this transcriptome dataset
will permit rigorous examination of rice rat-ANDV interactions and may lead to
better understanding of virus ecology.

PMCID: PMC4391749
PMID: 25856432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Mar 19;7(1):503-37. doi: 10.3390/cancers7010503.

Stat5 Exerts Distinct, Vital Functions in the Cytoplasm and Nucleus of Bcr-Abl+
K562 and Jak2(V617F)+ HEL Leukemia Cells.

Weber A(1), Borghouts C(2), Brendel C(3), Moriggl R(4), Delis N(5), Brill B(6),
Vafaizadeh V(7), Groner B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. axel.weber@signis.de. (2)Ganymed
Pharmaceuticals AG, Mainz 55131, Germany. c.heinz@ganymed.ag. (3)Boston
Children's Hospital, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
christian.brendel@childrens.harvard.edu. (4)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer
Research (LBI-CR), Vienna 1090, Austria. richard.moriggl@lbicr.lbg.ac.at.
(5)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. delis@gsh.uni-frankfurt.de.
(6)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. brill@gsh.uni-frankfurt.de.
(7)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. vida.vafaizadeh@unibas.ch.
(8)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main 60596, Germany. Groner@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stats) play central roles in 
the conversion of extracellular signals, e.g., cytokines, hormones and growth
factors, into tissue and cell type specific gene expression patterns. In normal
cells, their signaling potential is strictly limited in extent and duration. The 
persistent activation of Stat3 or Stat5 is found in many human tumor cells and
contributes to their growth and survival. Stat5 activation plays a pivotal role
in nearly all hematological malignancies and occurs downstream of oncogenic
kinases, e.g., Bcr-Abl in chronic myeloid leukemias (CML) and Jak2(V617F) in
other myeloproliferative diseases (MPD). We defined the mechanisms through which 
Stat5 affects growth and survival of K562 cells, representative of Bcr-Abl
positive CML, and HEL cells, representative for Jak2(V617F) positive acute
erythroid leukemia. In our experiments we suppressed the protein expression
levels of Stat5a and Stat5b through shRNA mediated downregulation and
demonstrated the dependence of cell survival on the presence of Stat5.
Alternatively, we interfered with the functional capacities of the Stat5 protein 
through the interaction with a Stat5 specific peptide ligand. This ligand is a
Stat5 specific peptide aptamer construct which comprises a 12mer peptide
integrated into a modified thioredoxin scaffold, S5-DBD-PA. The peptide sequence 
specifically recognizes the DNA binding domain (DBD) of Stat5. Complex formation 
of S5-DBD-PA with Stat5 causes a strong reduction of P-Stat5 in the nuclear
fraction of Bcr-Abl-transformed K562 cells and a suppression of Stat5 target
genes. Distinct Stat5 mediated survival mechanisms were detected in K562 and
Jak2(V617F)-transformed HEL cells. Stat5 is activated in the nuclear and
cytosolic compartments of K562 cells and the S5-DBD-PA inhibitor most likely
affects the viability of Bcr-Abl+ K562 cells through the inhibition of canonical 
Stat5 induced target gene transcription. In HEL cells, Stat5 is predominantly
present in the cytoplasm and the survival of the Jak2(V617F)+ HEL cells is
impeded through the inhibition of the cytoplasmic functions of Stat5.

PMCID: PMC4381271
PMID: 25809097  [PubMed]


59. Cancer Genet. 2015 Apr;208(4):115-28. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.01.007. Epub 
2015 Feb 2.

Emergence of clonal hematopoiesis in the majority of patients with acquired
aplastic anemia.

Babushok DV(1), Perdigones N(2), Perin JC(3), Olson TS(2), Ye W(2), Roth JJ(4),
Lind C(5), Cattier C(2), Li Y(6), Hartung H(2), Paessler ME(7), Frank DM(8), Xie 
HM(3), Cross S(2), Cockroft JD(2), Podsakoff GM(9), Monos D(5), Biegel JA(5),
Mason PJ(2), Bessler M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Comprehensive Bone
Marrow Failure Center, Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic 
address: daria.babushok@uphs.upenn.edu. (2)Comprehensive Bone Marrow Failure
Center, Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Department of Biomedical and
Health Informatics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital
of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA. (6)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (7)Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA. (9)Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics, Division of Hematology,
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (10)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA;
Comprehensive Bone Marrow Failure Center, Division of Hematology, Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Acquired aplastic anemia (aAA) is a nonmalignant disease caused by autoimmune
destruction of early hematopoietic cells. Clonal hematopoiesis is a late
complication, seen in 20-25% of older patients. We hypothesized that clonal
hematopoiesis in aAA is a more general phenomenon, which can arise early in
disease, even in younger patients. To evaluate clonal hematopoiesis in aAA, we
used comparative whole exome sequencing of paired bone marrow and skin samples in
22 patients. We found somatic mutations in 16 patients (72.7%) with a median
disease duration of 1 year; of these, 12 (66.7%) were patients with
pediatric-onset aAA. Fifty-eight mutations in 51 unique genes were found
primarily in pathways of immunity and transcriptional regulation. Most frequently
mutated was PIGA, with seven mutations. Only two mutations were in genes
recurrently mutated in myelodysplastic syndrome. Two patients had oligoclonal
loss of the HLA alleles, linking immune escape to clone emergence. Two patients
had activating mutations in key signaling pathways (STAT5B (p.N642H) and CAMK2G
(p.T306M)). Our results suggest that clonal hematopoiesis in aAA is common, with 
two mechanisms emerging-immune escape and increased proliferation. Our findings
expand conceptual understanding of this nonneoplastic blood disorder. Future
prospective studies of clonal hematopoiesis in aAA will be critical for
understanding outcomes and for designing personalized treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4433860
PMID: 25800665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Clin Immunol. 2015 Apr;35(3):264-72. doi: 10.1007/s10875-015-0145-5. Epub 2015 
Mar 11.

Long-term follow-up of STAT5B deficiency in three argentinian patients: clinical 
and immunological features.

Bezrodnik L(1), Di Giovanni D, Caldirola MS, Azcoiti ME, Torgerson T, Gaillard
MI.

Author information: 
(1)"Dr. Ricardo Gutiérrez" Children's Hospital, Gallo 1330, Capital Federal,
Argentina.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family of proteins
regulate gene transcription in response to a variety of cytokines. STAT5B, in
particular, plays an important role in T cells, where it is a key mediator of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) induced responses. STAT5B deficiency causes a rare autosomal
recessive disorder reported in only a handful of individuals. There are currently
ten published cases of STAT5B deficiency, four of which are Argentinians.AIM:
This is a report of more than 10 years follow up of the clinical and
immunological features of three Argentinian STAT5B deficient patients.
CONCLUSION: More than a decade of follow-up demonstrates that STAT5B deficiency
is associated with various clinical pathologies that cause significant morbidity.
Early diagnosis is critical for the prevention and improvement of clinical
outcomes for STAT5B deficient patients.

PMID: 25753012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Genet. 2015 Jan-Feb;208(1-2):52-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.12.001.
Epub 2014 Dec 19.

Rare occurrence of a STAT5B N642H mutation in adult T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Ma X(1), Wen L(1), Wu L(1), Wang Q(1), Yao H(1), Wang Q(1), Ma L(1), Chen S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, P.R. China; Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow
University, Suzhou, P.R. China. (2)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key
Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis of Ministry of Health, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, P.R. China; Collaborative
Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou, P.R. China.
Electronic address: chensuning@sina.com.

PMID: 25749351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Reproduction. 2015 May;149(5):523-32. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0622. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Decreased STAT3 in human idiopathic fetal growth restriction contributes to
trophoblast dysfunction.

Borg AJ(1), Yong HE(1), Lappas M(2), Degrelle SA(3), Keogh RJ(1), Da Silva-Costa 
F(1), Fournier T(1), Abumaree M(2), Keelan JA(2), Kalionis B(1), Murthi P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal MedicinePregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and
GynaecologyUniversity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of
Obstetrics and GynaecologyMercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria,
AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris
F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp
FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of Science and Health ProfessionsKing
Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaSchool of Women's and
Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital, University of Western Australia,
Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia Department of Perinatal MedicinePregnancy
Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria,
AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyUniversity of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyMercy
Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria, AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des
Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris
DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of
Science and Health ProfessionsKing Abdullah International Medical Research
Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi
ArabiaSchool of Women's and Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital,
University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia.
(2)Department of Perinatal MedicinePregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and
GynaecologyUniversity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of
Obstetrics and GynaecologyMercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria,
AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris
F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp
FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of Science and Health ProfessionsKing
Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaSchool of Women's and
Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital, University of Western Australia,
Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia. (3)Department of Perinatal
MedicinePregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville,
Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyUniversity of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and
GynaecologyMercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria,
AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris
F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp
FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of Science and Health ProfessionsKing
Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaSchool of Women's and
Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital, University of Western Australia,
Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia Department of Perinatal MedicinePregnancy
Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria,
AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyUniversity of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyMercy
Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria, AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des
Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris
DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of
Science and Health ProfessionsKing Abdullah International Medical Research
Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi
ArabiaSchool of Women's and Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital,
University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia Department
of Perinatal MedicinePregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyUniversity 
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and
GynaecologyMercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria,
AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris
F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris DescartesP (4)Department of Perinatal
MedicinePregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville,
Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyUniversity of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and
GynaecologyMercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria,
AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris
F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp
FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of Science and Health ProfessionsKing
Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaSchool of Women's and
Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital, University of Western Australia,
Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia Department of Perinatal MedicinePregnancy
Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria,
AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyUniversity of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynaecologyMercy
Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria, AustraliaINSERM-U767Faculté des
Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris F-75006, FranceUniversite Paris
DescartesParis F-75006, FrancePremUp FoundationParis F-75006, FranceCollege of
Science and Health ProfessionsKing Abdullah International Medical Research
Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi
ArabiaSchool of Women's and Infants' HealthKing Edward Memorial Hospital,
University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia
padma.murthi@monash.edu.

Abnormal trophoblast function is associated with fetal growth restriction (FGR). 
The JAK-STAT pathway is one of the principal signalling mechanisms by which
cytokines and growth factors modulate cell proliferation, differentiation, cell
migration and apoptosis. The expression of placental JAK-STAT genes in human
idiopathic FGR is unknown. In this study, we propose the hypothesis that JAK-STAT
pathway genes are differentially expressed in idiopathic FGR-affected pregnancies
and contribute to abnormal feto-placental growth by modulating the expression of 
the amino acid transporter SNAT2, differentiation marker CGB/human chorionic
gonadotrophin beta-subunit (ß-hCG) and apoptosis markers caspases 3 and 8, and
TP53. Expression profiling of FGR-affected placentae revealed that mRNA levels of
STAT3, STAT2 and STAT5B decreased by 69, 52 and 50%, respectively, compared with 
gestational-age-matched controls. Further validation by real-time PCR and
immunoblotting confirmed significantly lower STAT3 mRNA and STAT3 protein (total 
and phosphorylated) levels in FGR placentae. STAT3 protein was localised to the
syncytiotrophoblast (ST) in both FGR and control placentae. ST differentiation
was modelled by in vitro differentiation of primary villous trophoblast cells
from first-trimester and term placentae, and by treating choriocarcinoma-derived 
BeWo cells with forskolin in cell culture. Differentiation in these models was
associated with increased STAT3 mRNA and protein levels. In BeWo cells treated
with siRNA targeting STAT3, the mRNA and protein levels of CGB/ß-hCG, caspases 3 
and 8, and TP53 were significantly increased, while that of SNAT2 was
significantly decreased compared with the negative control siRNA. In conclusion, 
we report that decreased STAT3 expression in placentae may contribute to abnormal
trophoblast function in idiopathic FGR-affected pregnancies.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25713425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Dairy Sci. 2015 Apr;98(4):2409-18. doi: 10.3168/jds.2014-8734. Epub 2015 Feb
20.

The somatotropic axis during the physiological estrus cycle in dairy
heifers--Effect on hepatic expression of GHR and SOCS2.

Mense K(1), Meyerholz M(1), Gil Araujo M(2), Lietzau M(3), Knaack H(1), Wrenzycki
C(4), Hoedemaker M(3), Piechotta M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Laboratory, Clinic for Cattle, University of Veterinary
Medicine, 30173 Hannover, Germany. (2)Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, University of Zulia, Maracaibo, Zulia 44011, Venezuela.
(3)Clinic for Cattle, University of Veterinary Medicine, 30173 Hannover, Germany.
(4)Clinic for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Andrology of Large and Small Animals,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
(5)Endocrinology Laboratory, Clinic for Cattle, University of Veterinary
Medicine, 30173 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
marion.piechotta@tiho-hannover.de.

Pituitary growth hormone (GH) release and hepatic insulin-like growth factor-I
(IGF-I) production increase after an injection of 17ß-estradiol (E2) in
ovariectomized dairy cattle. However, whether endogenous sexual steroid hormones 
also influence the hepatic GH receptor (GHR) signaling pathway during a
physiological estrus cycle remains unclear. The aim of this study was to analyze 
the hepatic GHR signaling pathway during the luteal phase and after a period of
increased E2 concentrations (after ovulation) as well as in 7 heifers before
ovulation. Ovarian ultrasounds were performed daily during repeated physiological
cycles (n = 56) of 30 Holstein Friesian heifers to determine ovulation [before
ovulation (n = 7, bOv) and after ovulation 24-60 h after the appearance of estrus
signs (n = 49, aOv)] and luteal phase (CLP; d 12 ± 1 after ovulation). Blood
samples and liver biopsies were obtained, and blood concentrations of E2, P4,
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I, IGF-II, and GH were measured. In the liver
biopsies, we determined mRNA expression of the estrogen receptor a (ERa), GHR,
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B
(STAT5B), suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)2 and 3, IGF-I, and IGF-II by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. The concentration of E2 was higher bOv
than aOv and CLP, as expected. The concentrations of IGF-I and GH were higher bOv
and aOv compared with CLP. In contrast, concentrations of IGF-II were lower aOv
compared with bOv and CLP. The mRNA expression of GHR was higher in liver
biopsies obtained bOv compared with aOv and CLP. Notably, the expression of SOCS2
was higher bOv than aOv and in the CLP. Increased hepatic expression of SOCS2
during estrus was detectable when IGF-I concentrations were high; this result
might indicate that SOCS2 expression attenuates the GHR signal transduction
pathway during the phase of increased pituitary GH release. In conclusion,
hepatic GHR and SOCS2 mRNA expression appeared to be promptly and sensitively
regulated by increased E2 levels before ovulation of dairy heifers.

Copyright © 2015 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25704974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Apr 13;54(16):4758-63. doi: 10.1002/anie.201410672. 
Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Nanomolar inhibitors of the transcription factor STAT5b with high selectivity
over STAT5a.

Elumalai N(1), Berg A, Natarajan K, Scharow A, Berg T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Leipzig, Johannisallee 29, 04103
Leipzig (Germany) http://www.uni-leipzig.de/~tberg.

Src homology 2 (SH2) domains play a central role in signal transduction. Although
many SH2 domains have been validated as drug targets, their structural similarity
makes development of specific inhibitors difficult. The cancer-relevant
transcription factors STAT5a and STAT5b are particularly challenging
small-molecule targets because their SH2 domains are 93% identical on the amino
acid level. Here we present the natural product-inspired development of the
low-nanomolar inhibitor Stafib-1, as the first small molecule which inhibits the 
STAT5b SH2 domain (K(i)=44 nM) with more than 50-fold selectivity over STAT5a.
The binding site of the core moiety of Stafib-1 was validated by functional
analysis of point mutants. A prodrug of Stafib-1 was shown to inhibit STAT5b with
high selectivity over STAT5a in tumor cells. Stafib-1 provides the first
demonstration that naturally occurring SH2 domains with more than 90% sequence
identity can be selectively targeted with small organic molecules.

© 2015 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. This is an
open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non-Commercial NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial
and no modifications or adaptations are made.

PMCID: PMC4471549
PMID: 25702814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Apr 1;284(1):79-91. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.02.009.
Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Permanent uncoupling of male-specific CYP2C11 transcription/translation by
perinatal glutamate.

Banerjee S(1), Das RK(1), Giffear KA(1), Shapiro BH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary
Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6009, USA. (2)Laboratories
of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary Medicine, 3800 
Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6009, USA. Electronic address:
shapirob@vet.upenn.edu.

Perinatal exposure of rats and mice to the typically reported 4mg/g bd wt dose of
monosodium glutamate (MSG) results in a complete block in GH secretion as well as
obesity, growth retardation and a profound suppression of several cytochrome
P450s, including CYP2C11, the predominant male-specific isoform--all irreversible
effects. In contrast, we have found that a lower dose of the food additive, 2mg/g
bd wt on alternate days for the first 9days of life results in a transient
neonatal depletion of plasma GH, a subsequent permanent overexpression of CYP2C11
as well as subnormal (mini) GH pulse amplitudes in an otherwise normal adult
masculine episodic GH profile. The overexpressed CYP2C11 was characterized by a
250% increase in mRNA, but only a 40 to 50% increase in CYP2C11 protein and its
catalytic activity. Using freshly isolated hepatocytes as well as primary
cultures exposed to the masculine-like episodic GH profile, we observed normal
induction, activation, nuclear translocation and binding to the CYP2C11 promoter 
of the GH-dependent signal transducers required for CYP2C11 transcription. The
disproportionately lower expression levels of CYP2C11 protein were associated
with dramatically high expression levels of an aberrant, presumably nontranslated
CYP2C11 mRNA, a 200% increase in CYP2C11 ubiquitination and a 70-80% decline in
miRNAs associated, at normal levels, with a suppression of CYP2C expression.
Whereas the GH-responsiveness of CYP2C7 and CYP2C6 as well as albumin was normal 
in the MSG-derived hepatocytes, the abnormal expression of CYP2C11 was permanent 
and irreversible.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4374021
PMID: 25697375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(9):2731-4. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1007454. Epub 2015
Feb 11.

Novel STAT5B-RARA fusion transcript in acute promyelocytic leukemia:
identification and treatment response.

Wang YY(1), Hao J(1), Liu ZY(1), Weng XQ(2), Sheng Y(2), Jiang CL(2), Zhu YM(2), 
Chen B(2), Xiong SM(2), Li JM(2), Chen QS(2), Chen HY(3), Qiao C(4), Chen Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology , Bei Zhan Hospital , Shanghai , China. (2)b State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin
Hospital Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine ,
Shanghai , China. (3)c Jingjiang People's Hospital, The Seventh Affiliated
Hospital of Yangzhou University , Jingjiang , Jiangsu Province , China. (4)d
Department of Hematology , The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital , Nanjing , China.

PMID: 25629986  [PubMed - in process]


67. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 14;6:6025. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7025.

Activating mutations of STAT5B and STAT3 in lymphomas derived from <U+03B3>d-T or NK
cells.

Küçük C(1), Jiang B(1), Hu X(1), Zhang W(2), Chan JK(3), Xiao W(4), Lack N(5),
Alkan C(6), Williams JC(7), Avery KN(7), Kavak P(8), Scuto A(1), Sen E(5),
Gaulard P(9), Staudt L(10), Iqbal J(11), Zhang W(11), Cornish A(12), Gong Q(13), 
Yang Q(2), Sun H(2), d'Amore F(14), Leppä S(15), Liu W(2), Fu K(2), de Leval
L(16), McKeithan T(1), Chan WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, California
91010, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Hong Kong, China. (4)Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics,
National Center for Toxicological Research, Food and Drug Administration,
Maryland 20993, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Koc University, Istanbul
34450, Turkey. (6)Department of Computer Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara 
06800, Turkey. (7)Department of Molecular Medicine, Beckman Research Institute of
City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010, USA. (8)Department of Computer
Engineering, Bogaziçi University, Istanbul 34342, Turkey. (9)Département de
Pathologie, Groupe Henri-Mondor Albert-Chenevier, Inserm U955, Université Paris
Est, Créteil 94000, France. (10)Molecular Biology of Lymphoid Malignancies
Section, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA. (11)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-3135, USA. (12)Department of
Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska 68198-5805, USA. (13)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100029, China. (14)Department of Hematology, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus 8000, Denmark. (15)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, PO Box 180, Helsinki 00029, Finland. (16)Pathologie Clinique
Institut, Universitaire de Pathologie rue du Bugnon 25, CH 1011 Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Lymphomas arising from NK or <U+03B3>d-T cells are very aggressive diseases and little
is known regarding their pathogenesis. Here we report frequent activating
mutations of STAT3 and STAT5B in NK/T-cell lymphomas (n=51), <U+03B3>d-T-cell lymphomas 
(n=43) and their cell lines (n=9) through next generation and/or Sanger
sequencing. STAT5B N642H is particularly frequent in all forms of <U+03B3>d-T-cell
lymphomas. STAT3 and STAT5B mutations are associated with increased
phosphorylated protein and a growth advantage to transduced cell lines or normal 
NK cells. Growth-promoting activity of the mutants can be partially inhibited by 
a JAK1/2 inhibitor. Molecular modelling and surface plasmon resonance
measurements of the N642H mutant indicate a marked increase in binding affinity
of the phosphotyrosine-Y699 with the mutant histidine. This is associated with
the prolonged persistence of the mutant phosphoSTAT5B and marked increase of
binding to target sites. Our findings suggest that JAK-STAT pathway inhibition
may represent a therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 25586472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Mar;14(3):713-26. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0819. Epub 
2014 Dec 31.

Inhibition of Stat5a/b Enhances Proteasomal Degradation of Androgen Receptor
Liganded by Antiandrogens in Prostate Cancer.

Hoang DT(1), Gu L(1), Liao Z(1), Shen F(1), Talati PG(1), Koptyra M(1), Tan
SH(1), Ellsworth E(1), Gupta S(2), Montie H(3), Dagvadorj A(1), Savolainen S(4), 
Leiby B(5), Mirtti T(6), Merry DE(3), Nevalainen MT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Cancer Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Deparment of Cancer Biology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Medical Oncology, H. Lee Moffit Cancer Center and Research
Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Deparment of Physiology, University of
Turku, Turku, Finland. Center for Disease Modeling, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland. (5)Division of Biostatistics, Department of 
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (6)Deparment of Cancer Biology,
Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki
and HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland. Finnish Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM),
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (7)Deparment of Cancer Biology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Urology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer 
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
marja.nevalainen@jefferson.edu.

Although poorly understood, androgen receptor (AR) signaling is sustained despite
treatment of prostate cancer with antiandrogens and potentially underlies
development of incurable castrate-resistant prostate cancer. However, therapies
targeting the AR signaling axis eventually fail when prostate cancer progresses
to the castrate-resistant stage. Stat5a/b, a candidate therapeutic target protein
in prostate cancer, synergizes with AR to reciprocally enhance the signaling of
both proteins. In this work, we demonstrate that Stat5a/b sequesters
antiandrogen-liganded (MDV3100, bicalutamide, flutamide) AR in prostate cancer
cells and protects it against proteasomal degradation in prostate cancer. Active 
Stat5a/b increased nuclear levels of both unliganded and antiandrogen-liganded
AR, as demonstrated in prostate cancer cell lines, xenograft tumors, and clinical
patient-derived prostate cancer samples. Physical interaction between Stat5a/b
and AR in prostate cancer cells was mediated by the DNA-binding domain of
Stat5a/b and the N-terminal domain of AR. Moreover, active Stat5a/b increased AR 
occupancy of the prostate-specific antigen promoter and AR-regulated gene
expression in prostate cancer cells. Mechanistically, both Stat5a/b genetic
knockdown and antiandrogen treatment induced proteasomal degradation of AR in
prostate cancer cells, with combined inhibition of Stat5a/b and AR leading to
maximal loss of AR protein and prostate cancer cell viability. Our results
indicate that therapeutic targeting of AR in prostate cancer using antiandrogens 
may be substantially improved by targeting of Stat5a/b.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4456253
PMID: 25552366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Gastric Cancer. 2016 Jan;19(1):85-97. doi: 10.1007/s10120-014-0454-z. Epub 2014
Dec 23.

RNAi-mediated gene silencing of ST6GalNAc I suppresses the metastatic potential
in gastric cancer cells.

Tamura F(1), Sato Y(1), Hirakawa M(1), Yoshida M(1), Ono M(1), Osuga T(1),
Okagawa Y(1), Uemura N(1), Arihara Y(1), Murase K(1), Kawano Y(1), Iyama S(1),
Takada K(1), Hayashi T(1), Sato T(1), Miyanishi K(1), Kobune M(1), Takimoto R(1),
Kato J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, South-1, West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, 060-8543, Japan.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, South-1, West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, 060-8543, Japan.
jkato@sapmed.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: ST6GalNAc I is a sialyltransferase controlling the expression of
sialyl-Tn antigen (STn), which is overexpressed in several epithelial cancers,
including gastric cancer, and is highly correlated with cancer metastasis.
However, the functional contribution of ST6GalNAc I to development or progression
of gastric cancer remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the effects of 
suppression of ST6GalNAc I on gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Gastric cancer cell lines were transfected with ST6GalNAc I siRNA and
were examined by cell proliferation, migration, and invasion assays. We also
evaluated the effect of ST6GalNAc I siRNA treatment in a peritoneal dissemination
mouse model. The differences in mRNA levels of selected signaling molecules were 
analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) arrays associated with tumor
metastasis in MKN45 cells. The signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b (STAT5b) signaling pathways that reportedly regulate the insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) were analyzed by Western blot.
RESULTS: ST6GalNAc I siRNA inhibited gastric cancer cell growth, migration, and
invasion in vitro. Furthermore, intraperitoneal administration of ST6GalNAc I
siRNA- liposome significantly inhibited peritoneal dissemination and prolonged
the survival of xenograft model mice with peritoneal dissemination of gastric
cancer. PCR array confirmed that suppression of ST6GalNAc I caused a significant 
reduction in expression of IGF-1 mRNA. Decreased IGF-1 expression in MKN45 cells 
treated with ST6GalNAc I siRNA was accompanied by reduced phosphorylation of
STAT5b.
CONCLUSION: ST6GalNAc I may regulate the gene expression of IGF-1 through STAT5b 
activation in gastric cancer cells and may be a potential target for treatment of
metastasizing gastric cancer.

PMID: 25532910  [PubMed - in process]


70. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):375. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0375-z. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

STAT3 genetic variant, alone and in combination with STAT5b polymorphism,
contributes to breast cancer risk and clinical outcomes.

Zhao H(1), Wang Z, Wu H, Xiao Q, Yao W, Wang E, Liu Y, Wei M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, China Medical University,
Shenbei District, Shenyang City, 110013, Liaoning Province, People's Republic of 
China, haishan_zhao@126.com.

The genetic or abnormal activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STATs) family proteins play an important role with regard to
disease progression in variety of human malignancies, yet no data are available
for candidate gene and breast cancer (BC) risk. To address this, we investigate
the correlation between STAT3, STAT5b polymorphisms and BC susceptibility,
clinicopathological parameters, and clinical outcomes. A case-control study was
carried out in 1,240 BC patients and 882 healthy controls using TaqMan assay and 
PCR-RFLP method. A significant decreased risk of BC was associated with STAT3 G
allele and combined effect (validation alleles). Furthermore, patients after
anthracycline-based chemotherapy, carrying combined effect of STAT3 rs4796793 and
STAT5b rs6503691, had significantly increased progression-free survival (PFS)
[adjusted HR (95 % CI) 0.831 (0.704-0.980), P = 0.028]. More importantly,
ER-negative patients with STAT5b CT/TT genotype was associated with a longer PFS 
[adjusted HR (95 % CI) 0.519 (0.293-0.920), P = 0.025], recurrence-free survival 
[adjusted HR (95 % CI) 0.529 (0.298-0.939), P = 0.030], and overall survival
[adjusted HR (95 % CI) 0.547 (0.308-0.973), P = 0.040]. These results indicated
that STAT3 and STAT5b polymorphisms might be a candidate pharmacogenomic factor
to assess susceptibility and prognosis in BC patients.

PMID: 25487443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Med. 2015 Mar 13;20:625-38. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00180.

Deletion of STAT5a/b in vascular smooth muscle abrogates the male bias in hypoxic
pulmonary hypertension in mice: implications in the human disease.

Yang YM(1), Yuan H(1), Edwards JG(2), Skayian Y(2), Ochani K(3), Miller EJ(3),
Sehgal PB(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New 
York, United States of America. (2)Department of Physiology, New York Medical
College, Valhalla, New York, United States of America. (3)Center for Heart and
Lung Research, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York,
United States of America. (4)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, New York, United States of America.

Chronic hypoxia typically elicits pulmonary hypertension (PH) in mice with a
male-dominant phenotype. There is an opposite-sex bias in human PH, with a higher
prevalence in women, but greater survival (the "estrogen paradox"). We
investigated the involvement of the STAT5a/b species, previously established to
mediate sexual dimorphism in other contexts, in the sex bias in PH. Mice with
heterozygous or homozygous deletions of the STAT5a/b locus in vascular smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) were generated in crosses between STAT5a/b(fl/fl) and
transgelin (SM22a)-Cre(+/+) parents. Wild-type (wt) males subjected to chronic
hypoxia showed significant PH and pulmonary arterial remodeling, with wt females 
showing minimal changes (a male-dominant phenotype). However, in conditional
STAT5(+/-) or STAT5(-/-) mice, hypoxic females showed the severest manifestations
of PH (a female-dominant phenotype). Immunofluorescence studies on human lung
sections showed that obliterative pulmonary arterial lesions in patients with
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) or hereditary pulmonary
arterial hypertension (HPAH), both male and female, overall had reduced STAT5a/b,
reduced PY-STAT5 and reduced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) GTPase atlastin-3 (ATL3).
Studies of SMCs and endothelial cell (EC) lines derived from vessels isolated
from lungs of male and female IPAH patients and controls revealed instances of
coordinate reductions in STAT5a, STAT5b and ATL3 in IPAH-derived cells, including
SMCs and ECs from the same patient. Taken together, these data provide the first 
definitive evidence for a contribution of STAT5a/b to the sex bias in PH in the
hypoxic mouse and implicate reduced STAT5 in the pathogenesis of the human
disease.

PMCID: PMC4365065
PMID: 25470773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jan;135(1):217-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.10.019. 
Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Regulatory T-cell deficiency and immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, X-linked-like disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations in LRBA.

Charbonnier LM(1), Janssen E(1), Chou J(1), Ohsumi TK(2), Keles S(1), Hsu JT(1), 
Massaad MJ(1), Garcia-Lloret M(3), Hanna-Wakim R(4), Dbaibo G(4), Alangari AA(5),
Alsultan A(5), Al-Zahrani D(6), Geha RS(1), Chatila TA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, and the Department of
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass. (2)Department of Molecular
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass. (3)Division of Immunology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
Calif. (4)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, American University of
Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon. (5)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (6)Immunology and Allergy, Pediatric
Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City-WR, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (7)Division of 
Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, and the Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Mass. Electronic address:
talal.chatila@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: A number of heritable immune dysregulatory diseases result from
defects affecting regulatory T (Treg) cell development, function, or both. They
include immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX)
syndrome, which is caused by mutations in forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), and IPEX-like 
disorders caused by mutations in IL-2 receptor a (IL2RA), signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b), and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1). However, the genetic defects underlying many cases of
IPEX-like disorders remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify the genetic abnormalities in patients with
idiopathic IPEX-like disorders.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome and targeted gene sequencing and phenotypic and
functional analyses of Treg cells.
RESULTS: A child who presented with an IPEX-like syndrome and severe Treg cell
deficiency was found to harbor a nonsense mutation in the gene encoding
LPS-responsive beige-like anchor (LRBA), which was previously implicated as a
cause of common variable immunodeficiency with autoimmunity. Analysis of subjects
with LRBA deficiency revealed marked Treg cell depletion; profoundly decreased
expression of canonical Treg cell markers, including FOXP3, CD25, Helios, and
cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4; and impaired Treg cell-mediated
suppression. There was skewing in favor of memory T cells and intense
autoantibody production, with marked expansion of T follicular helper and
contraction of T follicular regulatory cells. Whereas the frequency of recent
thymic emigrants and the differentiation of induced Treg cells were normal,
LRBA-deficient T cells exhibited increased apoptosis and reduced activities of
the metabolic sensors mammalian target of rapamycin complexes 1 and 2.
CONCLUSION: LRBA deficiency is a novel cause of IPEX-like syndrome and Treg cell 
deficiency associated with metabolic dysfunction and increased apoptosis of Treg 
cells.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4289093
PMID: 25468195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. FASEB J. 2015 Apr;29(4):1176-84. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-258442. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

Intrauterine growth restriction disrupts developmental epigenetics around distal 
growth hormone response elements on the rat hepatic IGF-1 gene.

Fu Q(1), McKnight RA(1), Callaway CW(1), Yu X(1), Lane RH(1), Majnik AV(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA; and Division of Neonatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. (2)*Division of
Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, USA; and Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA amajnik@mcw.edu.

Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) decreases serum IGF-1 levels. Postnatal
IGF-1 expression is transcriptionally regulated by growth hormone (GH) through
growth hormone response elements (GHREs). We hypothesized that IUGR disrupts the 
normal developmental maturation of hepatic IGF-1 intron 2 growth hormone response
element (IN2GHRE) histone methylation of key lysines and DNA methylation. We also
evaluated a 5' distal weak enhancer (IGF-1 5'-upstream region growth hormone
response element; 5URGHRE) as a GHRE specificity control. IUGR was induced
through a well-characterized model of bilateral uterine artery ligation of the
pregnant rat. Offspring livers were tested at d 0 and 21. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and bisulfite sequencing quantified epigenetic
characteristics. We found that distinct age-related developmental patterns of
histone and DNA methylation characterize each GHRE. Development increased H3K4
trimethylation (me3) in both GHREs. However, H3K9me3 decreased with age at
IN2GHRE and increased with age at 5URGHRE. IUGR altered the developmental pattern
of H3K4me3 and K9me3 around the GHREs in a sex-specific manner at d 21.
Developmental and IUGR-induced DNA methylation occurred in a GHRE-, CpG site-,
and sex-specific manner. We conclude that IUGR disrupts developmental epigenetics
around distal GHREs on the rat hepatic IGF-1 gene.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25466885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Oct 23;232(1):310-325. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.10.022.
[Epub ahead of print]

Exposure to zearalenone mycotoxin alters in vitro porcine intestinal epithelial
cells by differential gene expression.

Taranu I(1), Braicu C(2), Marin DE(3), Pistol GC(3), Motiu M(3), Balacescu L(2), 
Beridan Neagoe I(2), Burlacu R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Biology, National Institute for Research and Development 
for Biology and Animal Nutrition, Calea Bucuresti No. 1, Balotesti, Ilfov 077015,
Romania. Electronic address: ionelia.taranu@ibna.ro. (2)National Institute for
Research and Development for Oncology "Prof. Dr. Ion Chiricuta", Str. Republicii,
No. 34-36, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Laboratory of Animal Biology, National
Institute for Research and Development for Biology and Animal Nutrition, Calea
Bucuresti No. 1, Balotesti, Ilfov 077015, Romania. (4)Mathematics and Physics
Department, University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Bulevardul Marasti
No. 59, Bucharest 011464, Romania.

The gut represents the main route of intoxication with mycotoxins. To evaluate
the effect and the underlying molecular changes that occurred when the intestine 
is exposed to zearalenone, a Fusarium sp mycotoxin, porcine epithelial cells
(IPEC-1) were treated with 10µM of ZEA for 24h and analysed by microarray using
Gene Spring GX v.11.5. Our results showed that 10µM of ZEA did not affect cell
viability, but can increase the expression of toll like receptors (TLR1-10) and
of certain cytokines involved in inflammation (TNF-a, IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-8, MCP-1,
IL-12p40, CCL20) or responsible for the recruitment of immune cells (IL-10,
IL-18). Microarray results identified 190 genes significantly and differentially 
expressed, of which 70% were up-regulated. ZEA determined the over expression of 
ITGB5 gene, essential against the attachment and adhesion of ETEC to porcine
jejunal cells and of TFF2 implicated in mucosal protection. An up-regulation of
glutathione peroxidase enzymes (GPx6, GPx2, GPx1) was also observed. Upon ZEA
challenge, genes like GTF3C4 responsible for the recruitment of polymerase III
and initiation of tRNA transcription in eukaryotes and STAT5B were significantly 
higher induced. The up-regulation of CD97 gene and the down-regulation of tumour 
suppressor genes (DKK-1, PCDH11X and TC531386) demonstrates the carcinogenic
potential of ZEA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25455459  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Feb 5;401:130-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.10.017. Epub 
2014 Nov 4.

Regulation of cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) by ubiquitination
and Elongin B/C interaction.

Jensik PJ(1), Arbogast LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
1135 Lincoln Drive, Carbondale, IL 62901-6523, USA. (2)Department of Physiology, 
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 1135 Lincoln Drive, Carbondale, 
IL 62901-6523, USA. Electronic address: larbogast@siumed.edu.

Cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) inhibits prolactin receptor
(PRLR) signaling and acts as part of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex through
interactions with Elongin B/C proteins. This study aimed to identify CIS lysine
ubiquitination sites and determine roles of ubiquitination and Elongin B/C
interactions on CIS protein stability and PRLR signaling inhibition.
Site-directed mutations revealed that CIS can be ubiquitinated on all six lysine 
residues. Elongin B/C interaction box mutation had no influence on CIS
ubiquitination. CIS stability was increased by mutation of lysine residues and
further enhanced by co-mutation of Elongin B/C interaction domain. CIS inhibition
of STAT5B phosphorylation and casein promoter activation was dependent on CIS
interactions with Elongin B/C, but not on CIS ubiquitination. These data indicate
CIS protein stability is regulated through multiple mechanisms, including
ubiquitination and interaction with Elongin B/C proteins, whereas CIS functional 
inhibition of PRLR signaling is dependent on the Elongin B/C interaction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4373541
PMID: 25448846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;172(2):151-61. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0541. Epub 2014 Nov
19.

Genetic characterisation of a cohort of children clinically labelled as GH or
IGF1 insensitive: diagnostic value of serum IGF1 and height at presentation.

Storr HL(1), Dunkel L(2), Kowalczyk J(2), Savage MO(2), Metherell LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Barts and the London School of Medicine and DentistryWilliam Harvey Research
Institute, Centre for Endocrinology, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK 
h.l.storr@qmul.ac.uk. (2)Barts and the London School of Medicine and
DentistryWilliam Harvey Research Institute, Centre for Endocrinology, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: GH insensitivity (GHI) encompasses growth failure, low
serum IGF1 and normal/elevated serum GH. By contrast, IGF1 insensitivity results 
in pre- and postnatal growth failure associated with relatively high IGF1 levels.
From 2008 to 2013, 72 patients from 68 families (45M), mean age 7.1 years
(0.4-17.0) with short stature (mean height SDS -3.9; range -9.4 to -1.5), were
referred for sequencing.
METHODS: As a genetics referral centre, we have sequenced appropriate candidate
genes (GHR, including its pseudoexon (6<U+03A8>), STAT5B, IGFALS, IGF1, IGF1R, OBSL1,
CUL7 and CCDC8) in subjects referred with suspected GHI (n=69) or IGF1
insensitivity (n=3).
RESULTS: Mean serum IGF1 SDS was -2.7 (range -0.9 to -8.2) in GHI patients and
2.0, 3.7 and 4.4 in patients with suspected IGF1 insensitivity. Out of 69 GHI
patients, 16 (23%) (19% families) had mutations in GH-IGF1 axis genes: homozygous
GHR (n=13; 6 6<U+03A8>, two novel IVS5ds+1 G to A) and homozygous IGFALS (n=3; one novel
c.1291delT). In the GHI groups, two homozygous OBSL1 mutations were also
identified (height SDS -4.9 and -5.7) and two patients had hypomethylation in
imprinting control region 1 in 11p15 or mUPD7 consistent with Silver-Russell
syndrome (SRS) (height SDS -3.7 and -4.3). A novel heterozygous IGF1R (c.112G>A) 
mutation was identified in one out of three (33%) IGF1-insensitive subjects.
CONCLUSION: Genotyping contributed to the diagnosis of children with suspected
GHI and IGF1 insensitivity, particularly in the GHI subjects with low serum IGF1 
SDS (<-2.0) and height SDS (<-2.5). Diagnoses with similar phenotypes included
SRS and 3-M syndrome. In 71% patients, no diagnosis was defined justifying
further genetic investigation.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25411237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Dec;81(12):1103-14. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22429. Epub 2014 Nov
12.

The miR-302 cluster transcriptionally regulated by POUV, SOX and STAT5B controls 
the undifferentiated state through the post-transcriptional repression of PBX3
and E2F7 in early chick development.

Lee SI(1), Jeon MH, Kim JS, Park JK, Park EW, Jeon IS, Byun SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Rural
Development Administration, Suwon, 441-706, Republic of Korea.

Early chick development is a systematic process governed by the concerted action 
of multiple mechanisms that regulate transcription and post-transcriptional
processes. Post-transcriptional microRNA-mediated regulation, with regard to
lineage specification and differentiation in early chick development, requires
further investigation. Here, we characterize the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms in undifferentiated chick blastodermal
cells. Expression of the miR-302 cluster, POUV, SOX2, and STAT5B decreased in a
time-dependent manner in early chick development. We found that POUV, SOX2, and
STAT5B regulate the transcription of the miR-302 cluster, as its 5'-flanking
region contains binding elements for each transcription factor. Additionally,
POUV, SOX2, and STAT5B maintain pluripotency by regulating genes containing the
miR-302 cluster target sequence. For example, microRNAs from the miR-302 cluster 
can bind to PBX3 and E2F7 transcripts, thus acting as a post-transcriptional
regulator that maintains the undifferentiated state of blastodermal cells by
balancing the expression of genes related to pluripotency and differentiation.
Based on these results, we suggest that both transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation of the miR302 cluster is critical for
intrinsically controlling the undifferentiated state of chick embryonic
blastodermal cells. These findings may help our understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms that underlie developmental decisions during early chick
development.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25394196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):713-29. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02570-14. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

High-throughput RNA sequencing-based virome analysis of 50 lymphoma cell lines
from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project.

Cao S(1), Strong MJ(1), Wang X(1), Moss WN(2), Concha M(1), Lin Z(1), O'Grady
T(1), Baddoo M(1), Fewell C(1), Renne R(3), Flemington EK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane Health Sciences Center and Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics Microbiology, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. (4)Tulane Health Sciences Center and Tulane
Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA eflemin@tulane.edu.

Using high-throughput RNA sequencing data from 50 common lymphoma cell culture
models from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project, we performed an unbiased
global interrogation for the presence of a panel of 740 viruses and strains known
to infect human and other mammalian cells. This led to the findings of previously
identified infections by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus
(KSHV), and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1). In addition, we also
found a previously unreported infection of one cell line (DEL) with a murine
leukemia virus. High expression of murine leukemia virus (MuLV) transcripts was
observed in DEL cells, and we identified four transcriptionally active
integration sites, one being in the TNFRSF6B gene. We also found low levels of
MuLV reads in a number of other cell lines and provided evidence suggesting
cross-contamination during sequencing. Analysis of HTLV-1 integrations in two
cell lines, HuT 102 and MJ, identified 14 and 66 transcriptionally active
integration sites with potentially activating integrations in immune regulatory
genes, including interleukin-15 (IL-15), IL-6ST, STAT5B, HIVEP1, and IL-9R.
Although KSHV and EBV do not typically integrate into the genome, we investigated
a previously identified integration of EBV into the BACH2 locus in Raji cells.
This analysis identified a BACH2 disruption mechanism involving splice donor
sequestration. Through viral gene expression analysis, we detected expression of 
stable intronic RNAs from the EBV BamHI W repeats that may be part of long
transcripts spanning the repeat region. We also observed transcripts at the EBV
vIL-10 locus exclusively in the Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line, Hs 611.T, the
expression of which were uncoupled from other lytic genes. Assessment of the KSHV
viral transcriptome in BCP-1 cells showed expression of the viral immune
regulators, K2/vIL-6, K4/vIL-8-like vCCL1, and K5/E2-ubiquitin ligase 1 that was 
significantly higher than expression of the latency-associated nuclear antigen.
Together, this investigation sheds light into the virus composition across these 
lymphoma model systems and provides insights into common viral mechanistic
principles.IMPORTANCE: Viruses cause cancer in humans. In lymphomas the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) and human
T-lymphotropic virus type 1 are major contributors to oncogenesis. We assessed
virus-host interactions using a high throughput sequencing method that
facilitates the discovery of new virus-host associations and the investigation
into how the viruses alter their host environment. We found a previously unknown 
murine leukemia virus infection in one cell line. We identified cellular genes,
including cytokine regulators, that are disrupted by virus integration, and we
determined mechanisms through which virus integration causes deregulation of
cellular gene expression. Investigation into the KSHV transcriptome in the BCP-1 
cell line revealed high-level expression of immune signaling genes. EBV
transcriptome analysis showed expression of vIL-10 transcripts in a Hodgkin's
lymphoma that was uncoupled from lytic genes. These findings illustrate unique
mechanisms of viral gene regulation and to the importance of virus-mediated host 
immune signaling in lymphomas.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301145
PMID: 25355872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2015 Jan 22;125(4):639-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-570101. Epub 2014
Oct 27.

Autoimmunity, hypogammaglobulinemia, lymphoproliferation, and mycobacterial
disease in patients with activating mutations in STAT3.

Haapaniemi EM(1), Kaustio M(2), Rajala HL(3), van Adrichem AJ(2), Kainulainen
L(4), Glumoff V(5), Doffinger R(6), Kuusanmäki H(2), Heiskanen-Kosma T(7), Trotta
L(2), Chiang S(8), Kulmala P(9), Eldfors S(2), Katainen R(10), Siitonen S(11),
Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML(11), Kovanen PE(12), Otonkoski T(13), Porkka K(3),
Heiskanen K(14), Hänninen A(15), Bryceson YT(8), Uusitalo-Seppälä R(16), Saarela 
J(2), Seppänen M(17), Mustjoki S(3), Kere J(18).

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Research Programs Unit, Molecular
Neurology, and. (2)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; (3)Hematology Research Unit Helsinki, Department of 
Hematology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital
Cancer Center, Helsinki, Finland; (4)Department of Pediatrics and Department of
Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland; (5)Department of Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University
Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; (6)Department of Clinical
Biochemistry and Immunology, Addenbrooke's Hospital and National Institute for
Health Research, Cambridge Biomedical Research Center, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland;
(8)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden; (9)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Medical 
Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland; Department of Pediatrics, Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University 
Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; (10)Department of Medical
Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; (11)Laboratory Services (Hospital
District of Helsinki and Uusimaa Laboratory). (12)Department of Pathology, and.
(13)Children's Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland;
Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland; (14)Children's Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. (15)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Turku, Turku, Finland; (16)Department of Infectious Diseases, Satakunta Central
Hospital, Pori, Finland; (17)Immunodeficiency Unit, Department of Medicine,
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; and. (18)Folkhälsan
Institute of Genetics and Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, and
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, and Center for Innovative Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family of
transcription factors orchestrate hematopoietic cell differentiation. Recently,
mutations in STAT1, STAT5B, and STAT3 have been linked to development of
immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked-like syndrome. Here, 
we immunologically characterized 3 patients with de novo activating mutations in 
the DNA binding or dimerization domains of STAT3 (p.K392R, p.M394T, and p.K658N, 
respectively). The patients displayed multiorgan autoimmunity,
lymphoproliferation, and delayed-onset mycobacterial disease. Immunologically, we
noted hypogammaglobulinemia with terminal B-cell maturation arrest, dendritic
cell deficiency, peripheral eosinopenia, increased double-negative (CD4(-)CD8(-))
T cells, and decreased natural killer, T helper 17, and regulatory T-cell
numbers. Notably, the patient harboring the K392R mutation developed T-cell large
granular lymphocytic leukemia at age 14 years. Our results broaden the spectrum
of phenotypes caused by activating STAT3 mutations, highlight the role of STAT3
in the development and differentiation of multiple immune cell lineages, and
strengthen the link between the STAT family of transcription factors and
autoimmunity.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4304109
PMID: 25349174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Faraday Discuss. 2014;169:303-21. doi: 10.1039/c4fd00024b. Epub 2014 May 30.

Allosteric pathway identification through network analysis: from molecular
dynamics simulations to interactive 2D and 3D graphs.

Allain A(1), Chauvot de Beauchêne I, Langenfeld F, Guarracino Y, Laine E,
Tchertanov L.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, Molecular Dynamics & Modeling (BiMoDyM), Laboratoire de
Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée (LBPA UMR8113 CNRS), École Normale Supérieure
de Cachan, 61 avenue du Président Wilson, 94235 Cachan, France.
Luba.Tchertanov@lbpa.ens-cachan.fr.

Allostery is a universal phenomenon that couples the information induced by a
local perturbation (effector) in a protein to spatially distant regulated sites. 
Such an event can be described in terms of a large scale transmission of
information (communication) through a dynamic coupling between structurally rigid
(minimally frustrated) and plastic (locally frustrated) clusters of residues. To 
elaborate a rational description of allosteric coupling, we propose an original
approach - MOdular NETwork Analysis (MONETA) - based on the analysis of
inter-residue dynamical correlations to localize the propagation of both
structural and dynamical effects of a perturbation throughout a protein
structure. MONETA uses inter-residue cross-correlations and commute times
computed from molecular dynamics simulations and a topological description of a
protein to build a modular network representation composed of clusters of
residues (dynamic segments) linked together by chains of residues (communication 
pathways). MONETA provides a brand new direct and simple visualization of protein
allosteric communication. A GEPHI module implemented in the MONETA package allows
the generation of 2D graphs of the communication network. An interactive PyMOL
plugin permits drawing of the communication pathways between chosen protein
fragments or residues on a 3D representation. MONETA is a powerful tool for
on-the-fly display of communication networks in proteins. We applied MONETA for
the analysis of communication pathways (i) between the main regulatory fragments 
of receptors tyrosine kinases (RTKs), KIT and CSF-1R, in the native and mutated
states and (ii) in proteins STAT5 (STAT5a and STAT5b) in the phosphorylated and
the unphosphorylated forms. The description of the physical support for
allosteric coupling by MONETA allowed a comparison of the mechanisms of (a)
constitutive activation induced by equivalent mutations in two RTKs and (b)
allosteric regulation in the activated and non-activated STAT5 proteins. Our
theoretical prediction based on results obtained with MONETA was validated for
KIT by in vitro experiments. MONETA is a versatile analytical and visualization
tool entirely devoted to the understanding of the functioning/malfunctioning of
allosteric regulation in proteins - a crucial basis to guide the discovery of
next-generation allosteric drugs.

PMID: 25340971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Proteome Res. 2014 Dec 5;13(12):5685-94. doi: 10.1021/pr5006923. Epub 2014 Nov 
7.

Identification of isoform-specific dynamics in phosphorylation-dependent STAT5
dimerization by quantitative mass spectrometry and mathematical modeling.

Boehm ME(1), Adlung L, Schilling M, Roth S, Klingmüller U, Lehmann WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure Analysis, ‡Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German 
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

STAT5A and STAT5B are important transcription factors that dimerize and transduce
activation signals of cytokine receptors directly to the nucleus. A typical
cytokine that mediates STAT5 activation is erythropoietin (Epo). Differential
functions of STAT5A and STAT5B have been reported. However, the extent to which
phosphorylated STAT5A and STAT5B (pSTAT5A, pSTAT5B) form homo- or heterodimers is
not understood, nor is how this might influence the signal transmission to the
nucleus. To study this, we designed a concept to investigate the isoform-specific
dimerization behavior of pSTAT5A and pSTAT5B that comprises isoform-specific
immunoprecipitation (IP), measurement of the degree of phosphorylation, and
isoform ratio determination between STAT5A and STAT5B. For the main analytical
method, we employed quantitative label-free and -based mass spectrometry. For the
cellular model system, we used Epo receptor (EpoR)-expressing BaF3 cells
(BaF3-EpoR) stimulated with Epo. Three hypotheses of dimer formation between
pSTAT5A and pSTAT5B were used to explain the analytical results by a static
mathematical model: formation of (i) homodimers only, (ii) heterodimers only, and
(iii) random formation of homo- and heterodimers. The best agreement between
experimental data and model simulations was found for the last case. Dynamics of 
cytoplasmic STAT5 dimerization could be explained by distinct nuclear import
rates and individual nuclear retention for homo- and heterodimers of
phosphorylated STAT5.

PMID: 25333863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 30;5(20):9564-76.

Inhibition of STAT5: a therapeutic option in BCR-ABL1-driven leukemia.

Berger A(1), Sexl V(1), Valent P(2), Moriggl R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Veterinary Medicine,
Vienna, Austria. (2)Department of Medicine I, Division of Hematology and
Ludwig-Boltzmann Cluster Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(3)Ludwig-Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, University of Veterinary
Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Austria.

The two transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B are central signaling molecules
in leukemias driven by Abelson fusion tyrosine kinases and they fulfill all
criteria of drug targets. STAT5A and STAT5B display unique nuclear shuttling
mechanisms and they have a key role in resistance of leukemic cells against
treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). Moreover, STAT5A and STAT5B
promote survival of leukemic stem cells. We here discuss the possibility of
targeting up-stream kinases with TKI, direct STAT5 inhibition via SH2 domain
obstruction and blocking nuclear translocation of STAT5. All discussed options
will result in a stop of STAT5 transport to the nucleus to block STAT5-mediated
transcriptional activity. In summary, recently described shuttling functions of
STAT5 are discussed as potentially druggable pathways in leukemias.

PMCID: PMC4259420
PMID: 25333255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6504-16. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1553. 
Epub 2014 Oct 14.

The novel, small-molecule DNA methylation inhibitor SGI-110 as an ovarian cancer 
chemosensitizer.

Fang F(1), Munck J(2), Tang J(1), Taverna P(2), Wang Y(1), Miller DF(1), Pilrose 
J(1), Choy G(2), Azab M(2), Pawelczak KS(3), VanderVere-Carozza P(4), Wagner
M(5), Lyons J(2), Matei D(6), Turchi JJ(7), Nephew KP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana.
(2)Astex Pharmaceuticals Inc., Dublin, California. (3)Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. (5)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Indiana University Melvin and Bren
Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. VA Roudebush Hospital, Indianapolis, 
Indiana. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu jturchi@iupui.edu 
dmatei@iupui.edu. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu jturchi@iupui.edu dmatei@iupui.edu.
(8)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana.
Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu
jturchi@iupui.edu dmatei@iupui.edu.

PURPOSE: To investigate SGI-110 as a "chemosensitizer" in ovarian cancer and to
assess its effects on tumor suppressor genes (TSG) and
chemoresponsiveness-associated genes silenced by DNA methylation in ovarian
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Several ovarian cancer cell lines were used for in vitro and
in vivo platinum resensitization studies. Changes in DNA methylation and
expression levels of TSG and other cancer-related genes in response to SGI-110
were measured by pyrosequencing and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We demonstrate in vitro that SGI-110 resensitized a range of
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin (CDDP) and induced
significant demethylation and reexpression of TSG, differentiation-associated
genes, and putative drivers of ovarian cancer cisplatin resistance. In vivo,
SGI-110 alone or in combination with CDDP was well tolerated and induced
antitumor effects in ovarian cancer xenografts. Pyrosequencing analyses confirmed
that SGI-110 caused both global (LINE1) and gene-specific hypomethylation in
vivo, including TSGs (RASSF1A), proposed drivers of ovarian cancer cisplatin
resistance (MLH1 and ZIC1), differentiation-associated genes (HOXA10 and HOXA11),
and transcription factors (STAT5B). Furthermore, DNA damage induced by CDDP in
ovarian cancer cells was increased by SGI-110, as measured by inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry analysis of DNA adduct formation and repair of
cisplatin-induced DNA damage.
CONCLUSIONS: These results strongly support further investigation of
hypomethylating strategies in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Specifically,
SGI-110 in combination with conventional and/or targeted therapeutics warrants
further development in this setting.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4268357
PMID: 25316809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jan;100(1):282-92. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2401.

Reduced Tregs in peripheral blood of PCOS patients - a consequence of aberrant
Il2 signaling.

Krishna MB(1), Joseph A, Subramaniam AG, Gupta A, Pillai SM, Laloraya M.

Author information: 
(1)Utero-Embryo Repromics Laboratory, Division of Molecular Reproduction (M.B.K.,
A.J., A.G.S., A.G., M.L.), Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram 695 014, India; and SAMAD IVF Hospitals (S.M.P.),
Thiruvananthapuram 695 035, India.

CONTEXT: The immunesupressive action of CD4(+)CD25(+) CD127(-/low) T regulatory
cells (Tregs) is vital for an efficient reproductive function. However no data
exists on their number or functionality in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to analyze the frequency of circulating Tregs and key 
factors modulating them in women with PCOS.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This is a retrospective, case-control cohort
study conducted in women with PCOS recruited from Samad IVF hospitals and Women
and Children Hospital, Thiruvananthapuram, India. Women with PCOS (N = 20) were
diagnosed according to Rotterdam Consensus and normal menstruating women were
taken as controls (N = 2331).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We analyzed the proportion of CD4(+)CD25(+) CD127(-/low)
Tregs in women with PCOS by fluorescent activated cell sorting.
RESULTS: The study discovered that the women with PCOS have reduced numbers of
Tregs (2.626 ± 0.62) compared with controls (4.253 ± 0.87) (t = 6.963, P < .0001,
mean difference = -1.627; 95% confidence interval = -2.099--1.155). We documented
a decrease in the follicular phase Treg expansion in women with PCOS. Our results
revealed a reduced STAT5A (fold change [FC] = 7.642, P < .0004)/STAT5B (FC =
3.824, P < .0001), FOXP3 (FC = 4.1343, P = .0004)/CTLA4 (FC = 2.569, P = .0001)
and elevated AKT (FC = 7.39, P = .05)/PIK3 (FC = 5.326, P = .0002) expression in 
women with PCOS. Recombinant interleukin 2 (rIL2) treatment failed to improve
FOXP3/CTLA4 levels but caused a reduction of AKT/PIK3 arm, possibly due to an
elevated PTEN in women with PCOS.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that women with PCOS have reduced Tregs due to an 
inherent hyporesponsiveness to IL2, which is unable to activate STAT5B and reduce
FOXP3 expression. IL2-based therapeutic strategies can ameliorate complications
in PCOS by suppressing the AKT/PIK3 arm.

PMID: 25303485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Cancer. 2015 May 1;136(9):2047-54. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29264. Epub 2014 Oct
23.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b drives malignant progression 
in a PDGFB-dependent proneural glioma model by suppressing apoptosis.

Gressot LV(1), Doucette TA, Yang Y, Fuller GN, Heimberger AB, Bögler O, Rao A,
Latha K, Rao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) is likely the
relevant STAT5 isoform with respect to the process of malignant progression in
gliomas. STAT5b is a latent cytoplasmic protein involved in cell signaling
through the modulation of growth factors, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Previous
in vitro studies have shown increased STAT5b expression in glioblastomas relative
to low-grade tumors and normal brain. We recently demonstrated that
phosphorylated STAT5b associates with delta epidermal growth factor receptor in
the nucleus and subsequently binds the promoters of downstream effector
molecules, including aurora kinase A. Analysis of TCGA dataset reveals that
STAT5b is predominantly expressed in proneural (PN) gliomas relative to
mesenchymal and neural gliomas. Here, we modeled ectopic expression of STAT5b in 
vivo using a platelet-derived growth factor subunit B (PDGFB)-dependent mouse
model of PN glioma to determine its effect on tumor formation and progression. We
showed that coexpression of STAT5b and PDGFB in mice yielded a significantly
higher rate of high-grade gliomas than PDGFB expression alone. We also observed
shorter survival in the combined expression set. High-grade tumors from the
STAT5b<U+2009>+<U+2009>PDGFB expression set were found to have a lower rate of apoptosis than
those from PDGFB alone. Furthermore, we showed that increased expression of
STAT5b<U+2009>+<U+2009>PDGFB led to increased expression of downstream STAT5b targets,
including Bcl-xL, cyclin D1 and aurora kinase A in high-grade tumors when
compared to tumors derived from PDGFB alone. Our findings show that STAT5b
promotes the malignant transformation of gliomas, particularly the PN subtype,
and is a potential therapeutic target.

© 2014 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4331224 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25302990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. BMC Med. 2014 Aug 7;12:121. doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0121-6.

Ancestral exposure to stress epigenetically programs preterm birth risk and
adverse maternal and newborn outcomes.

Yao Y, Robinson AM, Zucchi FC, Robbins JC, Babenko O, Kovalchuk O, Kovalchuk I,
Olson DM, Metz GA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic stress is considered to be one of many causes of human
preterm birth (PTB), but no direct evidence has yet been provided. Here we show
in rats that stress across generations has downstream effects on endocrine,
metabolic and behavioural manifestations of PTB possibly via microRNA (miRNA)
regulation.
METHODS: Pregnant dams of the parental generation were exposed to stress from
gestational days 12 to 18. Their pregnant daughters (F1) and grand-daughters (F2)
either were stressed or remained as non-stressed controls. Gestational length,
maternal gestational weight gain, blood glucose and plasma corticosterone levels,
litter size and offspring weight gain from postnatal days 1 to 30 were recorded
in each generation, including F3. Maternal behaviours were analysed for the first
hour after completed parturition, and offspring sensorimotor development was
recorded on postnatal day (P) 7. F0 through F2 maternal brain frontal cortex,
uterus and placenta miRNA and gene expression patterns were used to identify
stress-induced epigenetic regulatory pathways of maternal behaviour and pregnancy
maintenance.
RESULTS: Progressively up to the F2 generation, stress gradually reduced
gestational length, maternal weight gain and behavioural activity, and increased 
blood glucose levels. Reduced offspring growth and delayed behavioural
development in the stress cohort was recognizable as early as P7, with the
greatest effect in the F3 offspring of transgenerationally stressed mothers.
Furthermore, stress altered miRNA expression patterns in the brain and uterus of 
F2 mothers, including the miR-200 family, which regulates pathways related to
brain plasticity and parturition, respectively. Main miR-200 family target genes 
in the uterus, Stat5b, Zeb1 and Zeb2, were downregulated by multigenerational
stress in the F1 generation. Zeb2 was also reduced in the stressed F2 generation,
suggesting a causal mechanism for disturbed pregnancy maintenance. Additionally, 
stress increased placental miR-181a, a marker of human PTB.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that a family history of stress may program
central and peripheral pathways regulating gestational length and maternal and
newborn health outcomes in the maternal lineage. This new paradigm may model the 
origin of many human PTB causes.

PMCID: PMC4244860
PMID: 25286408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 4;15:860. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-860.

Genetic and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in fetal and adult human
livers.

Bonder MJ, Kasela S, Kals M, Tamm R, Lokk K, Barragan I, Buurman WA, Deelen P,
Greve JW, Ivanov M, Rensen SS, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wolfs MG, Fu J, Hofker
MH, Wijmenga C, Zhernakova A, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Franke L(1), Milani L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB Groningen, the Netherlands. lude@ludesign.nl.

BACKGROUND: The liver plays a central role in the maintenance of homeostasis and 
health in general. However, there is substantial inter-individual variation in
hepatic gene expression, and although numerous genetic factors have been
identified, less is known about the epigenetic factors.
RESULTS: By analyzing the methylomes and transcriptomes of 14 fetal and 181 adult
livers, we identified 657 differentially methylated genes with adult-specific
expression, these genes were enriched for transcription factor binding sites of
HNF1A and HNF4A. We also identified 1,000 genes specific to fetal liver, which
were enriched for GATA1, STAT5A, STAT5B and YY1 binding sites. We saw strong
liver-specific effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms on both methylation
levels (28,447 unique CpG sites (meQTL)) and gene expression levels (526 unique
genes (eQTL)), at a false discovery rate (FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Of the 526 unique eQTL
associated genes, 293 correlated significantly not only with genetic variation
but also with methylation levels. The tissue-specificities of these associations 
were analyzed in muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue and visceral adipose tissue.
We observed that meQTL were more stable between tissues than eQTL and a very
strong tissue-specificity for the identified associations between CpG methylation
and gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses generated a comprehensive resource of factors involved 
in the regulation of hepatic gene expression, and allowed us to estimate the
proportion of variation in gene expression that could be attributed to genetic
and epigenetic variation, both crucial to understanding differences in drug
response and the etiology of liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC4287518
PMID: 25282492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Haematologica. 2015 Jan;100(1):91-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.113142. Epub 2014
Oct 3.

The analysis of clonal diversity and therapy responses using STAT3 mutations as a
molecular marker in large granular lymphocytic leukemia.

Rajala HL(1), Olson T(2), Clemente MJ(3), Lagström S(4), Ellonen P(4), Lundan
T(5), Hamm DE(6), Zaman SA(4), Lopez Marti JM(4), Andersson EI(1), Jerez A(7),
Porkka K(1), Maciejewski JP(3), Loughran TP(2), Mustjoki S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Unit, Department of Hematology, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Central Hospital Cancer Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)University of Virginia Cancer Center, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (3)Department 
of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (4)Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM),
University of Helsinki, Finland. (5)Department of Clinical Chemistry and TYKSLAB,
University of Turku and Turku University Central Hospital, Finland. (6)Adaptive
Biotechnologies Corp, Seattle, WA, USA. (7)Department of Translational Hematology
and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH,
USA Hematology and Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Morales
Meseguer, Universidad de Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain. (8)Hematology
Research Unit, Department of Hematology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Central Hospital Cancer Center, Helsinki, Finland
satu.mustjoki@helsinki.fi.

T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia and chronic lymphoproliferative
disorder of natural killer cells are intriguing entities between benign and
malignant lymphoproliferation. The molecular pathogenesis has partly been
uncovered by the recent discovery of somatic activating STAT3 and STAT5b
mutations. Here we show that 43% (75/174) of patients with T-cell large granular 
lymphocytic leukemia and 18% (7/39) with chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of 
natural killer cells harbor STAT3 mutations when analyzed by quantitative deep
amplicon sequencing. Surprisingly, 17% of the STAT3-mutated patients carried
multiple STAT3 mutations, which were located in different lymphocyte clones. The 
size of the mutated clone correlated well with the degree of clonal expansion of 
the T-cell repertoire analyzed by T-cell receptor beta chain deep sequencing. The
analysis of sequential samples suggested that current immunosuppressive therapy
is not able to reduce the level of the mutated clone in most cases, thus
warranting the search for novel targeted therapies. Our findings imply that the
clonal landscape of large granular lymphocytic leukemia is more complex than
considered before, and a substantial number of patients have multiple lymphocyte 
subclones harboring different STAT3 mutations, thus mimicking the situation in
acute leukemia.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4281318
PMID: 25281507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov 1;307(9):E847-55. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00324.2014. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Differential effects of STAT proteins on growth hormone-mediated IGF-I gene
expression.

Varco-Merth B(1), Rotwein P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon rotweinp@ohsu.edu.

Growth hormone (GH) plays a key role regulating somatic growth and in controlling
metabolism and other physiological processes in humans and other animal species. 
GH acts by binding to the extracellular part of its transmembrane receptor,
leading to induction of multiple intracellular signal transduction pathways that 
culminate in changes in gene and protein expression. A key agent in GH-stimulated
growth is the latent transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 5B, one of four STAT proteins induced by the GH receptor in 
cultured cells and in vivo. As shown by genetic and biochemical studies,
GH-activated STAT5B promotes transcription of the gene encoding the critical
growth peptide, insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), and natural null mutations 
of STAT5B in humans lead to growth failure accompanied by diminished IGF-I
expression. Here we have examined the possibility that other GH-activated STATs
can enhance IGF-I gene transcription, and thus potentially contribute to
GH-regulated somatic growth. We find that human STAT5A is nearly identical to
STAT5B in its biochemical and functional responses to GH but that STAT1 and STAT3
show a weaker profile of in vitro binding to STAT DNA elements from the IGF-I
gene than STAT5B, and are less potent inducers of gene transcription through
these elements. Taken together, our results offer a molecular explanation for why
STAT5B is a key in vivo mediator of GH-activated IGF-I gene transcription and
thus of GH-regulated somatic growth.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4216947
PMID: 25205818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):9079-91.

Prolactin induces up-regulation of its cognate receptor in breast cancer cells
via transcriptional activation of its generic promoter by cross-talk between ERa 
and STAT5.

Kavarthapu R(1), Tsai Morris CH(1), Dufau ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Prolactin (PRL) serves a critical role in breast cancer progression via
activation of its cognate receptor. These studies reveal up-regulation of PRLR
gene expression by PRL in absence of estradiol in MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer
cells. PRL/PRLR via activation of STAT5 that binds a GAS-element in the PRLR gene
and the participation of ERa stimulates PRLR transcription/expression. PRL/PRLR
induces phosphorylation of ERa through the JAK2/PI3K/MAPK/ERK and JAK2/HER2
activated pathways. The increased recruitment of phospho-ERa, induced by PRL to
Sp1 and C/EBPß at PRLR promoter sites is essential for PRL-induced PRLR
transcription. This recruitment is prevented by blockade of PRL expression using 
RNA interference or ERa phosphorylation using specific inhibitors of PI3K and
ERK. Direct evidence is provided for local actions of PRL, independent of
estradiol, in the up-regulation of PRLR transcription/expression by an
activation-loop between STAT5 and the phospho-ERa/Sp1/C/EBPß complex with
requisite participation of signaling mechanisms. PRL's central role in the
up-regulation of PRLR maximizes the action of the endogenous hormone. This study 
offers mechanistically rational basis for invasiveness fueled by prolactin in
refractory states to adjuvant therapies in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4253420
PMID: 25193864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014 Nov;171(5):623-31. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0538. Epub 2014 Aug
27.

GH signaling in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue in healthy human subjects:
impact of gender and age.

Vestergaard PF(1), Vendelbo MH(2), Pedersen SB(2), Juul A(2), Ringgard S(2),
Møller N(2), Jessen N(2), Jørgensen JO(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Medical Research LaboratoriesDepartment of Endocrinology and Internal
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus University, Nørrebrogade 44, DK-8000 Aarhus C,
DenmarkDepartment of Growth and ReproductionUniversity Hospital of Copenhagen,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, DenmarkDepartment of Clinical
MedicineMR Research Centre Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby,
Brendstrupgaardsvej 100, DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark poulv@ki.au.dk. (2)The Medical
Research LaboratoriesDepartment of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Faculty
of Health Sciences, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus University, Nørrebrogade 44, DK-8000 Aarhus C, DenmarkDepartment of Growth
and ReproductionUniversity Hospital of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9,
2100 Copenhagen Ø, DenmarkDepartment of Clinical MedicineMR Research Centre
Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, Brendstrupgaardsvej 100, DK-8200 Aarhus N,
Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The mechanisms underlying the impact of age and gender on the GH-IGF1 
axis remain unclear. We tested the hypothesis that age and gender have impacts on
GH signaling in human subjects in vivo.
DESIGN: A total of 20 healthy non-obese adults ('young group'<30 years (5F/5M)
and 'old group'>60 years (5F/5M)) were studied after: i) an i.v. GH bolus
(0.5<U+200A>mg) and ii) saline.
METHODS: Muscle and fat biopsies were obtained after 30 and 120<U+200A>min. Total and
phosphorylated STAT5B proteins, gene expression of IGF1, SOCS1, SOCS2, SOCS3 and 
CISH, body composition, VO2max, and muscle strength were measured.
RESULTS: In the GH-unstimulated state, women displayed significantly elevated
levels of CISH mRNA in muscle (P=0.002) and fat (P=0.05) and reduced levels of
IGF1 mRNA in fat. Phosphorylated STAT5B (pSTAT5b) was maximally increased in all 
subjects 30<U+200A>min after GH exposure and more pronounced in women when compared with
men (P=0.01). IGF1, SOCS1, SOCS2, SOCS3, and CISH mRNA expression increased
significantly in muscle after 120<U+200A>min in all subjects with no impact of age and
gender. GH-induced pSTAT5b correlated inversely with lean body mass (LBM;
r=-0.56, P=0.01) and positively with the CISH mRNA response (r=0.533, P=0.05).
CONCLUSION: i) GH signaling in muscle and fat after a single GH bolus in healthy 
human subjects is age independent, ii) we hypothesize that constitutive
overexpression of CISH may contribute to the relative GH resistance in women, and
iii) experimental studies on the impact of sex steroid administration and
physical training on GH signaling in human subjects in vivo are required.

© 2014 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25163724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e104265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104265.
eCollection 2014.

Expression of STAT5, COX-2 and PIAS3 in correlation with NSCLC histhopathological
features.

Pastuszak-Lewandoska D(1), Domanska D(1), Czarnecka KH(1), Kordiak J(2),
Migdalska-Sek M(1), Nawrot E(1), Kiszalkiewicz J(1), Antczak A(3), Górski P(4),
Brzezianska E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bases of Medicine, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz,
Poland. (2)Department of Chest Surgery, General and Oncological Surgery,
University Hospital No. 2, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(3)Department of General and Oncological Pulmonology, Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland. (4)Department of Pneumology and Allergology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs), their inhibitors and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) participate in transformations of many various types of 
cancers. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the relationship between
STAT5A/B, COX-2, and PIAS3 mRNA expression and tumor staging, metastasis status, 
and histopathological subtype in 71 patients with confirmed non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) diagnosis. Total RNA was isolated from NSCLC tissue samples and
the expression of the studied genes was assessed using TaqMan probes in real-time
PCR assay. The expression levels of STAT5A, STAT5B, and COX-2 genes were
increased in 69%, 79%, and 71% NSCLC samples respectively, while PIAS3 expression
was decreased in the majority (69%) of the studied tissues. Statistically
significant differences were observed between STAT5 isoforms (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0008), with
higher expression of STAT5B. We found statistically significant positive
correlation between STAT5B and COX-2 (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.045), and significant negative
correlation between STAT5B and PIAS3 (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.049). The negative correlation
between STAT5B and PIAS3 (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.43) was also observed in T2a+T2b tumor group. 
Additionally, STAT5B and COX-2 expression levels were significantly different
between T1a+T1b and T2a+T2b tumors (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041, respectively), with 
higher expression of both genes in T2 tumor stage. PIAS3 expression was
significantly lower in NSCC subtype as compared with SCC subtype (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.017).
Also, STAT5A and STAT5B immunoexpression was assessed, and the results indicated 
significantly higher protein levels in NSCLC patients as compared with controls
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.048 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.034, respectively). High STAT5B immunoexpression was
positively correlated with STAT5B gene expression in tumors (rho<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.755). STAT5B
protein level was also significantly higher in T2a+T2b tumors, reflecting high
STAT5B gene expression in this group. There was no statistically significant
association between mRNA and protein expression levels of the studied genes and
patients' characteristics: age, gender, smoking. The obtained results highlight
the importance of the genes STAT5B and COX-2 in lung cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4138089
PMID: 25137041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e104184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104184.
eCollection 2014.

MafA is required for postnatal proliferation of pancreatic ß-cells.

Eto K(1), Nishimura W(2), Oishi H(3), Udagawa H(2), Kawaguchi M(2), Hiramoto
M(2), Fujiwara T(4), Takahashi S(3), Yasuda K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Diabetes Research Center, Research
Institute, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (2)Department of
Metabolic Disorders, Diabetes Research Center, Research Institute, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Anatomy and
Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. (4)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Okayama University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama,
Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(11):e113892.

The postnatal proliferation and maturation of insulin-secreting pancreatic
ß-cells are critical for glucose metabolism and disease development in adults.
Elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying these events will be
beneficial to direct the differentiation of stem cells into functional ß-cells.
Maturation of ß-cells is accompanied by increased expression of MafA, an insulin 
gene transcription factor. Transcriptome analysis of MafA knockout islets
revealed MafA is required for the expression of several molecules critical for
ß-cell function, including Glut2, ZnT8, Granuphilin, Vdr, Pcsk1 and Urocortin 3, 
as well as Prolactin receptor (Prlr) and its downstream target Cyclin D2 (Ccnd2).
Inhibition of MafA expression in mouse islets or ß-cell lines resulted in reduced
expression of Prlr and Ccnd2, and MafA transactivated the Prlr promoter.
Stimulation of ß-cells by prolactin resulted in the phosphorylation and
translocation of Stat5B and an increased nuclear pool of Ccnd2 via Prlr and Jak2.
Consistent with these results, the loss of MafA resulted in impaired
proliferation of ß-cells at 4 weeks of age. These results suggest that MafA
regulates the postnatal proliferation of ß-cells via prolactin signaling.

PMCID: PMC4134197
PMID: 25126749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Aug;147(1):145-58. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3071-y. 
Epub 2014 Aug 8.

Genetic variation in the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway influences breast
cancer-specific mortality through interaction with cigarette smoking and use of
aspirin/NSAIDs: the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Hines LM, Torres-Mejia G, Wolff RK, Stern MC, John
EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, 383 Colorow, Salt Lake City, UT,
84108, USA, marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu.

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway is involved in immune function and cell growth; genetic
variation in this pathway could influence breast cancer risk. We examined 12
genes in the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway with breast cancer risk and
mortality in an admixed population of Hispanic (2,111 cases, 2,597 controls) and 
non-Hispanic white (1,481 cases, 1,585 controls) women. Associations were
assessed by Indigenous American (IA) ancestry. After adjustment for multiple
comparisons, JAK1 (three of ten SNPs) and JAK2 (4 of 11 SNPs) interacted with
body mass index (BMI) among pre-menopausal women, while STAT3 (four of five SNPs)
interacted significantly with BMI among post-menopausal women to alter breast
cancer risk. STAT6 rs3024979 and TYK2 rs280519 altered breast cancer-specific
mortality among all women. Associations with breast cancer-specific mortality
differed by IA ancestry; SOCS1 rs193779, STAT3 rs1026916, and STAT4 rs11685878
associations were limited to women with low IA ancestry, and associations with
JAK1 rs2780890, rs2254002, and rs310245 and STAT1 rs11887698 were observed among 
women with high IA ancestry. JAK2 (5 of 11 SNPs), SOCS2 (one of three SNPs), and 
STAT4 (2 of 20 SNPs) interacted with cigarette smoking status to alter breast
cancer-specific mortality. SOCS2 (one of three SNPs) and all STAT3, STAT5A, and
STAT5B SNPs significantly interacted with use of aspirin/NSAIDs to alter breast
cancer-specific mortality. Genetic variation in the JAK/STAT/SOCS pathway was
associated with breast cancer-specific mortality. The proportion of SNPs within a
gene that significantly interacted with lifestyle factors lends support for the
observed associations.

PMCID: PMC4167366
PMID: 25104439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Dec;99(12):E2565-73. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2215.

Growth hormone signaling in muscle and adipose tissue of obese human subjects:
associations with measures of body composition and interaction with resveratrol
treatment.

Clasen BF(1), Poulsen MM, Escande C, Pedersen SB, Møller N, Chini EN, Jessen N,
Jørgensen JO.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory for Biochemical Pathology (B.F.C., N.J.), Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark; Department of
Endocrinology and Internal Medicine (M.M.P., S.B.P., N.M., J.O.L.J.), Aarhus
University Hospital, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark; Department of Molecular Medicine
(N.J.), Aarhus University Hospital, 8000 Aarhus N, Denmark; Department of
Anesthesiology and Kogod Center on Aging (C.E., E.N.C.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905; Metabolism and Aging Laboratory (C.E.), Institut Pasteur, 11400 
Montevideo, Uruguay.

CONTEXT: Growth hormone (GH) secretion is reduced in obesity, despite normal
serum insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-1) levels, but the association between
obesity and the GH signaling is unknown. Furthermore, SIRT1, an nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide-dependent protein deacetylase, reduces hepatic IGF-1
production in mice via blunting of GH-induced STAT5 signaling.
OBJECTIVE: To study GH signaling in muscle and fat in obese subjects and the
interaction with concomitant administration of the putative SIRT1 activator
resveratrol, and to assess the effects of inhibiting or knocking down SIRT1 on GH
regulated genes in vitro.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-four obese males were examined in a randomized,
double blinded, parallel-group study with resveratrol or placebo treatment for 5 
weeks followed by a GH bolus. Muscle and fat biopsies were collected before and
after GH. Body composition was assessed by DEXA and MRI.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: (1) Effect of body composition and age on GH-stimulated
STAT5b phosphorylation and IGF-1, SOCS2, and CISH mRNA in muscle and fat. (2) The
impact of resveratrol treatment on GH activity. (3) Impact of inhibiting or
knocking down SIRT1 on effects of GH in vitro.
RESULTS: Significant GH-induced STAT5b phosphorylation in muscle and fat in obese
subjects was recorded together with increased CISH and SOCS2 mRNA. GH-induced
STAT5b phosphorylation in muscle correlated positively with age [r = 0.53, p <
0.01], but not with body composition. Resveratrol administration had no impact on
body composition, serum IGF-1, or GH signaling in vivo, and SIRT1 knock down or
inhibition did not affect GH signaling in vitro.
CONCLUSION: (1) GH induced STAT5b phosphorylation is detectable in muscle and fat
in adult males with simple obesity, but is not determined by body composition.
(2) Resveratrol supplementation does not impact circulating IGF-1 levels or GH
signaling in human muscle and fat. (3) Our data speak against a major impact of
SIRT1on GH action in human subjects.

PMID: 25050904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2014 Oct;21(10):767-76. doi: 10.1002/jhbp.131. Epub
2014 Jul 16.

STATs profiling reveals predominantly-activated STAT3 in cholangiocarcinoma
genesis and progression.

Dokduang H(1), Techasen A, Namwat N, Khuntikeo N, Pairojkul C, Murakami Y,
Loilome W, Yongvanit P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, 40002, Thailand; Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Khon
Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the aberrant expression of the STAT family in humans 
and liver fluke (Opisthorchis viverrini, Ov)-induced hamster cholangiocarcinoma
(CCA) tissues.
METHODS: The expression and phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4,
STAT5a, STAT5b and STAT6 in human hamster CCA tissues were
immunohistochemistry-profiled. Localizations of STAT5 in macrophages and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophage-conditioned media mediated STAT3
activation in CCA cells were demonstrated.
RESULTS: The expressions of STAT 1-4 and 6 were detected in the cytoplasm of
hyperplastic bile ducts and tumor cells, whereas STAT5a and STAT5b were observed 
in macrophages and connective tissues surrounding tumor, respectively. The
expressions of STAT3 and STAT5b were significantly observed in tumors with a
poorer histological differentiation. STAT3 expression was significantly
associated with shorter survival of CCA patients and was predominately activated 
in CCA cell lines. In the CCA-hamsters, STATs expression was gradually increased 
along the carcinogenesis, especially at 30 days post-infection in which the
inflammatory response was markedly observed, showing the correlation between the 
inflammation and STATs activation. Moreover, LPS-induced macrophage-conditioned
media could mediate STAT3 activation in CCA cells.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT3 is the major STAT, which plays roles in the inflammation that 
contributes to CCA carcinogenesis and progression and may serve as a marker for a
poor prognosis of CCA.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery.

PMID: 25044480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 11;9(7):e100822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100822.
eCollection 2014.

Reliable quantification of protein expression and cellular localization in
histological sections.

Schlederer M(1), Mueller KM(1), Haybaeck J(2), Heider S(3), Huttary N(3), Rosner 
M(4), Hengstschläger M(4), Moriggl R(5), Dolznig H(4), Kenner L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(3)Institute of Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (4)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria. (5)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna,
Austria; Unit for Translational Methods in Cancer Research University of
Veterinary Medicine Vienna (Vetmeduni Vienna), Vienna, Austria. (6)Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research (LBI-CR), Vienna, Austria; Institute of
Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Unit of
Pathology of Laboratory Animals, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna
(Vetmeduni Vienna), Vienna, Austria.

In targeted therapy, patient tumors are analyzed for aberrant activations of core
cancer pathways, monitored based on biomarker expression, to ensure efficient
treatment. Thus, diagnosis and therapeutic decisions are often based on the
status of biomarkers determined by immunohistochemistry in combination with other
clinical parameters. Standard evaluation of cancer specimen by
immunohistochemistry is frequently impeded by its dependence on subjective
interpretation, showing considerable intra- and inter-observer variability. To
make treatment decisions more reliable, automated image analysis is an attractive
possibility to reproducibly quantify biomarker expression in patient tissue
samples. We tested whether image analysis could detect subtle differences in
protein expression levels. Gene dosage effects generate well-graded expression
patterns for most gene-products, which vary by a factor of two between wildtype
and haploinsufficient cells lacking one allele. We used conditional mouse models 
with deletion of the transcription factors Stat5ab in the liver as well Junb
deletion in a T-cell lymphoma model. We quantified the expression of total or
activated STAT5AB or JUNB protein in normal (Stat5ab+/+ or JunB+/+), hemizygous
(Stat5ab+/<U+0394> or JunB+/<U+0394>) or knockout (Stat5ab<U+0394>/<U+0394> or JunB<U+0394>/<U+0394>) settings. Image
analysis was able to accurately detect hemizygosity at the protein level.
Moreover, nuclear signals were distinguished from cytoplasmic expression and
translocation of the transcription factors from the cytoplasm to the nucleus was 
reliably detected and quantified using image analysis. We demonstrate that image 
analysis supported pathologists to score nuclear STAT5AB expression levels in
immunohistologically stained human hepatocellular patient samples and decreased
inter-observer variability.

PMCID: PMC4094387
PMID: 25013898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Haematologica. 2014 Oct;99(10):e188-92. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.104992. Epub
2014 Jun 27.

The activating STAT5B N642H mutation is a common abnormality in pediatric T-cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia and confers a higher risk of relapse.

Bandapalli OR(1), Schuessele S(1), Kunz JB(1), Rausch T(2), Stütz AM(2), Tal
N(3), Geron I(4), Gershman N(3), Izraeli S(3), Eilers J(1), Vaezipour N(1),
Kirschner-Schwabe R(5), Hof J(6), von Stackelberg A(5), Schrappe M(7), Stanulla
M(8), Zimmermann M(9), Koehler R(10), Avigad S(11), Handgretinger R(12),
Frismantas V(13), Bourquin JP(13), Bornhauser B(13), Korbel JO(14), Muckenthaler 
MU(15), Kulozik AE(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Children's
Hospital, University of Heidelberg, Germany Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, 
EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany. (2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
(EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Childhood Leukemia Research 
Institute and Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, and Tel Aviv University, Israel. (4)Childhood Leukemia Research
Institute and Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, and Tel Aviv University, Israel Division of Biological Sciences and
Department of Medicine Stem Cell Program, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA. (5)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. (6)Department of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany German Cancer 
Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 
(7)Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Germany.
(8)Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Germany
Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Medical School Hannover, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Medical School Hannover, Germany.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(11)Molecular Oncology, Felsenstein Medical Research Center and Pediatric
Hematology Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, 
Israel. (12)Children's Hospital, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany.
(13)Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Switzerland.
(14)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology Unit,
Heidelberg, Germany Jan.korbel@embl-heidelberg.de
Martina.Muckenthaler@med.uni-heidelberg.de Andreas.Kulozik@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(15)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Children's
Hospital, University of Heidelberg, Germany Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, 
EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany Jan.korbel@embl-heidelberg.de
Martina.Muckenthaler@med.uni-heidelberg.de Andreas.Kulozik@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

PMCID: PMC4181267
PMID: 24972766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Leukemia. 2014 Nov;28(11):2244-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.200. Epub 2014 Jun 20.

Frequent STAT5B mutations in <U+03B3>d hepatosplenic T-cell lymphomas.

Nicolae A(1), Xi L(2), Pittaluga S(1), Abdullaev Z(3), Pack SD(3), Chen J(4),
Waldmann TA(4), Jaffe ES(1), Raffeld M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Molecular Diagnostics Unit, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Chromosome Biology
Unit, Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer 
Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

PMID: 24947020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Tumour Biol. 2014 Sep;35(9):9317-30. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2222-4. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

A pilot study evaluating genetic alterations that drive tobacco- and betel
quid-associated oral cancer in Northeast India.

Yadav DS(1), Chattopadhyay I, Verma A, Devi TR, Singh LC, Sharma JD, Kataki ACh, 
Saxena S, Kapur S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pathology, Indian Council of Medical Research, Room No
206, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi, 110029, India, dsyadav12@gmail.com.

The susceptibility of an individual to oral cancer is mediated by genetic factors
and carcinogen-exposure behaviors such as betel quid chewing, tobacco use, and
alcohol consumption. This pilot study was aimed to identify the genetic
alteration in 100 bp upstream and downstream flanking regions in addition to the 
exonic regions of 169 cancer-associated genes by using Next Generation sequencing
with aim to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of tobacco- and betel
quid-associated oral cancer of Northeast India. To understand the role of
chemical compounds present in tobacco and betel quid associated with the
progression of oral cancer, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertion 
and deletion (Indels) found in this study were analyzed for their association
with chemical compounds found in tobacco and betel quid using Comparative
Toxogenomic Database. Genes (AR, BRCA1, IL8, and TP53) with novel SNP were found 
to be associated with arecoline which is the major component of areca nut. Genes 
(BARD1, BRCA2, CCND2, IGF1R, MSH6, and RASSF1) with novel deletion and genes
(APC, BRMS1, CDK2AP1, CDKN2B, GAS1, IGF1R, and RB1) with novel insertion were
found to be associated with aflatoxin B1 which is produced by fermented areca
nut. Genes (ADH6, APC, AR, BARD1, BRMS1, CDKN1A, E2F1, FGFR4, FLNC, HRAS, IGF1R, 
IL12B, IL8, NBL1, STAT5B, and TP53) with novel SNP were found to be associated
with aflatoxin B1. Genes (ATM, BRCA1, CDKN1A, EGFR, IL8, and TP53) with novel SNP
were found to be associated with tobacco specific nitrosamines.

PMID: 24943687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. FASEB J. 2014 Sep;28(9):4111-22. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-248864. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Irreversible perinatal imprinting of adult expression of the principal
sex-dependent drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP2C11.

Das RK(1), Banerjee S(1), Shapiro BH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Laboratories of Biochemistry,
University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA shapirob@vet.upenn.edu.

We proposed to determine whether, like other sexual dimorphisms, drug metabolism 
is permanently imprinted by perinatal hormones, resulting in its irreversible
sex-dependent expression. We treated newborn male rats with monosodium glutamate 
(MSG), a total growth hormone (GH) blocker, and, using cultured hepatocytes,
examined expression of adult CYP2C11, the predominant cytochrome-P450 expressed
only in males, as well as the signal transduction pathway by which episodic GH
solely regulates the isoform's expression. In addition, adolescent
hypophysectomized (hypox) male rats served as controls in which GH was eliminated
after the critical imprinting period. Whereas renaturalization of the masculine
episodic GH profile restored normal male-like levels of CYP2C11, as well as
CYP2C12, in hepatocytes from hypox rats, the cells derived from the MSG-treated
rats were completely unresponsive. Moreover, GH exposure of hepatocytes from
hypox rats resulted in normal induction, activation, nuclear translocation, and
binding to the CYP2C11 promoter of the signal transducers mediating GH regulation
of CYP2C11 expression, which dramatically contrasted with the complete
unresponsiveness of the MSG-derived hepatocytes, also associated with
hypermethylation of GH-response elements in the CYP2C11 promoter. Lastly,
neonatal MSG treatment had no adverse effect on postnatal and adult testosterone 
levels. The results demonstrate that the sexually dimorphic expression of CYP2C11
is irreversibly imprinted shortly after birth by a hormone other than the
customary testosterone, but likely by GH.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4139898
PMID: 24942648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3597-609. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1017. Epub 2014 Jun
10.

Hypothalamic molecular changes underlying natural reproductive senescence in the 
female rat.

Kermath BA(1), Riha PD, Woller MJ, Wolfe A, Gore AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience (B.A.K., A.C.G.), Division of Pharmacology and
Toxicology (P.D.R., A.C.G.), and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology
(A.C.G.), The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712; Department of
Biology (M.J.W.), University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, Whitewater, Wisconsin
53190; and Department of Pediatrics (A.W.), Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore Maryland 21287.

The role of the hypothalamus in female reproductive senescence is unclear. Here
we identified novel molecular neuroendocrine changes during the natural
progression from regular reproductive cycles to acyclicity in middle-aged female 
rats, comparable with the perimenopausal progression in women. Expression of 48
neuroendocrine genes was quantified within three hypothalamic regions: the
anteroventral periventricular nucleus, the site of steroid positive feedback onto
GnRH neurons; the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the site of negative feedback and
pulsatile GnRH release; and the median eminence (ME), the site of GnRH secretion.
Surprisingly, the majority of changes occurred in the ARC and ME, with few
effects in anteroventral periventricular nucleus. The overall pattern was
increased mRNA levels with chronological age and decreases with reproductive
cycle status in middle-aged rats. Affected genes included transcription factors
(Stat5b, Arnt, Ahr), sex steroid hormone receptors (Esr1, Esr2, Pgr, Ar),
steroidogenic enzymes (Sts, Hsd17b8), growth factors (Igf1, Tgfa), and
neuropeptides (Kiss1, Tac2, Gnrh1). Bionetwork analysis revealed region-specific 
correlations between genes and hormones. Immunohistochemical analyses of
kisspeptin and estrogen receptor-a in the ARC demonstrated age-related decreases 
in kisspeptin cell numbers as well as kisspeptin-estrogen receptor-a dual-labeled
cells. Taken together, these results identify unexpectedly strong roles for the
ME and ARC during reproductive decline and highlight fundamental differences
between middle-aged rats with regular cycles and all other groups. Our data
provide evidence of decreased excitatory stimulation and altered hormone feedback
with aging and suggest novel neuroendocrine pathways that warrant future study.
Furthermore, these changes may impact other neuroendocrine systems that undergo
functional declines with age.

PMCID: PMC4138577
PMID: 24914937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Sep;210(9):582-5. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.04.019. Epub
2014 May 9.

Association between STAT5 polymorphisms and glioblastoma risk in Han Chinese
population.

Liu YL(1), Liu PF(2), Liu HE(3), Ma LX(2), Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 107 Wenhua
Western Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China; Department of Neurosurgery,
Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical College, Binzhou, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical College,
Binzhou, Shandong, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, People's Hospital of
Binzhou City, Binzhou, Shandong, China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu
Hospital of Shandong University, 107 Wenhua Western Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012,
China. Electronic address: drdoctorligang@163.com.

The aim of this study was to investigate the associations between STAT5 gene
polymorphisms and glioblastoma (GBM) risk predisposition. We undertook a
case-control study to analyze two STAT5 polymorphisms (STAT5a rs11079041 and
STAT5b rs2293157) in a Han Chinese population, by extraction of genomic DNA from 
the peripheral blood of 328 patients with glioma and 342 control participants,
and performed STAT5 genotyping using DNA sequencing. The obtained results
indicated that overall, no statistically significant association was observed in 
STAT5a rs11079041. Nevertheless, STAT5b rs2293157 G/T genotype was at increased
risk of glioma (P=0.001). Furthermore, rs2293157T allele was more significantly
prognostic in patients suffering from glioblastoma compared to other subtypes of 
gliomas (P<0.001; odds ratio (OR)=5.14, CI 95%: 2.70-9.79). These findings led us
to conclude that polymorphism in STAT5b rs2293157 G/T was observed to be
associated with susceptibility of glioblastoma. Nevertheless, further
investigation with a later confirmation in another ethnical or geographical
cohort is required.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24878107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Oct;54(10):959-70. doi: 10.1002/mc.22165. Epub 2014 May 17.

Genetic background determines if Stat5b suppresses or enhances murine
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Oberley CC(1), Bilger A(1), Drinkwater NR(1).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.

Murine hepatocarcinogenesis requires growth hormone (GH). To determine if the
GH-responsive transcription factor STAT5b (signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b) is also required, we compared the hepatic gene expression
profiles of global Stat5b null mice to cancer-resistant mice mutant in the GH
pathway-GH-deficient little and androgen receptor-null Tfm males. We found a high
degree of overlap among Tfm, little, and Stat5b null males. The liver cancer
susceptibility of global Stat5b null mice was assessed on three distinct genetic 
backgrounds: BALB/cJ (BALB), C57BL/6J (B6), and C3H/HeJ (C3H). The effect of
Stat5b on hepatocarcinogenesis depended on the genetic background. B6 Stat5b null
congenic males and females developed 2.4 times as many tumors as wild-type (WT)
controls (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.002) and the tumors were larger (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003). In BALB/c congenics,
loss of STAT5b had no effect on either sex. C3H Stat5b null congenic males and
females were resistant to liver cancer, developing 2.7- and 6-fold fewer tumors, 
respectively (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.02, 0.01). These results provide the first example of a
single gene behaving as both oncogene and tumor suppressor in a given tissue,
depending only on the endogenous modifier alleles carried by different genetic
backgrounds.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4254363
PMID: 24838184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2014 May 16;9(5):e97243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097243. eCollection
2014.

BCR-ABL affects STAT5A and STAT5B differentially.

Schaller-Schönitz M(1), Barzan D(1), Williamson AJ(2), Griffiths JR(2), Dallmann 
I(1), Battmer K(1), Ganser A(1), Whetton AD(2), Scherr M(1), Eder M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hannover Medical School, Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and
Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover, Germany. (2)Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester,
Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are latent cytoplasmic
transcription factors linking extracellular signals to target gene transcription.
Hematopoietic cells express two highly conserved STAT5-isoforms (STAT5A/STAT5B), 
and STAT5 is directly activated by JAK2 downstream of several cytokine receptors 
and the oncogenic BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. Using an IL-3-dependent cell line with
inducible BCR-ABL-expression we compared STAT5-activation by IL-3 and BCR-ABL in 
a STAT5-isoform specific manner. RNAi targeting of STAT5B strongly inhibits
BCR-ABL-dependent cell proliferation, and STAT5B but not STAT5A is essential for 
BCL-XL-expression in the presence of BCR-ABL. Although BCR-ABL induces
STAT5-tyrosine phosphorylation independent of JAK2-kinase activity, BCR-ABL is
less efficient in inducing active STAT5A:STAT5B-heterodimerization than IL-3,
leaving constitutive STAT5A and STAT5B-homodimerization unaffected. In comparison
to IL-3, nuclear accumulation of a STAT5A-eGFP fusion protein is reduced by
BCR-ABL, and BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase activity induces STAT5A-eGFP translocation
to the cell membrane and co-localization with the IL-3 receptor. Furthermore,
BCR-ABL-dependent phosphorylation of Y682 in STAT5A was detected by
mass-spectrometry. Finally, RNAi targeting STAT5B but not STAT5A sensitizes human
BCR-ABL-positive cell lines to imatinib-treatment. These data demonstrate
differences between IL-3 and BCR-ABL-mediated STAT5-activation and
isoform-specific effects, indicating therapeutic options for isoform-specific
STAT5-inhibition in BCR-ABL-positive leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4023949
PMID: 24836440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood. 2014 Aug 28;124(9):1460-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-559542. Epub 2014
May 13.

Integrated genomic sequencing reveals mutational landscape of T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia.

Kiel MJ(1), Velusamy T(1), Rolland D(1), Sahasrabuddhe AA(1), Chung F(1), Bailey 
NG(1), Schrader A(2), Li B(3), Li JZ(4), Ozel AB(5), Betz BL(1), Miranda RN(6),
Medeiros LJ(6), Zhao L(7), Herling M(2), Lim MS(1), Elenitoba-Johnson KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI;
(2)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling and Oncoproteome, Department of Medicine,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; (3)Department of Computational Medicine 
and Bioinformatics and. (4)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics and Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; (5)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI; (6)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; and.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Aug 28;124(9):1383-4.

The comprehensive genetic alterations underlying the pathogenesis of T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) are unknown. To address this, we performed
whole-genome sequencing (WGS), whole-exome sequencing (WES), high-resolution
copy-number analysis, and Sanger resequencing of a large cohort of T-PLL. WGS and
WES identified novel mutations in recurrently altered genes not previously
implicated in T-PLL including EZH2, FBXW10, and CHEK2. Strikingly, WGS and/or WES
showed largely mutually exclusive mutations affecting IL2RG, JAK1, JAK3, or
STAT5B in 38 of 50 T-PLL genomes (76.0%). Notably, gain-of-function IL2RG
mutations are novel and have not been reported in any form of cancer. Further,
high-frequency mutations in STAT5B have not been previously reported in T-PLL.
Functionally, IL2RG-JAK1-JAK3-STAT5B mutations led to signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) hyperactivation, transformed Ba/F3 cells
resulting in cytokine-independent growth, and/or enhanced colony formation in
Jurkat T cells. Importantly, primary T-PLL cells exhibited constitutive
activation of STAT5, and targeted pharmacologic inhibition of STAT5 with pimozide
induced apoptosis in primary T-PLL cells. These results for the first time
provide a portrait of the mutational landscape of T-PLL and implicate
deregulation of DNA repair and epigenetic modulators as well as high-frequency
mutational activation of the IL2RG-JAK1-JAK3-STAT5B axis in the pathogenesis of
T-PLL. These findings offer opportunities for novel targeted therapies in this
aggressive leukemia.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4148768
PMID: 24825865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jul;28(7):1012-25. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1099. Epub 2014 May 
13.

Minireview: mechanisms of growth hormone-mediated gene regulation.

Chia DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mt Sinai, New York, New 
York 10029.

GH exerts a diverse array of physiological actions that include prominent roles
in growth and metabolism, with a major contribution via stimulating IGF-1
synthesis. GH achieves its effects by influencing gene expression profiles, and
Igf1 is a key transcriptional target of GH signaling in liver and other tissues. 
This review examines the mechanisms of GH-mediated gene regulation that begin
with signal transduction pathways activated downstream of the GH receptor and
continue with chromatin events at target genes and additionally encompasses the
topics of negative regulation and cross talk with other cellular inputs. The
transcription factor, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b, is
regarded as the major signaling pathway by which GH achieves its physiological
effects, including in stimulating Igf1 gene transcription in liver. Recent
studies exploring the mechanisms of how activated signal transducer and activator
of transcription 5b accomplishes this are highlighted, which begin to
characterize epigenetic features at regulatory domains of the Igf1 locus. Further
research in this field offers promise to better understand the GH-IGF-1 axis in
normal physiology and disease and to identify strategies to manipulate the axis
to improve human health.

PMCID: PMC4075164
PMID: 24825400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):7861-70. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2048-0. Epub 2014
May 14.

Bortezomib induces apoptosis by interacting with JAK/STAT pathway in K562
leukemic cells.

Selvi N(1), Kaymaz BT, Gündüz C, Aktan C, Kiper HD, Sahin F, Cömert M, Selvi AF, 
Kosova B, Saydam G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Ege University, Bornova,
35100, Izmir, Turkey, selvi.nur@gmail.com.

In the current study, we aimed to identify the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of
bortezomib (BOR) on human K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cells and to evaluate
the potential roles of Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway members STAT3, STAT5, and JAK2 on BOR-induced
cell death of leukemic cells. Cell viability was assessed via trypan blue dye
exclusion test, and cytotoxicity of the BOR-treated cells was conducted by
2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulphophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner
salt (XTT) assay. The relative messenger RNA (mRNA) expression levels of STAT3,
STAT5A, STAT5B, and JAK2 were analyzed by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). On the other hand, their
protein expression levels were detected by western blot method. The obtained
results indicated that BOR treatment reduced cell viability and induced leukemic 
cell apoptosis in a dose- and time-dependent manner as compared to untreated
control cells. While mRNA expression levels of STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT3 were
significantly reduced following BOR treatment when compared to untreated
controls, it had no effect upon JAK2 mRNA expression. As for protein levels, STAT
expressions were downregulated after BOR treatment especially at 72nd and 96th
hours. Our results pointed out that BOR treatment had a significant potential of 
being an anticancer agent for chronic myelogenous leukemia therapy, and this
effect could be due to the expressional downregulations of JAK/STAT pathway
members.

PMID: 24824872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS One. 2014 May 9;9(5):e96305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096305. eCollection 
2014.

Lipid profiling and transcriptomic analysis reveals a functional interplay
between estradiol and growth hormone in liver.

Fernández-Pérez L(1), Santana-Farré R(2), de Mirecki-Garrido M(2), García I(3),
Guerra B(1), Mateo-Díaz C(1), Iglesias-Gato D(4), Díaz-Chico JC(1),
Flores-Morales A(4), Díaz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria -
Biomedical and Health Research Institute (IUIBS), Molecular and Translational
Endocrinology Group, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain; Cancer Research Institute
of The Canary Islands (ICIC), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands, Spain. 
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria -
Biomedical and Health Research Institute (IUIBS), Molecular and Translational
Endocrinology Group, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain. (3)Cancer Research
Institute of The Canary Islands (ICIC), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary
Islands, Spain; Department of Animal Biology, University of La Laguna, Laboratory
of Membrane Physiology and Biophysics, La Laguna, Spain. (4)Molecular
Endocrinology group, University of Copenhagen - Novo Nordisk Center for Protein
Research, Copenhagen, Denmark.

17ß-estradiol (E2) may interfere with endocrine, metabolic, and
gender-differentiated functions in liver in both females and males. Indirect
mechanisms play a crucial role because of the E2 influence on the pituitary GH
secretion and the GHR-JAK2-STAT5 signaling pathway in the target tissues. E2,
through its interaction with the estrogen receptor, exerts direct effects on
liver. Hypothyroidism also affects endocrine and metabolic functions of the
liver, rendering a metabolic phenotype with features that mimic deficiencies in
E2 or GH. In this work, we combined the lipid and transcriptomic analysis to
obtain comprehensive information on the molecular mechanisms of E2 effects, alone
and in combination with GH, to regulate liver functions in males. We used the
adult hypothyroid-orchidectomized rat model to minimize the influence of internal
hormones on E2 treatment and to explore its role in male-differentiated
functions. E2 influenced genes involved in metabolism of lipids and
endo-xenobiotics, and the GH-regulated endocrine, metabolic, immune, and
male-specific responses. E2 induced a female-pattern of gene expression and
inhibited GH-regulated STAT5b targeted genes. E2 did not prevent the inhibitory
effects of GH on urea and amino acid metabolism-related genes. The combination of
E2 and GH decreased transcriptional immune responses. E2 decreased the hepatic
content of saturated fatty acids and induced a transcriptional program that seems
to be mediated by the activation of PPARa. In contrast, GH inhibited fatty acid
oxidation. Both E2 and GH replacements reduced hepatic CHO levels and increased
the formation of cholesterol esters and triacylglycerols. Notably, the hepatic
lipid profiles were endowed with singular fingerprints that may be used to
segregate the effects of different hormonal replacements. In summary, we provide 
in vivo evidence that E2 has a significant impact on lipid content and
transcriptome in male liver and that E2 exerts a marked influence on GH
physiology, with implications in human therapy.

PMCID: PMC4015979
PMID: 24816529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Immunol Lett. 2014 Sep;161(1):100-5. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.04.015. Epub 2014 
May 4.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) gene polymorphisms
related with susceptibility to rheumatic heart disease in north Indian
population.

Gupta U(1), Mir SS(2), Srivastava A(3), Garg N(4), Agarwal SK(5), Pande S(5),
Mittal B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India; Department of Biosciences, Integral
University, Lucknow, India. (2)Department of Biosciences, Integral University,
Lucknow, India. (3)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute
of Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India. (4)Department of Cardiology,
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow,
India. (5)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Sanjay Gandhi
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India.
(6)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India. Electronic address: balraj@sgpgi.ac.in.

Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) is the most serious complication of heart that
comprises inflammatory reactions in heart valves. Cytokines play a critical role 
in triggering inflammatory reactions and they activate the Janus Kinase/Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway. Altered
signals of STATs play important roles in the balance between proinflammatory and 
anti-inflammatory cytokines in inflammatory diseases. The aim of the present
study was to investigate for the association of polymorphisms related with STAT
genes, i.e. STAT3 (rs4796793 C/G) and STAT5b (rs6503691 C/T) with the
pathogenesis of RHD. This case-control association study involved 300 healthy
controls and 400 RHD patients from North Indian Population. We categorized RHD
patients into two subgroups based on involvement of heart valves, mitral valve
lesion alone (MVL), and combined valve lesions including mitral valve (CVL).
Genotyping was done by RFLP/Taqman probes. We observed that STAT3 CG and GG
genotypes were significantly associated with RHD (p=0.030 and p=0.014
respectively), STAT5b CT and TT genotypes were also significantly associated with
RHD (p=0.001). Haplotype analysis revealed that minor alleles of both the
variants (Grs4796793Trs6503691) were significantly associated (p<0.0001) with
increased risk of the disease susceptibility irrespective of gender or age of
onset of the disease. However, the polymorphisms were not involved in severity of
RHD as both MVL and CVL patients were equally affected. STAT Grs4796793Trs6503691
carriers may have reduced production of STAT3 leading to damage of heart valves. 
Thus, STAT genes polymorphisms may be useful markers for the identification of
individuals with high risk of RHD in the susceptible population.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24797343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Vet Med Sci. 2014 Aug;76(8):1147-51. Epub 2014 May 1.

Repression of hepatic cytochrome P450 2D expression in mice during Babesia
microti infection.

Shimamoto Y(1), Watanabe K, Ikadai H, Okamura M, Ishizuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Teaching Hospital, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Kitasato University, Towada, Aomori 034-8628, Japan.

To examine the effect of Babesia infection on the level of the drug-metabolizing 
enzyme hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D, we intraperitoneally inoculated Babesia 
microti into male ICR mice. CYP2D protein and CYP2D9 mRNA were significantly
decreased at 12 days after infection with B. microti. The activity of bunitrolol 
4-hydroxylase, which is catalyzed by CYP2D, was also significantly decreased. The
mRNA levels of transcriptional regulators of CYP2D9, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a
and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b, were markedly
suppressed. These results suggest that Babesia infection represses CYP2D
expression in the mouse liver. The decline in CYP2D-dependent drug metabolism
might be involved in the incidence of adverse drug reactions in patients with
babesiosis.

PMCID: PMC4155197
PMID: 24784440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014 Apr;2(4):332-40. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0136.
Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Large-scale evaluation of common variation in regulatory T cell-related genes and
ovarian cancer outcome.

Charbonneau B, Moysich KB, Kalli KR, Oberg AL, Vierkant RA, Fogarty ZC, Block MS,
Maurer MJ, Goergen KM, Fridley BL, Cunningham JM, Rider DN, Preston C, Hartmann
LC, Lawrenson K, Wang C, Tyrer J, Song H, deFazio A, Johnatty SE, Doherty JA,
Phelan CM, Sellers TA, Ramirez SM, Vitonis AF, Terry KL, Van Den Berg D, Pike MC,
Wu AH, Berchuck A, Gentry-Maharaj A, Ramus SJ, Diergaarde B, Shen H, Jensen A,
Menkiszak J, Cybulski C, Lubilski J, Ziogas A, Rothstein JH, McGuire V, Sieh W,
Lester J, Walsh C, Vergote I, Lambrechts S, Despierre E, Garcia-Closas M, Yang H,
Brinton LA, Spiewankiewicz B, Rzepecka IK, Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Seibold P,
Rudolph A, Paddock LE, Orlow I, Lundvall L, Olson SH, Hogdall CK, Schwaab I, du
Bois A, Harter P, Flanagan JM, Brown R, Paul J, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Hein A,
Eccles D, Lurie G, Hays LE, Bean YT, Pejovic T, Goodman MT, Campbell I, Fasching 
PA, Konecny G, Kaye SB, Heitz F, Hogdall E, Bandera EV, Chang-Claude J,
Kupryjanczyk J, Wentzensen N, Lambrechts D, Karlan BY, Whittemore AS, Culver HA, 
Gronwald J, Levine DA, Kjaer SK, Menon U, Schildkraut JM, Pearce CL, Cramer DW,
Rossing MA, Chenevix-Trench G; AOCS group; ACS, Pharoah PD, Gayther SA, Ness RB, 
Odunsi K, Sucheston LE, Knutson KL, Goode EL.

The presence of regulatory T cells (Treg) in solid tumors is known to play a role
in patient survival in ovarian cancer and other malignancies. We assessed
inherited genetic variations via 749 tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in
25 Treg-associated genes (CD28, CTLA4, FOXP3, IDO1, IL10, IL10RA, IL15, 1L17RA,
IL23A, IL23R, IL2RA, IL6, IL6R, IL8, LGALS1, LGALS9, MAP3K8, STAT5A, STAT5B,
TGFB1, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1, TGRBR2, and TGFBR3) in relation to ovarian cancer
survival. We analyzed genotype and overall survival in 10,084 women with invasive
epithelial ovarian cancer, including 5,248 high-grade serous, 1,452 endometrioid,
795 clear cell, and 661 mucinous carcinoma cases of European descent across 28
studies from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC). The strongest
associations were found for endometrioid carcinoma and IL2RA SNPs rs11256497 [HR,
1.42; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.22-1.64; P = 5.7 × 10(-6)], rs791587 (HR,
1.36; 95% CI, 1.17-1.57; P = 6.2 × 10(-5)), rs2476491 (HR, = 1.40; 95% CI,
1.19-1.64; P = 5.6 × 10(-5)), and rs10795763 (HR, 1.35; 95% CI, 1.17-1.57; P =
7.9 × 10(-5)), and for clear cell carcinoma and CTLA4 SNP rs231775 (HR, 0.67; 95%
CI, 0.54-0.82; P = 9.3 × 10(-5)) after adjustment for age, study site, population
stratification, stage, grade, and oral contraceptive use. The rs231775 allele
associated with improved survival in our study also results in an amino acid
change in CTLA4 and previously has been reported to be associated with autoimmune
conditions. Thus, we found evidence that SNPs in genes related to Tregs seem to
play a role in ovarian cancer survival, particularly in patients with clear cell 
and endometrioid epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4000890
PMID: 24764580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 30;289(22):15642-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.544320. Epub
2014 Apr 21.

Regulation of the interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF-8) tumor suppressor gene by
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) transcription
factor in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Waight JD(1), Banik D(1), Griffiths EA(2), Nemeth MJ(3), Abrams SI(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Immunology. (2)Pharmacology and Therapeutics, and
Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 14263. (3)From the
Departments of Immunology, Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New 
York 14263 Michael.Nemeth@RoswellPark.org. (4)Pharmacology and Therapeutics, and 
Scott.Abrams@RoswellPark.org.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib can effectively target the BCR-ABL
oncoprotein in a majority of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Unfortunately, some patients are resistant primarily to imatinib and others
develop drug resistance, prompting interest in the discovery of new drug targets.
Although much of this resistance can be explained by the presence of mutations
within the tyrosine kinase domain of BCR-ABL, such mutations are not universally 
identified. Interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF-8) is a transcription factor that
is essential for myelopoiesis. Depressed IRF-8 levels are observed in a majority 
of CML patients and Irf-8(-/-) mice exhibit a CML-like disease. The underlying
mechanisms of IRF-8 loss in CML are unknown. We hypothesized that BCR-ABL
suppresses transcription of IRF-8 through STAT5, a proximal BCR-ABL target.
Treatment of primary cells from newly diagnosed CML patients in chronic phase as 
well as BCR-ABL(+) cell lines with imatinib increased IRF-8 transcription.
Furthermore, IRF-8 expression in cell line models was necessary for
imatinib-induced antitumor responses. We have demonstrated that IRF-8 is a direct
target of STAT5 and that silencing of STAT5 induced IRF-8 expression. Conversely,
activating STAT5 suppressed IRF-8 transcription. Finally, we showed that STAT5
blockade using a recently discovered antagonist increased IRF-8 expression in
patient samples. These data reveal a previously unrecognized BCR-ABL-STAT5-IRF-8 
network, which widens the repertoire of potentially new anti-CML targets.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4140919
PMID: 24753251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Brain Res. 2014 May 30;1566:47-59. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.04.018. Epub 2014
Apr 19.

Prolactin-sensitive neurons express estrogen receptor-a and depend on sex
hormones for normal responsiveness to prolactin.

Furigo IC(1), Kim KW(2), Nagaishi VS(1), Ramos-Lobo AM(1), de Alencar A(1),
Pedroso JA(1), Metzger M(1), Donato J Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Department of Pharmacology,
Institute of Lifestyle Medicine, and Nuclear Receptor Research Consortium, Yonsei
University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju 220-701, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
jdonato@icb.usp.br.

Estrogens and prolactin share important target tissues, including the gonads,
brain, liver, kidneys and some types of cancer cells. Herein, we sought
anatomical and functional evidence of possible crosstalk between prolactin and
estrogens in the mouse brain. First, we determined the distribution of
prolactin-responsive neurons that express the estrogen receptor a (ERa). A large 
number of prolactin-induced pSTAT5-immunoreactive neurons expressing ERa mRNA
were observed in several brain areas, including the anteroventral periventricular
nucleus, medial preoptic nucleus, arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus,
ventrolateral subdivision of the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH), 
medial nucleus of the amygdala and nucleus of the solitary tract. However,
although the medial preoptic area, periventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus,
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, retrochiasmatic area, dorsomedial
subdivision of the VMH, lateral hypothalamic area, dorsomedial nucleus of the
hypothalamus and ventral premammillary nucleus contained significant numbers of
prolactin-responsive neurons, these areas showed very few pSTAT5-immunoreactive
cells expressing ERa mRNA. Second, we evaluated prolactin sensitivity in
ovariectomized mice and observed that sex hormones are required for a normal
responsiveness to prolactin as ovariectomized mice showed a lower number of
prolactin-induced pSTAT5 immunoreactive neurons in all analyzed brain nuclei
compared to gonad-intact females. In addition, we performed hypothalamic gene
expression analyses to determine possible post-ovariectomy changes in components 
of prolactin signaling. We observed no significant changes in the mRNA expression
of prolactin receptor, STAT5a or STAT5b. In summary, sex hormones exert a
permissive role in maintaining the brain's prolactin sensitivity, most likely
through post-transcriptional mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24751572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Anim Sci. 2014 May;92(5):1958-67. doi: 10.2527/jas.2013-7113. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Effect of growth hormone on the differentiation of bovine preadipocytes into
adipocytes and the role of the signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b.

Zhao L(1), Wang A, Corl BA, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences.

We evaluated the effect of GH on the differentiation of primary bovine
preadipocytes into adipocytes. Bovine preadipocytes, derived from adipose tissue 
explants, were induced to differentiate into adipocytes in the presence or
absence of recombinant bovine GH. The differentiation status of adipocytes was
assessed by Oil Red O staining and by measuring the activity of
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) and the rate of acetate incorporation.
Fewer preadipocytes became adipocytes in the presence of GH than in the absence
of GH; adipocytes formed in the presence of GH had lower G3PDH activity and lower
rate of acetate incorporation than those formed without GH treatment (P < 0.05). 
These data suggest an inhibitory effect of GH on the differentiation of bovine
preadipocytes into adipocytes. Growth hormone decreased the expression of C/EBPa 
and PPAR<U+03B3> mRNA in bovine adipocytes (P < 0.05). Because C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> are the 
master regulators of adipocyte differentiation, this data suggests that GH might 
inhibit the differentiation of bovine preadipocytes into adipocytes by inhibiting
the expression of C/EBPa and/or PPAR<U+03B3>. Because the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a major component of signaling from the
GH receptor, we next determined the potential role of STAT5 in GH inhibition of
bovine adipocyte differentiation. Overexpression of a constitutively active form 
of STAT5b (STAT5bCA) in bovine preadipocytes through adenoviral transduction
mimicked the effects of GH on the formation of lipid-containing adipocytes, G3PDH
activity, and acetate incorporation rate. Overexpression of STAT5bCA was
associated with decreased expression of C/EBPa mRNA (P < 0.05) but not that of
PPAR<U+03B3> mRNA in bovine adipocytes. These results support a role of STAT5b in
mediating GH inhibition of C/EBPa expression but not that of PPAR<U+03B3> expression in 
bovine preadipocytes. Overall, the present study suggests that GH may inhibit
adipose growth in cattle in part by inhibiting adipogenesis and that GH inhibits 
the differentiation of bovine preadipocytes to adipocytes through
STAT5b-dependent inhibition of C/EBPa expression and STAT5b-independent
inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3> expression.

PMID: 24668956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2013 Dec;44(6):403-8.

[Regulation on EGFR function via its interacting proteins and its potential
application].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng JF, Chen HM, He JQ.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is imptortant for cell activities,
oncogenesis and cell migration, and EGFR inhibitor can treat cancer efficiently, 
but its side effects, for example, in skin, limited its usage. On the other hand,
EGFR interacting proteins may also lead to oncogenesis and its interacting
protein as drug targets can avoid cutaneous side effect, which implies possibly a
better outcome and life quality of cancer patients. For the multiple EGFR
interaction proteins, B1R enhances Erk/MAPK signaling, while PTPN12, Kek1,
CEACAM1 and NHERF repress Erk/MAPK signaling. CaM may alter charge of EGFR
juxamembrane domain and regulate activation of PI3K/Akt and PLC-gamma/PKC. STAT1,
STAT5b are widely thought to be activated by EGFR, while there is unexpectedly
inhibiting sequence within EGFR to repress the activity of STATs. LRIG1 and ACK1 
enhance the internalization and degration of EGFR, while NHERF and HIP1 repress
it. In this article, proteins interacting with EGFR, their interacting sites and 
their regulation on EGFR signal transduction will be reviewed.

PMID: 24665737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Pulm Circ. 2013 Sep;3(3):533-50. doi: 10.1086/674336. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Subcellular mechanisms in pulmonary arterial hypertension: combinatorial
modalities that inhibit anterograde trafficking and cause bone morphogenetic
protein receptor type 2 mislocalization.

Yang YM(1), Lane KB, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, 
New York, USA.

Abstract The natural history of familial pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
typically involves mutations in and/or haploinsuffciency of BMPR2 (gene for bone 
morphogenetic protein receptor type 2) but with low penetrance (10%-15%), delayed
onset (in the third or fourth decade), and a gender bias (two- to fourfold more
prevalent in postpubertal women). Thus, investigators have sought an
understanding of "second-hit" modalities that might affect BMPR2 anterograde
trafficking and/or function. Indeed, vascular lung lesions in PAH have been
reported to contain enlarged "vacuolated" endothelial and smooth muscle cells
with dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cisternae, increased ER structural
protein reticulon 4 (also called Nogo-B), and enlarged and fragmented Golgi
apparatus. We recently replicated this cellular phenotype in primary human
pulmonary arterial endothelial cells and human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle
cells in culture by acute knockdown of the estradiol 17ß (E2)-responsive proteins
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b using
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). We have now investigated whether functional
haploinsufficiences of these molecules, alone or in combination with other
modalities, might interfere with anterograde membrane trafficking using (a) the
quantitative tsO45VSV-G-GFP trafficking assay and (b) assays for cell-surface
localization of Flag-tagged BMPR2 molecules. The G glycoprotein of the vesicular 
stomatitis virus (VSV-G) trafficking assay was validated in EA.hy926 endothelial 
cells by showing that cells exposed to monocrotaline pyrrole displayed reduced
anterograde trafficking. Thereafter, the combinatorial knockdowns of STAT5a,
STAT5b, BMPR2, and/or endothelial nitric oxide synthase as well as exposure to E2
or 2-methoxyestradiol were observed to significantly inhibit VSV-G trafficking.
These combinations also led to intracellular trapping of wild-type Flag-tagged
BMPR2. Overexpression of the PAH disease-derived F14 and KDF mutants of BMPR2,
which were trapped in the ER/Golgi, also inhibited VSV-G trafficking in trans.
Moreover, probenecid, a chemical chaperone in clinical use today, partially
restored cell-surface localization of the KDF but not the F14 mutant. These data 
identify several combinatorial modalities that inhibit VSV-G anterograde
trafficking and cause mislocalization of BMPR2. These modalities merit
consideration in defining aspects of the late-developing and gender-biased
natural history of human PAH.

PMCID: PMC4070808
PMID: 24618539  [PubMed]


118. Leukemia. 2014 Aug;28(8):1738-42. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.89. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Novel activating STAT5B mutations as putative drivers of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kontro M(1), Kuusanmäki H(2), Eldfors S(3), Burmeister T(4), Andersson EI(1),
Bruserud O(5), Brümmendorf TH(6), Edgren H(3), Gjertsen BT(5), Itälä-Remes M(7), 
Lagström S(3), Lohi O(8), Lundán T(9), Martí JM(3), Majumder MM(3), Parsons A(3),
Pemovska T(3), Rajala H(1), Vettenranta K(10), Kallioniemi O(3), Mustjoki S(1),
Porkka K(1), Heckman CA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Unit Helsinki, Department of Medicine, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital Cancer Center, Helsinki,
Finland. (2)1] Hematology Research Unit Helsinki, Department of Medicine,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital Cancer Center,
Helsinki, Finland [2] Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland
(FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of Hematology,
Oncology, and Tumor Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. (5)1] Department of Clinical Science, Hematology Section, University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway [2] Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology Section,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (6)Department of Oncology,
Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital Aachen, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany. (7)Department of Clinical Hematology, Turku
University Central Hospital, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. (8)Tampere
Center for Child Health Research, University of Tampere School of Medicine and
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. (9)Department of Clinical
Chemistry and TYKSLAB, Turku University Central Hospital, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. (10)Division of Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. (11)1] Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM),
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland [2] Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

PMID: 24573384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 15;192(6):2913-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302951. Epub 2014
Feb 12.

Cutaneous T cell lymphoma expresses immunosuppressive CD80 (B7-1) cell surface
protein in a STAT5-dependent manner.

Zhang Q(1), Wang HY, Wei F, Liu X, Paterson JC, Roy D, Mihova D, Woetmann A,
Ptasznik A, Odum N, Schuster SJ, Marafioti T, Riley JL, Wasik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Abramson Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104;

In this article, we report that cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) cells and
tissues ubiquitously express the immunosuppressive cell surface protein CD80
(B7-1). CD80 expression in CTCL cells is strictly dependent on the expression of 
both members of the STAT5 family, STAT5a and STAT5b, as well as their joint
ability to transcriptionally activate the CD80 gene. In IL-2-dependent CTCL
cells, CD80 expression is induced by the cytokine in a Jak1/3- and
STAT5a/b-dependent manner, whereas in the CTCL cells with constitutive STAT5
activation, CD80 expression is also STAT5a/b dependent but is independent of Jak 
activity. Although depletion of CD80 expression does not affect the proliferation
rate and viability of CTCL cells, induced expression of the cell-inhibitory
receptor of CD80, CD152 (CTLA-4), impairs growth of the cells. Coculture of CTCL 
cells with normal T lymphocytes consisting of both CD4(+) and CD8(+) populations 
or the CD4(+) subset alone, transfected with CD152 mRNA, inhibits proliferation
of normal T cells in a CD152- and CD80-dependent manner. These data identify a
new mechanism of immune evasion in CTCL and suggest that the CD80-CD152 axis may 
become a therapeutic target in this type of lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3984051
PMID: 24523507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 6;9(2):e87694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087694. eCollection 
2014.

Survival response of hippocampal neurons under low oxygen conditions induced by
Hippophae rhamnoides is associated with JAK/STAT signaling.

Manickam M(1), Tulsawani R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, Defence Research and
Development Organization, Delhi, India.

Janus activated kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription
(JAK/STATs) pathway are associated with various neuronal functions including cell
survival and inflammation. In the present study, it is hypothesized that
protective action of aqueous extract of Hippophae rhamnoides in hippocampal
neurons against hypoxia is mediated via JAK/STATs. Neuronal cells exposed to
hypoxia (0.5% O2) display higher reactive oxygen species with compromised
antioxidant status compared to unexposed control cells. Further, these cells had 
elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines; tumor necrosis factor a and
interleukin 6 and nuclear factor <U+03BA>appa B. Moreover, the expression of JAK1 was
found to be highly expressed with phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT5. Cells
treated with JAK1, STAT3 and STAT5 specific inhibitors resulted in more cell
death compared to hypoxic cells. Treatment of cells with extract prevented
oxidative stress and inflammatory response associated with hypoxia. The extract
treated cells had more cell survival than hypoxic cells with induction of JAK1
and STAT5b. Cells treated with extract having suppressed JAK1 or STAT3 or STAT5
expression showed reduced cell viability than the cell treated with extract
alone. Overall, the findings from these studies indicate that the aqueous extract
of Hippophae rhamnoides treatment inhibited hypoxia induced oxidative stress by
altering cellular JAK1, STAT3 and STAT5 levels thereby enhancing cellular
survival response to hypoxia and provide a basis for possible use of aqueous
extract of Hippophae rhamnoides in facilitating tolerance to hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3916341
PMID: 24516559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Ann Med. 2014 May;46(3):114-22. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2014.882105. Epub 2014 Feb 
11.

Uncovering the pathogenesis of large granular lymphocytic leukemia-novel STAT3
and STAT5b mutations.

Rajala HL(1), Porkka K, Maciejewski JP, Loughran TP Jr, Mustjoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Central Hospital , Helsinki , Finland.

Large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia is an incurable chronic disease,
characterized by clonal expansion of cytotoxic T- or NK-cells in blood and bone
marrow. Cytopenias (anemia, neutropenia) and autoimmune disorders such as
rheumatoid arthritis are the most common clinical manifestations of LGL leukemia.
Recently, somatic activating STAT3 gene mutations were shown to be specific for
LGL leukemia with a prevalence of up to 70%. Analogous mutations in the STAT5b
gene were seen in a smaller proportion of patients. These gain-of-function
mutations are located in the SH2 domain of STAT3 and affect the
phosphotyrosine-SH2 interaction required for dimerization of STAT3. The mutations
increase the phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT5b and enhance the transcriptional 
activity of the mutated proteins. STAT3 and STAT5b mutations can be used as
molecular markers for LGL leukemia diagnostics, and they present novel
therapeutic targets for STAT3 and STAT5b inhibitors, which currently are in
development for treatment of cancer and autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 24512550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Anim Sci. 2014 Jul;92(7):2922-30. doi: 10.2527/jas.2013-7118. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Effects of the plant extract silymarin on prolactin concentrations, mammary gland
development, and oxidative stress in gestating gilts.

Farmer C(1), Lapointe J(2), Palin MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Dairy and Swine R & D Centre, 2000 College
St., Sherbrooke, QC J1M 0C8, Canada chantal.farmer@agr.gc.ca. (2)Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada, Dairy and Swine R & D Centre, 2000 College St., Sherbrooke, QC 
J1M 0C8, Canada.

The impacts of supplementing the diet of gestating gilts twice daily with 4 g of 
the plant extract silymarin on circulating hormonal concentrations, oxidative
status, mammary development, and mammary gene expression at the end of gestation 
were determined. Gilts were fed conventional diets during gestation and on d 90
they were assigned as controls (CTL; n = 16) or treated (TRT; n = 17) animals.
Treatment consisted of providing 4 g of silymarin twice daily until d 110, at
which time all gilts were slaughtered to collect mammary tissue for compositional
analyses and measures of gene expression and oxidative status, and liver and
corpora lutea for measures of oxidative stress variables. Blood samples for
hormonal assays and evaluation of oxidative stress biomarkers were obtained on d 
89, 94, and 109 of gestation. Silymarin increased (P = 0.05) circulating
concentrations of prolactin over all samples in the repeated in time analysis. In
separate analyses for each sampling time, prolactin concentrations in TRT gilts
tended (P < 0.10) to be greater than in CTL gilts on d 94 of gestation. Repeated 
in time analysis also revealed that silymarin reduced (P = 0.05) plasmatic
accumulation of biomarkers of oxidative damage to protein (protein carbonyls)
between d 89 and 109. There was no effect (P > 0.10) of treatment on
progesterone, estradiol, leptin, or 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine concentrations.
Percent fat in mammary parenchyma was greater (P = 0.05), percent protein was
lesser (P = 0.05), and concentrations of both RNA (P = 0.01) and DNA (P < 0.05)
were lesser in TRT than CTL gilts. Mammary parenchyma from TRT gilts had lower (P
= 0.05) mRNA abundance for STAT5A and leptin and tended to have lower (P = 0.10) 
abundance for STAT5B than CTL gilts. Silymarin reduced (P = 0.001) protein
carbonyls concentrations in liver of TRT gilts. No effect of treatment was
observed on antioxidant gene expression and enzymatic activities in liver samples
while total superoxide dismutase activity tended to be higher (P = 0.10) in the
corpora lutea of TRT animals when compared with CTL. This is the first
demonstration that, in female pigs, silymarin can increase prolactin
concentrations and protect against oxidative stress, yet the increase in
prolactin was not enough to have beneficial effects on mammary gland development 
in late gestation.

PMID: 24504042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 30;9(1):e86790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086790. eCollection
2014.

Identification of STAT5A and STAT5B target genes in human T cells.

Kanai T(1), Seki S(1), Jenks JA(1), Kohli A(1), Kawli T(2), Martin DP(2), Snyder 
M(2), Bacchetta R(3), Nadeau KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, School of
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America. (3)Division of Immunology and Allergy,
Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America ; San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene
Therapy (HSR-TIGET), San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) comprises a family of
universal transcription factors that help cells sense and respond to
environmental signals. STAT5 refers to two highly related proteins, STAT5A and
STAT5B, with critical function: their complete deficiency is lethal in mice; in
humans, STAT5B deficiency alone leads to endocrine and immunological problems,
while STAT5A deficiency has not been reported. STAT5A and STAT5B show peptide
sequence similarities greater than 90%, but subtle structural differences suggest
possible non-redundant roles in gene regulation. However, these roles remain
unclear in humans. We applied chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by DNA
sequencing using human CD4(+) T cells to detect candidate genes regulated by
STAT5A and/or STAT5B, and quantitative-PCR in STAT5A or STAT5B knock-down (KD)
human CD4(+) T cells to validate the findings. Our data show STAT5A and STAT5B
play redundant roles in cell proliferation and apoptosis via SGK1 interaction.
Interestingly, we found a novel, unique role for STAT5A in binding to genes
involved in neural development and function (NDRG1, DNAJC6, and SSH2), while
STAT5B appears to play a distinct role in T cell development and function via
DOCK8, SNX9, FOXP3 and IL2RA binding. Our results also suggest that one or more
co-activators for STAT5A and/or STAT5B may play important roles in establishing
different binding abilities and gene regulation behaviors. The new identification
of these genes regulated by STAT5A and/or STAT5B has major implications for
understanding the pathophysiology of cancer progression, neural disorders, and
immune abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC3907443
PMID: 24497979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;51(12):930-3.

[Analysis of clinical manifestations and genetic mutations in a child with Laron 
syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Chang GY(1), Chen SK, Gu XF(2), Gong ZW, Zhang QG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. (2)Email:
gu_xuefan@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze clinical manifestations and gene mutations in a child with 
severe short stature, explore its molecular mechanism and further clarify the
diagnostic procedure for short stature.
METHOD: We observed clinical characteristics of a patient with short stature and 
did diagnostic examinations, assessed the function of GH-IGF-1 axis, and surveyed
its family members.Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood, GHR, IGFALS, 
STAT5b and GH1 gene were amplified by PCR for sequencing, including exons and
splicing areas.
RESULT: The patient presented symmetrical short stature (height -8.2 SDS) and
facial features, and other congenital abnormalities.It displayed non-growth
hormone deficiency. The baseline value of GH was 21 µg/L, and the peak was 57.9
µg/L. The value of IGF-1 was less than 25 µg/L, and the IGFBP-3 less than 50
µg/L. And IGF-1 generation test showed no response. There was no similar patients
in the family members.Sequencing of GHR in the patient revealed a homozygous
point mutation (c.Ivs6+1G>A), and her father and mother had the same heterozygous
mutation. The same mutation was not identified for her sister.No other candidate 
gene was found.
CONCLUSION: As the result of combined clinical characteristics and lab
examinations, as well as gene detection, the case was diagnosed with Laron
syndrome and GHR gene mutation is the molecular mechanism.We should explicit the 
etiological diagnosis for short stature, and avoid missed diagnosis and
misdiagnosis.

PMID: 24495765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e24931. doi: 10.4161/jkst.24931. Epub 2013 May 7.

JAK2-STAT5B pathway and osteoblast differentiation.

Darvin P(1), Joung YH(1), Yang YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; School of Medicine; and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology; Konkuk University; Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Osteoblast differentiation is a critical step in the maintenance of bone
homeostasis. Osteoblast differentiation is generally maintained by growth hormone
(GH) and various other endocrine and autocrine/paracrine factors. JAK2-STAT5B
pathway is a central axis in the mechanism of GH signaling. Similarly, the
autocrine/paracrine signaling factor IGF-1 also mediates its effects through this
pathway. Analysis on JAK2-STAT5B pathway showed its importance in the
IGF-1/IGF-1R mediated regulation of gene expression and osteoblast
differentiation. Persistent activation of STAT5B and inhibition of STAT5B
degradation showed increased osteoblastic differentiation and STAT5B/Runx-2
activities. Conditional gene silencing studies showed the importance of the
JAK2-STAT5B pathway in stimulation of other transcription factors and expression 
of various differentiation markers.

PMCID: PMC3894232
PMID: 24470975  [PubMed]


126. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e24860. doi: 10.4161/jkst.24860. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Non-genomic STAT5-dependent effects at the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
apparatus and STAT6-GFP in mitochondria.

Sehgal PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology & Anatomy, and Medicine; New York Medical College;
Valhalla, NY USA.

STAT protein species are well-known as transcription factors that regulate
nuclear gene expression. Recent novel lines of research suggest new non-genomic
functions of STAT5A/B and STAT6. It was discovered in human pulmonary arterial
endothelial cells that STAT5A, including STAT5A-GFP, constitutively associated
with the Golgi apparatus, and both STAT5A and B with the endoplasmic reticulum.
Acute siRNA-mediated knockdown of STAT5A/B led to the rapid development of a
dramatic cystic change in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) characterized by
deposition of the ER structural protein reticulon-4 (RTN4; also called Nogo-B)
and the ER-resident GTPase atlastin-3 (ATL3) along cyst membranes and cyst-zone
boundaries, accompanied by Golgi fragmentation. Functional consequences included 
reduced anterograde trafficking, an ER stress response (increased GRP78/BiP) and 
eventual mitochondrial fragmentation. This phenotype was "non-genomic" in that it
was elicited in enucleated cytoplasts. In cross-immunopanning assays STAT5A and B
species associated with ATL3, and the ER-lumen spacer CLIMP63 (also called
cytoskeleton-associated protein 4, CKAP4) but not RTN4. From a disease
significance perspective we posit that STAT5, which is known to be affected by
estradiol-17ß and prolactin, represents the gender-sensitive determinant in the
pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension (IPAH), a disease which
includes ER/Golgi dysfunctions but with a 2- to 4-fold higher prevalence in
postpubertal women. A separate line of recent research produced evidence for the 
association of STAT6-GFP, but not STAT3-GFP, STAT3-DsRed, or STAT3-Flag, with
mitochondria in live-cell, immunofluorescence, and immunoelectron microscopy. An 
N-terminal truncation of STAT6-GFP (1-459), which lacked the SH2 domain and
Tyr-phosphorylation site, constitutively associated with mitochondria. Thus, the 
emergent new of biology STAT proteins includes non-genomic roles-structurally and
functionally-in the three closely related membrane organelles consisting of the
endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and mitochondria.

PMCID: PMC3894245
PMID: 24470974  [PubMed]


127. Cell Death Differ. 2014 May;21(5):720-34. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.196. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

Multiple receptor tyrosine kinases converge on microRNA-134 to control KRAS,
STAT5B, and glioblastoma.

Zhang Y(1), Kim J(1), Mueller AC(2), Dey B(2), Yang Y(1), Lee DH(3), Hachmann
J(1), Finderle S(1), Park DM(3), Christensen J(4), Schiff D(5), Purow B(5), Dutta
A(2), Abounader R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (4)Pfizer Global Research and Development, La
Jolla, CA, USA. (5)Department of Neurology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA. (6)1] Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer
Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA [2] Cancer Center,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are co-deregulated in a majority of glioblastoma
(GBM), the most common and most deadly brain tumor. We show that the RTKs MET,
EGFR, and PDGFR regulate microRNA-134 (miR-134) in GBM. We find that miR-134 is
downregulated in human tumors and cancer stem cells and that its expression
inversely correlates with the activation of MET, EGFR, and PDGFR. We demonstrate 
that miR-134 inhibits cancer cell and stem-cell proliferation, survival, and
xenograft growth, as well as cancer stem-cell self-renewal and stemness. We
identify KRAS and STAT5B as targets of miR-134, and establish molecular and
functional links between RTKs, miR-134, KRAS/STAT5B and malignancy in vitro and
in vivo. We show that miR-134 induction is required for the anti-tumor effects of
RTK inhibitors. We also uncover the molecular pathways through which RTKs
regulate miR-134 expression and demonstrate the involvement of MAPK signaling and
the KLF4 transcription factor. We therefore identify miR-134 as a novel
RTK-regulated tumor-suppressive hub that mediates RTK and RTK-inhibitor effects
on GBM malignancy by controlling KRAS and STAT5B.

PMCID: PMC3978301
PMID: 24440911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. JAKSTAT. 2013 Oct 1;2(4):e26102. doi: 10.4161/jkst.26102. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

STAT5 acetylation: Mechanisms and consequences for immunological control and
leukemogenesis.

Kosan C(1), Ginter T(1), Heinzel T(1), Krämer OH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine (CMB); Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics; University of Jena; Jena, Germany. (2)Center for Molecular
Biomedicine (CMB); Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics; University of Jena; 
Jena, Germany ; Institute of Toxicology; Medical Center of the University Mainz; 
Mainz, Germany.

The cytokine-inducible transcription factors signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5A and 5B (STAT5A and STAT5B) are important for the proper
development of multicellular eukaryotes. Disturbed signaling cascades evoking
uncontrolled expression of STAT5 target genes are associated with cancer and
immunological failure. Here, we summarize how STAT5 acetylation is integrated
into posttranslational modification networks within cells. Moreover, we focus on 
how inhibitors of deacetylases and tyrosine kinases can correct leukemogenic
signaling nodes involving STAT5. Such small molecules can be exploited in the
fight against neoplastic diseases and immunological disorders.

PMCID: PMC3876427
PMID: 24416653  [PubMed]


129. Cell Rep. 2014 Jan 30;6(2):366-76. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.029. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

Critical role for mast cell Stat5 activity in skin inflammation.

Ando T(1), Xiao W(1), Gao P(2), Namiranian S(3), Matsumoto K(4), Tomimori Y(1),
Hong H(1), Yamashita H(1), Kimura M(1), Kashiwakura J(5), Hata TR(6), Izuhara
K(7), Gurish MF(8), Roers A(9), Rafaels NM(2), Barnes KC(2), Jamora C(3),
Kawakami Y(1), Kawakami T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (4)Department of
Allergy and Immunology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Allergic Disease, RIKEN
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences (IMS-RCAI), Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(6)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (7)Division of Medical Biochemistry, Department
of Biomolecular Sciences and Department of Laboratory Medicine, Saga Medical
School, Saga 849-85-01, Japan. (8)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (9)Institute for Immunology, University of
Technology Dresden, Medical Faculty Carl-Gustav Carus, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(10)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Laboratory for Allergic Disease, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences (IMS-RCAI), Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. Electronic
address: toshi@lji.org.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease. Here, we show that
phospholipase C-ß3 (PLC-ß3)-deficient mice spontaneously develop AD-like skin
lesions and more severe allergen-induced dermatitis than wild-type mice. Mast
cells were required for both AD models and remarkably increased in the skin of
Plcb3(-/-) mice because of the increased Stat5 and reduced SHP-1 activities. Mast
cell-specific deletion of Stat5 gene ameliorated allergen-induced dermatitis,
whereas that of Shp1 gene encoding Stat5-inactivating SHP-1 exacerbated it.
PLC-ß3 regulates the expression of periostin in fibroblasts and TSLP in
keratinocytes, two proteins critically involved in AD pathogenesis. Furthermore, 
polymorphisms in PLCB3, SHP1, STAT5A, and STAT5B genes were associated with human
AD. Mast cell expression of PLC-ß3 was inversely correlated with that of
phospho-STAT5, and increased mast cells with high levels of phospho-STAT5 were
found in lesional skin of some AD patients. Therefore, STAT5 regulatory
mechanisms in mast cells are important for AD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4329986
PMID: 24412367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):883-95. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2250. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Combination of AG490, a Jak2 inhibitor, and methylsulfonylmethane synergistically
suppresses bladder tumor growth via the Jak2/STAT3 pathway.

Joung YH(1), Na YM(1), Yoo YB(2), Darvin P(1), Sp N(1), Kang DY(1), Kim SY(1),
Kim HS(3), Choi YH(4), Lee HK(5), Park KD(5), Cho BW(6), Kim HS(6), Park JH(7),
Yang YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Science
and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, Konkuk
University Glocal Campus, Chungju 380-704, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University College London, London, UK. (5)Genomic
Informatics Center, Hankyong National University, Anseong 456-749, Republic of
Korea. (6)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan
National University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea. (7)College of Pharmacy,
Dongguk University, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea.

Human urinary bladder cancer is the fifth most common cancer, with a worldwide
estimate of about two million patients. Recurrence after complete transurethral
prostatic resection is the most important problem in therapy. Combination therapy
is a new approach in the treatment of cancers that do not respond to current
therapies. These therapies have many advantages over conventional therapies, such
as fewer side-effects and greater efficiency. Research efforts using natural
compounds for the elimination or growth suppression of the cancer arise from
studies on methylsulfonylmethane (MSM). MSM is a natural sulfur compound with no 
side-effects. AG490 is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that has been extensively used
for inhibiting Jak2 in vitro and in vivo. In our study, the combinatorial effect 
of these two agents on human bladder cancer cell lines and xenografts was
analyzed. We observed that the combination of AG490 and MSM inhibited cancer cell
viability and cell migration in vitro. This combination inhibited VEGF mRNA
expression in bladder cancer cell lines. In vivo experiments showed that oral
administration of AG490 and MSM combination significantly inhibited the growth of
tumor xenografts in mice. Our study clearly demonstrates that the predominant
effect of this combination is the reduction of signaling molecules including
STAT3, STAT5b, IGF-1R, VEGF and VEGF-R2 which are involved in the growth,
progression and metastasis of human bladder cancer. The anti-metastatic ability
of this drug combination is confirmed using metastatic animal models. Therefore, 
this combination could have the effect of genesistasis and powerful anticancer
effects against bladder cancer.

PMID: 24402583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Nutr Cancer. 2014;66(2):308-14. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2014.864419. Epub 2013 Dec 
31.

Naturally occurring phenolic acids modulate TPA-induced activation of EGFR, AP-1,
and STATs in mouse epidermis.

Cichocki M(1), Dalek M, Szamalek M, Baer-Dubowska W.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry , Poznan University of Medical
Sciences , Poznan , Poland.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role in epithelial
carcinogenesis and appears to be involved in STATs activation. In this study we
investigated the possible interference of naturally occurring phenolic acids with
EGFR, activator protein-1 (AP-1), and signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STATs) pathways activated by topical application of tumor promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in Balb/c mice epidermis. Pretreatment
with tannic or chlorogenic acid resulted in a significant decrease in the
phosphorylation of EGFR Y-1068 and Y-1173 tyrosine residues, which was
accompanied by reduced activation of AP-1. Tannic acid decreased also the c-Jun
AP-1 subunit level and binding to TPA response element (TRE) (3- and 2-fold in
comparison with TPA-treated group respectively). Simultaneous reduction of JNK
activity might be responsible for reduced activation of AP-1. In contrast to
these more complex phenolics, protocatechuic acid increased the activity of JNK
and was also the most efficient inhibitor of STATs activation. These results
indicate that naturally occurring phenolic acids, by decreasing EGFR, AP-1, and
STATs activation, may modulate other elements both upstream and downstream in
these pathways and thus inhibit the tumor development. Although more complex
phenolics affect mainly the EGFR/AP-1 pathway, STATs seem to be the most
important targets for simple compounds, such as protocatechuic acid.

PMID: 24380573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003997. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Comprehensive analysis of transcriptome variation uncovers known and novel driver
events in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Atak ZK(1), Gianfelici V(2), Hulselmans G(1), De Keersmaecker K(3), Devasia
AG(4), Geerdens E(3), Mentens N(3), Chiaretti S(5), Durinck K(6), Uyttebroeck
A(7), Vandenberghe P(3), Wlodarska I(3), Cloos J(8), Foà R(5), Speleman F(6),
Cools J(3), Aerts S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biology, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. (2)Laboratory for the Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for 
Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Center for the Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven,
Belgium ; Division of Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and
Hematology, 'Sapienza' University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (3)Laboratory for the
Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Center
for the Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Computational 
Biology, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium ; Laboratory for
the Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven and
Center for the Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (5)Division of
Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, 'Sapienza'
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (6)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium. (7)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (8)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology and Hematology, VU
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

RNA-seq is a promising technology to re-sequence protein coding genes for the
identification of single nucleotide variants (SNV), while simultaneously
obtaining information on structural variations and gene expression perturbations.
We asked whether RNA-seq is suitable for the detection of driver mutations in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). These leukemias are caused by a
combination of gene fusions, over-expression of transcription factors and
cooperative point mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. We analyzed 
31 T-ALL patient samples and 18 T-ALL cell lines by high-coverage paired-end
RNA-seq. First, we optimized the detection of SNVs in RNA-seq data by comparing
the results with exome re-sequencing data. We identified known driver genes with 
recurrent protein altering variations, as well as several new candidates
including H3F3A, PTK2B, and STAT5B. Next, we determined accurate gene expression 
levels from the RNA-seq data through normalizations and batch effect removal, and
used these to classify patients into T-ALL subtypes. Finally, we detected gene
fusions, of which several can explain the over-expression of key driver genes
such as TLX1, PLAG1, LMO1, or NKX2-1; and others result in novel fusion
transcripts encoding activated kinases (SSBP2-FER and TPM3-JAK2) or involving
MLLT10. In conclusion, we present novel analysis pipelines for variant calling,
variant filtering, and expression normalization on RNA-seq data, and successfully
applied these for the detection of translocations, point mutations, INDELs,
exon-skipping events, and expression perturbations in T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3868543
PMID: 24367274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(6):443-8. doi: 10.1159/000355543. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

A database and website for molecular defects of the GH-IGF axis:
www.growthgenetics.com.

Rosenfeld RG(1), von Stein T.

Author information: 
(1)STAT5, LLC, Los Altos, Calif., USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Over the last decade, multiple molecular defects of the GH-IGF
axis have been identified and characterized, greatly expanding our appreciation
of the genotypic and phenotypic variability of endocrine growth disorders.
METHODS: In an effort to address the growing complexity of molecular defects and 
their characteristic phenotypes, a Growth Genetics Consortium was established in 
2008, with the goal of developing a repository of case information on all
patients with genetic variations in the GH-IGF axis. A database was established, 
along with a publicly accessible website (www.growthgenetics.com), with
registration open to all potential users.
RESULTS: The genes currently available in the database include GHR, Stat5b, IGF1,
IGF2, IGFALS and IGF1R. The data collected include clinical details, auxology,
family history, laboratory data, identified molecular defects and, if relevant,
treatment information.
CONCLUSIONS: It is planned for the database and website to eventually include all
identified genes in the GH-IGF axis.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24356304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Aging Cell. 2014 Jun;13(3):408-18. doi: 10.1111/acel.12188. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Reductions in serum IGF-1 during aging impair health span.

Gong Z(1), Kennedy O, Sun H, Wu Y, Williams GA, Klein L, Cardoso L, Matheny RW
Jr, Hubbard GB, Ikeno Y, Farrar RP, Schaffler MB, Adamo ML, Muzumdar RH, Yakar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, 10461, USA.

In lower or simple species, such as worms and flies, disruption of the
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 and the insulin signaling pathways has been
shown to increase lifespan. In rodents, however, growth hormone (GH) regulates
IGF-1 levels in serum and tissues and can modulate lifespan via/or independent of
IGF-1. Rodent models, where the GH/IGF-1 axis was ablated congenitally, show
increased lifespan. However, in contrast to rodents where serum IGF-1 levels are 
high throughout life, in humans, serum IGF-1 peaks during puberty and declines
thereafter during aging. Thus, animal models with congenital disruption of the
GH/IGF-1 axis are unable to clearly distinguish between developmental and
age-related effects of GH/IGF-1 on health. To overcome this caveat, we developed 
an inducible liver IGF-1-deficient (iLID) mouse that allows temporal control of
serum IGF-1. Deletion of liver Igf-1 gene at one year of age reduced serum IGF-1 
by 70% and dramatically impaired health span of the iLID mice. Reductions in
serum IGF-1 were coupled with increased GH levels and increased basal STAT5B
phosphorylation in livers of iLID mice. These changes were associated with
increased liver weight, increased liver inflammation, increased oxidative stress 
in liver and muscle, and increased incidence of hepatic tumors. Lastly, despite
elevations in serum GH, low levels of serum IGF-1 from 1 year of age compromised 
skeletal integrity and accelerated bone loss. We conclude that an intact GH/IGF-1
axis is essential to maintain health span and that elevated GH, even late in
life, associates with increased pathology.

© 2013 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4326899
PMID: 24341939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(6):406-12. doi: 10.1159/000355928. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Genetic analysis of GHR should contain sequencing of all coding exons and
specific intron sequences, and screening for exon deletions.

Walenkamp MJ(1), Klammt J, Feigerlova E, Losekoot M, van Duyvenvoorde HA, Hwa V, 
Pfäffle R, Wit JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The work-up of patients with clinical and/or biochemical features of 
growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) usually contains genetic analysis of the
growth hormone receptor (GHR) gene, and if negative, of STAT5B, IGFALS and IGF1. 
In a previous report we described 2 siblings presenting with short stature, low
IGF-1 levels, elevated GH secretion and no increase of IGF-1 after 1 week of GH
administration. Repeated analysis of the GHR showed no abnormalities; however,
further testing revealed a heterozygous STAT5B defect in both siblings.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Two boys of Surinam-Hindustan origin showed growth failure 
up to the age of 6-7 years, followed by partial catch-up growth associated with
increasing body mass index. Reanalysis of GHR including published intronic
sequences was performed on the patients' DNA collected 7 years earlier.
RESULTS: The heterozygous STAT5B variant proved to be functionally benign. A
homozygous intronic mutation of the GHR, c.618+792A>G (IVS6+792A>G), was
subsequently found, resulting in the activation of pseudoexon 6<U+03C8>, and explaining 
the GHI phenotype of the patients.
CONCLUSION: An intronic GHR mutation should be considered in all patients with
signs of GHI and no coding exon mutations, even if the phenotype is mild and even
if other genetic variants have been found.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24335149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1055-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-521963. Epub 2013
Dec 11.

Constitutive activation of STAT5A and STAT5B regulates IgM secretion in
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia.

Hodge LS(1), Ziesmer SC, Yang ZZ, Secreto FJ, Novak AJ, Ansell SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Activation of the Janus kinase family/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway has been associated with the
pathogenesis and progression of both solid and hematologic malignancies. We have 
detected constitutive activation of STAT5 in malignant B cells derived from
patients with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia (WM). Although short hairpin
RNA-mediated knockdown of the STAT5A and STAT5B isoforms did not affect cellular 
proliferation, loss of STAT5 significantly decreased immunoglobulin M (IgM)
secretion. A similar dose-dependent inhibition of IgM secretion was observed when
WM cell lines were treated with a small molecule inhibitor of STAT5. These data
suggest that STAT5 is involved in regulating IgM production in WM and that
inhibition of STAT5 may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for lowering IgM
levels in WM patients.

PMCID: PMC3924927
PMID: 24335105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Hematol Oncol. 2013 Dec 5;6:90. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-6-90.

STAT inhibitors for cancer therapy.

Furqan M(1), Akinleye A, Mukhi N, Mittal V, Chen Y, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College and Westchester Medical
Center, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. delong_liu@nymc.edu.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins are a family of 
cytoplasmic transcription factors consisting of 7 members, STAT1 to STAT6,
including STAT5a and STAT5b. STAT proteins are thought to be ideal targets for
anti-cancer therapy since cancer cells are more dependent on the STAT activity
than their normal counterparts. Inhibitors targeting STAT3 and STAT5 have been
developed. These included peptidomimetics, small molecule inhibitors and
oligonucleotides. This review summarized advances in preclinical and clinical
development of these compounds.

PMCID: PMC4029528
PMID: 24308725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(10):5825-31.

Multiple cytotoxic factors involved in IL-21 enhanced antitumor function of CIK
cells signaled through STAT-3 and STAT5b pathways.

Rajbhandary S(1), Zhao MF, Zhao N, Lu WY, Zhu HB, Xiao X, Deng Q, Li YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Tianjin, China
E-mail : zmfzmf@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Maintenance of cellular function in culture is vital for
transfer and development following adoptive immunotherapy. Dual properties of
IL-21 in activating T cells and reducing activation induced cell death led us to 
explore the mechanism of action of IL-21 enhanced proliferation and cytotoxic
potential of CIK cells.
METHOD: CIK cells cultured from PBMCs of healthy subjects were stimulated with
IL-21 and cellular viability and cytotoxicity to K562 cells were measured. To
elucidate the mechanism of action of IL-21, mRNA expression of cytotoxic factors 
was assessed by RT-PCR and protein expression of significantly important
cytotoxic factors and cytokine secretion were determined through flow cytometry
and ELISA. Western blotting was performed to check the involvement of the
JAK/STAT pathway following stimulation.
RESULTS: We found that IL-21 did not enhance in vitro proliferation of CIK cells,
but did increase the number of cells expressing the CD3+/ CD56+ phenotype.
Cytotoxic potential was increased with corresponding increase in perforin
(0.9831±0.1265 to 0.7592±0.1457), granzyme B (0.4084±0.1589 to 0.7319±0.1639) and
FasL (0.4015±0.2842 to 0.7381±0.2568). Interferon gamma and TNF-alpha were noted 
to increase (25.8±6.1 ng/L to 56.0±2.3 ng/L; and 5.64±0.61 µg/L to 15.14±0.93
µg/L, respectively) while no significant differences were observed in the
expression of granzyme A, TNF-alpha and NKG2D, and NKG2D. We further affirmed
that IL-21 signals through the STAT-3 and STAT- 5b signaling pathway in the CIK
cell pool.
CONCLUSION: IL-21 enhances cytotoxic potential of CIK cells through increasing
expression of perforin, granzyme B, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha. The effect is
brought about by the activation of STAT-3 and STAT-5b proteins.

PMID: 24289584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(6):466-76. doi: 10.1159/000355409. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Association analysis of ten candidate genes in a large multinational cohort of
small for gestational age children and children with idiopathic short stature
(NESTEGG study).

de Graaff LC(1), Clark AJ, Tauber M, Ranke MB, Johnston LB, Caliebe J, Molinas C,
Amin N, van Duijn C, Wollmann H, Wallaschofski H, Savage MO, Hokken-Koelega AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Fetal growth failure has been associated with an increased risk of
hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetes in adulthood. Exploring the
mechanisms underlying this association should improve our understanding of these 
common adult diseases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We investigated 225 SNPs in 10 genes involved in growth and
glucose metabolism (GH1, GHR, IGF1, IGF1R, STAT5A, STAT5B, MAPK1, MAPK3, PPAR<U+03B3>
and INS) in 1,437 children from the multinational NESTEGG consortium: 345
patients born small for gestational age who remained short (SGA-S), 288 who
showed catch-up growth (SGA-Cu), 410 idiopathic short stature (ISS) and 394
controls. We related genotype to pre- and/or postnatal growth parameters,
response to growth hormone (if applicable) and blood pressure.
RESULTS: We found several clinical associations for GH1, GHR, IGF1, IGF1R, PPAR<U+03B3> 
and MAPK1. One SNP remained significant after Bonferroni's correction: IGF1R SNP 
rs4966035's minor allele A was significantly more prevalent among SGA and
associated with smaller birth length (p = 0.000378) and birth weight (weaker
association), independent of gestational age.
CONCLUSION: IGF1R SNP rs4966035 is significantly associated with birth length,
independent of gestational age. This and other associations suggest that
polymorphisms in these genes might partly explain the phenotype of short children
born SGA and children with ISS.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24280783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biomark Res. 2013 Jan 16;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2050-7771-1-5.

Dysregulation of JAK-STAT pathway in hematological malignancies and JAK
inhibitors for clinical application.

Furqan M(1), Mukhi N, Lee B, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College and Westchester Medical
Center, Valhalla, NY, 10595, USA. DELONG_LIU@NYMC.EDU.

JAK-STAT (Janus associated kinase-signal transducer and activator of
transcription) pathway plays a critical role in transduction of extracellular
signals from cytokines and growth factors involved in hematopoiesis, immune
regulation, fertility, lactation, growth and embryogenesis. JAK family contains
four cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases, JAK1-3 and Tyk2. Seven STAT proteins have been
identified in human cells, STAT1-6, including STAT5a and STAT5b. Negative
regulators of JAK-STAT pathways include tyrosine phosphatases (SHP1 and 2, CD45),
protein inhibitors of activated STATs (PIAS), suppressors of cytokine signaling
(SOCS) proteins, and cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS).
Dysregulation of JAK-STAT pathway have been found to be key events in a variety
of hematological malignancies. JAK inhibitors are among the first successful
agents reaching clinical application. Ruxolitinib (Jakafi), a non-selective
inhibitor of JAK1 & 2, has been approved by FDA for patients with intermediate to
high risk primary or secondary myelofibrosis. This review will also summarize
early data on selective JAK inhibitors, including SAR302503 (TG101348),
lestaurtinib (CEP701), CYT387, SB1518 (pacritinib), LY2784544, XL019, BMS-911543,
NS-018, and AZD1480.

PMCID: PMC3776247
PMID: 24252238  [PubMed]


141. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013 Dec;25(6):708-14. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000029.

Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) and
IPEX-related disorders: an evolving web of heritable autoimmune diseases.

Verbsky JW(1), Chatila TA.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin bDepartment of Pediatrics, Division of
Immunology, The Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent progress in our understanding of immune
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) and IPEX-related 
disorders.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of Mendelian disorders of immune dysregulation and
autoimmunity have been noted to result from defects in T regulatory cell,
development and function. The best characterized of these is IPEX, resulting from
mutations affecting FOXP3. A number of other gene defects that affect T
regulatory cell function also give rise to IPEX-related phenotypes, including
loss-of-function mutations in CD25, STAT5b and ITCH. Recent progress includes the
identification of gain-of-function mutations in STAT1 as a cause of an IPEX-like 
disease, emerging FOXP3<U+200A>genotype/phenotype relationships in IPEX, and the
elucidation of a role for the microbiota in the immune dysregulation associated
with regulatory T cell deficiency.
SUMMARY: An expanding spectrum of genetic defects that compromise T regulatory
cell function underlies human disorders of immune dysregulation and autoimmunity.
Collectively, these disorders offer novel insights into pathways of peripheral
tolerance and their disruption in autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC4047515
PMID: 24240290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 14;8(10):e76155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076155.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of a STAT5 target gene, Dpf3, provides novel insights in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Theodorou M(1), Speletas M, Mamara A, Papachristopoulou G, Lazou V, Scorilas A,
Katsantoni E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of
Athens, Athens, Greece.

STAT5 controls essential cellular functions and is encoded by two genes, Stat5a
and Stat5b. To provide insight to the mechanisms linking hematologic malignancy
to STAT5 activation/regulation of target genes, we identified STAT5 target genes 
and focused on Dpf3 gene, which encodes for an epigenetic factor. Dpf3 expression
was induced upon IL-3 stimulation in Ba/F3 cells, while strong binding of both
STAT5a and STAT5b was detected in its promoter. Reduced expression of Dpf3 was
detected in Ba/F3 cells with Stat5a and Stat5b knock-down, suggesting that this
gene is positively regulated by STAT5, upon IL-3 stimulation. Furthermore, this
gene was significantly up-regulated in CLL patients, where DPF3 gene/protein
up-regulation and strong STAT5 binding to the DPF3 promoter, correlated with
increased STAT5 activation, mainly in non-malignant myeloid cells (granulocytes).
Our findings provide insights in the STAT5 dependent transcriptional regulation
of Dpf3, and demonstrate for the first time increased STAT5 activation in
granulocytes of CLL patients. Novel routes of investigation are opened to
facilitate the understanding of the role of STAT5 activation in the communication
between non-malignant myeloid and malignant B-cells, and the functions of STAT5
target genes networks in CLL biology.

PMCID: PMC3796511
PMID: 24155890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Nov;146(5):1305-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.04.047.

Which is more important in the potential interference on cardioprotection by
remote ischemic preconditioning: ß-blockers or anesthetic choice?

Liu Y(1), Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

Comment on
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):376-82.

PMID: 24128912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Nov 25;170(1):101-7. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0685. Print 2014 
Jan.

SNPs within the GH-signaling pathway are associated with the early IGF1 response 
to GH replacement therapy in GHD adults.

Glad CA(1), Barbosa EJ, Filipsson Nyström H, Carlsson LM, Nilsson S, Nilsson AG, 
Svensson PA, Johannsson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gröna Stråket 8, Vita Stråket 15, SE-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: GH-deficient (GHD) adults have reduced serum concentrations of IGF1.
GH replacement therapy increases serum IGF1 concentrations, but the
interindividual variation in treatment response is large and likely influenced by
genetic factors. This study was designed to test the hypothesis that
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes within the GH signaling pathway
influence the serum IGF1 response to GH replacement.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 313 consecutive GHD adults (58.1% men; mean age
49.7 years) were studied before and after 1 week, 6 months, and 1 year of GH
treatment. GH dose was individually titrated to normalize serum IGF1 levels. Six 
SNPs in the GH receptor (GHR) and the GH signaling pathway (JAK2, STAT5B, SOCS2, 
and PIK3CB) genes were selected for genotyping. The GHR exon
3-deleted/full-length (d3/fl) polymorphism was analyzed using tagSNP rs6873545.
RESULTS: After 1 week of GH replacement, homozygotes of the fl-GHR showed a
better IGF1 response to GH than carriers of the d3-GHR (P=0.016). Conversely,
homozygotes of the minor allele of PIK3CB SNP rs361072 responded better than
carriers of the major allele (P=0.025). Compared with baseline, both SNPs were
associated with the IGF1 response at 6 months (P=0.041 and P=0.047 respectively),
and SNP rs6873545 was further associated with the IGF1 response at 1 year
(P=0.041).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that common genetic variants in the GH
signaling pathway may be of functional relevance to the response to GH
replacement in GHD adults.

PMID: 24114431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 1;191(9):4505-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202723. Epub 2013
Sep 25.

Genotype-dependent effects of TGF-ß1 on mast cell function: targeting the Stat5
pathway.

Fernando J(1), Faber TW, Pullen NA, Falanga YT, Kolawole EM, Oskeritzian CA,
Barnstein BO, Bandara G, Li G, Schwartz LB, Spiegel S, Straus DB, Conrad DH,
Bunting KD, Ryan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284;

We previously demonstrated that TGF-ß1 suppresses IgE-mediated signaling in human
and mouse mast cells in vitro, an effect that correlated with decreased
expression of the high-affinity IgE receptor, FceRI. The in vivo effects of
TGF-ß1 and the means by which it suppresses mast cells have been less clear. This
study shows that TGF-ß1 suppresses FceRI and c-Kit expression in vivo. By
examining changes in cytokine production concurrent with FceRI expression, we
found that TGF-ß1 suppresses TNF production independent of FceRI levels. Rather, 
IgE-mediated signaling was altered. TGF-ß1 significantly reduced expression of
Fyn and Stat5, proteins critical for cytokine induction. These changes may partly
explain the effects of TGF-ß1, because Stat5B overexpression blocked TGF-mediated
suppression of IgE-induced cytokine production. We also found that Stat5B is
required for mast cell migration toward stem cell factor, and that TGF-ß1 reduced
this migration. We found evidence that genetic background may alter TGF
responses. TGF-ß1 greatly reduced mast cell numbers in Th1-prone C57BL/6, but not
Th2-prone 129/Sv mice. Furthermore, TGF-ß1 did not suppress IgE-induced cytokine 
release and did increase c-Kit-mediated migration in 129/Sv mast cells. These
data correlated with high basal Fyn and Stat5 expression in 129/Sv cells, which
was not reduced by TGF-ß1 treatment. Finally, primary human mast cell populations
also showed variable sensitivity to TGF-ß1-mediated changes in Stat5 and
IgE-mediated IL-6 secretion. We propose that TGF-ß1 regulates mast cell
homeostasis, and that this feedback suppression may be dependent on genetic
context, predisposing some individuals to atopic disease.

PMCID: PMC3846427
PMID: 24068671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 16;8(8):e71646. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071646. eCollection
2013.

Novel multiplexed assay for identifying SH2 domain antagonists of STAT family
proteins.

Takakuma K(1), Ogo N, Uehara Y, Takahashi S, Miyoshi N, Asai A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Discovery, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Shizuoka, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka, Japan.

Some of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family
members are constitutively activated in a wide variety of human tumors. The
activity of STAT depends on their Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-mediated binding to
sequences containing phosphorylated tyrosine. Thus, antagonizing this binding is 
a feasible approach to inhibiting STAT activation. We have developed a novel
multiplexed assay for STAT3- and STAT5b-SH2 binding, based on amplified
luminescent proximity homogeneous assay (Alpha) technology. AlphaLISA and
AlphaScreen beads were combined in a single-well assay, which allowed the binding
of STAT3- and STAT5b-SH2 to phosphotyrosine peptides to be simultaneously
monitored. Biotin-labeled recombinant human STAT proteins were obtained as N- and
C-terminal deletion mutants. The spacer length of the DIG-labeled peptide, the
reaction time, and the concentration of sodium chloride were optimized to
establish a HTS system with Z' values of greater than 0.6 for both STAT3- and
STAT5b-SH2 binding. We performed a HTS campaign for chemical libraries using this
multiplexed assay and identified hit compounds. A 2-chloro-1,4-naphthalenedione
derivative, Compound 1, preferentially inhibited STAT3-SH2 binding in vitro, and 
the nuclear translocation of STAT3 in HeLa cells. Initial structure activity
relationship (SAR) studies using the multiplexed assay showed the 3-substituent
effect on both the activity and selectivity of STAT3 and STAT5b inhibition.
Therefore, this multiplexed assay is useful for not only searching for potential 
lead compounds but also obtaining SAR data for developing new STAT3/STAT5b
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3745430
PMID: 23977103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Oct 1;86(7):950-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.009. Epub
2013 Aug 17.

Sophoraflavanone G induces apoptosis of human cancer cells by targeting upstream 
signals of STATs.

Kim BH(1), Won C, Lee YH, Choi JS, Noh KH, Han S, Lee H, Lee CS, Lee DS, Ye SK,
Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Biomedical Science, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Neuro-Immune Information Storage
Network Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Aberrantly activated signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins are implicated with human cancers and represent essential roles for
cancer cell survival and proliferation. Therefore, the development of
small-molecule inhibitors of STAT signaling bearing pharmacological activity has 
therapeutic potential for the treatment of human cancers. In this study, we
identified sophoraflavanone G as a novel small-molecule inhibitor of STAT
signaling in human cancer cells. Sophoraflavanone G inhibited tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT proteins in Hodgkin's lymphoma and tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT3 in solid cancer cells by inhibiting phosphorylation of
the Janus kinase (JAK) proteins, Src family tyrosine kinases, such as Lyn and
Src, Akt, and ERK1/2. In addition, sophoraflavanone G inhibited STAT5
phosphorylation in murine-bone-marrow-derived pro-B cells transfected with
translocated Ets Leukemia (TEL)-JAKs and cytokine-induced rat pre-T lymphoma
cells, as well as STAT5b reporter activity in TEL-JAKs and STAT5b reporter
systems. Sophoraflavanone G also inhibited nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling in
multiple myeloma cells. Furthermore, sophoraflavanone G inhibited cancer cell
proliferation and induced apoptosis by regulating the expression of apoptotic and
anti-apoptotic proteins. Our data suggest that sophoraflavanone G is a novel
small-molecule inhibitor of STAT signaling by targeting upstream signals of STATs
that may have therapeutic potential for cancers caused by persistently activated 
STAT proteins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23962443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Neurochem. 2013 Nov;127(3):329-41. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12386. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

d-opioid receptor activation leads to neurite outgrowth and neuronal
differentiation via a STAT5B-Gai/o pathway.

Georganta EM(1), Tsoutsi L, Gaitanou M, Georgoussi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Signalling and Molecular Pharmacology, Institute of
Biosciences and Applications, National Centre for Scientific Research
"Demokritos", Athens, Greece.

It remains unclear how opioid receptors (d, µ, <U+03BA>) are implicated in mechanisms
controlling differentiation, cell proliferation, and survival. Opioid receptors
are coupled to Gi/Go proteins and recent findings have shown that opioid
receptors can form a multicomponent signaling complex, consisting of members of G
protein and the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5B. We
thus wondered whether activation of the opioid receptors could direct
differentiation and neurite outgrowth through a molecular pathway involving
STAT5B and other signaling intermediates. We demonstrate that prolonged d-opioid 
receptor (d-OR) activation with opioid agonists induces STAT5B phosphorylation in
Neuro-2A cells. Moreover, [D-Ser2, Leu5, Thr6]-enkephalin-activation of d-OR
triggers neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival; these effects are blocked by
the selective antagonist naltrindole, by treatment with pertussis toxin, and
after expression of a dominant negative mutant of STAT5B (DN-STAT5B), suggesting 
that the signaling pathway participating in this mechanism involves Gi/o proteins
and p-STAT5B. Additional studies have shown that while [D-Ser(2) , Leu(5) ,
Thr(6) ]-enkephalin exposure of neuroblastoma cells induces a marked increase in 
the differentiation marker proteins, ßIII-tubulin (Tuj-1), synaptophysin, and
neural cell adhesion molecule, over-expression of the DN-STAT5B attenuated
significantly their expression levels. Taken together, our findings demonstrate
that d-OR activation leads to a number of neurotropic events via a Gai/o-linked
and STAT5B-dependent manner. We propose a novel signalling pathway for d-opioid
receptor (d-<U+039F>R)-mediated neurotropic events. STAT5B interacts with the d-<U+039F>R and
upon prolonged receptor activation phosphorylates STAT5B in a Gi/Go dependent
manner leading to increased neuronal survival, neurite outgrowth and
differentiation. These findings contribute to a better understanding of the
molecular and cellular events following d-OR activation and suggest a possible
neuroprotective role opioids could exert.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 23906478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2013 Jul;57(5):333-8.

[STAT5B deficiency: a new growth hormone insensitivity syndrome associated to
immunological dysfunction].

[Article in Portuguese]

Scalco RC(1), Pugliese-Pires PN, Jorge AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia Genética, LIM-25, Disciplina de Endocrinologia,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil

A new presentation of growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) caused by homozygous
mutations in STAT5B (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B) gene
has been characterized in the last years. Its particularity is the association
with severe immune dysfunction, especially with lymphocytic interstitial
pneumonitis. This may mislead physicians into considering short stature as
secondary to chronic immunological disease and consequently into underdiagnosing 
this form of GHI. The objective of this review is to propagate current knowledge 
about this rare pathology, facilitating the diagnosis of patients with GHI due to
STAT5B mutations in endocrinology and other specialties clinics.

PMID: 23896798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Sep;8(3):891-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1593. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Hwanggeumchal sorghum extract enhances BMP7 and GH signaling through the
activation of Jak2/STAT5B in MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells.

Joung YH(1), Lim EJ, Darvin P, Jang JW, Park KD, Lee HK, Kim HS, Cho BW, Park T, 
Chung S, Park JH, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Science
and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

Sorghum is a principal cereal food in a number of parts of the world and is
critical in folk medicine in Asia and Africa. However, its effects on bone are
unknown. Growth hormone (GH) is a regulator of bone growth and bone metabolism.
GH activates several signaling pathways, including the Janus kinase (Jak)/signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathways, thereby regulating
expression of genes, including insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1. Bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) induce the differentiation of cells of the
osteoblastic lineage, increasing the pool of IGF-1 target cells, the mature
osteoblasts. In the present study, the effects of Hwanggeumchal sorghum extracts 
(HSE) on GH signaling via the Jak/STAT pathway in osteoblasts were investigated. 
HSE was not observed to be toxic to osteoblastic cells and increased the
expression of BMP7 and GH-related proteins, including STAT5B, p-STAT5B, IGF-1
receptor (IGF-1R), growth receptor hormone (GHR) and Jak2 in MC3T3-E1 cells. In
addition, HSE increased BMP7 and GHR mRNA expression in MC3T3-E1 cells. The
expression of HSE-induced BMP7 and GHR was inhibited by AG490, a Jak2 kinase
inhibitor. The observations indicate that HSE-induced signaling is similar to GH 
signaling via the GHR-Jak2 signaling axis. Using small interference RNA (siRNA)
analysis, STAT5B was found to play an essential role in HSE-induced BMP7 and GH
signaling in MC3T3-E1 cells. Results of the current study indicate that HSE
promotes bone growth through activation of STAT5B.

PMID: 23877734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Oncotarget. 2013 Jun;4(6):808-9.

STAT5b in LGL leukemia--a novel therapeutic target?

Rajala HL, Mustjoki S.

PMCID: PMC3757236
PMID: 23868875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Nov;138:273-80. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.06.008. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß is involved in the breed-dependent
transcriptional regulation of 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/<U+0394>(5)-<U+0394>(4)-isomerase
in adrenal gland of preweaning piglets.

Li X(1), Li R, Jia Y, Sun Z, Yang X, Sun Q, Zhao R.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology & Biochemistry, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, PR China.

The enzyme 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/<U+0394>(5)-<U+0394>(4)-isomerase (3ß-HSD) catalyzes
the biosynthesis of all steroid hormones. The molecular mechanisms regulating
porcine adrenal 3ß-HSD expression in different breeds are still poorly
understood. In this study, we aimed to compare the expression of 3ß-HSD between
preweaning purebred Large White (LW) and Erhualian (EHL) piglets and to explore
the potential factors regulating 3ß-HSD transcription. EHL had significantly
higher serum levels of cortisol (P<0.01) and testosterone (P<0.01), which were
associated with significantly higher expression of 3ß-HSD mRNA (P<0.01) and
protein (P<0.05) in the adrenal gland, compared with LW piglets. The 5' flanking 
region of the porcine 3ß-HSD gene showed significant sequence variations between 
breeds, and the sequence of EHL demonstrated an elevated promoter activity
(P<0.05) in luciferase reporter gene assay. Higher adrenal expression of 3ß-HSD
in EHL was accompanied with higher CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß)
expression (P<0.05), enriched histone H3 acetylation (P<0.05) and C/EBPß binding 
to 3ß-HSD promoter (P<0.05). In addition, higher androgen receptor (AR) (P=0.06) 
and lower glucocorticoid receptor (GR) (P<0.05) were detected in EHL.
Co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed interactions of C/EBPß with both AR and 
GR. These results indicate that the C/EBPß binding to 3ß-HSD promoter is
responsible, at least in part, for the breed-dependent 3ß-HSD expression in
adrenal gland of piglets. The sequence variations of 3ß-HSD promoter and the
interactions of AR and/or GR with C/EBPß may also participate in the regulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Jan;134(1):213-20. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.276. Epub 2013
Jun 17.

Mutational landscape of basal cell carcinomas by whole-exome sequencing.

Jayaraman SS(1), Rayhan DJ(2), Hazany S(2), Kolodney MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Carilion Clinic and Virginia Tech Carilion School of 
Medicine, Roanoke, Virginia, USA. (2)Division of Dermatology, Harbor-UCLA Medical
Center, Torrance, California, USA.

Recent advances in sequencing technology allow genome-scale approaches to cancer 
mutation discovery. Such data-intensive methods have been applied to cutaneous
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) and melanomas but have not, to our knowledge,
been applied to basal cell carcinomas (BCCs). We used whole-exome sequencing to
characterize the mutational landscape of sporadic BCCs. We show that BCCs are the
most mutated type of human cancer. Tumors from anatomical regions with chronic UV
exposure were associated with higher mutation rates than those with intermittent 
exposure. The majority of all mutations (75.7%) were UV signature. Using a
conventional binomial probability model, several genes were found mutated
significantly. However, this model assumes a uniform distribution of mutations
throughout the genome. We also used a more stringent approach called InVEx that
uses a permutation-based framework to pick drivers from passengers. After
correction for multiple hypothesis testing, InVEx identified only PTCH1 (Patched 
1) as having a significant functional mutation burden. We also found three genes,
STAT5B, CRNKL1, and NEBL, with mutational hot spots at a single base in 3 of 12
tumors sequenced. Our findings support the central role of PTCH1 mutations in BCC
genesis. Moreover, our discovery of the uniquely high number of mutations in this
tumor may lend insight into its biological behavior.

PMID: 23774526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;148(2):227-36. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014. Epub 2013 
May 5.

Differentiating the roles of STAT5B and STAT5A in human CD4+ T cells.

Jenks JA(1), Seki S, Kanai T, Huang J, Morgan AA, Scalco RC, Nath R, Bucayu R,
Wit JM, Al-Herz W, Ramadan D, Jorge AA, Bacchetta R, Hwa V, Rosenfeld R, Nadeau
KC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.

STAT5A and STAT5B are highly homologous proteins whose distinctive roles in human
immunity remain unclear. However, STAT5A sufficiency cannot compensate for STAT5B
defects, and human STAT5B deficiency, a rare autosomal recessive primary
immunodeficiency, is characterized by chronic lung disease, growth failure and
autoimmunity associated with regulatory T cell (Treg) reduction. We therefore
hypothesized that STAT5A and STAT5B play unique roles in CD4(+) T cells. Upon
knocking down STAT5A or STAT5B in human primary T cells, we found differentially 
regulated expression of FOXP3 and IL-2R in STAT5B knockdown T cells and
down-regulated Bcl-X only in STAT5A knockdown T cells. Functional ex vivo studies
in homozygous STAT5B-deficient patients showed reduced FOXP3 expression with
impaired regulatory function of STAT5B-null Treg cells, also of increased memory 
phenotype. These results indicate that STAT5B and STAT5A act partly as
non-redundant transcription factors and that STAT5B is more critical for Treg
maintenance and function in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4169138
PMID: 23773921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Leuk Res. 2013 Sep;37(9):1120-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.05.003. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

Polymorphisms in JAK/STAT signaling pathway genes and risk of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Chen Y(1), Lan Q, Zheng T, Zhao N, Holford TR, Lerro C, Dai M, Huang H, Liang J, 
Ma S, Leaderer B, Boyle P, Chanock S, Rothman N, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Hospital/Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China.

Impaired function of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway genes leads to immunodeficiency and
various hematopoietic disorders. We evaluated the association between genetic
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 JAK/STAT pathway genes (JAK3, STAT1, STAT2, STAT3,
STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT6, SCOS1, SCOS2, SCOS3, and SCOS4) and NHL risk in a
population-based case-control study of Connecticut women. We identified three
SNPs in STAT3 (rs12949918 and rs6503695) and STAT4 (rs932169) associated with NHL
risk after adjustment for multiple comparison. Our results suggest that genetic
variation in JAK/STAT pathway genes may play a role in lymphomagenesis and
warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3998836
PMID: 23768868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cell Signal. 2013 Sep;25(9):1924-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.05.007. Epub
2013 May 22.

Regulation of STAT signaling by acetylation.

Zhuang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai 200120, China. szhuang@lifespan.org

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) belong to a family of
latent cytoplasmic factors that can be activated by tyrosine phosphorylation by
the members of the Jak tyrosine kinase family in response to a variety of
cytokines and growth factors. Activated STATs form dimers and translocate into
nucleus to induce expression of critical genes essential for normal cellular
events. In the past several years, significant progress has been made in the
characterization of STAT acetylation, which is dependent on the balance between
histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) such as
CBP/p300. Acetylation of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT5b and STAT6 has been
identified. This review will highlight acetylation on the modulation of STAT
activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4550442
PMID: 23707527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2013 Apr 16;7:71-83. doi: 10.4137/GRSB.S11783. Print 2013.

Yin yang 1 and adipogenic gene network expression in longissimus muscle of beef
cattle in response to nutritional management.

Moisá SJ(1), Shike DW, Meteer WT, Keisler D, Faulkner DB, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics, University of Illinois, Urbana, USA. ;
Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, USA.

Among 36 differentially-expressed genes during growth in longissimus muscle (LM) 
of Angus steers, Yin Yang 1 (YY1) had the most relationships with other genes
including some associated with adipocyte differentiation. The objective of this
study was to examine the effect of nutritional management on mRNA expression of
YY1 along with its targets genes PPARG, GTF2B, KAT2B, IGFBP5 and STAT5B.
Longissimus from Angus and Angus × Simmental steers (7 total/treatment) on early 
weaning plus high-starch (EWS), normal weaning plus starch creep feeding (NWS),
or normal weaning without starch creep feeding (NWN) was biopsied at 0, 96, and
240 days on treatments. Results suggest that YY1 does not exert control of
adipogenesis in LM, and its expression is not sensitive to weaning age. Among the
YY1-related genes, EWS led to greater IGFBP5 during growing and finishing phases.
Pro-adipogenic transcriptional regulation was detected in EWS due to greater
PPARG and VDR at 96 and 240 d vs. 0 d. GTF2B and KAT2B expression was lower in
response to NWS and EWS than NWN, and was most pronounced at 240 d. The increase 
in PPARG and GTF2B expression between 96 and 240 d underscored the existence of a
molecular programming mechanism that was sensitive to age and dietary starch.
Such response partly explains the greater carcass fat deposition observed in
response to NWS.

PMCID: PMC3653888
PMID: 23700364  [PubMed]


158. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Jul;9(7):391-401. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.96. Epub 2013
May 14.

MicroRNAs--mediators of myometrial contractility during pregnancy and labour.

Renthal NE(1), Williams KC, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Medical Center Dallas, 1935 Medical
District Drive, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

The maintenance of myometrial quiescence and initiation of contractility, which
lead to parturition at term and preterm, involve a shifting equilibrium between
anti-inflammatory and proinflammatory signalling pathways. Progesterone (P4),
acting through the progesterone receptor (PR), has an essential and multifaceted 
role in the maintenance of myometrial quiescence. This effect of P4-PR signalling
is mediated, in part, by its anti-inflammatory actions and capacity to repress
the expression of genes that encode proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1 and
IL-6, and contraction-associated proteins, such as OXTR, GJA1 and PTGS2. By
contrast, increased expression of genes that ultimately lead to parturition is
mediated by enhanced inflammatory and estradiol-17ß (E2) and estrogen receptor a 
signalling, which reduce PR function, thus further intensifying the inflammatory 
response. To obtain a more complete understanding of the molecular events that
underlie the transition of the pregnant myometrium from a refractory to a
contractile state, the roles of microRNAs, their targets, and their
transcriptional and hormonal regulation have been investigated. This article
reviews the actions of the miR-200 family and their P4-regulated targets-the
transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and STAT5B-in the pregnant myometrium, as well
as the role of miR-199a-3p and miR-214 and their mutual target PTGS2. The central
role of ZEB1 as the mediator of the opposing actions of P4 and E2 on myometrial
contractility will be highlighted.

PMID: 23669656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Transl Med. 2013 May 13;11:121. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-121.

Genome scan study of prostate cancer in Arabs: identification of three genomic
regions with multiple prostate cancer susceptibility loci in Tunisians.

Shan J(1), Al-Rumaihi K, Rabah D, Al-Bozom I, Kizhakayil D, Farhat K, Al-Said S, 
Kfoury H, Dsouza SP, Rowe J, Khalak HG, Jafri S, Aigha II, Chouchane L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Medicine and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College
in Qatar, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar. loc2008@qatar-med.cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: Large databases focused on genetic susceptibility to prostate cancer 
have been accumulated from population studies of different ancestries, including 
Europeans and African-Americans. Arab populations, however, have been only rarely
studied.
METHODS: Using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6, we conducted a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) in which 534,781 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 221 Tunisians (90 prostate cancer patients
and 131 age-matched healthy controls). TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays on 11
prostate cancer associated SNPs were performed in a distinct cohort of 337
individuals from Arab ancestry living in Qatar and Saudi Arabia (155 prostate
cancer patients and 182 age-matched controls). In-silico expression quantitative 
trait locus (eQTL) analysis along with mRNA quantification of nearby genes was
performed to identify loci potentially cis-regulated by the identified SNPs.
RESULTS: Three chromosomal regions, encompassing 14 SNPs, are significantly
associated with prostate cancer risk in the Tunisian population (P = 1 × 10-4 to 
P = 1 × 10-5). In addition to SNPs located on chromosome 17q21, previously found 
associated with prostate cancer in Western populations, two novel chromosomal
regions are revealed on chromosome 9p24 and 22q13. eQTL analysis and mRNA
quantification indicate that the prostate cancer associated SNPs of chromosome 17
could enhance the expression of STAT5B gene.
CONCLUSION: Our findings, identifying novel GWAS prostate cancer susceptibility
loci, indicate that prostate cancer genetic risk factors could be ethnic
specific.

PMCID: PMC3659060
PMID: 23668334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jun;182(6):2264-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.02.044. Epub
2013 May 7.

STAT5A/B gene locus undergoes amplification during human prostate cancer
progression.

Haddad BR(1), Gu L, Mirtti T, Dagvadorj A, Vogiatzi P, Hoang DT, Bajaj R, Leiby
B, Ellsworth E, Blackmon S, Ruiz C, Curtis M, Fortina P, Ertel A, Liu C, Rui H,
Visakorpi T, Bubendorf L, Lallas CD, Trabulsi EJ, McCue P, Gomella L, Nevalainen 
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

The molecular mechanisms underlying progression of prostate cancer (PCa) to
castrate-resistant (CR) and metastatic disease are poorly understood. Our
previous mechanistic work shows that inhibition of transcription factor Stat5 by 
multiple alternative methods induces extensive rapid apoptotic death of
Stat5-positive PCa cells in vitro and inhibits PCa xenograft tumor growth in nude
mice. Furthermore, STAT5A/B induces invasive behavior of PCa cells in vitro and
in vivo, suggesting involvement of STAT5A/B in PCa progression. Nuclear STAT5A/B 
protein levels are increased in high-grade PCas, CR PCas, and distant metastases,
and high nuclear STAT5A/B expression predicts early disease recurrence and
PCa-specific death in clinical PCas. Based on these findings, STAT5A/B represents
a therapeutic target protein for advanced PCa. The mechanisms underlying
increased Stat5 protein levels in PCa are unclear. Herein, we demonstrate
amplification at the STAT5A/B gene locus in a significant fraction of clinical
PCa specimens. STAT5A/B gene amplification was more frequently found in PCas of
high histologic grades and in CR distant metastases. Quantitative in situ
analysis revealed that STAT5A/B gene amplification was associated with increased 
STAT5A/B protein expression in PCa. Functional studies showed that increased
STAT5A/B copy numbers conferred growth advantage in PCa cells in vitro and as
xenograft tumors in vivo. The work presented herein provides the first evidence
of somatic STAT5A/B gene amplification in clinical PCas.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3668029
PMID: 23660011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):4541-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-474577. Epub 2013 
Apr 17.

Discovery of somatic STAT5b mutations in large granular lymphocytic leukemia.

Rajala HL(1), Eldfors S, Kuusanmäki H, van Adrichem AJ, Olson T, Lagström S,
Andersson EI, Jerez A, Clemente MJ, Yan Y, Zhang D, Awwad A, Ellonen P,
Kallioniemi O, Wennerberg K, Porkka K, Maciejewski JP, Loughran TP Jr, Heckman C,
Mustjoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Unit Helsinki, Department of Medicine, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia is characterized by clonal expansion of
cytotoxic T cells or natural killer cells. Recently, somatic mutations in the
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) gene were discovered
in 28% to 40% of LGL leukemia patients. By exome and transcriptome sequencing of 
2 STAT3 mutation-negative LGL leukemia patients, we identified a recurrent,
somatic missense mutation (Y665F) in the Src-like homology 2 domain of the STAT5b
gene. Targeted amplicon sequencing of 211 LGL leukemia patients revealed 2
additional patients with STAT5b mutations (N642H), resulting in a total frequency
of 2% (4 of 211) of STAT5b mutations across all patients. The Y665F and N642H
mutant constructs increased the transcriptional activity of STAT5 and tyrosine
(Y694) phosphorylation, which was also observed in patient samples. The clinical 
course of the disease in patients with the N642H mutation was aggressive and
fatal, clearly different from typical LGL leukemia with a relatively favorable
outcome. This is the first time somatic STAT5 mutations are discovered in human
cancer and further emphasizes the role of STAT family genes in the pathogenesis
of LGL leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3668487
PMID: 23596048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(4):e1003295. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003295. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

The JAK-STAT transcriptional regulator, STAT-5, activates the ATM DNA damage
pathway to induce HPV 31 genome amplification upon epithelial differentiation.

Hong S(1), Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) must evade innate immune surveillance to
establish persistent infections and to amplify viral genomes upon
differentiation. Members of the JAK-STAT family are important regulators of the
innate immune response and HPV proteins downregulate expression of STAT-1 to
allow for stable maintenance of viral episomes. STAT-5 is another member of this 
pathway that modulates the inflammatory response and plays an important role in
controlling cell cycle progression in response to cytokines and growth factors.
Our studies show that HPV E7 activates STAT-5 phosphorylation without altering
total protein levels. Inhibition of STAT-5 phosphorylation by the drug pimozide
abolishes viral genome amplification and late gene expression in differentiating 
keratinocytes. In contrast, treatment of undifferentiated cells that stably
maintain episomes has no effect on viral replication. Knockdown studies show that
the STAT-5ß isoform is mainly responsible for this activity and that this is
mediated through the ATM DNA damage response. A downstream target of STAT-5, the 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) contributes to the effects
on members of the ATM pathway. Overall, these findings identify an important new 
regulatory mechanism by which the innate immune regulator, STAT-5, promotes HPV
viral replication through activation of the ATM DNA damage response.

PMCID: PMC3616964
PMID: 23593005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun 1;304(11):C1091-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00343.2012. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Regulation of adipocyte differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells by PDZRN3.

Honda T(1), Ishii A, Inui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

PDZRN3, a member of the PDZRN (or LNX) family of proteins, is essential for the
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells into myotubes, but it plays an
inhibitory role in the differentiation of these cells into osteoblasts. Given
that mesenchymal stem cells also differentiate into adipocytes, we examined the
possible role of PDZRN3 in adipogenesis in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. The
expression of PDZRN3 decreased at both the mRNA and protein levels during
adipogenic differentiation. RNAi-mediated depletion of PDZRN3 enhanced the
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells into adipocytes as assessed on the basis of lipid
accumulation. The upregulation of aP2 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP)-ß during adipocyte differentiation was also enhanced in the
PDZRN3-depleted cells, as was the induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), an upstream regulator of aP2 and C/EBPa, at both the mRNA and
protein levels. Among transcription factors that control the expression of PPAR<U+03B3>,
we found that STAT5b, but not STAT5a, was upregulated in PDZRN3-depleted cells at
both mRNA and protein levels. Tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b, but not that of
STAT5a, was also enhanced at an early stage of differentiation by PDZRN3
depletion. In addition, the expression of C/EBPß during the induction of
differentiation was enhanced at the mRNA and protein levels in PDZRN3-depleted
cells. Our results thus suggest that PDZRN3 negatively regulates adipogenesis in 
3T3-L1 cells through downregulation of STAT5b and C/EBPß and consequent
suppression of PPAR<U+03B3> expression.

PMID: 23576576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 May 15;304(10):E1118-28. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00585.2012. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Sex steroid hormones regulate constitutive expression of Cyp2e1 in female mouse
liver.

Konstandi M(1), Cheng J, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Ioannina,
GR-45110, Ioannina, Greece. mkonstan@cc.uoi.gr

CYP2E1 is of paramount toxicological significance because it metabolically
activates a large number of low-molecular-weight toxicants and carcinogens. In
this context, factors that interfere with Cyp2e1 regulation may critically affect
xenobiotic toxicity and carcinogenicity. The aim of this study was to investigate
the role of female steroid hormones in the regulation of CYP2E1, as estrogens and
progesterone are the bases of contraceptives and hormonal replacement therapy in 
menopausal women. Interestingly, a fluctuation in the hepatic expression pattern 
of Cyp2e1 was revealed in the different phases of the estrous cycle of female
mice, with higher Cyp2e1 expression at estrus (E) and lower at methestrus (ME),
highly correlated with that in plasma gonadal hormone levels. Depletion of sex
steroids by ovariectomy repressed Cyp2e1 expression to levels similar to those
detected in males and cyclic females at ME. Hormonal supplementation brought
Cyp2e1 expression back to levels detected at E. The role of progesterone appeared
to be more prominent than that of 17ß-estradiol. Progesterone-induced Cyp2e1
upregulation could be attributed to inactivation of the insulin/PI3K/Akt/FOXO1
signaling pathway. Tamoxifen, an anti-estrogen, repressed Cyp2e1 expression
potentially via activation of the PI3K/Akt/FOXO1 and GH/STAT5b-linked pathways.
The sex steroid hormone-related changes in hepatic Cyp2e1 expression were highly 
correlated with those observed in Hnf-1a, ß-catenin, and Srebp-1c. In conclusion,
female steroid hormones are clearly involved in the regulation of CYP2E1, thus
affecting the metabolism of a plethora of toxicants and carcinogenic agents,
conditions that may trigger several pathologies or exacerbate the outcomes of
various pathophysiological states.

PMCID: PMC3651618
PMID: 23548611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. IUBMB Life. 2013 May;65(5):462-71. doi: 10.1002/iub.1152. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

IGF-1 stimulated upregulation of cyclin D1 is mediated via STAT5 signaling
pathway in neuronal cells.

Kalita A(1), Gupta S, Singh P, Surolia A, Banerjee K.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna
Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STATs) regulate various target 
genes such as cyclin D1, MYC, and BCL2 in nonneuronal cells which contribute
towards progression as well as prevention of apoptosis and are involved in
differentiation and cell survival. However, in neuronal cells, the role of STATs 
in the activation and regulation of these target genes and their signaling
pathways are still not well established. In this study, a robust cyclin D1
expression was observed following IGF-1 stimulation in SY5Y cells as well as
neurospheres. JAK/STAT pathway was shown to be involved in this upregulation. A
detailed promoter analysis revealed that the specific STAT involved was STAT5,
which acted as a positive regulatory element for cyclin D1 expression.
Overexpression studies confirmed increase in cyclin D1 expression in response to 
STAT5a and STAT5b constructs when compared to dominant-negative STAT5. siRNA
targeting STAT5, diminished the cyclin D1 expression, further confirming that
STAT5 specifically regulated cyclin D1 in neuronal cells. Together, these
findings shed new light on the mechanism of IGF-1 mediated upregulation of cyclin
D1 expression in neural cell lines as well as in neural stem cells via the
JAK/STAT5 signaling cascade.

Copyright © 2013 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 23504816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser. 2013;71:43-55. doi: 10.1159/000342548. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

IGF-I in human growth: lessons from defects in the GH-IGF-I axis.

Hwa V(1), Fang P, Derr MA, Fiegerlova E, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.

The IGF system plays a critical role in all phases of human growth, including
intrauterine, childhood and pubertal. The importance of IGF-I for both in utero
as well as postnatal human growth is highlighted by rare human homozygous IGF1
mutations, which are characterized by intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR),
microcephaly, mental retardation and severe postnatal growth failure. Clinical
conditions of IGF-I resistance due to mutations in the IGF-I receptor (IGFIR)
similarly lead to IUGR and postnatal growth retardation. Postnatal regulation of 
IGF-I production is predominantly GH dependent. Defects in the GH-IGF-I axis,
including mutations in the GHR, STAT5B and IGFALS genes, lead to postnatal IGF
deficiency and GH insensitivity. Patients are of normal birth size but present
with severe postnatal growth failure, despite normal or elevated levels of GH.
Other phenotypic features - immune deficiency for STAT5B defects and insulin
insensitivity for IGFALS defects - are of note. Mutations identified have been
predominantly recessive. The identification and assessment of genetic defects in 
the GH-IGF axis has greatly enhanced our understanding of the critical importance
of IGF-I in human linear growth. Continued evaluations will facilitate better
diagnosis and management of children presenting with abnormal growth and
development.

Copyright © 2013 Nestec Ltd., Vevey/S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23502138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):376-82. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.01.005. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Interference of propofol with signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 
activation and cardioprotection by remote ischemic preconditioning during
coronary artery bypass grafting.

Kottenberg E(1), Musiolik J(2), Thielmann M(3), Jakob H(3), Peters J(4), Heusch
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Anästhesiologie und Intensivmedizin, Universität Duisburg-Essen,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. Electronic address:
eva.kottenberg@uni-duisburg-essen.de. (2)Institut für Pathophysiologie,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Klinik
für Thorax- und Kardiovaskuläre Chirurgie, Universität Duisburg-Essen,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. (4)Klinik für Anästhesiologie und
Intensivmedizin, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Sep;146(3):732-3.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Nov;146(5):1305-6.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Sep;146(3):733-4.

OBJECTIVE: Remote ischemic preconditioning protects the myocardium from
ischemia/reperfusion injury. We recently identified protection by remote ischemic
preconditioning to be associated with the activation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 in left ventricular biopsy specimens of patients
undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting during isoflurane anesthesia. Because 
remote ischemic preconditioning did not protect the heart during propofol
anesthesia, we hypothesized that propofol anesthesia interferes with signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation.
METHODS: In a randomized, single-blind, placebo-controlled, prospective study, we
analyzed an array of established cardioprotective proteins during propofol
anesthesia with or without remote ischemic preconditioning in 24 nondiabetic
patients with 3-vessel coronary artery disease.
RESULTS: Remote ischemic preconditioning (n = 12) compared with no remote
ischemic preconditioning (n = 12) failed to decrease the area under the troponin 
I time curve (273 ± 184 ng/mL × 72 hours vs 365 ± 301 ng/mL × 72 hours; P =
.374). Although phosphorylation of several protein kinases was increased from
baseline to reperfusion, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
phosphorylation was not increased and was not different between the remote
ischemic preconditioning and no remote ischemic preconditioning groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Remote ischemic preconditioning during propofol anesthesia did not
evoke either signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation or
cardioprotection, implying interaction of propofol with cardioprotective
signaling upstream of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23465551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 May 1;268(3):331-42. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.02.007. Epub 2013 Feb 24.

Action of hexachlorobenzene on tumor growth and metastasis in different
experimental models.

Pontillo CA(1), Rojas P, Chiappini F, Sequeira G, Cocca C, Crocci M, Colombo L,
Lanari C, Kleiman de Pisarev D, Randi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Efectos Biológicos de Contaminantes Ambientales, Departamento
de Bioquímica Humana, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. caroponti@hotmail.com

Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) is a widespread organochlorine pesticide, considered a
possible human carcinogen. It is a dioxin-like compound and a weak ligand of the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). We have found that HCB activates
c-Src/HER1/STAT5b and HER1/ERK1/2 signaling pathways and cell migration, in an
AhR-dependent manner in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. The aim of this study was
to investigate in vitro the effect of HCB (0.005, 0.05, 0.5, 5µM) on cell
invasion and metalloproteases (MMPs) 2 and 9 activation in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Furthermore, we examined in vivo the effect of HCB (0.3, 3, 30mg/kg b.w.) on
tumor growth, MMP2 and MMP9 expression, and metastasis using MDA-MB-231
xenografts and two syngeneic mouse breast cancer models (spontaneous metastasis
using C4-HI and lung experimental metastasis using LM3). Our results show that
HCB (5µM) enhances MMP2 expression, as well as cell invasion, through AhR,
c-Src/HER1 pathway and MMPs. Moreover, HCB increases MMP9 expression, secretion
and activity through a HER1 and AhR-dependent mechanism, in MDA-MB-231 cells. HCB
(0.3 and 3mg/kg b.w.) enhances subcutaneous tumor growth in MDA-MB-231 and C4-HI 
in vivo models. In vivo, using MDA-MB-231 model, the pesticide (0.3, 3 and
30mg/kg b.w.) activated c-Src, HER1, STAT5b, and ERK1/2 signaling pathways and
increased MMP2 and MMP9 protein levels. Furthermore, we observed that HCB
stimulated lung metastasis regardless the tumor hormone-receptor status. Our
findings suggest that HCB may be a risk factor for human breast cancer
progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23462309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Oncotarget. 2012 Dec;3(12):1669-87.

STAT5 triggers BCR-ABL1 mutation by mediating ROS production in chronic myeloid
leukaemia.

Warsch W(1), Grundschober E, Berger A, Gille L, Cerny-Reiterer S, Tigan AS,
Hoelbl-Kovacic A, Valent P, Moriggl R, Sexl V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Veterinary University Vienna,
Veterinaerplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jun 15;12(12):1813-4.

We recently reported that chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) patients harbour high
levels of STAT5 when they progress to advanced phases of disease. Advanced
disease is characterized by an increased incidence of BCR-ABL1 mutations. We now 
describe a highly significant correlation between STAT5 expression and the
incidence of BCR-ABL1 mutations in primary CML. Forced expression of STAT5 in
murine BCR-ABL1 transformed cells sufficed to enhance the production of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and to trigger DNA damage. STAT5-mediated ROS production is 
independent of JAK2 but requires concomitant BCR-ABL1 signalling as forced STAT5 
expression in untransformed BCR-ABL1 negative cells has no impact on ROS levels. 
Only within the context of a BCR-ABL1 positive cell does STAT5 transcriptionally 
regulate a target gene or set of genes that causes the enhanced ROS production.
Our study suggests the existence of a feed-forward loop accelerating disease
progression, in which BCR-ABL1 enhances its own mutation rate in a STAT5-ROS
dependent manner. This model explains the increased occurrence of
inhibitor-resistant BCR-ABL1 mutations in advanced disease stages driven and
characterized by high STAT5 expression.

PMCID: PMC3681503
PMID: 23458731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056600. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Enhanced T cell lymphoma in NOD.Stat5b transgenic mice is caused by
hyperactivation of Stat5b in CD8+ thymocytes.

Chen B(1), Yi B, Mao R, Liu H, Wang J, Sharma A, Peiper S, Leonard WJ, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Activation of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins 
may be critical to their oncogenic functions as demonstrated by the development
of B-cell lymphoma/leukemia in transgenic (TG) mice overexpressing a
constitutively activated form of Stat5b. However, low incidence of CD8(+) T cell 
lymphoma was observed in B6 transgenic mice overexpressing a wild-type Stat5b
(B6.Stat5b(Tg)) despite of undetectable Stat5b phosphorylation and the rate of
lymphomagenesis was markedly enhanced by immunization or the introduction of TCR 
transgenes [1]. Here, we report that the wild-type Stat5b transgene leads to the 
acceleration and high incidence (74%) of CD8(+) T cell lymphoblastic lymphomas in
the non-obese-diabetic (NOD) background. In contrast to the B6.Stat5b(Tg) mice,
Stat5b in transgenic NOD (NOD.Stat5b(Tg)) mice is selectively and progressively
phosphorylated in CD8(+) thymocytes. Stat5 phosphorylation also leads to
up-regulation of many genes putatively relevant to tumorigenesis. Treatment of
NOD.Stat5b(Tg) mice with cancer chemopreventive agents Apigenin and Xanthohumol
efficiently blocked lymphomagenesis through reduction of Stat5 phosphorylation
and genes up-regulated in the NOD.Stat5b(Tg) mice. These results suggest that NOD
genetic background is critical to the Stat5b-mediated lymphomagenesis through
regulation of Stat5 hyperactivation. NOD.Stat5b(Tg) mouse is an excellent model
for studying the molecular mechanisms underlying lymphomagenesis and testing
novel chemoprevention strategies.

PMCID: PMC3572980
PMID: 23457589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057326. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Genome wide mapping reveals PDE4B as an IL-2 induced STAT5 target gene in
activated human PBMCs and lymphoid cancer cells.

Nagy ZS(1), Ross JA, Rodriguez G, Balint BL, Szeles L, Nagy L, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
Texas, United States of America. nagyzsu@med.unideb.hu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(2). doi:10.1371/annotation/cb55d096-61f8-46de-b58f-81a872be6dd3.

IL-2 is the primary growth factor for promoting survival and proliferation of
activated T cells that occurs following engagement of the Janus Kinase
(JAK)1-3/and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) 5 signaling 
pathway. STAT5 has two isoforms: STAT5A and STAT5B (commonly referred to as
STAT5) which, in T cells, play redundant roles transcribing cell cycle and
survival genes. As such, inhibition of STAT5 by a variety of mechanisms can
rapidly induce apoptosis in certain lymphoid tumor cells, suggesting that it and 
its target genes represent therapeutic targets to control certain lymphoid
diseases. To search for these molecules we aligned IL-2 regulated genes detected 
by Affymetrix gene expression microarrays with the STAT5 cistrome identified by
chip-on-ChIP analysis in an IL-2-dependent human leukemia cell line, Kit225.
Select overlapping genes were then validated using qRT(2)PCR medium-throughput
arrays in human PHA-activated PBMCs. Of 19 putative genes, one key regulator of T
cell receptor signaling, PDE4B, was identified as a novel target, which was
readily up-regulated at the protein level (3 h) in IL-2 stimulated, activated
human PBMCs. Surprisingly, only purified CD8+ primary T-cells expressed PDE4B,
but not CD4+ cells. Moreover, PDE4B was found to be highly expressed in CD4+
lymphoid cancer cells, which suggests that it may represent a physiological role 
unique to the CD8+ and lymphoid cancer cells and thus might represent a target
for pharmaceutical intervention for certain lymphoid diseases.

PMCID: PMC3581501
PMID: 23451206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 1;73(7):2052-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3955. Epub
2013 Feb 11.

Differential contributions of STAT5A and STAT5B to stress protection and tyrosine
kinase inhibitor resistance of chronic myeloid leukemia stem/progenitor cells.

Casetti L(1), Martin-Lannerée S, Najjar I, Plo I, Augé S, Roy L, Chomel JC,
Lauret E, Turhan AG, Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.

STAT5 fulfills essential roles in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) self-renewal and 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), a prototypical stem cell malignancy. However, the
specific contributions of the two related genes STAT5A and STAT5B have not been
determined. In this study, we used a RNAi-based strategy to establish
participation of these genes to CML disease and persistence following targeted
therapy. We showed that STAT5A/STAT5B double-knockdown triggers CML cell
apoptosis and suppresses both normal and CML HSC long-term clonogenic potential. 
STAT5A and STAT5B exhibited similar prosurvival activity, but STAT5A attenuation 
alone was ineffective at impairing growth of normal and CML CD34(+) cells
isolated at diagnosis. In contrast, STAT5A attenuation was sufficient to enhance 
basal oxidative stress and DNA damage of normal CD34(+) and CML cells.
Furthermore, it weakened the ability to manage exogenous oxidative stress,
increased p53 (TRP53)/CHK-2 (CHEK2) stress pathway activation, and enhanced
prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD)-3 (EGLN3) mRNA expression. Only STAT5A and its
transactivation domain-deficient mutant STAT5A<U+0394>749 specifically rescued these
activities. STAT5A attenuation was also active at inhibiting growth of CML
CD34(+) cells from patients with acquired resistance to imatinib. Our findings
show that STAT5A has a selective role in contributing to stress resistance
through unconventional mechanisms, offering new opportunities to eradicate the
most primitive and tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant CML cells with an
additional potential to eradicate persistent stem cell populations.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23400594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Endocr Dev. 2013;24:118-27. doi: 10.1159/000342586. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Current issues on molecular diagnosis of GH signaling defects.

Feigerlova E(1), Hwa V, Derr MA, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oreg., USA.

The growth-promoting effects of GH are mediated primarily by regulating the
biosynthesis of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1. The binding of circulating GH
to the cell surface GH receptor (GHR) initiates signaling cascades, of which the 
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5b pathway has proven, in
both rodent models and human case studies, to be the most critical in regulating 
IGF-1 production. The identification of rare inactivating STAT5B mutations in
children, whose severe postnatal growth retardation was associated with GH
insensitivity (GHI) and IGF-1 deficiency, confirmed the importance of STAT5b in
regulating IGF-1 gene expression. Unlike GHI due to mutations in the GHR gene,
patients carrying STAT5B mutations often present with immune dysfunction that can
lead to severe, life-threatening infections and chronic pulmonary disease,
consistent with the fact that STAT5b is activated by multiple cytokines involved 
in immunity. The possibility of a STAT5b disorder should be considered,
therefore, when children present with chronic infection and/or unexplained
pulmonary disease concomitant with severe postnatal growth failure.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23392100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;33(10):823-8.

[Effects of humanized interleukin 21 on anti-leukemic activity of cytokine
induced killer cells and the mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao N(1), Zhao MF, Rajbhandary S, Lu WY, Zhu HB, Xiao X, Deng Q, Li YM.

Author information: 
(1)First Center Clinical College of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of humanized interleukin 21 (IL-21) on
anti-leukemic activity of cytokine induced killer(CIK) cells derived from
peripheral blood(PB) and the mechanism.
METHODS: Mononuclear cells were separated from peripheral blood and cultured with
cytokines to induce CIK cells. Proliferation of CIK cells with or without IL-21
stimulation and their cytotoxic activity against K562 cells was measured by MTT
method. IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) and immunophenotypes of CIK cells were measured
by flow cytometry. The expression of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a), tumor necrosis factor-ß (TNF-ß), perforin, granzyme A, granzyme
B, FasL and NKG2D mRNA were measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. FasL on the
surface of CIK cells and intra-cellular perforin and granzyme B of CIK cells were
measured by flow cytometry. The concentration of IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a in the cultured 
supernatant were measured by enzyme immunoassay. JAK-STAT signalling pathway of
CIK cells were measured by Western-blot.
RESULTS: After IL-21 stimulation, the proportion of CIK cells increased from
(17.5 ± 4.7)% to (26.5 ± 2.1)%. Cytotoxic activity against K562 cells by CIK
cells increased from (22.8 ± 2.8)% to(44.6 ± 8.3)%. The expression of IL-21R
increased about 2 folds. The mRNA expression of IFN-<U+03B3> increased almost 2 folds
from (0.3760 ± 0.2358) to (0.7786 ± 0.2493), TNF-a increased almost 2 folds from 
(0.6557 ± 0.1598) to (1.3145 ± 0.2136), perforin increased almost 1.5 folds from 
(0.6361 ± 0.1457) to (0.9831 ± 0.1265), granzyme B increased almost 2 folds from 
(0.4084 ± 0.1589) to (0.7319 ± 0.1639), FasL increased almost 2 folds from
(0.4015 ± 0.2842) to (0.7381 ± 0.2568), the expression of granzyme A, TNF-ß and
NKG2D were similar with control. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the
expression of FasL of CIK cells was higher than that of control (0.19% vs 0.04%),
the expression of perforin increased from 35.28% to 53.16%, and the expression of
granzyme B increased from 43.16% to 78.82%. The concentration of IFN-<U+03B3> in the
culture supernatant increased almost 2 folds from (25.8 ± 6.1) ng/L to (56.0 ±
2.3) ng/L, and TNF-a increased almost 3 folds from (5.64 ± 0.61) µg/L to (15.14 ±
0.93) µg/L. Western blot showed that the expression of STAT1 and STAT5a had no
significant differences, but the expression of STAT3 and STAT5b were higher than 
that of control.
CONCLUSION: Humanized IL-21 could enhance the anti-leukemic activity of CIK cells
via increasing IL-21R, perforin, granzyme B, FasL, IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a, as well as
activating JAK-STAT signaling pathway. These data indicate that IL-21 has a
potential clinical value in the enhancement of anti-leukemic immunotherapy.

PMID: 23384903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Exp Dermatol. 2013 Feb;22(2):119-24. doi: 10.1111/exd.12086.

The antihistamines clemastine and desloratadine inhibit STAT3 and c-Myc
activities and induce apoptosis in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cell lines.

Döbbeling U(1), Waeckerle-Men Y, Zabel F, Graf N, Kündig TM, Johansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Mycosis fungoides and its leukaemic counterpart Sézary syndrome are the most
frequent cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL), and there is no cure for these
diseases. We evaluated the effect of clinically approved antihistamines on the
growth of CTCL cell lines. CTCL cell lines as well as blood lymphocytes from
patients with Sézary syndrome were cultured with antihistamines, and the cell
were analysed for proliferation, apoptosis and expression of programmed death
molecules and transcription factors. The two antihistamines clemastine and
desloratadine, currently used for symptom alleviation in allergy, induced potent 
reduction of the activities of the constitutively active transcription factors
c-Myc, STAT3, STAT5a and STAT5b in mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome cell
lines. This inhibition was followed by apoptosis and cell death, especially in
the Sézary syndrome-derived cell line Hut78 that also showed increased expression
of the programmed death-1 (PD-1) after clemastine treatment. In lymphocytes
isolated from Sézary syndrome patients, the CD4-positive fraction underwent
apoptosis after clemastine treatment, while CD4-negative lymphocytes were little 
affected. Because both c-Myc and STAT transcription factors are highly expressed 
in proliferating tumours, their inhibition by clemastine, desloratadine and other
inhibitors could complement established chemotherapies not only for cutaneous
T-cell lymphomas but perhaps also other cancers.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23362870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Blood Res. 2013;3(1):58-70. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Suppression of STAT5A and STAT5B chronic myeloid leukemia cells via siRNA and
antisense-oligonucleotide applications with the induction of apoptosis.

Kaymaz BT(1), Selvi N, Gokbulut AA, Aktan C, Gündüz C, Saydam G, Sahin F,
Cetintas VB, Baran Y, Kosova B.

Author information: 
(1)Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins function in
the JAK/STAT signaling pathway and are activated by phosphorylation. As a result 
of this signaling event, they affect many cellular processes including cell
growth, proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Increases in the
expressions of STAT5A and STAT5B play a remarkable role in the development of
leukemia in which leukemic cells gain uncontrolled proliferation and angiogenesis
ability. At the same time, these cells acquire ability to escape from apoptosis
and host immune system. In this study, we aimed to suppress STAT-5A and -5B genes
in K562 CML cells by siRNA transfection and antisense oligonucleotides (ODN)
targeting and then to evaluate apoptosis rate. Finally, we compared the
transfection efficiencies of these approaches. Quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blot results indicated that STAT expressions were downregulated at both mRNA and 
protein levels following siRNA transfection. However, electroporation mediated
ODN transfection could only provide limited suppression rates at mRNA and protein
levels. Moreover, it was displayed that apoptosis were significantly induced in
siRNA treated leukemic cells as compared to ODN treated cells. As a conclusion,
siRNA applications were found to be more effective in terms of gene silencing
when compared to ODN treatment based on the higher apoptosis and mRNA suppression
rates. siRNA application could be a new and alternative curative method as a
supporting therapy in CML patients.

PMCID: PMC3555192
PMID: 23358828  [PubMed]


177. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Apr;56(4):226-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.12.005. Epub 2013
Jan 19.

A de novo 17q21.2 duplication in a boy with developmental delay and dysmorphic
features.

Poirsier-Violle C(1), Abourra A, Baumann C, Perrin L, Capri Y, Mignot C,
Passemard S, Drunat S, Verloes A.

Author information: 
(1)Départment of Genetics, Univ Paris Diderot Sorbonne Paris Cité, Robert Debré
Hospital, Paris, France. celine.violle@gmail.com

We report a boy with severe developmental delay, microcephaly and characteristic 
facial dysmorphism consisting in round face, hypertelorism, upslanted palpebral
fissures, small nose, large mouth, micrognathia, sparse hair and eyelashes.
Array-CGH revealed a de novo duplication of 103 kb within 17q21.2 not reported to
date. The duplication includes 8 genes: DHX58, KAT2A, HSPB9, RAB5C, KCNH4, HCRT, 
GHDC and STAT5B. Three genes (KATA2, KCNH4, and STAT5B) may contribute to
intellectual deficiency. Further observations will be necessary to confirm the
specificity of the facial Gestalt.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23337768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Biol Sci. 2013;9(1):45-54. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.5194. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Tuning of alternative splicing--switch from proto-oncogene to tumor suppressor.

Shchelkunova A(1), Ermolinsky B, Boyle M, Mendez I, Lehker M, Martirosyan KS,
Kazansky AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, The University of Texas at Brownsville,
Brownsville, TX 78520, USA.

STAT5B, a specific member of the STAT family, is intimately associated with
prostate tumor progression. While the full form of STAT5B is thought to promote
tumor progression, a naturally occurring truncated isoform acts as a tumor
suppressor. We previously demonstrated that truncated STAT5 is generated by
insertion of an alternatively spliced exon and results in the introduction of an 
early termination codon. Present approaches targeting STAT proteins based on
inhibition of functional domains of STAT's, such as DNA-binding, cooperative
binding (protein-protein interaction), dimerization and phosphorylation will halt
the action of the entire gene, both the proto-oncogenic and tumor suppressor
functions of Stat5B. In this report we develop a new approach aimed at inhibiting
the expression of full-length STAT5B (a proto-oncogene) while simultaneously
enhancing the expression of STAT5<U+2206>B (a tumor suppressor). We have demonstrated
the feasibility of using steric-blocking splice-switching oligonucleotides (SSOs)
with a complimentary sequence to the targeted exon-intron boundary to enhance
alternative intron/exon retention (up to 10%). The functional effect of the
intron/exon proportional tuning was validated by cell proliferation and
clonogenic assays. The new scheme applies specific steric-blocking
splice-switching oligonucleotides and opens an opportunity for anti-tumor
treatment as well as for the alteration of functional abilities of other STAT
proteins.

PMCID: PMC3535533
PMID: 23289016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Feb;60:112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.11.004. Epub 2012
Dec 4.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of new N-alkylcarbazole derivatives as STAT3 
inhibitors: preliminary study.

Saturnino C(1), Palladino C, Napoli M, Sinicropi MS, Botta A, Sala M, Carcereri
de Prati A, Novellino E, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, University of Salerno, Via Ponte Don
Melillo 8, 84024 Fisciano (SA), Italy. saturnino@unisa.it

The signalling pathway of Janus tyrosine Kinases-Signal Transducers and
Activators of Transcription (JAK-STAT) is activated by a number of cytokines,
hormones (GH, erythropoietin and prolactin), and growth factors. JAK-STAT
signalling is involved in regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. These activities are due to different members of JAK-STAT family
consisting of: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, Tyk2 and STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a,
STAT5b, STAT6. Recent studies suggest a key role for STAT family proteins, in
particular for STAT3, in selectively inducing and maintaining a pro-carcinogenic 
inflammatory microenvironment, that promote tumour cells transformation.
Moreover, a striking correlation between cancer development/progression and STAT3
persistent activation exists, probably due to STAT3 promoting of the
pro-oncogenic inflammatory pathways, like NF-kB, IL-6 and JAK family kinases.
Recent study demonstrated that carbazoles can inhibit STAT3 mediated
transcription. From these evidences, STAT3 represents a therapeutic target, so we
have synthesized a new set of N-alkylcarbazole derivatives substituted in
positions 2, 4 and 6, to evaluate their activity on STAT3. Some of these
compounds showed an interesting activity as STAT3 selective inhibitors; in
particular, compounds 9a 9b and 9c revealed to inhibit the STAT3 activation for
the 50%, 90% and 95%, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23287056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(3):1622-36. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1310. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Sequential activation of genetic programs in mouse mammary epithelium during
pregnancy depends on STAT5A/B concentration.

Yamaji D(1), Kang K, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20815,
USA.

The transcription factors Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)
5A/B mediate prolactin-induced mammary development during pregnancy. However, it 
is not clear how the different processes, expansion and maturation of alveolar
precursor cells and the differential induction of milk protein genes are
regulated on a molecular level. We have used mouse genetics and genome-wide
analyses to determine how altering concentrations of STAT5A and STAT5B impacts
mammary epithelial development during pregnancy and the regulation of target
genes. The presence of only a single Stat5a or Stat5b allele was sufficient for
the establishment of histologically undifferentiated alveolar units and two
alleles permitted the execution of a differentiation program similar to that
found with all four alleles. While one copy of Stat5 induced limited expression
of target genes, two copies activated a lactation-like gene signature. Using
ChIP-seq analyses on intact tissue under physiological conditions, we found that 
highly expressed and regulated genes were bound by STAT5 in their promoter
proximal regions, whereas upstream binding had minor biological consequences.
Remarkably, 80% of the genes bound by STAT5 in vivo were not under STAT5 control.
RNA polymerase II intensity was directly proportional to STAT5 concentration only
on STAT5 regulated genes providing mechanistic insight by which STAT5 activates
mammary specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3561979
PMID: 23275557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1606-10. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.371. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

All-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide resistance of acute promyelocytic
leukemia with the variant STAT5B-RARA fusion gene.

Strehl S, König M, Boztug H, Cooper BW, Suzukawa K, Zhang SJ, Chen HY,
Attarbaschi A, Dworzak MN.

PMID: 23271512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;197(3):209-23. doi: 10.1159/000343740. Epub 2012 Dec
14.

Analysis of differentiation potentials and gene expression profiles of
mesenchymal stem cells derived from periodontal ligament and Wharton's jelly of
the umbilical cord.

Yu S(1), Long J, Yu J, Du J, Ma P, Ma Y, Yang D, Fan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling and Stem Cells Therapy, Molecular Laboratory
for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tooth
Regeneration and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical University School of
Stomatology, Beijing, China.

PDLSC-mediated periodontal tissue regeneration is considered a promising method
for periodontitis treatment, but the supply of PDLSCs is limited. As a potential 
alternative, WJCMSCs are readily available; however, there is a lack of evidence 
proving that WJCMSCs are suitable for periodontal tissue regeneration. In this
study, we investigated the characteristics of WJCMSCs and PDLSCs. We found the
osteo-/dentinogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic differentiation potentials of
PDLSCs were more powerful than those of WJCMSCs. Microarray analysis discovered
that 903 genes were significantly down-regulated and 726 genes up-regulated in
WJCMSCs compared with PDLSCs. Based on the microarray data, we found that several
genes may be associated with MSCs characteristics. Further bioinformatic analysis
identified that TGF-ß and WNT signaling pathways, and several genes, including
STAT5B and ITGA4, may play key roles in MSCs. Our results indicate that the
differentiation potentials of WJCMSCs are far less than those of PDLSCs, and that
unmodified WJCMSCs may not be good seeding cells for periodontal tissue
regeneration. Our results also help to elucidate the differentiation mechanisms
in MSCs and to find the key factors to prompt WJCMSC-mediated periodontal tissue 
regeneration.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23257615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Dec;20(6):1496-500.

[Roles of STAT5 in hematopoietic regulation and blood diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YZ(1), Yuan WP, Cheng T.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Disease Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is an important
transcription factor existing in the cytoplasm of various types of cells. Once
activated, STAT5 dimers translocate into nucleus and bind to the corresponding
DNA sequence to regulate the transcription of its target genes. There are two
isoforms of STAT5: STAT5A and STAT5B with 96% sequence homology and are encoded
by two closely related but different genes. Studies have shown that STAT5 can
regulate the survival, proliferation, differentiation and death of hematopoietic 
cells. Furthermore, elevated activation of STAT5 was found in many malignant
hematologic diseases and therefore raised the possibility that STAT5 may be used 
as a new therapeutic target for blood related diseases. This review discusses the
regulatory role of STAT5 in hematopoietic cells and its effect on the occurrence 
and development of blood diseases.

PMID: 23257461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Apr;19(2):329-43. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9588-7. Epub
2012 Dec 20.

DARPP32, STAT5 and STAT3 mRNA expression ratios in glioblastomas are associated
with patient outcome.

Televantou D(1), Karkavelas G, Hytiroglou P, Lampaki S, Iliadis G, Selviaridis P,
Polyzoidis KS, Fountzilas G, Kotoula V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, University Campus, 54006, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Based on recent developments in glioblastoma subtyping, we examined DARPP32
(PPP1R1B), a neuronal marker against STAT5 and STAT3 that are pro-oncogenic in
glioblastoma. mRNA ratios of DARPP32, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A and STAT5B were
assessed in routinely diagnosed gliomas s including a series of glioblastomas
from patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>67) treated with chemoradiotherapy (temozolomide), out of
which 88 % had sequencing validated IDH-negative disease. DARPP32/STAT1
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0007), DARPP32/STAT3 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0004) and DARPP32/STAT5B (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0039) ratios
were significantly higher in grade II and III as compared to grade IV tumours.
The same high ratios were also associated with absence of immunohistochemically
assessed AKT/PKB phosphorylation and survivin protein expression. High
DARPP32/STAT3, DARPP32/STAT5B, and STAT5B/STAT3 ratios were associated with
longer patient progression free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Upon
multivariate analysis, total/subtotal removal of the tumour (HR:0.431;
95%CI:0.241-0.771, Wald p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), high DARPP32/STAT5B (HR:0.341;
95%CI:0.169-0.690; Wald p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) and STAT5B/STAT3 mRNA ratios (HR:0.480;
95%CI:0.280-0.824; Wald p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008) were independent favorable parameters for
prolonged PFS. Extent of surgery (HR:0.198; 95%CI:0.101-0.390; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and
high DARPP32/STAT5A ratios (HR:0.320; 95%CI:0.160-0.638, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001) were
independently predictive for longer OS. The presented approach is applicable for 
prospective validation and appears promising towards an effective glioblastoma
patient stratification in addition to IDH mutations. These data may contribute to
understanding the biology of gliomas with respect to their potential neuronal
characteristics and justify STAT-inhibiting therapeutic interventions in the same
tumour system.

PMCID: PMC3622752
PMID: 23250732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2013 Feb-Apr;23(1-2):19-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2012.11.002.
Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Growth hormone STAT5-mediated signaling and its modulation in mice liver during
the growth period.

Martinez CS(1), Piazza VG, Ratner LD, Matos MN, González L, Rulli SB, Miquet JG, 
Sotelo AI.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas (UBA-CONICET), Universidad de 
Buenos Aires, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Junín 956, 1113, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Postnatal growth exhibits two instances of rapid growth in mice: the first is
perinatal and independent of growth hormone (GH), the second is peripuberal and
GH-dependent. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) is the
main GH-signaling mediator and it is related to IGF1 synthesis and somatic
growth. The aim of this work was to assess differential STAT5 sensitivity to GH
during the growth period in mouse liver of both sexes. Three representative ages 
were selected: 1-week-old animals, in the GH-independent phase of growth;
2.5-week-old mice, at the onset of the GH-dependent phase of growth; and
9-week-old young adults. GH-signaling mediators were assessed by immunoblotting, 
quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. GH-induced STAT5 phosphorylation is
low at one-week and maximal at 2.5-weeks of age when compared to young adults,
accompanied by higher protein content at the onset of growth. Suppressor CIS and 
phosphatase PTP1B exhibit high levels in one-week animals, which gradually
decline, while SOCS2 and SOCS3 display higher levels at adulthood. Nuclear
phosphorylated STAT5 is low in one-week animals while in 2.5-week animals it is
similar to 9-week control; expression of SOCS3, an early response GH-target gene,
mimics this pattern. STAT5 coactivators glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and hepatic 
nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) abundance is higher in adulthood. Therefore, GH-induced
STAT5 signaling presents age-dependent activity in liver, with its maximum
coinciding with the onset of GH-dependent phase of growth, accompanied by an
age-dependent variation of modulating factors. This work contributes to elucidate
the molecular mechanisms implicated in GH responsiveness during growth.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23245546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50278. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050278. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Biochemical characterization of diverse Stat5b-binding enhancers that mediate
growth hormone-activated insulin-like growth factor-I gene transcription.

Varco-Merth B(1), Mirza K, Alzhanov DT, Chia DJ, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America.

Many of the biological effects of growth hormone (GH) are mediated by
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), a 70-amino acid secreted peptide whose gene
expression is rapidly induced by GH via the Stat5b transcription factor. We
previously identified multiple evolutionarily conserved GH-activated chromosomal 
binding domains for Stat5b within the rat Igf1 locus, and proposed that they
could regulate IGF-I gene activity. Here we investigate the biochemical and
functional characteristics of these putative long-range transcriptional
enhancers. Each element contained 2 or 3 individual Stat5b recognition sequences 
that could bind Stat5b in vitro, but with affinities that varied over a >100-fold
range. Full transcriptional responsiveness to GH required that all Stat5b sites
be intact within an individual enhancer. Replacement of a single lower-affinity
Stat5b sequence with a higher-affinity one increased in vitro binding of Stat5b, 
and boosted transcriptional potency of the entire element to GH. As enhanced
transcriptional activity involved changes in only one or two nucleotides within
an enhancer DNA segment, there appears to be remarkable specificity and
sensitivity in the ability of Stat5b to transform DNA binding activity into
transcriptional function. Stat5b was able to stimulate the transcriptional
activity of two enhancers in the absence of GH, indicating that individual
Stat5b-regulated elements possess distinct functional features. We conclude that 
combinatorial interplay among multiple Stat5b-binding response elements with
distinguishable biochemical properties is responsible for highly regulated
control of IGF-I gene activity by GH.

PMCID: PMC3502335
PMID: 23185594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Endocr Dev. 2012;23:30-41. doi: 10.1159/000341739. Epub 2012 Nov 23.

Spectrum of insulin-like growth factor deficiency.

Wit JM(1), Oostdijk W, Losekoot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.m.wit@lumc.nl

There are eight known genetic causes of short stature characterized by low serum 
IGF-1 (IGF-1 deficiency, IGFD) and normal GH secretion. One of these (GHSR
defect) is a form of secondary IGFD, although the GH peak in provocation tests
can be normal. Bioinactive GH (GH1 mutations) can disturb GH secretion, but also 
GH binding and signaling. The remaining conditions are classified as primary IGFD
(GH insensitivity). The clinical phenotype of GH receptor (GHR) defects is
variable. Of the three GH signal transduction defects, a STAT5B defect is well
established, but abnormalities in the MAPK pathway (such as PTPN11 mutations in
Noonan syndrome) and NF-<U+0138>B pathway (I<U+0138>Ba mutation) may also cause IGFD.
Homozygous IGFALS defects are relatively common, and lead to moderate growth
failure, very low serum IGF-1 and even lower IGFBP-3, while a heterozygous IGFALS
mutation decreases height by 1 SD. Most cases with a homozygous IGF1 defect are
very short, microcephalic, and deaf, but heterozygous mutations may also lead to 
short stature. IGFD can also have a digenic or oligogenic origin. The diagnostic 
yield of genetic testing in children with a height <-2.5 SDS and a serum IGF-1
<-2 appears sufficient to perform genetic tests for known candidate genes.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23182818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013 Feb;41(2):457-65. doi: 10.1124/dmd.112.048835. Epub 2012 
Nov 20.

The role of cytochrome P450-dependent metabolism in the regulation of mouse
hepatic growth hormone signaling components and target genes by
3-methylcholanthrene.

Lee C(1), Ding X, Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

3-Methylcholanthrene (MC) is a readily metabolized aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR) agonist. MC disrupts expression of mouse hepatic growth hormone (GH)
signaling components and suppresses cytochrome P450 2D9 (Cyp2d9), a male-specific
gene controlled by pulsatile GH via signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b). To determine if these effects of MC depend on hepatic 
microsomal P450-mediated activity, we examined biologic responses to MC treatment
in liver Cpr-null (LCN) mice with hepatocyte-specific conditional deletion of
NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR). MC caused mild induction of Por and a
hepatic inflammatory marker in wild-type mice, whereas MC caused strong induction
of AHR target genes, Cyp1a1, Cyp1a2, and Cyp1b1 in wild-type and LCN mice. Two
mouse hepatic STAT5b target genes, Cyp2d9 and major urinary protein 2 (Mup2),
were suppressed by MC in wild-type mice, and the CYP2D9 mRNA response was
maintained in LCN mice. In wild-type mice only, MC decreased hepatic GH receptor 
(GHR) mRNA but increased GHR protein levels. There was an apparent impairment of 
STAT5 phosphorylation by MC in wild-type and LCN mice, but large interanimal
variation prevented achievement of statistical significance. In vehicle-treated
mice, basal levels of MUP2 mRNA, GHR mRNA, GHR protein, and the activation status
of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 and Akt were influenced by hepatic Por
genetic status. These results indicate that the effects of MC on hepatic GH
signaling components and target genes are complex, involving aspects that are
both dependent and independent of hepatic microsomal P450-mediated activity.

PMCID: PMC3558870
PMID: 23169610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049374. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

The Jak/STAT signaling pathway is downregulated at febrile temperatures.

Nespital T(1), Strous GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Institute of Biomembranes, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The Janus family of kinases (JAKs), Jak1, Jak2, Jak3, and Tyk2,
constitute a subgroup of non-receptor protein tyrosine kinases. Upon cytokine
binding, the receptor-associated kinases are activated and phosphorylate tyrosine
residues in their cognate cytokine receptors. Their activities are controlled at 
several levels and include cellular concentration, auto-activation, and
degradation.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Our findings show that elevated temperatures in the fever
range irreversibly aggregate Jak2 and considerably reduce functional Jak2 protein
levels. Jak2 synthesis remains unaltered. We observed that also the protein level
of the signal transducer and activator of transcription, STAT5b, is transiently
decreased at temperatures above 37°C. Consequently, the signaling response, e.g. 
via the growth hormone receptor, is reduced.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings predict that elevated body temperatures 
lower the responsiveness of cytokine receptors.

PMCID: PMC3498154
PMID: 23166650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jan;27(1):150-61. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1275. Epub 2012 Nov
16.

Severe growth deficiency is associated with STAT5b mutations that disrupt protein
folding and activity.

Varco-Merth B(1), Feigerlová E, Shinde U, Rosenfeld RG, Hwa V, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

The first genetic defect in human signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)5b was identified in an individual with profound short
stature and GH insensitivity, immune dysfunction, and severe pulmonary disease,
and was caused by an alanine to proline substitution (A630P) within the Src
homology-2 (SH2) domain. STAT5b(A630P) was found to be an inactive transcription 
factor based on its aberrant folding, diminished solubility, and propensity for
aggregation triggered by its misfolded SH2 domain. Here we have characterized the
second human STAT5b amino acid substitution mutation in an individual with
similar pathophysiological features. This single nucleotide transition, predicted
to change phenyalanine 646 to serine (F646S), also maps to the SH2 domain. Like
STAT5b(A630P), STAT5b(F646S) is prone to aggregation, as evidenced by its
detection in the insoluble fraction of cell extracts, the presence of dimers and 
higher-order oligomers in the soluble fraction, and formation of insoluble
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in cells. Unlike STAT5b(A630P), which showed minimal
GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and no transcriptional activity,
STAT5b(F646S) became tyrosine phosphorylated after GH treatment and could
function as a GH-activated transcription factor, although to a substantially
lesser extent than STAT5b(WT). Biochemical characterization demonstrated that the
isolated SH2 domain containing the F646S substitution closely resembled the
wild-type SH2 domain in secondary structure, but exhibited reduced thermodynamic 
stability and altered tertiary structure that were intermediate between
STAT5b(A630P) and STAT5b(WT). Homology-based structural modeling suggests that
the F646S mutation disrupts key hydrophobic interactions and may also distort the
phosphopeptide-binding face of the SH2 domain, explaining both the reduced
thermodynamic stability and impaired biological activity.

PMCID: PMC3545219
PMID: 23160480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb 15;304(4):C312-23. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00311.2012. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Definitive evidence using enucleated cytoplasts for a nongenomic basis for the
cystic change in endoplasmic reticulum structure caused by STAT5a/b siRNAs.

Lee JE(1), Yang YM, Yuan H, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

STAT5a/b species are well known as transcription factors that regulate nuclear
gene expression. In a novel line of research in human pulmonary arterial
endothelial cells (HPAECs), we previously observed that STAT5a associated with
the Golgi apparatus and that siRNA-mediated knockdown of STAT5a/b led to the
rapid development of a dramatic cystic change in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
characterized by deposition along cyst membranes and tubule-to-cyst boundaries of
the proteins reticulon-4 (RTN4; also called Nogo-B) and the ER-resident GTPase
atlastin-3 (ATL3) and Golgi fragmentation. We now report that STAT5a can be
observed in ER sheets in digitonin-permeabilized HPAECs and that anti-STAT5a
cross- immunopanned ATL3 but not RTN4. Moreover, there was marked accumulation of
the 63-kDa cytoskeleton-linking membrane protein and ER-spacer CLIMP63 (also
called cytoskeleton-associated protein 4, CKAP4) and KDEL-mCherry within the
cysts. That the STAT5a/b-siRNA-induced cystic ER phenotype developed in the
presence of the transcription inhibitor
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) had suggested that the
mechanism was independent of the transcription factor functions of STAT5a/b,
i.e., was "nongenomic." We have now definitively tested the requirement for the
nucleus in eliciting the STAT5a/b-siRNA-induced cystic ER phenotype. Enucleated
HPAEC cytoplasts were prepared using adherent 35-mm cultures using the
cytochalasin B-centrifugation method (typically yielding 65-75% enucleation).
STAT5a/b siRNAs readily elicited the cystic ER phenotype including the marked
luminal accumulation of CLIMP63 and Golgi fragmentation in the recovered HPAEC
cytoplasts demonstrably lacking a nucleus. These studies provide unequivocal
evidence using enucleated cytoplasts for a nongenomic mechanism(s) underlying the
cystic change in ER structure elicited by STAT5a/b knockdown.

PMCID: PMC3566531
PMID: 23151802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Eur J Haematol. 2013 Mar;90(3):257-8. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12040. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

No association between the STAT5b rs6503691 (C>T) SNP and myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Trifa AP, Cucuianu A, Popp RA, Coada CA, Costache RM, Sarca AD, Farcas MF,
Militaru MS, Pop IV.

PMID: 23130760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biosens Bioelectron. 2013 Mar 15;41:71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2012.06.062. Epub
2012 Oct 9.

Visual detection of STAT5B gene expression in living cell using the hairpin DNA
modified gold nanoparticle beacon.

Xue J(1), Shan L, Chen H, Li Y, Zhu H, Deng D, Qian Z, Achilefu S, Gu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Natural
Medicines, School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, PR China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B (STAT5B) is an important
protein in JAK-STAT signaling pathway that is responsible for the metastasis and 
proliferation of tumor cells. Determination of the STAT5B messenger Ribonucleic
Acid (mRNA) relating to the STAT5B expression provides insight into the mechanism
of tumor progression. In this study, we designed and used a special hairpin
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) for human STAT5B mRNA to functionalize gold
nanoparticles, which served as a beacon for detecting human STAT5B expression. Up
to 90% quenching efficiency was achieved. Upon hybridizing with the target mRNA, 
the hairpin DNA modified gold nanoparticle beacons (hDAuNP beacons) release the
fluorophores attached at 5' end of the oligonucleotide sequence. The fluorescence
properties of the beacon before and after the hybridization with the
complementary DNA were confirmed in vitro. The stability of hDAuNP beacons
against degradation by DNase I and GSH indicated that the prepared beacon is
stable inside cells. The detected fluorescence in MCF-7 cancer cells correlates
with the specific STAT5B mRNA expression, which is consistent with the result
from PCR measurement. Fluorescence microscopy showed that the hDAuNP beacons
internalized in cells without using transfection agents, with intracellular
distribution in the cytoplasm rather than the nucleus. The results demonstrated
that this beacon could directly provide quantitative measurement of the
intracellular STAT5B mRNA in living cells. Compared to the previous approaches,
this beacon has advantages of higher target to background ratio of detection and 
an increased resistance to nuclease degradation. The strategy reported in this
study is a promising approach for the intracellular measurement of RNA or protein
expression in living cells, and has great potential in the study of drug
screening and discovery.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23122230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Neoplasia. 2012 Oct;14(10):915-25.

STAT5b as molecular target in pancreatic cancer--inhibition of tumor growth,
angiogenesis, and metastases.

Moser C(1), Ruemmele P, Gehmert S, Schenk H, Kreutz MP, Mycielska ME, Hackl C,
Kroemer A, Schnitzbauer AA, Stoeltzing O, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, Lang SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Regensburg Medical Center, Regensburg,
Germany.

The prognosis of patients suffering from pancreatic cancer is still poor and
novel therapeutic options are urgently needed. Recently, the transcription factor
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) was associated with 
tumor progression in human solid cancer. Hence, we assessed whether STAT5b might 
serve as an anticancer target in ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma (DPAC). We
found that nuclear expression of STAT5b can be detected in approximately 50% of
DPAC. Blockade of STAT5b by stable shRNA-mediated knockdown showed no effects on 
tumor cell growth in vitro. However, inhibition of tumor cell motility was found 
even in response to stimulation with epidermal growth factor or interleukin-6.
These findings were paralleled by a reduction of prometastatic and proangiogenic 
factors in vitro. Subsequent in vivo experiments revealed a strong growth
inhibition on STAT5b blockade in subcutaneous and orthotopic models. These
findings were paralleled by impaired tumor angiogenesis in vivo. In contrast to
the subcutaneous model, the orthotopic model revealed a strong reduction of tumor
cell proliferation that emphasizes the meaning of assessing targets in an
appropriate microenvironment. Taken together, our results suggest that STAT5b
might be a potential novel target for human DPAC.

PMCID: PMC3479837
PMID: 23097626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genet Mol Res. 2012 Sep 13;11(3):3236-45. doi: 10.4238/2012.September.12.6.

Bottom-up assembly of RNA nanoparticles containing phi29 motor pRNA to silence
the asthma STAT5b gene.

Qiu C(1), Peng WK, Shi F, Zhang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, P.R. China. dalyschloe@yahoo.cn

Activation of the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b) is a key event in the development of asthma. The potent
ability of small interfering RNA (siRNA) to inhibit the expression of STAT5b mRNA
has provided a new class of therapeutics for asthma. However, efficient delivery 
of siRNAs remains a key obstacle to their successful application. A targeted
intracellular delivery approach for siRNA to specific cell types would be highly 
desirable. We used packaging RNA (pRNA), a component of the bacteriophage
phi29-packaging motor, to deliver STAT5b siRNA to asthmatic spleen lymphocytes.
This pRNA was able to spontaneously carry siRNA/STAT5b and aptamer/CD4, which is 
a ligand to CD4 molecule. Based on RT-PCR data, the pRNA dimer effectively
inhibited STAT5b gene mRNA expression of asthmatic spleen lymphocytes, without
the need for additional transfections. We conclude that the pRNA dimer carrying
both siRNA and aptamer can deliver functional siRNA to cells; possibly, the
aptamer acts as a ligand to interact with specific receptors. The pRNAs were
evaluated with a CCK-8 kit and were found to have little cytotoxicity. We
conclude that pRNA as a novel nanovehicle for RNA worth further study.

PMID: 23079817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 2;216(1):87-97. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0255. Print 2013 Jan.

Noncanonical suppression of GH-dependent isoforms of cytochrome P450 by the
somatostatin analog octreotide.

Das RK(1), Banerjee S, Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6009, USA.

Octreotide is a potent somatostatin analog therapeutically used to treat several 
conditions including hyper GH secretion in patients with acromegaly. We infused, 
over 30 s, octreotide into male rats every 12 h for 6 days at levels considerably
greater than typical human therapeutic doses. Unexpectedly, resulting circulating
GH profile was characterized by pulses of higher amplitudes, longer durations,
and greater total content than normal, but still contained an otherwise male-like
episodic secretory profiles. In apparent disaccord, the normally elevated
masculine expression levels (protein and/or mRNA) of CYP2C11 (accounting for >50%
of the total hepatic cytochrome P450 content), CYP3A2, CYP2C7, and IGF1,
dependent on the episodic GH profile, were considerably downregulated. We explain
this contradiction by proposing that the requisite minimal GH-devoid interpulse
durations in the masculine profile that solely regulate expression of at least
CYP2C11 and IGF1 may be sufficiently reduced to suppress transcription of the
hepatic genes. Alternatively, we observed that octreotide infusion may have acted
directly on the hepatocytes to induce expression of immune response factors
postulated to suppress CYP transcription and/or upregulate expression of several 
negative regulators (e.g. phosphatases and SOCS proteins) of the JAK2/STAT5B
signaling pathway that normally mediates the upregulation of CYP2C11 and IGF1 by 
the masculine episodic GH profile.

PMCID: PMC3539820
PMID: 23077183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047477. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

MSM enhances GH signaling via the Jak2/STAT5b pathway in osteoblast-like cells
and osteoblast differentiation through the activation of STAT5b in MSCs.

Joung YH(1), Lim EJ, Darvin P, Chung SC, Jang JW, Do Park K, Lee HK, Kim HS, Park
T, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Science
and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is a naturally occurring sulfur compound with
well-known anti-oxidant properties and anti-inflammatory activities. But, its
effects on bone are unknown. Growth hormone (GH) is regulator of bone growth and 
bone metabolism. GH activates several signaling pathways such as the Janus kinase
(Jak)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway, thereby 
regulating expression of genes including insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1. GH
exerts effects both directly and via IGF-1, which signals by activating the IGF-1
receptor (IGF-1R). In this study, we investigated the effects of MSM on the GH
signaling via the Jak/STAT pathway in osteoblasts and the differentiation of
primary bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). MSM was not toxic to
osteoblastic cells and MSCs. MSM increased the expression of GH-related proteins 
including IGF-1R, p-IGF-1R, STAT5b, p-STAT5b, and Jak2 in osteoblastic cells and 
MSCs. MSM increased IGF-1R and GHR mRNA expression in osteoblastic cells. The
expression of MSM-induced IGF-1R and GHR was inhibited by AG490, a Jak2 kinase
inhibitor. MSM induced binding of STAT5 to the IGF-1R and increased IGF-1 and
IGF-1R promoter activities. Analysis of cell extracts by immunoprecipitation and 
Western blot showed that MSM enhanced GH-induced activation of Jak2/STAT5b. We
found that MSM and GH, separately or in combination, activated GH signaling via
the Jak2/STAT5b pathway in UMR-106 cells. Using siRNA analysis, we found that
STAT5b plays an essential role in GH signaling activation in C3H10T1/2 cells.
Osteogenic marker genes (ALP, ON, OCN, BSP, OSX, and Runx2) were activated by
MSM, and siRNA-mediated STAT5b knockdown inhibited MSM-induced expression of
osteogenic markers. Furthermore, MSM increased ALP activity and the
mineralization of MSCs. Taken together, these results indicated that MSM can
promote osteogenic differentiation of MSCs through activation of STAT5b.

PMCID: PMC3469535
PMID: 23071812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Dec 15;303(12):G1402-15. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00071.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Hepatic microtubule acetylation and stability induced by chronic alcohol exposure
impair nuclear translocation of STAT3 and STAT5B, but not Smad2/3.

Fernandez DJ(1), Tuma DJ, Tuma PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department. of Biology, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC
20064, USA.

Although alcoholic liver disease is clinically well described, the molecular
basis for alcohol-induced hepatotoxicity is not well understood. Previously, we
found that alcohol exposure led to increased microtubule acetylation and
stability in polarized, hepatic WIF-B cells and in livers from ethanol-fed rats. 
Because microtubules are known to regulate transcription factor nuclear
translocation and dynamic microtubules are required for translocation of at least
a subset of these factors, we examined whether alcohol-induced microtubule
acetylation and stability impair nuclear translocation. We examined nuclear
delivery of factors representing the two mechanisms by which microtubules
regulate translocation. To represent factors that undergo directed delivery, we
examined growth hormone-induced STAT5B translocation and IL-6-induced STAT3
translocation. To represent factors that are sequestered in the cytoplasm by
microtubule attachment until ligand activation, we examined transforming growth
factor-ß-induced Smad2/3 translocation. We found that ethanol exposure
selectively impaired translocation of the STATs, but not Smad2/3. STAT5B delivery
was decreased to a similar extent by addition of taxol (a microtubule-stabilizing
drug) or trichostatin A (a deacetylase inhibitor), agents that promote
microtubule acetylation in the absence of alcohol. Thus the alcohol-induced
impairment of STAT nuclear translocation can be explained by increased
microtubule acetylation and stability. Only ethanol treatment impaired STAT5B
activation, indicating that microtubules are not important for its activation by 
Jak2. Furthermore, nuclear exit was not changed in treated cells, indicating that
this process is also independent of microtubule acetylation and stability.
Together, these results raise the exciting possibility that deacetylase agonists 
may be effective therapeutics for the treatment of alcoholic liver disease.

PMCID: PMC3532545
PMID: 23064763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Int J Oncol. 2012 Dec;41(6):2285-95. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1660. Epub 2012 Oct
15.

The prolactin receptor mediates HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity in mammary
carcinoma cells.

Hou L(1), Xu B, Mohankumar KM, Goffin V, Perry JK, Lobie PE, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

The HOX genes are a highly conserved subgroup of homeodomain-containing
transcription factors that are crucial to normal development. Forced expression
of HOXA1 results in oncogenic transformation of immortalized human mammary cells 
with aggressive tumour formation in vivo. Microarray analysis identified that the
prolactin receptor (PRLR) was significantly upregulated by forced expression of
HOXA1 in mammary carcinoma cells. To determine prolactin (PRL) involvement in
HOXA1-induced oncogenicity in mammary carcinoma cells (MCF-7), we examined the
effect of human prolactin (hPRL)-initiated PRLR signal transduction on changes in
cellular behaviour mediated by HOXA1. Forced expression of HOXA1 in MCF-7 cells
increased PRLR mRNA and protein expression. Forced expression of HOXA1 also
enhanced hPRL-stimulated phosphorylation of both STAT5A/B and p44/42 MAPK, and
increased subsequent transcriptional activity of STAT5A and STAT5B, and Elk-1 and
Sap1a, respectively. Moreover, forced expression of HOXA1 in MCF-7 cells enhanced
the hPRL-stimulated increase in total cell number as a consequence of enhanced
cell proliferation and cell survival, and also enhanced hPRL-stimulated
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. Increased anchorage-independent growth
was attenuated by the PRLR antagonist <U+2206>1-9-G129R-hPRL. In conclusion, we have
demonstrated that HOXA1 increases expression of the cell surface receptor PRLR
and enhances PRLR-mediated signal transduction. Thus, the PRLR is one mediator of
HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity in mammary carcinoma cells.

PMID: 23064471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Ann Hematol. 2013 Jan;92(2):151-62. doi: 10.1007/s00277-012-1575-2. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Repression of STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B expressions in chronic myelogenous
leukemia cell line K-562 with unmodified or chemically modified siRNAs and
induction of apoptosis.

Kaymaz BT(1), Selvi N, Gündüz C, Aktan C, Dalmizrak A, Saydam G, Kosova B.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Ege University, Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey. burcin.tezcanli@ege.edu.tr

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent
cytoplasmic transcription factors that affect several cellular processes
including cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Following
phosphorylation, STATs are activated, and their upregulated expressions increase 
in malignancies with playing a role in the development of leukemia. In this
study, transfection of K-562 cells with either unmodified or chemically modified 
anti-STAT3, -STAT5A, -STAT5B siRNAs for duration of 12 days, determining gene
silencing at mRNA and protein levels, evaluating apoptosis rate, and detecting
JAK/STAT pathway members' gene expression profiles via array method were aimed.
Quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot assays indicated that STAT expressions were 
downregulated both at mRNA and protein levels, and TUNEL assay showed that
leukemic cell apoptosis was induced due to inhibition of STATs. Array analysis
resulted with decreases in signal transducer, phosphorylation inducer, and
oncogene expressions, whereas increased expressions in STAT inhibitor and
apoptosis inducer genes were observed. These results point out that siRNA
application could constitute a new and alternative curative method for supporting
therapy of CML-diagnosed patients in the future.

PMID: 23053176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Nov;130(5):1019-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.09.011.
Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Molecular mechanisms of mucocutaneous immunity against Candida and Staphylococcus
species.

Maródi L(1), Cypowyj S, Tóth B, Chernyshova L, Puel A, Casanova JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Pediatric Immunology, University of Debrecen
Medical and Health Science Center, Debrecen, Hungary. lmarodi@dote.hu

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are key
components of the innate and adaptive immune responses to pathogenic
microorganisms. Recent research on primary immunodeficiency disorders and the
identification of patients carrying germline mutations in STAT1, STAT3, and
STAT5B have highlighted the role of human STATs in host defense against various
viruses, bacteria, and fungi. Mutations in STAT1 and STAT3 disrupt various
cytokine pathways that control mucocutaneous immunity against Candida species,
especially Candida albicans, and Staphylococcus species, especially
Staphylococcus aureus. Here we consider inborn errors of immunity arising from
mutations in either STAT1 or STAT3 that affect mucocutaneous immunity to Candida 
and Staphylococcus species.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3703675
PMID: 23040277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 4;14(5):R130. doi: 10.1186/bcr3328.

Low levels of Stat5a protein in breast cancer are associated with tumor
progression and unfavorable clinical outcomes.

Peck AR, Witkiewicz AK, Liu C, Klimowicz AC, Stringer GA, Pequignot E, Freydin B,
Yang N, Ertel A, Tran TH, Girondo MA, Rosenberg AL, Hooke JA, Kovatich AJ,
Shriver CD, Rimm DL, Magliocco AM, Hyslop T, Rui H.

INTRODUCTION: Signal transducer and activator of transcripton-5a (Stat5a) and its
close homologue, Stat5b, mediate key physiological effects of prolactin and
growth hormone in mammary glands. In breast cancer, loss of nuclear localized and
tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5a/b is associated with poor prognosis and increased 
risk of antiestrogen therapy failure. Here we quantify for the first time levels 
of Stat5a and Stat5b over breast cancer progression, and explore their potential 
association with clinical outcome.
METHODS: Stat5a and Stat5b protein levels were quantified in situ in
breast-cancer progression material. Stat5a and Stat5b transcript levels in breast
cancer were correlated with clinical outcome in 936 patients. Stat5a protein was 
further quantified in four archival cohorts totaling 686 patients with clinical
outcome data by using multivariate models.
RESULTS: Protein levels of Stat5a but not Stat5b were reduced in primary breast
cancer and lymph node metastases compared with normal epithelia. Low tumor levels
of Stat5a but not Stat5b mRNA were associated with poor prognosis.
Experimentally, only limited overlap between Stat5a- and Stat5b-modulated genes
was found. In two cohorts of therapy-naïve, node-negative breast cancer patients,
low nuclear Stat5a protein levels were an independent marker of poor prognosis.
Multivariate analysis of two cohorts treated with antiestrogen monotherapy
revealed that low nuclear Stat5a levels were associated with a more than fourfold
risk of unfavorable outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of Stat5a represents a new independent marker of poor prognosis
in node-negative breast cancer and may be a predictor of response to antiestrogen
therapy if validated in randomized clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4053108
PMID: 23036105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Hum Pathol. 2013 Mar;44(3):310-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.06.001. Epub 2012
Sep 29.

Nuclear Stat5a/b predicts early recurrence and prostate cancer-specific death in 
patients treated by radical prostatectomy.

Mirtti T(1), Leiby BE, Abdulghani J, Aaltonen E, Pavela M, Mamtani A, Alanen K,
Egevad L, Granfors T, Josefsson A, Stattin P, Bergh A, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki and
HUSLAB, Helsinki 00014, Finland.

There is an urgent need for reliable markers to identify patients whose prostate 
cancer (PCa) will recur after initial therapy and progress to lethal disease.
Gleason score (GS) is considered the most accurate predictive marker for
disease-specific mortality after primary treatment of localized PCa. Most PCas
cluster into groups of GS 6 and 7 with considerable variation in the disease
recurrence and disease-specific death. In preclinical PCa models, Stat5a/b
promotes PCa growth and progression. Stat5a/b is critical for PCa cell viability 
in vitro and for tumor growth in vivo and promotes metastatic dissemination of
cancer in nude mice. Here, we analyzed the predictive value of high nuclear
Stat5a/b protein levels in 2 cohorts of PCas: Material I (n = 562) PCas treated
by radical prostatectomy (RP), and Material II (n = 106) PCas treated by deferred
palliative therapy. In intermediate GS PCas treated by radical prostatectomy,
high levels of nuclear Stat5a/b predicted both early recurrence (univariable
analysis; P < .0001, multivariable analysis; HR = 1.82, P = .017) and early
PCa-specific death (univariable analysis; P = .028). In addition, high nuclear
Stat5a/b predicted early disease recurrence in both univariable (P < .0001) and
multivariable (HR = 1.61; P = .012) analysis in the entire cohort of patients
treated by RP regardless of the GS. Patients treated by deferred palliative
therapy, elevated nuclear Stat5a/b expression was associated with early
PCa-specific death by univariable Cox regression analysis (HR = 1.59; 95% CI =
[1.04, 2.44]; P = .034). If confirmed in future prospective studies, nuclear
Stat5a/b may become a useful independent predictive marker of recurrence of
lethal PCa after RP for intermediate GS PCas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3548055
PMID: 23026195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Oct 30;49(3):267-75. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0034. Print 2012 
Dec.

Mutations in CUL7, OBSL1 and CCDC8 in 3-M syndrome lead to disordered growth
factor signalling.

Hanson D(1), Murray PG, Coulson T, Sud A, Omokanye A, Stratta E, Sakhinia F,
Bonshek C, Wilson LC, Wakeling E, Temtamy SA, Aglan M, Rosser EM, Mansour S,
Carcavilla A, Nampoothiri S, Khan WI, Banerjee I, Chandler KE, Black GC, Clayton 
PE.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology, School of Biomedicine, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.

3-M syndrome is a primordial growth disorder caused by mutations in CUL7, OBSL1
or CCDC8. 3-M patients typically have a modest response to GH treatment, but the 
mechanism is unknown. Our aim was to screen 13 clinically identified 3-M families
for mutations, define the status of the GH-IGF axis in 3-M children and using
fibroblast cell lines assess signalling responses to GH or IGF1. Eleven CUL7,
three OBSL1 and one CCDC8 mutations in nine, three and one families respectively 
were identified, those with CUL7 mutations being significantly shorter than those
with OBSL1 or CCDC8 mutations. The majority of 3-M patients tested had normal
peak serum GH and normal/low IGF1. While the generation of IGF binding proteins
by 3-M cells was dysregulated, activation of STAT5b and MAPK in response to GH
was normal in CUL7(-/-) cells but reduced in OBSL1(-/-) and CCDC8(-/-) cells
compared with controls. Activation of AKT to IGF1 was reduced in CUL7(-/-) and
OBSL1(-/-) cells at 5<U+200A>min post-stimulation but normal in CCDC8(-/-) cells. The
prevalence of 3-M mutations was 69% CUL7, 23% OBSL1 and 8% CCDC8. The GH-IGF axis
evaluation could reflect a degree of GH resistance and/or IGF1 resistance. This
is consistent with the signalling data in which the CUL7(-/-) cells showed
impaired IGF1 signalling, CCDC8(-/-) cells showed impaired GH signalling and the 
OBSL1(-/-) cells showed impairment in both pathways. Dysregulation of the
GH-IGF-IGF binding protein axis is a feature of 3-M syndrome.

PMID: 23018678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Rep. 2012 Sep 27;2(3):652-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.021. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

Crosstalk of humoral and cell-cell contact-mediated signals in postnatal body
growth.

Jing X(1), Miyajima M, Sawada T, Chen Q, Iida K, Furushima K, Arai D, Chihara K, 
Sakaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Institute of
Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama, Japan.

The growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) axis mediates
postnatal body growth. The GH receptor has been regarded as the sole receptor
that mediates the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducers and activators of the 
transcription 5B (STAT5B) signal toward IGF1 synthesis. Here, we report a
signaling pathway that regulates postnatal body growth through EphA4, a member of
the Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and a mediator of the cell-cell
contact-mediated signaling. EphA4 forms a complex with the GH receptor, JAK2, and
STAT5B and enhances Igf1 expression predominantly via the JAK2-dependent pathway,
with some direct effect on STAT5B. Mice with a defective Epha4 gene have a gene
dose-dependent short stature and low plasma IGF1 levels. Igf1 messenger RNA
(mRNA) in the liver and many other tissues was also significantly reduced in
Epha4-knockout mice, whereas pituitary Gh mRNA and plasma GH levels were not.
These findings suggest that the local cell-cell contact-mediated ephrin/EphA4
signal is as important as the humoral GH signal in IGF1 synthesis and body size
determination.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22999939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;90(10):1354-63. doi: 10.1139/y2012-099. Epub
2012 Sep 14.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependence of dioxin's effects on constitutive mouse
hepatic cytochromes P450 and growth hormone signaling components.

Lee C(1), Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) has physiological roles in the absence of
exposure to exogenous ligands, and mediates adaptive and toxic responses to the
environmental pollutant 2,3,7,8-tetracholorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). A readily
metabolized AHR agonist, 3-methylcholanthrene, disrupts the expression of mouse
hepatic growth hormone (GH) signaling components and suppresses cytochrome P450
2D9 (Cyp2d9), a male-specific gene controlled by pulsatile GH via signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b). Using TCDD as an
essentially nonmetabolized AHR agonist, and Ahr<U+2009>(-/-) mice as the preferred model
to determine the AHR-dependence of biological responses, we now show that 2 mouse
hepatic STAT5b target genes, Cyp2d9, and major urinary protein 2 (Mup2), are
suppressed by TCDD in an AHR-dependent manner. TCDD also decreased hepatic mRNA
levels for GH receptor, Janus kinase 2, and STAT5a/b with AHR-dependence. Without
inducing selected hepatic inflammatory markers, TCDD caused AHR-dependent
induction of Cyp1a1 and NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (Por) and
suppression of Cyp3a11. In vehicle-treated mice, basal mRNA levels for CYP2D9,
CYP3A11, POR, serum amyloid protein P, and MUP2 were influenced by Ahr genetic
status. We conclude that AHR activation per se leads to dysregulation of hepatic 
GH signaling components and suppression of some, but not all, STAT5b target
genes.

PMCID: PMC3515668
PMID: 22978700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2012;2012:390385. doi: 10.1155/2012/390385. Epub 2012 Aug
7.

Coffee polyphenols change the expression of STAT5B and ATF-2 modifying cyclin D1 
levels in cancer cells.

Oleaga C(1), Ciudad CJ, Noé V, Izquierdo-Pulido M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies suggest that coffee consumption reduces the
risk of cancer, but the molecular mechanisms of its chemopreventive effects
remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To identify differentially expressed genes upon incubation of HT29
colon cancer cells with instant caffeinated coffee (ICC) or caffeic acid (CA)
using whole-genome microarrays.
RESULTS: ICC incubation of HT29 cells caused the overexpression of 57 genes and
the underexpression of 161, while CA incubation induced the overexpression of 12 
genes and the underexpression of 32. Using Venn-Diagrams, we built a list of five
overexpressed genes and twelve underexpressed genes in common between the two
experimental conditions. This list was used to generate a biological association 
network in which STAT5B and ATF-2 appeared as highly interconnected nodes. STAT5B
overexpression was confirmed at the mRNA and protein levels. For ATF-2, the
changes in mRNA levels were confirmed for both ICC and CA, whereas the decrease
in protein levels was only observed in CA-treated cells. The levels of cyclin D1,
a target gene for both STAT5B and ATF-2, were downregulated by CA in colon cancer
cells and by ICC and CA in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Coffee polyphenols are able to affect cyclin D1 expression in cancer
cells through the modulation of STAT5B and ATF-2.

PMCID: PMC3424007
PMID: 22919439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Front Immunol. 2012 Aug 14;3:234. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00234. eCollection
2012.

The STAT5b Pathway Defect and Autoimmunity.

Kanai T(1), Jenks J, Nadeau KC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, School of
Medicine, Stanford University Stanford, CA, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b is a universal
transcription factor that plays key biological roles in allergic diseases,
immunodeficiencies, autoimmunities, cancers, hematological diseases, growth
disorders, and lung diseases. The identification of distinct pathological
manifestations of STAT5b deficiency in humans has highlighted the critical role
of the STAT5b pathway. Proper gene transcription at IL-2R a, FOXP3, Bcl-2, and
growth hormone (GH) associated loci are thought to be associated with normal
STAT5b transcriptional activity. These genes are thought to play important roles 
in allergy/autoimmunity, immunodeficiency, cancer/anemia, and growth,
respectively. The STAT5A and STAT5B genes are collocated on 17q11. Although these
two monomeric proteins exhibit peptide sequence similarities of >90%, it is known
through observations of STAT5b deficient subjects that STAT5a and STAT5b are not 
fully redundant in humans. Patients with STAT5b deficiency have decreased numbers
of regulatory CD4(+)CD25(high) T cell (Treg) despite their STAT5a levels being
normal. Prior studies on STAT5b deficient subjects have revealed immunological
aberrations associated with the following disease phenotype: modest lymphopenia
and decreased populations of Treg, <U+03B3>-d T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells.
Most subjects with STAT5b deficiency show severe eczema, and autoimmune disease
(juvenile idiopathic arthritis, autoimmune thyroiditis, idiopathic thrombocytic
purpura) which are thought to be associated with Treg dysfunction. We will review
the likely pathophysiological mechanisms associated with STAT5b deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3418548
PMID: 22912632  [PubMed]


209. Blood Cancer J. 2011 Nov;1(11):e40. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2011.39. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Analysis of genomic aberrations and gene expression profiling identifies novel
lesions and pathways in myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Rice KL, Lin X, Wolniak K, Ebert BL, Berkofsky-Fessler W, Buzzai M, Sun Y, Xi C, 
Elkin P, Levine R, Golub T, Gilliland DG, Crispino JD, Licht JD, Zhang W.

Polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis, are 
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) with distinct clinical features and are
associated with the JAK2V617F mutation. To identify genomic anomalies involved in
the pathogenesis of these disorders, we profiled 87 MPN patients using Affymetrix
250K single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Aberrations affecting chr9 were
the most frequently observed and included 9pLOH (n=16), trisomy 9 (n=6) and
amplifications of 9p13.3-23.3 (n=1), 9q33.1-34.13 (n=1) and 9q34.13 (n=6).
Patients with trisomy 9 were associated with elevated JAK2V617F mutant allele
burden, suggesting that gain of chr9 represents an alternative mechanism for
increasing JAK2V617F dosage. Gene expression profiling of patients with and
without chr9 abnormalities (+9, 9pLOH), identified genes potentially involved in 
disease pathogenesis including JAK2, STAT5B and MAPK14. We also observed
recurrent gains of 1p36.31-36.33 (n=6), 17q21.2-q21.31 (n=5) and 17q25.1-25.3
(n=5) and deletions affecting 18p11.31-11.32 (n=8). Combined SNP and gene
expression analysis identified aberrations affecting components of a
non-canonical PRC2 complex (EZH1, SUZ12 and JARID2) and genes comprising a 'HSC
signature' (MLLT3, SMARCA2 and PBX1). We show that NFIB, which is amplified in
7/87 MPN patients and upregulated in PV CD34+ cells, protects cells from
apoptosis induced by cytokine withdrawal.

PMCID: PMC3256752
PMID: 22829077  [PubMed]


210. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012 Sep;24(5):515-21. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835680c6.

Immune deficiency and autoimmunity.

Atkinson TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
patkinson@peds.uab.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an overview of the mechanisms of autoimmunity
associated with primary immunodeficiencies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Over the past several years, new concepts of the relationship
between primary immunodeficiencies and autoimmunity have developed that promise
to illuminate the mechanisms by which alterations in the same gene may
alternately, or sometimes concomitantly, lead to increased susceptibility to
infection and loss of self-tolerance. A common pathway in the process leading to 
autoimmunity involves gene defects that permit effector T-cell development in the
absence of sufficient regulatory T-cell function. Conversely, gene defects that
primarily lead to autoimmunity may impair host defense by neutralizing key
elements of immunity. The production of neutralizing antibodies against cytokines
comprises a newly recognized mechanism in which autoimmunity may lead to
immunodeficiency.
SUMMARY: Autoimmunity has long been known to be a part of the presenting symptoms
and clinical course of many primary immunodeficiencies. This review will provide 
an overview of the new concepts regarding the complex relationship between the
genetic immune deficiencies and autoimmunity. The mechanisms by which
immunodeficiency may lead to autoimmunity or, in some instances, by which
autoimmunity produces immunodeficiency can provide important insights into the
underlying pathogenic processes and ultimately better diagnosis and treatment for
the patient.

PMID: 22820513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3732-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00615-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
16.

The KRAB zinc finger protein RSL1 regulates sex- and tissue-specific promoter
methylation and dynamic hormone-responsive chromatin configuration.

Krebs CJ(1), Schultz DC, Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Over 400 Krüppel-associated box zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs) are encoded in
mammalian genomes. While KRAB-ZFPs strongly repress transcription in vitro,
little is known about their biological function or gene targets in vivo.
Regulator of sex limitation 1 (Rsl1), one of the first KRAB-Zfp genes assigned a 
physiological role, accentuates sex-biased liver gene expression, most
dramatically for mouse sex-limited protein (Slp), which provides an in vivo
reporter of KRAB-ZFP function. Slp is induced in males in the liver and kidney by
growth hormone (GH) and androgen, respectively. In the liver but not kidney, the 
Rsl1 genotype correlates with methylation of a CpG dinucleotide in the Slp
promoter that is demethylated at puberty. RSL1 binds 2 kb upstream of the Slp
promoter, both in vitro and in vivo, within an enhancer containing response
elements for STAT5b. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that
RSL1 recruits KAP1/TRIM28, the corepressor for KRAB action in vitro, to this
enhancer. Slp induction requires rapid cycling of STAT5b in chromatin.
Remarkably, RSL1 simultaneously binds adjacent to STAT5b with a reciprocal
binding pattern that limits hormonal response. These experiments demonstrate a
surprisingly dynamic interplay between a hormonal activator, STAT5b, and a
KRAB-ZFP repressor and provide unique insights into KRAB-ZFP epigenetic
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3430191
PMID: 22801370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040531. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Hwanggeumchal sorghum induces cell cycle arrest, and suppresses tumor growth and 
metastasis through Jak2/STAT pathways in breast cancer xenografts.

Park JH(1), Darvin P, Lim EJ, Joung YH, Hong DY, Park EU, Park SH, Choi SK, Moon 
ES, Cho BW, Park KD, Lee HK, Kim MJ, Park DS, Chung IM, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University Glocal Campus, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Cancer is one of the highly virulent diseases known to humankind with
a high mortality rate. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women
worldwide. Sorghum is a principal cereal food in many parts of the world, and is 
critical in folk medicine of Asia and Africa. In the present study, we analyzed
the effects of HSE in metastatic breast cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Preliminary studies conducted on MDA-MB 231 and
MCF-7 xenograft models showed tumor growth suppression by HSE. Western blotting
studies conducted both in vivo and in vitro to check the effect of HSE in
Jak/STAT pathways. Anti-metastatic effects of HSE were confirmed using both
MDA-MB 231 and MCF-7 metastatic animal models. These studies showed that HSE can 
modulate Jak/STAT pathways, and it hindered the STAT5b/IGF-1R and STAT3/VEGF
pathways not only by down-regulating the expression of these signal molecules and
but also by preventing their phosphorylation. The expression of angiogenic
factors like VEGF, VEGF-R2 and cell cycle regulators like cyclin D, cyclin E, and
pRb were found down-regulated by HSE. In addition, it also targets Brk, p53, and 
HIF-1a for anti-cancer effects. HSE induced G1 phase arrest and migration
inhibition in MDA-MB 231 cells. The metastasis of breast cancer to the lungs also
found blocked by HSE in the metastatic animal model.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Usage of HS as a dietary supplement is an inexpensive
natural cancer therapy, without any side effects. We strongly recommend the use
of HS as an edible therapeutic agent as it possesses tumor suppression, migration
inhibition, and anti-metastatic effects on breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3391253
PMID: 22792362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 10;424(4):669-74. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.162. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Over-expression of Stat5b confers protection against diabetes in the non-obese
diabetic (NOD) mice via up-regulation of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells.

Jin Y(1), Purohit S, Chen X, Yi B, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Georgia Health Sciences
University, GA 30912, USA.

The signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family of proteins 
play a critical role in cytokine signaling required for fine tuning of immune
regulation. Previous reports showed that a mutation (L327M) in the Stat5b protein
leads to aberrant cytokine signaling in the NOD mice. To further elaborate the
role of Stat5b in diabetes, we established a NOD transgenic mouse that
over-expresses the wild type Stat5b gene. The incidences of spontaneous diabetes 
as well as cyclophosphamide-induced diabetes were significantly reduced and
delayed in the Stat5b transgenic NOD mice compared to their littermate controls. 
The total cell numbers of CD4(+) T cells and especially CD8(+) T cells in the
spleen and pancreatic lymph node were increased in the Stat5b transgenic NOD
mice. Consistent with these findings, CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells from the Stat5b
transgenic NOD mice showed a higher proliferation capacity and up-regulation of
multiple cytokines including IL-2, IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a and IL-10 as well as
anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-xl. Furthermore, the number and proportion of
CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells were significantly increased in transgenic mice 
although in vitro suppression ability of the regulatory T-cells was not affected 
by the transgene. Our results suggest that Stat5b confers protection against
diabetes in the NOD mice by regulating the numbers and function of multiple
immune cell types, especially by up-regulating CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3990414
PMID: 22789848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Neuroendocrinol. 2012 Dec;24(12):1484-91. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2012.02357.x.

Prolactin signalling in the mouse hypothalamus is primarily mediated by signal
transducer and activator of transcription factor 5b but not 5a.

Yip SH(1), Eguchi R, Grattan DR, Bunn SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Centre for Neuroendocrinology, University of Otago,
Dunedin, New Zealand.

Prolactin acts at multiple targets throughout the body, including the mammary
gland, heart, liver, muscle and brain. Upon binding to its receptors, prolactin
signals through the phosphorylation and thus activation of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5). There are two very similar STAT5 isoforms, 
termed STAT5a and STAT5b, which are selectively activated by prolactin in
specific tissues. Various brain regions, including the hypothalamus, are
prolactin responsive, although the STAT5 isoform involved in these actions is
unknown. Immunohistochemical and western blot analysis were used to determine the
expression and activation of STAT5a and STAT5b throughout the hypothalamus in
adult wild-type and STAT5b-deficient mice. Both groups were pretreated with
bromocriptine to suppress endogenous prolactin levels followed by the
administration of ovine prolactin (10 mg/kg) for 45 min. STAT5a and STAT5b were
expressed throughout the hypothalamus of wild-type mice. As expected, only STAT5a
was detected in STAT5b-deficient mice, although, unexpectedly, there was a marked
reduction in its expression compared to wild-type mice. When stimulated with
prolactin, phosphorylated STAT5 was observed in the hypothalamus of wild-type but
not STAT5b-deficient mice. By contrast, phosphorylated STAT5 was detected in
mammary gland epithelial cells and adipocytes of STAT5b-deficient animals. Thus, 
although STAT5a was still expressed in the STAT5b-deficient mice, it was not
phosphorylated in the hypothalamus in response to prolactin. These observations
indicate that STAT5b but not STAT5a is the primary mediator of the action of
prolactin in the hypothalamus. Despite the similarity between the two STAT5
isoforms, STAT5a was unable to compensate for the absence of STAT5b, suggesting
that each isoform exhibits a unique biological activity.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neuroendocrinology © 2012 British Society for
Neuroendocrinology.

PMID: 22775396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;82(4):668-78. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

D2-dopaminergic receptor-linked pathways: critical regulators of CYP3A, CYP2C,
and CYP2D.

Daskalopoulos EP(1), Lang MA, Marselos M, Malliou F, Konstandi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Ioannina,
Ioannina, Greece.

Various hormonal and monoaminergic systems play determinant roles in the
regulation of several cytochromes P450 (P450s) in the liver. Growth hormone (GH),
prolactin, and insulin are involved in P450 regulation, and their release is
under dopaminergic control. This study focused on the role of D2-dopaminergic
systems in the regulation of the major drug-metabolizing P450s, i.e., CYP3A,
CYP2C, and CYP2D. Blockade of D2-dopaminergic receptors with either sulpiride
(SULP) or 4-(4-chlorophenyl)-1-(1H-indol-3-ylmethyl)piperidin-4-ol (L-741,626)
markedly down-regulated CYP3A1/2, CYP2C11, and CYP2D1 expression in rat liver.
This suppressive effect appeared to be mediated by the
insulin/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/FOXO1 signaling pathway. Furthermore,
inactivation of the GH/STAT5b signaling pathway appeared to play a role in
D2-dopaminergic receptor-mediated down-regulating effects on these P450s. SULP
suppressed plasma GH levels, with subsequently reduced activation of STAT5b,
which is the major GH pulse-activated transcription factor and has up-regulating 
effects on various P450s in hepatic tissue. Levels of prolactin, which exerts
down-regulating control on P450s, were increased by SULP, which may contribute to
SULP-mediated effects. Finally, it appears that SULP-induced inactivation of the 
cAMP/protein kinase A/cAMP-response element-binding protein signaling pathway,
which is a critical regulator of pregnane X receptor and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1a, and inactivation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase contribute to
SULP-induced down-regulation of the aforementioned P450s. Taken together, the
present data provide evidence that drugs acting as D2-dopaminergic receptor
antagonists might interfere with several major signaling pathways involved in the
regulation of CYP3A, CYP2C, and CYP2D, which are critical enzymes in drug
metabolism, thus affecting the effectiveness of the majority of prescribed drugs 
and the toxicity and carcinogenic potency of a plethora of toxicants and
carcinogens.

PMID: 22772593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jul;32(7):2885-93.

Enalapril-induced apoptosis of acute promyelocytic leukaemia cells involves
STAT5A.

Purclutepe O(1), Iskender G, Kiper HD, Tezcanli B, Selvi N, Avci CB, Kosova B,
Gokbulut AA, Sahin F, Baran Y, Saydam G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Ege University, Bornova, 
Izmir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: In this study, we aimed at evaluating the cytotoxic and apoptotic
effects of enalapril on human HL60 acute promyelocytic leukaemia cells and at
clarifying the roles of signal transducers and activator of transcription
proteins (STATs) on enalapril-induced cell death.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell viability and cytotoxicity tests were conducted by
Trypan blue dye exclusion and
2,3-Bis[2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulphophenyl]-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner
salt (XTT) assays, respectively. Apoptotic analyses were performed by the
AnnexinV-enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) staining method and by
fluorescence microscopy. Expression levels of STAT3, -5A and -5B genes were
analysed by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: The results showed that enalapril reduced viability and proliferation,
and induced apoptosis in HL60 cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner as
compared to untreated controls. The expression levels of STAT5A gene were
significantly reduced in enalapril-treated HL60 cells as compared to untreated
controls.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, all data showed for the first time that enalapril has
significant anticancer potential for the treatment of acute premyelocytic
leukaemia.

PMID: 22753752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jun;205(6):327-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.02.007.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with a STAT5b-RARa fusion transcript defined by
array-CGH, FISH, and RT-PCR.

Chen H(1), Pan J, Yao L, Wu L, Zhu J, Wang W, Liu C, Han Q, Du G, Cen J, Xue Y,
Wu D, Sun M, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Jingjiang People's Hospital, the Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou
University, Jiangsu Province, PR China.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the generation of the
PML-RARa fusion transcript as a result of a reciprocal chromosomal rearrangement,
t(15;17)(q22;q12), with breakpoints within the PML gene and the RARa gene. In a
small proportion of APL cases, RARa is fused with a number of alternative partner
genes. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 beta (STAT5b) is
one of the variant partners. Here, we describe one rare case with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) -unresponsive APL characterized by the STAT5b-RARa fusion
transcript. Morphology and immunophenotypic analyses indicated the typical
features of APL; however, cytogenetic analysis exhibited a normal karyotype, and 
importantly, results of interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis indicated that 
PML-RARa expression was negative. FISH analysis with the RARa dual-color
break-apart rearrangement probe indicated a submicroscopic deletion of the 3' end
of one RARA gene. Indeed, the STAT5b-RARa fusion transcript was found in this
case by array-based comparative genomic hybridization and nested RT-PCR. To the
best of our knowledge, we report here only the sixth APL patient in the world
with the STAT5b-RARa fusion transcript. Additional clinical studies concerning
the prognosis, response to therapy, and pathogenesis of APL patients with
STAT5b-RARa fusion are necessary.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. JAKSTAT. 2012 Jul 1;1(3):203-7. doi: 10.4161/jkst.21232.

Acetylation and sumoylation control STAT5 activation antagonistically.

Krämer OH(1), Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine; Institute for Biochemistry and Biophysics;
Department of Biochemistry; Friedrich Schiller University of Jena; Jena, Germany.

STAT5 proteins are activated by tyrosine phosphorylation, but recently further
post-translation modifications such as serine/threonine phosphorylation,
acetylation at lysine residues or sumoylation in close vicinity of the critical
tyrosine residue have been reported. Here, we discuss new findings on impaired
STAT5 signaling in lymphocytes isolated from a SUMO-specific protease knockout
mouse (SENP1(-/-)), which results in sumoylated STAT5 and abolishes tyrosine
phosphorylation. Van Nguyen and colleagues examined acetylation and sumoylation
of STAT5 and found that both modifications act antagonistically to control
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC3670247
PMID: 24058773  [PubMed]


219. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8484-98. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

NMDAR signaling facilitates the IPO5-mediated nuclear import of CPEB3.

Chao HW(1), Lai YT, Lu YL, Lin CL, Mai W, Huang YS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein (CPEB)3 is a
nucleocytoplasm-shuttling RNA-binding protein and predominantly resides in the
cytoplasm where it represses target RNA translation. When translocated into the
nucleus, CPEB3 binds to Stat5b and downregulates Stat5b-dependent transcription. 
In neurons, the activation of N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) accumulates
CPEB3 in the nucleus and redistributes CPEB3 in the nucleocytoplasmic
compartments to control gene expression. Nonetheless, it is unclear which
karyopherin drives the nuclear import of CPEB3 and which transport direction is
most affected by NMDA stimulation to increase the nuclear pool of CPEB3. Here, we
have identified that the karyopherins, IPO5 and CRM1, facilitate CPEB3
translocation by binding to RRM1 and a leucine-containing motif of CPEB3,
respectively. NMDAR signaling increases RanBP1 expression and reduces the level
of cytoplasmic GTP-bound Ran. These changes enhance CPEB3-IPO5 interaction, which
consequently accelerates the nuclear import of CPEB3. This study uncovers a novel
NMDA-regulated import pathway to facilitate the nuclear translocation of CPEB3.

PMCID: PMC3458550
PMID: 22730302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 1;132(3):509-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27690. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Nuclear EGFRvIII-STAT5b complex contributes to glioblastoma cell survival by
direct activation of the Bcl-XL promoter.

Latha K(1), Li M, Chumbalkar V, Gururaj A, Hwang Y, Dakeng S, Sawaya R, Aldape K,
Cavenee WK, Bogler O, Furnari FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, TX,
USA. klatha@mdanderson.org

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2015 Sep 15;137(6):E10-1.

Aberrant EGFR signaling strongly promotes glioma malignancy and treatment
resistance. The most prevalent mutation, <U+0394>EGFR/EGFRvIII, is an in-frame deletion 
of the extracellular domain, which occurs in more than 25% of glioblastomas and
enhances growth and survival of tumor cells. Paradoxically, the signaling of the 
potent oncogene <U+0394>EGFR is of low intensity, raising the question of whether it
exhibits preferential signaling to key downstream targets. We have observed
levels of phosphorylation of STAT5 at position Y699 in cells expressing <U+0394>EGFR
that are similar or higher than in cells that overexpress EGFR and are acutely
stimulated with EGF, prompting us to investigate the role of STAT5 activation in 
glioblastoma. Here, we show that in human glioblastoma samples, pSTAT5 levels
correlated positively with EGFR expression and were associated with reduced
survival. Interestingly, the activation of STAT5b downstream of <U+0394>EGFR was
dependent on SFKs, while the signal from acutely EGF-stimulated EGFR to STAT5b
involved other kinases. Phosphorylated STAT5b and <U+0394>EGFR associated in the
nucleus, bound DNA and were found on promoters known to be regulated by STAT5
including that of the Aurora A gene. <U+0394>EGFR cooperated with STAT5b to regulate the
Bcl-XL promoter and knockdown of STAT5b suppressed anchorage independent growth, 
reduced the levels of Bcl-XL and sensitized glioblastoma cells to cisplatin.
Together these results delineate a novel association of nuclear <U+0394>EGFR with
STAT5b, which promotes oncogenesis and treatment resistance in glioblastoma by
direct regulation of anti-apoptotic gene, Bcl-XL.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3802533
PMID: 22729867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Dairy Sci. 2012 Jul;95(7):3711-21. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4977.

Genetic merit for fertility traits in Holstein cows: III. Hepatic expression of
somatotropic axis genes during pregnancy and lactation.

Cummins SB(1), Waters SM, Evans AC, Lonergan P, Butler ST.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Moorepark,
Fermoy, Co. Cork, Ireland.

The objective of this study was to characterize the circulating concentrations of
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and the hepatic expression of key genes
regulating the somatotropic axis in cows divergent in genetic merit for fertility
traits but with similar genetic merit for milk production traits. A total of 11
cows with good genetic merit for fertility (Fert+) and 12 cows with poor genetic 
merit for fertility (Fert-) underwent liver biopsy by percutaneous punch
technique on d 20 (±6.7 d) prepartum and on d 2 (±1.5 d), d 58 (±3.7 d), d 145
(±13 d), and d 245 (±17.1 d) postpartum. Total RNA was isolated and the mRNA
expression of growth hormone receptor (GHR 1A and GHRtot), IGF-I, janus tyrosine 
kinase 2 (JAK2), signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B (STAT5B),
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS-3), acid-labile subunit (ALS), and
IGF-binding proteins (IGFBP1 to IGFBP6) were measured by real-time quantitative
PCR. During lactation, the circulating concentrations of IGF-I were 34% greater
in Fert+ cows. The Fert+ cows had increased mean expression of IGF-I mRNA during 
the study; however, the difference in IGF-I mRNA abundance between Fert+ and
Fert- cows was most pronounced at d 145 and 245. The expression of IGFBP3 and ALS
transcript was similar in Fert+ and Fert- cows for the duration of the study. The
Fert- cows, however, had greater expression of IGFBP2, IGFBP4, IGFBP5, and
IGFBP6. Genotype had no effect on mRNA abundance of GHR 1A, STAT5B, JAK2, or
SOCS-3. Genetic merit for fertility traits affects hepatic expression of key
genes of the somatotropic axis regulating the synthesis, bioavailability, and
stability of circulating IGF-I.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22720928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Endocrinology. 2012 Aug;153(8):3668-78. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1135. Epub 2012 Jun 
14.

The regulation of Rasd1 expression by glucocorticoids and prolactin controls
peripartum maternal insulin secretion.

Lellis-Santos C(1), Sakamoto LH, Bromati CR, Nogueira TC, Leite AR, Yamanaka TS, 
Kinote A, Anhê GF, Bordin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

The transition from gestation to lactation is characterized by a robust
adaptation of maternal pancreatic ß-cells. Consistent with the loss of ß-cell
mass, glucose-induced insulin secretion is down-regulated in the islets of early 
lactating dams. Extensive experimental evidence has demonstrated that the surge
of prolactin is responsible for the morphofunctional remodeling of the maternal
endocrine pancreas during pregnancy, but the precise molecular mechanisms by
which this phenotype is rapidly reversed after delivery are not completely
understood. This study investigated whether glucocorticoid-regulated expression
of Rasd1/Dexras, a small inhibitory G protein, is involved in this physiological 
plasticity. Immunofluorescent staining demonstrated that Rasd1 is localized
within pancreatic ß-cells. Rasd1 expression in insulin-secreting cells was
increased by dexamethasone and decreased by prolactin. In vivo data confirmed
that Rasd1 expression is decreased in islets from pregnant rats and increased in 
islets from lactating mothers. Knockdown of Rasd1 abolished the inhibitory
effects of dexamethasone on insulin secretion and the protein kinase A, protein
kinase C, and ERK1/2 pathways. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed
that glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b) cooperatively mediate glucocorticoid-induced Rasd1
expression in islets. Prolactin inhibited the stimulatory effect of GR/STAT5b
complex on Rasd1 transcription. Overall, our data indicate that the stimulation
of Rasd1 expression by glucocorticoid at the end of pregnancy reverses the
increased insulin secretion that occurs during pregnancy. Prolactin negatively
regulates this pathway by inhibiting GR/STAT5b transcriptional activity on the
Rasd1 gene.

PMID: 22700767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;77(5):320-33. doi: 10.1159/000338462. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Genetic analysis of short children with apparent growth hormone insensitivity.

Wit JM(1), van Duyvenvoorde HA, Scheltinga SA, de Bruin S, Hafkenscheid L, Kant
SG, Ruivenkamp CA, Gijsbers AC, van Doorn J, Feigerlova E, Noordam C, Walenkamp
MJ, Claahsen-van de Grinten H, Stouthart P, Bonapart IE, Pereira AM, Gosen J,
Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Hwa V, Breuning MH, Domené HM, Oostdijk W, Losekoot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In short children, a low IGF-I and normal GH secretion may be
associated with various monogenic causes, but their prevalence is unknown. We
aimed at testing GH1, GHR, STAT5B, IGF1, and IGFALS in children with GH
insensitivity.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Patients were divided into three groups: group 1 (height
SDS <-2.5, IGF-I <-2 SDS, n = 9), group 2 (height SDS -2.5 to -1.9, IGF-I <-2
SDS, n = 6) and group 3 (height SDS <-1.9, IGF-I -2 to 0 SDS, n = 21). An IGF-I
generation test was performed in 11 patients. Genomic DNA was used for direct
sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and whole-genome SNP
array analysis.
RESULTS: Three patients in group 1 had two novel heterozygous STAT5B mutations,
in two combined with novel IGFALS variants. In groups 2 and 3 the association
between genetic variants and short stature was uncertain. The IGF-I generation
test was not predictive for the growth response to GH treatment.
CONCLUSION: In severely short children with IGF-I deficiency, genetic assessment 
is advised. Heterozygous STAT5B mutations, with or without heterozygous IGFALS
defects, may be associated with GH insensitivity. In children with less severe
short stature or IGF-I deficiency, functional variants are rare.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22678306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Hematology. 2012 Mar;17(2):93-9. doi: 10.1179/102453312X13221316477859.

Methylprednisolone induces apoptosis by interacting with the JAK/STAT pathway in 
HL-60 and K-562 leukemic cells.

Kaymaz BT(1), Selvi N, Saydam G, Sahin F, Kosova B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey. burcin.tezcanli@ege.edu.tr

OBJECTIVE: To determine the gene expression profiles of the JAK/STAT pathway
members STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B at both mRNA and protein levels in HL-60 and K-562 
leukemia cells that were undergoing apoptosis following high-dose
methylprednisolone (MP) treatment.
METHODS: HL-60 cells were treated with 0.1 mM MP and K-562 cells were treated
with 0.4 mM MP according to their IC(50) values. STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B mRNA
relative expression levels were determined by qRT-PCR whereas the protein levels 
were detected via western-blot analysis and apoptosis was evaluated by Annexin V 
method.
RESULTS: A significant decrease was seen in STAT5A mRNA relative expression level
at 48 hours of MP treatment (P < 0.05) both in HL-60 and K-562 cells. Other STATs
showed a lower downregulation in their relative expressions at 48 hours at mRNA
level for both of the cell lines. STAT proteins showed no expression change in
K-562 cells in time course experiments but while STAT5A expression was
downregulated; STAT5B showed an increase at 96 hours in HL-60 cells. Apoptosis
was triggered by high-dose MP treatment that was evaluated by fluorescent
microscopy.
CONCLUSION: The JAK/STAT pathway components may play an important role in the
apoptosis mechanism of leukemic cells under MP treatment in HL-60 and K-562
cells. Other pathways may also be involved with a post-translational modification
seen in the HL-60 cell line, with both upregulation and downregulation of protein
expression levels of STAT5B and STAT5A, respectively.

PMID: 22664047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. FASEB J. 2012 Aug;26(8):3282-91. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-205583. Epub 2012 May 4.

SOCS2 deletion protects against hepatic steatosis but worsens insulin resistance 
in high-fat-diet-fed mice.

Zadjali F(1), Santana-Farre R, Vesterlund M, Carow B, Mirecki-Garrido M,
Hernandez-Hernandez I, Flodström-Tullberg M, Parini P, Rottenberg M, Norstedt G, 
Fernandez-Perez L, Flores-Morales A.

Author information: 
(1)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Hepatic steatosis is a prominent feature in patients with growth hormone (GH)
deficiency. The ubiquitin ligase SOCS2 attenuates hepatic GH signaling by
inhibiting the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b) axis. Here, we investigated the role of SOCS2 in the
development of diet-induced hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance.
SOCS2-knockout (SOCS2(-/-)) mice and wild-type littermates were fed for 4 mo with
control or high-fat diet, followed by assessment of insulin sensitivity, hepatic 
lipid content, and expression of inflammatory cytokines. SOCS2(-/-) mice
exhibited increased hepatic TG secretion by 77.6% (P<0.001) as compared with
wild-type control mice and were protected from high-fat-diet (HFD)-induced
hepatic steatosis, showing 49.3% (P<0.01) reduction in liver TG levels compared
to HFD-fed wild-type littermates. In contrast, we found that HFD-triggered
attenuation of systemic insulin sensitivity was more marked in SOCS2(-/-) mice.
Livers from the HFD-fed SOCS2(-/-) mice showed increased NF-<U+03BA>B activity as well
as elevated expression of genes for the inflammatory cytokines IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-6. An
inhibitory role of SOCS2 on Toll-like receptor 4 signaling was demonstrated in
macrophages obtained from the SOCS2(-/-) and wild-type mice. This study
identified SOCS2 as an important regulator of hepatic homeostasis under
conditions of high-fat dietary stress.

PMID: 22562833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jul;41(1):161-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1450. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Hypoxia upregulates Hsp90a expression via STAT5b in cancer cells.

Pak SH(1), Joung YH, Park JH, Lim EJ, Darvin P, Na YM, Hong DY, Lee B, Hwang TS, 
Park T, Ye SK, Moon ES, Cho BW, Park KD, Lee HK, Chung IM, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University Hospital, Seoul 143-701, Republic of
Korea.

Hsp90a is a molecular chaperone protein involved in the structural maturation of 
oncogenic signaling proteins. Hsp90 was recently identified as an anticancer
target; various studies are ongoing to find ways for managing cancer through
Hsp90a. However, this approach is limited by reported side-effects. Hypoxia is a 
hallmark of solid tumors, including those of breast cancer and the extent of
tumor hypoxia is associated with resistance to treatment and poor prognosis. One 
of the major signaling pathways in cancer cells, the Jak2/STAT5b pathway, has
been found to be closely correlated with hypoxia. The objective of this study was
to investigate the role of Jak2/STAT5b in the regulation of Hsp90a expression so 
that Hsp90a targeting can be achieved indirectly by modulating the Jak2/STAT5b
pathway. We examined the role of the Jak2/STAT5b pathway in the expression of
Hsp90a under hypoxic conditions by immunoblotting, reporter gene assays, EMSA and
RNA interference analysis. With the help of in vivo models, we also analyzed the 
expression of Hsp90a in different parts of solid tumor tissues. We found a close 
association between hypoxic stress and Hsp90a expression. We also determined that
STAT5b regulates the expression of Hsp90a during hypoxic stimulation. Under
hypoxic conditions the expression of Hsp90a and STAT5b were proportional. siRNA
analysis and nucleotide analysis showed that the promoter of Hsp90a has a STAT5b 
binding domain. Our work confirmed that STAT5b is one of the transcription
factors that regulate Hsp90a. We, therefore, concluded that under hypoxic
conditions, the Jak2/STAT5b pathway regulates Hsp90a expression and it could
serve as a promising target for the treatment of solid tumors.

PMID: 22552610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):7529-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1200650109. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

MicroRNA-200a serves a key role in the decline of progesterone receptor function 
leading to term and preterm labor.

Williams KC(1), Renthal NE, Condon JC, Gerard RD, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

During pregnancy, uterine quiescence is maintained by increased progesterone
receptor (PR) activity, but labor is facilitated by a series of events that
impair PR function. Previously, we discovered that miR-200 family members serve
as progesterone (P(4))-modulated activators of contraction-associated genes in
the pregnant uterus. In this study, we identified a unique role for miR-200a to
enhance the local metabolism of P(4) in myometrium and, thus, decrease PR
function during the progression toward labor. miR-200a exerts this action by
direct repression of STAT5b, a transcriptional repressor of the P(4)-metabolizing
enzyme 20a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20a-HSD). We observed that miR-200a
expression increased and STAT5b expression coordinately decreased in myometrium
of mice as they progressed to labor and in laboring myometrium from pregnant
women. These changes were associated with a dramatic increase in expression and
activity of 20a-HSD in laboring myometrium from mouse and human. Notably,
overexpression of miR-200a in cultured human myometrial cells (hTERT-HM)
suppressed STAT5b and increased 20a-HSD mRNA levels. In uterine tissues of
ovariectomized mice injected with P(4), miR-200 expression was significantly
decreased, STAT5b expression was up-regulated, and 20a-HSD mRNA was decreased,
but in 15 d postcoitum pregnant mice injected with the PR antagonist RU486,
preterm labor was associated with increased miR-200a, decreased STAT5b, and
enhanced 20a-HSD expression. Taken together, these findings implicate miR-200a as
an important regulator of increased local P(4) metabolism in the pregnant uterus 
near term and provide insight into the importance of miR-200s in the decline in
PR function leading to labor.

PMCID: PMC3358858
PMID: 22529366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Immunity. 2012 Apr 20;36(4):586-99. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.02.017.

Critical Role of STAT5 transcription factor tetramerization for cytokine
responses and normal immune function.

Lin JX(1), Li P, Liu D, Jin HT, He J, Ata Ur Rasheed M, Rochman Y, Wang L, Cui K,
Liu C, Kelsall BL, Ahmed R, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Apr 20;36(4):553-5.

Cytokine-activated STAT proteins dimerize and bind to high-affinity motifs, and
N-terminal domain-mediated oligomerization of dimers allows tetramer formation
and binding to low-affinity tandem motifs, but the functions of dimers versus
tetramers are unknown. We generated Stat5a-Stat5b double knockin (DKI) N-domain
mutant mice in which STAT5 proteins form dimers but not tetramers, identified
cytokine-regulated genes whose expression required STAT5 tetramers, and defined
dimer versus tetramer consensus motifs. Whereas Stat5-deficient mice exhibited
perinatal lethality, DKI mice were viable; thus, STAT5 dimers were sufficient for
survival. Nevertheless, STAT5 DKI mice had fewer CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells, NK cells,
and CD8(+) T cells, with impaired cytokine-induced and homeostatic proliferation 
of CD8(+) T cells. Moreover, DKI CD8(+) T cell proliferation after viral
infection was diminished and DKI Treg cells did not efficiently control colitis. 
Thus, tetramerization of STAT5 is critical for cytokine responses and normal
immune function, establishing a critical role for STAT5 tetramerization in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3551341
PMID: 22520852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Immunity. 2012 Apr 20;36(4):515-28. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.03.016.

Inborn errors of human JAKs and STATs.

Casanova JL(1), Holland SM, Notarangelo LD.

Author information: 
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, Rockefeller University Hospital, New York, NY
10065, USA. jean-laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu

Inborn errors of the genes encoding two of the four human JAKs (JAK3 and TYK2)
and three of the six human STATs (STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5B) have been described. 
We review the disorders arising from mutations in these five genes, highlighting 
the way in which the molecular and cellular pathogenesis of these conditions has 
been clarified by the discovery of inborn errors of cytokines, hormones, and
their receptors, including those interacting with JAKs and STATs. The phenotypic 
similarities between mice and humans lacking individual JAK-STAT components
suggest that the functions of JAKs and STATs are largely conserved in mammals.
However, a wide array of phenotypic differences has emerged between mice and
humans carrying biallelic null alleles of JAK3, TYK2, STAT1, or STAT5B. Moreover,
the high degree of allelic heterogeneity at the human JAK3, TYK2, STAT1, and
STAT3 loci has revealed highly diverse immunological and clinical phenotypes,
which had not been anticipated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3334867
PMID: 22520845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3374-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-406611.

Advancing the STATus of MPN pathogenesis.

Shah NP(1), Shannon K.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3550-60.
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3539-49.

In this issue of Blood, Yan et al and Walz et al exploit mouse genetics to
investigate the contribution of signal transducer and activator of transcription 
5 (STAT5) to the abnormal in vivo growth of hematopoietic cells expressing
JAK2(V617F) or BCR-ABL. Eliminating STAT5 expression had dramatic effects in both
contexts, and this new work and other recent studies support the therapeutic
potential of targeting pathways regulated by this important signaling molecule in
patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs).

PMID: 22500049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034467. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Dual anti-OX40/IL-2 therapy augments tumor immunotherapy via IL-2R-mediated
regulation of OX40 expression.

Redmond WL(1), Triplett T, Floyd K, Weinberg AD.

Author information: 
(1)Earle A. Chiles Research Institute, Providence Portland Medical Center,
Portland, Oregon, United States of America. william.redmond@providence.org

The provision of T cell co-stimulation via members of the TNFR super-family,
including OX40 (CD134) and 4-1BB (CD137), provides critical signals that promote 
T cell survival and differentiation. Recent studies have demonstrated that
ligation of OX40 can augment T cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity in pre-clinical 
models and more importantly, OX40 agonists are under clinical development for
cancer immunotherapy. OX40 is of particular interest as a therapeutic target as
it is not expressed on naïve T cells but rather, is transiently up-regulated
following TCR stimulation. Although TCR engagement is necessary for inducing OX40
expression, the downstream signals that regulate OX40 itself remain unclear. In
this study, we demonstrate that OX40 expression is regulated through a TCR and
common gamma chain cytokine-dependent signaling cascade that requires
JAK3-mediated activation of the downstream transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5.
Furthermore, combined treatment with an agonist anti-OX40 mAb and IL-2 augmented 
tumor immunotherapy against multiple tumor types. Dual therapy was also able to
restore the function of anergic tumor-reactive CD8 T cells in mice with long-term
well-established (>5 wks) tumors, leading to increased survival of the
tumor-bearing hosts. Together, these data reveal the ability of TCR/common gamma 
chain cytokine signaling to regulate OX40 expression and demonstrate a novel
means of augmenting cancer immunotherapy by providing dual anti-OX40/common gamma
chain cytokine-directed therapy.

PMCID: PMC3319580
PMID: 22496812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e33361. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033361. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Methylsulfonylmethane suppresses breast cancer growth by down-regulating STAT3
and STAT5b pathways.

Lim EJ(1), Hong DY, Park JH, Joung YH, Darvin P, Kim SY, Na YM, Hwang TS, Ye SK, 
Moon ES, Cho BW, Do Park K, Lee HK, Park T, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University Glocal Campus, Seoul, South Korea.

Breast cancer is the most aggressive form of all cancers, with high incidence and
mortality rates. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the
molecular mechanism by which methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) inhibits breast cancer
growth in mice xenografts. MSM is an organic sulfur-containing natural compound
without any toxicity. In this study, we demonstrated that MSM substantially
decreased the viability of human breast cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. 
MSM also suppressed the phosphorylation of STAT3, STAT5b, expression of IGF-1R,
HIF-1a, VEGF, BrK, and p-IGF-1R and inhibited triple-negative receptor expression
in receptor-positive cell lines. Moreover, MSM decreased the DNA-binding
activities of STAT5b and STAT3, to the target gene promoters in MDA-MB 231 or
co-transfected COS-7 cells. We confirmed that MSM significantly decreased the
relative luciferase activities indicating crosstalk between STAT5b/IGF-1R,
STAT5b/HSP90a, and STAT3/VEGF. To confirm these findings in vivo, xenografts were
established in Balb/c athymic nude mice with MDA-MB 231 cells and MSM was
administered for 30 days. Concurring to our in vitro analysis, these xenografts
showed decreased expression of STAT3, STAT5b, IGF-1R and VEGF. Through in vitro
and in vivo analysis, we confirmed that MSM can effectively regulate multiple
targets including STAT3/VEGF and STAT5b/IGF-1R. These are the major molecules
involved in tumor development, progression, and metastasis. Thus, we strongly
recommend the use of MSM as a trial drug for treating all types of breast cancers
including triple-negative cancers.

PMCID: PMC3317666
PMID: 22485142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16596-608. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.319756. Epub
2012 Mar 22.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) serine 193 is a
novel cytokine-induced phospho-regulatory site that is constitutively activated
in primary hematopoietic malignancies.

Mitra A(1), Ross JA, Rodriguez G, Nagy ZS, Wilson HL, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Border Biomedical Research Center, The
University of Texas, El Paso, Texas 79968, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) is a critical node
in the signaling network downstream of external (cytokines or growth factors) or 
internal (oncogenic tyrosine kinases) stimuli. Maximum transcriptional activation
of Stat5b requires both tyrosine and serine phosphorylation. Although the
mechanisms governing tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of Stat5b have been 
extensively studied, the role of serine phosphorylation remains to be fully
elucidated. Using mass spectrometry and phospho-specific antibodies, we
identified Ser-193 as a novel site of cytokine-induced phosphorylation within
human Stat5b. Stat5b Ser(P)-193 was detected in activated primary human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells or lymphoid cell lines in response to several 
<U+03B3> common (<U+03B3>c) cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-2, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15.
Kinetic and spatial analysis indicated that Stat5b Ser-193 phosphorylation was
rapid and transient and occurred in the cytoplasmic compartment of the cell prior
to Stat5b translocation to the nucleus. Moreover, inducible Stat5b Ser-193
phosphorylation was sensitive to inhibitors of mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR), whereas inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) induced
phosphorylation of Ser-193. Reconstitution assays in HEK293 cells in conjunction 
with site-directed mutagenesis, EMSA, and reporter assays indicated that
Ser(P)-193 is required for maximal Stat5b transcriptional activity. Indeed,
Stat5b Ser-193 was found constitutively phosphorylated in several lymphoid tumor 
cell lines as well as primary leukemia and lymphoma patient tumor cells. Taken
together, IL-2 family cytokines tightly control Stat5b Ser-193 phosphorylation
through a rapamycin-sensitive mechanism. Furthermore, constitutive Ser-193
phosphorylation is associated with Stat5b proto-oncogenic activity and therefore 
may serve as a novel therapeutic target for treating hematopoietic malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3351328
PMID: 22442148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2011 Sep;9 Suppl 1:538-40.

Diagnosis and management of disorders of IGF-I synthesis and action.

Wit JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.m.wit@lumc.nl

After a proper medical history, growth analysis and physical examination of a
short child, followed by radiological and laboratory screening, the clinician may
decide to perform genetic testing. We recently proposed several clinical
algorithms that can be used to establish the diagnosis. GH insensitivity (primary
IGF-I deficiency) can be caused by genetic defects in GHR, STAT5B, IGF1, IGFALS, 
which all have their specific clinical and biochemical characteristics. IGF-I
resistance is seen in heterozygous defects of IGF1R. If besides short stature
additional abnormalities are present, these should be matched with known
dysmorphic syndromes. If no obvious candidate gene can be determined, a whole
genome approach can be taken to check for deletions, duplications and/or
uniparental disomies (SNP-array) or whole exome sequencing. Children with GHR
defects, and presumably STAT5B and homozygous IGF1 defects, can be treated with
rhlGF-I. Children with IGF1R defects and mild or heterozygous IGF1 defects
respond to GH treatment.

PMID: 22423513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 May;97(5):E830-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2554. Epub
2012 Mar 14.

A novel missense mutation in the SH2 domain of the STAT5B gene results in a
transcriptionally inactive STAT5b associated with severe IGF-I deficiency, immune
dysfunction, and lack of pulmonary disease.

Scaglia PA(1), Martínez AS, Feigerlová E, Bezrodnik L, Gaillard MI, Di Giovanni
D, Ballerini MG, Jasper HG, Heinrich JJ, Fang P, Domené HM, Rosenfeld RG, Hwa V.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas (Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas), Ricardo Gutiérrez Children's Hospital,
1330 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

CONTEXT: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) deficiency,
first reported in a patient who carried a p.Ala630Pro missense mutation in the
Src homology 2 (SH2) domain, results in a rare clinical condition of GH
insensitivity (GHI), IGF-I deficiency (IGFD), and severe immune dysregulation
manifesting as progressive worsening of pulmonary function.
PATIENT: The new patient presented with severe cutaneous eczema, episodic
infections in the first years of life, and autoimmune thyroiditis. Immunological 
evaluation revealed T lymphopenia, but severe pulmonary symptoms were notably
absent. She concomitantly exhibited pronounced growth failure, reaching an adult 
height of 124.7 cm [-5.90 SD score (SDS)]. Endocrine evaluations (normal
provocative GH tests; low serum IGF-I, -3.7 SDS, and IGF-binding protein-3, -4.5 
SDS) were consistent with GHI and IGFD.
RESULTS: Analysis of the STAT5B gene revealed a novel homozygous missense
mutation, p.Phe646Ser, located within the ßD' strand of the SH2 domain.
Reconstitution studies demonstrated expression of the p.Phe646Ser variant was
less robust than wild type but, in contrast to the previously described STAT5B
p.Ala630Pro SH2 mutation, could be phosphorylated in response to GH and
interferon-<U+03B3>. The phosphorylated p.Phe646Ser, however, could not drive
transcription.
CONCLUSION: A novel STAT5B p.Phe646Ser mutation has been identified in a patient 
with clinical characteristics of STAT5b deficiency. Only the second STAT5B
missense mutation identified, its lack of transcriptional activities despite
GH-induced phosphorylation, confirms the crucial role of STAT5b for regulating
the expression of IGF1 and provides insights into the importance of the SH2 ßD'
strand for full STAT5b transcriptional activities. Whether the phosphorylated
p.Phe646Ser variant retained functions that prevented pulmonary distress remains 
unresolved.

PMID: 22419735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;23(4):186-93. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2012.01.001.
Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Mapping the growth hormone--Stat5b--IGF-I transcriptional circuit.

Rotwein P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA. rotweinp@ohsu.edu

Growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) exert powerful
influences on somatic growth, metabolism, and tissue repair, and have been
implicated in aging and carcinogenesis. Since the formulation of the somatomedin 
hypothesis over 50 years ago, GH and IGF-I have been linked intimately to one
another. Recent studies have established that GH potently stimulates IGF-I gene
transcription, and through this mechanism controls production of IGF-I. A key
mediator of the GH-IGF-I biosynthetic pathway is the latent transcription factor 
Stat5b. This review summarizes the potentially complex mechanistic relationship
between GH action, Stat5b, and IGF-I gene activation, and suggests that Stat5b
may have a broad role in mediating IGF-I gene regulation in response to diverse
physiological inputs.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3313013
PMID: 22361342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(9):2263-9.

Inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis by trimethoxyl stilbene
(TMS) in a lung cancer cell line.

Liu P(1), Wang X, Hu C, Hu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Chang-sha, Hunan, China.

Trimethoxyl stilbene (TMS) is a derivative of resveratrol, a compound shown to
inhibit development of a variety of tumor types. We aimed to evaluate the effect 
of TMS on cell proliferation and apoptosis in the A549 non-small cell lung cancer
cell line. Growth inhibition rate and colony formation was measured and apoptosis
was determined with Hoechst 33258 staining. Protein expression levels of
caspase-3, STAT3, STAT5b, JAK2, NF-<U+03BA>B, and I<U+03BA>B were examined by Western blotting.
Furthermore, localization of NF-<U+03BA>B protein was also explored. TMS inhibited
proliferation (IC50 8.6 µmol/L) and induced apoptosis of the cells in a
concentration-dependent manner., also inducing apoptosis accompanied by
up-regulated expression and cleavage activation of caspase-3, up-regulation of
I<U+03BA>B and down-regulation of NF<U+03BA>B, STAT3, STAT5b, and JAK2 signal transduction. TMS
has potential as a new drug for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer patients 
with anti-proliferation and apoptosis inducing effect of TMS to A549 cells
apparently related to its inhibitory effect on STATs and NF-<U+03BA>B signal
transduction. Up-regulation of caspase-3 further supports the potential clinical 
use of TMS for the treatment of non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22296367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Toxicology. 2012 Mar 11;293(1-3):68-77. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.12.012. Epub 2012
Jan 5.

Alterations in c-Src/HER1 and estrogen receptor a signaling pathways in mammary
gland and tumors of hexachlorobenzene-treated rats.

Peña D(1), Pontillo C, García MA, Cocca C, Alvarez L, Chiappini F, Bourguignon N,
Frahm I, Bergoc R, Kleiman de Pisarev D, Randi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Efectos Biológicos de Contaminantes Ambientales, Departamento
de Bioquímica Humana, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) is an organochlorine pesticide that acts as an endocrine 
disruptor in humans and rodents. The development of breast cancer strongly
depends on endocrine conditions modulated by environmental factors. We have
demonstrated that HCB is a tumor co-carcinogen in rats and an inducer of
proliferation in MCF-7 cells, in an estrogen receptor a (ERa)-dependent manner,
and of migration in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. In the present study, we 
examined HCB effect on c-Src/human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER1) and
ERa signaling pathways in mammary glands and in N-nitroso-N-methylurea
(NMU)-induced mammary tumors in rats. Furthermore, we evaluated histopathological
changes and serum hormone levels. Rats were separated into four groups: control, 
HCB (100 mg/kg b.w.), NMU (50 mg/kg b.w.) and NMU-HCB. Our data show that HCB
increases c-Src and HER1 activation, c-Src/HER1 association, and Y699-STAT5b and 
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in mammary glands. HCB also enhances Y537-ERa
phosphorylation and ERa/c-Src physical interaction. In tumors, HCB also induces
c-Src and HER1 activation, c-Src/HER1 association, as well as T308-Akt and
Y699-STAT5b phosphorylation. In addition, the pesticide increases ERa protein
content and decreases p-Y537-ERa levels and ERa/c-Src association in tumors. HCB 
increases serum 17-beta estradiol and prolactin contents and decreases
progesterone, FSH and LH levels in rats without tumors, while the opposite effect
was observed in rats with tumors. Taken together, our results indicate that HCB
induces an estrogenic effect in mammary gland, increasing c-Src/HER1 and ERa
signaling pathways. HCB stimulates c-Src/HER1 pathway, but decreases ERa activity
in tumors, appearing to shift them towards a higher malignancy phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3550-60. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-397554. Epub 2012 
Jan 10.

Essential role for Stat5a/b in myeloproliferative neoplasms induced by BCR-ABL1
and JAK2(V617F) in mice.

Walz C(1), Ahmed W, Lazarides K, Betancur M, Patel N, Hennighausen L, Zaleskas
VM, Van Etten RA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Apr 12;119(15):3374-6.

STAT5 proteins are constitutively activated in malignant cells from many patients
with leukemia, including the myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) chronic myeloid 
leukemia (CML) and polycythemia vera (PV), but whether STAT5 is essential for the
pathogenesis of these diseases is not known. In the present study, we used mice
with a conditional null mutation in the Stat5a/b gene locus to determine the
requirement for STAT5 in MPNs induced by BCR-ABL1 and JAK2(V617F) in retroviral
transplantation models of CML and PV. Loss of one Stat5a/b allele resulted in a
decrease in BCR-ABL1-induced CML-like MPN and the appearance of B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, whereas complete deletion of Stat5a/b prevented the
development of leukemia in primary recipients. However, BCR-ABL1 was expressed
and active in Stat5-null leukemic stem cells, and Stat5 deletion did not prevent 
progression to lymphoid blast crisis or abolish established B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. JAK2(V617F) failed to induce polycythemia in recipients
after deletion of Stat5a/b, although the loss of STAT5 did not prevent the
development of myelofibrosis. These results demonstrate that STAT5a/b is
essential for the induction of CML-like leukemia by BCR-ABL1 and of polycythemia 
by JAK2(V617F), and validate STAT5a/b and the genes they regulate as targets for 
therapy in these MPNs.

PMCID: PMC3325042
PMID: 22234689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012 Apr;166(4):743-52. doi: 10.1530/EJE-11-0774. Epub 2012 Jan
3.

A mosaic de novo duplication of 17q21-25 is associated with GH insensitivity,
disturbed in vitro CD28-mediated signaling, and decreased STAT5B, PI3K, and NF-<U+03BA>B
activation.

Mul D(1), Wu S, de Paus RA, Oostdijk W, Lankester AC, Duyvenvoorde HA, Ruivenkamp
CA, Losekoot M, Tol MJ, De Luca F, van de Vosse E, Wit JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: The established causes of GH insensitivity include defects of the GH
receptor and STAT5B. The latter condition is also characterized by severe
immunodeficiency. A recent case with short stature, GH resistance, and
immunodeficiency due to an I<U+03BA>B mutation suggests that the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway may
interact with STAT5B signaling.
DESIGN: Here, we present a case of a short child with several congenital
anomalies as well as GH insensitivity and mild immunodeficiency associated with a
mosaic de novo duplication of chromosome 17q21-25, suggesting that overexpression
of one of the duplicated genes may be implicated in GH resistance.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In vitro studies on blood lymphocytes showed disturbed
signaling of the CD28 pathway, involving NF-<U+03BA>B and related proteins. Functional
studies on cultured skin fibroblasts revealed that NF-<U+03BA>B activation, PI3K
activity, and STAT5 phosphorylation in response to GH were suppressed, while the 
sensitivity to GH in terms of MAPK phosphorylation was increased. An in silico
analysis of the duplicated genes showed that MAP3K3 and PRKCA are associated with
the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Baseline MAP3K3 expression in T-cell blasts (TCBs) was normal,
but PRKCA expression in TCBs and fibroblasts was significantly higher than that
in control cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the 17q21-25 duplication is associated with GH
insensitivity and disturbed STAT5B, PI3K, and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, possibly due to
PRKCA mRNA overexpression.

PMID: 22214923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(4):2345-7. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-0147-y. Epub 2011 Dec
29.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia associated with the PLZF-RARA fusion gene: two
additional cases with clinical and laboratorial peculiar presentations.

Rohr SS(1), Pelloso LA, Borgo A, De Nadai LC, Yamamoto M, Rego EM, de Lourdes L F
Chauffaille M.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Hematologia e Hemoterapia, UNIFESP, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 740-3.andar, São Paulo, SP, CEP 
04023-900, Brazil. sandra.rohr@gmail.com

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the presence of the
t(15;17) and PML-RARa rearrangement, with good response to treatment with
retinoids. However, few cases of variant APL involving alternative chromosomal
aberrations have been reported, including t(11;17)(q23;q21) (Wells et al. in Nat 
Genet 17:109-113, 1; Arnould et al. in Hum Mol Genet 8:1741-1749, 2)
t(5;17)(q35;q12-21), t(11;17)(q13;q21) (Grimwade et al in Blood 96:1297-1308, 3) 
and der(17) (Rego et al. in Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts)114:Abstract 6,
4), whereby RARa is fused to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA, and STAT5b genes, respectively,
have been described. These cases are characterized by distinct morphology,
clinical presentation, and in respect to PLZF, a lack of differentiation response
to retinoids leading to the need of different approaches concerning diagnostic
methods and therapeutics. This paper describes two cases of APL associated with
the PLZF-RARA fusion gene enrolled in the IC-APL trial that is a non-randomized, 
multicenter study conducted in Brazil, Mexico, Chile and Uruguay with the aim to 
improve the treatment outcome of APL patients in developing countries. These
cases, although rare, offer a challenge to its early recognition and proper
conduction.

PMID: 22205181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 24;287(9):6668-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.271346. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Heparanase induces signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
protein phosphorylation: preclinical and clinical significance in head and neck
cancer.

Cohen-Kaplan V(1), Jrbashyan J, Yanir Y, Naroditsky I, Ben-Izhak O, Ilan N,
Doweck I, Vlodavsky I.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Vascular Biology Research Center, Bruce Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine, Technion, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Activity of heparanase is implicated strongly in dissemination of metastatic
tumor cells and cells of the immune system. In addition, heparanase enhances the 
phosphorylation of selected signaling molecules, including SRC and EGFR, in a
manner that requires secretion but not enzymatic activity of heparanase and is
mediated by its C-terminal domain. Clinically, heparanase staining is associated 
with larger tumors and increased EGFR phosphorylation in head and neck carcinoma.
We hypothesized that signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins mediate the protumorigenic function of heparanase downstream of the
EGFR. We provide evidence that heparanase enhances the phosphorylation of STAT3
and STAT5b but not STAT5a. Moreover, enhanced proliferation of heparanase
transfected cells was attenuated by STAT3 and STAT5b siRNA, but not STAT5a or
STAT1 siRNA. Clinically, STAT3 phosphorylation was associated with head and neck 
cancer progression, EGFR phosphorylation, and heparanase expression and cellular 
localization. Notably, cytoplasmic rather than nuclear phospho-STAT3 correlated
with increased tumor size (T-stage; p = 0.007), number of metastatic neck lymph
nodes (p = 0.05), and reduced survival of patients (p = 0.04).

PMCID: PMC3307274
PMID: 22194600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Mar 1;302(5):C804-20. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00379.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Nongenomic STAT5-dependent effects on Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum
structure and function.

Lee JE(1), Yang YM, Liang FX, Gough DJ, Levy DE, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595,
USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 May;302(10):C1568.

We report unexpected nongenomic functions of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 5 species in the cytoplasm aimed at preserving the structure
and function of the Golgi apparatus and rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in
vascular cells. Immunoimaging and green fluorescent protein-tagged-STAT5a protein
localization studies showed the constitutive association of nonphosphorylated
STAT5a, and to a lesser extent STAT5b, with the Golgi apparatus and of STAT5a
with centrosomes in human pulmonary arterial endothelial and smooth muscle cells.
Acute knockdown of STAT5a/b species using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs),
including in the presence of an mRNA synthesis inhibitor
(5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole), produced a dramatic phenotype
within 1 day, consisting of dilatation and fragmentation of Golgi cisternae, a
marked tubule-to-cyst change in the ER, increased accumulation of reticulon-4
(RTN4)/Nogo-B and atlastin-3 (ATL3) at cyst-zone boundaries, cystic separation of
the outer and inner nuclear membranes, accompanied by scalloped/lunate distortion
of the nucleus, with accumulation of RTN4 on convex sides of distorted nuclei.
These cells showed inhibition of vesicular stomatitis virus G protein
glycoprotein trafficking, mitochondrial fragmentation, and reduced mitochondrial 
function. STAT5a/b(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts also showed altered ER/Golgi
dynamics. RTN4 knockdown using siRNA did not affect development of the cystic
phenotype; ATL3 siRNA led to effacement of cyst-zone boundaries. In magnetic-bead
cross-immunopanning assays, ATL3 bound both STAT5a and STAT5b. Remarkably, this
novel cystic ER/lunate nucleus phenotype was characteristic of vascular cells in 
arterial lesions of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension, an unrelentingly fatal
human disease. These data provide evidence of a STAT-family protein regulating
the structure of a cytoplasmic organelle and implicate this mechanism in the
pathogenesis of a human disease.

PMCID: PMC3311300
PMID: 22159083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. BMC Cancer. 2011 Dec 9;11:512. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-512.

Regulation of hTERT by BCR-ABL at multiple levels in K562 cells.

Chai JH(1), Zhang Y, Tan WH, Chng WJ, Li B, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, 117597 Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: The cytogenetic characteristic of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is
the formation of the Philadelphia chromosome gene product, BCR-ABL. Given that
BCR-ABL is the specific target of Gleevec in CML treatment, we investigated the
regulation of the catalytic component of telomerase, hTERT, by BCR-ABL at
multiple levels in K562 cells.
METHODS: Molecular techniques such as over expression, knockdown, real-time PCR, 
immunoprecipitation, western blotting, reporter assay, confocal microscopy,
telomerase assays and microarray were used to suggest that hTERT expression and
activity is modulated by BCR-ABL at multiple levels.
RESULTS: Our results suggest that BCR-ABL plays an important role in regulating
hTERT in K562 (BCR-ABL positive human leukemia) cells. When Gleevec inhibited the
tyrosine kinase activity of BCR-ABL, phosphorylation of hTERT was downregulated, 
therefore suggesting a positive correlation between BCR-ABL and hTERT. Gleevec
treatment inhibited hTERT at mRNA level and significantly reduced telomerase
activity (TA) in K562 cells, but not in HL60 or Jurkat cells (BCR-ABL negative
cells). We also demonstrated that the transcription factor STAT5a plays a
critical role in hTERT gene regulation in K562 cells. Knockdown of STAT5a, but
not STAT5b, resulted in a marked downregulation of hTERT mRNA level, TA and hTERT
protein level in K562 cells. Furthermore, translocation of hTERT from nucleoli to
nucleoplasm was observed in K562 cells induced by Gleevec.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal that BCR-ABL can regulate TA at multiple levels,
including transcription, post-translational level, and proper localization. Thus,
suppression of cell growth and induction of apoptosis by Gleevec treatment may be
partially due to TA inhibition. Additionally, we have identified STAT5a as
critical mediator of the hTERT gene expression in BCR-ABL positive CML cells,
suggesting that targeting STAT5a may be a promising therapeutic strategy for
BCR-ABL positive CML patients.

PMCID: PMC3259104
PMID: 22151181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 13;287(3):2045-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.311142. Epub 2011 
Nov 30.

Novel mechanism for Fc{epsilon}RI-mediated signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) tyrosine phosphorylation and the selective influence of
STAT5B over mast cell cytokine production.

Pullen NA(1), Barnstein BO, Falanga YT, Wang Z, Suzuki R, Tamang TD, Khurana MC, 
Harry EA, Draber P, Bunting KD, Mizuno K, Wilson BS, Ryan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
23284, USA.

Previous studies indicate that STAT5 expression is required for mast cell
development, survival, and IgE-mediated function. STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation 
is swiftly and transiently induced by activation of the high affinity IgE
receptor, FceRI. However, the mechanism for this mode of activation remains
unknown. In this study we observed that STAT5 co-localizes with FceRI in
antigen-stimulated mast cells. This localization was supported by cholesterol
depletion of membranes, which ablated STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation. Through the
use of various pharmacological inhibitors and murine knock-out models, we found
that IgE-mediated STAT5 activation is dependent upon Fyn kinase, independent of
Syk, PI3K, Akt, Bruton's tyrosine kinase, and JAK2, and enhanced in the context
of Lyn kinase deficiency. STAT5 immunoprecipitation revealed that
unphosphorylated protein preassociates with Fyn and that this association
diminishes significantly during mast cell activation. SHP-1 tyrosine phosphatase 
deficiency modestly enhanced STAT5 phosphorylation. This effect was more apparent
in the absence of Gab2, a scaffolding protein that docks with multiple negative
regulators, including SHP-1, SHP-2, and Lyn. Targeting of STAT5A or B with
specific siRNA pools revealed that IgE-mediated mast cell cytokine production is 
selectively dependent upon the STAT5B isoform. Altogether, these data implicate
Fyn as the major positive mediator of STAT5 after FceRI engagement and
demonstrate importantly distinct roles for STAT5A and STAT5B in mast cell
function.

PMCID: PMC3265884
PMID: 22130676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026674. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Suppressor of cytokine signalling-6 promotes neurite outgrowth via
JAK2/STAT5-mediated signalling pathway, involving negative feedback inhibition.

Gupta S(1), Mishra K, Surolia A, Banerjee K.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New
Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS) protein family are key
regulators of cellular responses to cytokines and play an important role in the
nervous system. The SOCS6 protein, a less extensively studied SOCS family member,
has been shown to induce insulin resistance in the retina and promote survival of
the retinal neurons. But no reports are available about the role of SOCS6 in
neuritogenesis. In this study, we examined the role of SOCS6 in neurite outgrowth
and neuronal cell signalling.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The effect of SOCS6 in neural stem cells
differentiation was studied in neural stem cells and PC12 cell line. Highly
elevated levels of SOCS6 were found upon neural cell differentiation both at the 
mRNA and protein level. Furthermore, SOCS6 over-expression lead to increase in
neurite outgrowth and degree of branching, whereas SOCS6 knockdown with specific 
siRNAs, lead to a significant decrease in neurite initiation and extension.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) stimulation which enhanced neurite outgrowth
of neural cells resulted in further enhancement of SOCS6 expression. Jak/Stat
(Janus Kinase/Signal Transducer And Activator Of Transcription) pathway was found
to be involved in the SOCS6 mediated neurite outgrowth. Bioinformatics study
revealed presence of putative Stat binding sites in the SOCS6 promoter region.
Transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b were involved in SOCS6 gene upregulation 
leading to neuronal differentiation. Following differentiation, SOCS6 was found
to form a ternary complex with IGFR (Insulin Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor) and
JAK2 which acted in a negative feedback loop to inhibit pStat5 activation.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The current paradigm for the first time states that
SOCS6, a SOCS family member, plays an important role in the process of neuronal
differentiation. These findings define a novel molecular mechanism for Jak2/Stat5
mediated SOCS6 signalling.

PMCID: PMC3219632
PMID: 22125600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Feb;62(2):705-14. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.11.007. 
Epub 2011 Nov 25.

Molecular and cell signaling targets for PTSD pathophysiology and
pharmacotherapy.

Hauger RL(1), Olivares-Reyes JA, Dautzenberg FM, Lohr JB, Braun S, Oakley RH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Stress and Mental Health, VA Healthcare System, 3350 
La Jolla Village Drive, San Diego, CA 92161, USA. rhauger@ucsd.edu

The reasons for differences in vulnerability or resilience to the development of 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are unclear. Here we review key genetic
diatheses and molecular targets especially signaling pathways that mediate
responses to trauma and severe stress and their potential contribution to the
etiology of PTSD. Sensitization of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signaling and
dysregulation of GR modulators FKBP5, STAT5B, Bcl-2, and Bax have been implicated
in PTSD pathophysiology. Furthermore, Akt, NF<U+03BA>B, MKP-1, and p11, which are G
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) pathway molecules, can promote or prevent
sustained high anxiety- and depressive-like behavior following severe stress.
Agonist-induced activation of the corticotropin releasing factor CRF(1) receptor 
is crucial for survival in the context of serious danger or trauma, but
persistent CRF(1) receptor hypersignaling when a threatening or traumatic
situation is no longer present is maladaptive. CRF(1) receptor single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) can confer susceptibility or resilience to childhood trauma 
while a SNP for the PAC1 receptor, another class B1 GPCR, has been linked
genetically to PTSD. GRK3 phosphorylation of the CRF(1) receptor protein and
subsequent binding of ßarrestin2 rapidly terminate Gs-coupled CRF(1) receptor
signaling by homologous desensitization. A deficient GRK-ßarrestin2 mechanism
would result in excessive CRF(1) receptor signaling thereby contributing to PTSD 
and co-morbid posttraumatic depression. Clinical trials are needed to assess if
small molecule CRF(1) receptor antagonists are effective prophylactic agents when
administered immediately after trauma. ßarrestin2-biased agonists for CRF
receptors and possibly other GPCRs implicated in PTSD, however, may prove to be
novel pharmacotherapy with greater selectivity and therapeutic efficacy. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder'.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3545643
PMID: 22122881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Feb;52(2):155-66. doi: 10.1002/mc.21841. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

JAK/STAT/SOCS-signaling pathway and colon and rectal cancer.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Kadlubar SA, Bondurant KL, Wolff RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway is involved in immune function and cell growth. We evaluated
the association between genetic variation in JAK1 (10 SNPs), JAK2 (9 SNPs), TYK2 
(5 SNPs), suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 (2 SNPs), SOCS2 (2 SNPs),
STAT1 (16 SNPs), STAT2 (2 SNPs), STAT3 (6 SNPs), STAT4 (21 SNPs), STAT5A (2
SNPs), STAT5B (3 SNPs), STAT6 (4 SNPs) with risk of colorectal cancer. We used
data from population-based case-control studies (colon cancer n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1555 cases,
1,956 controls; rectal cancer n<U+2009>=<U+2009>754 cases, 959 controls). JAK2, SOCS2, STAT1,
STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6 were associated with colon cancer; STAT3, STAT4,
STAT6, and TYK2 were associated with rectal cancer. Given the biological role of 
the JAK/STAT-signaling pathway and cytokines, we evaluated interaction with IFNG,
TNF, and IL6; numerous statistically significant associations after adjustment
for multiple comparisons were observed. The following statistically significant
interactions were observed: TYK2 with aspirin/NSAID use; STAT1, STAT4, and TYK2
with estrogen status; and JAK2, STAT2, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6 with
smoking status and colon cancer risk; JAK2, STAT6, and TYK2 with aspirin/NSAID
use; JAK1 with estrogen status; STAT2 with cigarette smoking and rectal cancer.
JAK2, SOCS1, STAT3, STAT5, and TYK2 were associated with colon cancer survival
(hazard rate ratio (HRR) of 3.3 95% CI 2.01,5.42 for high mutational load). JAK2,
SOCS1, STAT1, STAT4, and TYK2 were associated with rectal cancer survival (HRR
2.80 95% CI 1.63,4.80). These data support the importance of the
JAK/STAT-signaling pathway in colorectal cancer and suggest targets for
intervention.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3430812
PMID: 22121102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;18(1):127-39. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1889.
Epub 2011 Nov 16.

STAT5A-mediated SOCS2 expression regulates Jak2 and STAT3 activity following
c-Src inhibition in head and neck squamous carcinoma.

Sen B(1), Peng S, Woods DM, Wistuba I, Bell D, El-Naggar AK, Lai SY, Johnson FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: The inhibition of c-Src results in a striking reduction in cancer cell
invasion, but the effect on cell survival is modest. Defining mechanisms that
limit apoptosis following c-Src inhibition could result in an ideal therapeutic
approach that both inhibits invasion and leads to apoptosis. In this regard, we
discovered a novel feedback loop that results in STAT3 reactivation following
sustained c-Src inhibition. Here we define the mechanism underlying this feedback
loop and examine the effect of inhibiting it in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We measured levels and activity of pathway components using 
PCR, Western blotting, and kinase assays following their manipulation using both 
molecular and pharmacologic approaches. We used a heterotransplant animal model
in which human oral squamous cancer is maintained exclusively in vivo.
RESULTS: Following c-Src inhibition, STAT5 is durably inhibited. The inhibition
of STAT5A, but not STAT5B, subsequently reduces the expression of suppressors of 
cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2). SOCS2 inhibits Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) activity and
Jak2-STAT3 binding. SOCS2 expression is necessary for STAT3 inhibition by c-Src
inhibitors. Overexpression of SOCS2 is adequate to prevent STAT3 reactivation and
to enhance the cytotoxic effects of c-Src inhibition. Likewise, the combination
of Jak and c-Src inhibitors led to significantly more apoptosis than either agent
alone in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, ours is the first study that fully defines the
mechanism underlying this feedback loop, in which sustained c-Src inhibition
leads to diminished SOCS2 expression via sustained inhibition of STAT5A, allowing
activation of Jak2 and STAT3, Jak2-STAT3 binding, and survival signals.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3251692
PMID: 22090359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2011 Nov 1;8(2):471-8. doi: 10.1515/HMBCI.2011.125.

Liver X receptor agonist downregulates growth hormone signaling in the liver.

Zadjali F, Santana-Farre R, Mirecki-Garrido M, Ellis E, Norstedt G,
Fernandez-Perez L, Flores-Morales A.

Liver X receptor (LXR) agonists have been shown to influence the development of
hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis in mouse models. It has also been demonstrated
that some LXR agonists can cause hepatic steatosis in experimental animals.
Growth hormone (GH) is known to regulate hepatic metabolism and the absence of
hepatic GH receptors (GHR) leads to hepatic steatosis. In this study, we analyzed
whether the actions of LXR agonists could involve interference with GH signaling.
We showed that LXR agonists impair GH signaling in hepatocytes. LXR agonist
treatment attenuated GH induction of suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2), 
SOCS3, and CIS mRNA levels in BRL-4 cells. Likewise, the activity of a luciferase
reporter vector driven by the GH response element (GHRE) of the SOCS2 gene was
inhibited by simultaneous treatment with an LXR agonist. The inhibitory effect of
LXR agonists on GH signals can be mimicked by overexpression of the LXR regulated
factors, sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP1) and SREBP2, in
hepatic cells. In both cases total and phosphorylated signal transducers and
activators of transcription 5b (STAT5b) protein levels were significantly
reduced. DNA binding assays demonstrated that SREBP1 binds to an E-box within a
previously defined GHRE in the SOCS2 gene promoter, but does not compete with
STAT5b binding to a nearby site in the same promoter construct. Taken together,
our findings indicate that the inhibitory effects of LXR agonists on GH signaling
are mediated by SREBP1, through the downregulation of STAT5b gene transcription
and stimulation of STAT5b protein degradation. The findings provide a new insight
into the understanding of the molecular actions of LXR agonists, which may be of 
relevance to their pharmacological actions.

PMID: 25961345  [PubMed]


251. Hum Immunol. 2011 Dec;72(12):1204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.10.002. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The CREM gene is involved in genetic predisposition to inflammatory bowel disease
in the Tunisian population.

Bouzid D(1), Fourati H, Amouri A, Marques I, Abida O, Haddouk S, Ben Ayed M,
Tahri N, Penha-Gonçalves C, Masmoudi H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Medicine School and Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia. dorra-ing@voila.fr

The identification of susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is key to understanding pathogenic mechanisms. Recently, the results of genetic
association studies have highlighted many loci that are shared among several
autoimmune diseases. We aimed to study the genetic epidemiology of polymorphisms 
in specific genes previously associated with other autoimmune diseases, namely
the CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes. Twelve polymorphisms in the
CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes were genotyped in a cohort of 107 IBD
patients (39 Crohn's disease [CD] and 68 ulcerative colitis [UC]) and 162
controls from southern Tunisia. One CREM single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
displayed evidence for genetic association with IBD (p=8.7×10(-4), odds ratio
[OR]=2.84 [1.58; 5.09]). One STAT4 SNP (p=0.026; OR=1.65 [1.06; 2.58]) exhibited 
a marginal association with UC but not with CD. No significant association was
observed with the SNPs in STAT5a, IRF5, and STAT5b. These results suggest that
common variants of the CREM gene are involved in the genetic component conferring
general susceptibility to IBD, whereas STAT4 appears to be more specifically
associated with UC. This work provides motivation for studies aiming to replicate
these findings in larger populations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22019623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Jan;69(1):49-58. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0838-8. Epub
2011 Oct 9.

Genetic disorders with immune dysregulation.

Gambineri E(1), Torgerson TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Woman and Child's Health, Anna Meyer Children's
Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

We summarize the clinical presentation and molecular basis of a unique group of
congenital immunodeficiency disorders in which defects in immune tolerance
mechanisms result in severe autoimmunity. Patients with severe, familial forms of
multi-organ autoimmunity have been recognized and clinically described for more
than 40 years (Clin Exp Immunol 1: 119-128, 1966; Clin Exp Immunol 2: 19-30,
1967). Some are characterized primarily by autoimmunity and others by
autoimmunity combined with susceptibility to specific infectious organisms. The
first mechanistic understanding of these disorders began to emerge approximately 
10 years ago with the initial identification of causative genes. As a result, our
understanding of how immune tolerance is established and maintained in humans has
expanded dramatically. Data generated over the last 3-4 years including
identification of additional gene defects and functional characterization of each
identified gene product in human and animal models have added clarity. This, in
turn, has improved our ability to diagnose and effectively treat these severe,
life-threatening disorders. Inherited disorders characterized by immune
dysregulation have dramatically expanded our understanding of immune tolerance
mechanisms in humans. Recognition and diagnosis of these disorders in the clinic 
allows timely initiation of life-saving therapies that may prevent death or
irreversible damage to vital organs.

PMID: 21984607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025358. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

The SOCS2 ubiquitin ligase complex regulates growth hormone receptor levels.

Vesterlund M(1), Zadjali F, Persson T, Nielsen ML, Kessler BM, Norstedt G,
Flores-Morales A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Growth Hormone is essential for the regulation of growth and the homeostatic
control of intermediary metabolism. GH actions are mediated by the Growth Hormone
Receptor; a member of the cytokine receptor super family that signals chiefly
through the JAK2/STAT5 pathway. Target tissue responsiveness to GH is under
regulatory control to avoid excessive and off-target effects upon GHR activation.
The suppressor of cytokine signalling 2 (SOCS) is a key regulator of GHR
sensitivity. This is clearly shown in mice where the SOCS2 gene has been
inactivated, which show 30-40% increase in body length, a phenotype that is
dependent on endogenous GH secretion. SOCS2 is a GH-stimulated, STAT5b-regulated 
gene that acts in a negative feedback loop to downregulate GHR signalling. Since 
the biochemical basis for these actions is poorly understood, we studied the
molecular function of SOCS2. We demonstrated that SOCS2 is part of a multimeric
complex with intrinsic ubiquitin ligase activity. Mutational analysis shows that 
the interaction with Elongin B/C controls SOCS2 protein turnover and affects its 
molecular activity. Increased GHR levels were observed in livers from SOCS2<U+207B>/<U+207B>
mice and in the absence of SOCS2 in in vitro experiments. We showed that SOCS2
regulates cellular GHR levels through direct ubiquitination and in a
proteasomally dependent manner. We also confirmed the importance of the SOCS-box 
for the proper function of SOCS2. Finally, we identified two phosphotyrosine
residues in the GHR to be responsible for the interaction with SOCS2, but only
Y487 to account for the effects of SOCS2. The demonstration that SOCS2 is an
ubiquitin ligase for the GHR unveils the molecular basis for its physiological
actions.

PMCID: PMC3183054
PMID: 21980433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;360(1-2):197-203. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-1057-1. Epub
2011 Sep 23.

Association between polymorphisms in the signal transducer and activator of
transcription and dilated cardiomyopathy in the Chinese Han population.

Peng Y(1), Zhou B, Wang Y, Chen Y, Li H, Song Y, Zhang L, Rao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
People's Republic of China.

The signal transduction pathways mediating the progress of heart failure have
been intensively studied. Altered signaling of the signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STATs), which play important roles in regulating
cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, has been observed in the
heart. We conducted a pilot study to test whether single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in STATs were associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Genotypes of
two SNPs of STATs (rs6503691 C/T in exon 1 of STAT5B and rs4796793 C/G in the 5' 
region of STAT3) in 251 DCM patients and 484 control subjects were determined
with the use of PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay and TaqMan
assay, respectively. Significantly increased DCM risk was found to be associated 
with T allele of rs6503691 (P = 0.012, OR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.07-1.74). We found
that increased DCM risk statistically significantly associated with rs6503691 in 
a dominant model (P = 0.009, OR = 1.50, 95% CI = 1.11-2.04). No association
between DCM risk and rs4796793 was observed (P = 0.706, OR = 1.05, 95% CI =
0.83-1.32). The present pilot study provides evidence that both rs6503691 T
allele and CT/TT genotypes, but not rs4796793 C/G in the 5' region of STAT3, are 
associated with a significantly increased risk of DCM, indicating that common
genetic polymorphism in STATs is associated with DCM.

PMID: 21948258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76 Suppl 3:11-3. doi: 10.1159/000330140. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Genetics of human stature: Insight from single gene disorders.

Kiess W(1), Kratzsch J, Kruis T, Müller E, Wallborn T, Odeh R, Schlicke M, Klammt
J, Pfäffle R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.

Mutations of numerous genes encoding proteins that affect multiple pathways
responsible for regulation of cell proliferation can cause growth disturbances in
humans. Genes such as HESX1, PROP1, PIT1/POU1F1 and GLI2 have been shown to cause
pituitary hormone deficiency. In addition, heterozygous mutations or gene
deletions in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor (GH-IGF) axis such as 
the GH, GH-releasing hormone receptor, GH receptor, STAT5b, IGF-I, IGF-I receptor
and the acid labile subunit have also been observed in children with growth
failure and short stature. More recently, mutations of genes encoding regulators 
of cell proliferation and division, i.e., the pericentrin gene, have also
resulted in severe growth disturbances.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21912148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):442-56. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.004. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

The role of stat1b in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Song H(1), Yan YL, Titus T, He X, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, 1425 E. 13th Avenue, Eugene, 
OR 97403, USA. hsong@uoregon.edu

STAT1 mediates response to interferons and regulates immunity, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and sensitivity of Fanconi Anemia cells to apoptosis
after interferon signaling; the roles of STAT1 in embryos, however, are not
understood. To explore embryonic functions of STAT1, we investigated stat1b, an
unstudied zebrafish co-ortholog of human STAT1. Zebrafish stat1a encodes all five
domains of the human STAT1-alpha splice form but, like the human STAT1-beta
splice variant, stat1b lacks a complete transactivation domain; thus, two
unlinked zebrafish paralogs encode protein forms translated from two splice
variants of a single human gene, as expected by sub-functionalization after
genome duplication. Phylogenetic and conserved synteny studies showed that stat1b
and stat1a arose as duplicates in the teleost genome duplication (TGD) and
clarified the evolutionary origin of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B
and STAT6 by tandem and genome duplication. RT-PCR revealed maternal expression
of stat1a and stat1b. In situ hybridization detected stat1b but not stat1a
expression in embryonic hematopoietic tissues. Morpholino knockdown of stat1b,
but not stat1a, decreased expression of the myeloid and granulocyte markers spi
and mpo and increased expression of the hematopoietic progenitor marker scl, the 
erythrocyte marker gata1, and hemoglobin. These results suggest that zebrafish
Stat1b promotes myeloid development at the expense of erythroid development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3223297
PMID: 21914475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Nov;96(11):E1896-904. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1597.
Epub 2011 Sep 7.

The growth hormone receptor (GHR) c.899dupC mutation functions as a dominant
negative: insights into the pathophysiology of intracellular GHR defects.

Derr MA(1), Aisenberg J, Fang P, Tenenbaum-Rakover Y, Rosenfeld RG, Hwa V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, CDRCP, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW
Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA. derrm@ohsu.edu

CONTEXT: GH insensitivity (GHI) is a condition characterized by pronounced IGF-I 
deficiency and severe short stature. We previously identified a novel compound
heterozygous GH receptor (GHR) mutation, GHR:p.R229H/c.899dupC, in a patient
presenting with GHI. The heterozygous p.R229H (prepeptide) variant was previously
associated with GHI despite a lack of adequate functional studies. The novel
heterozygous GHR:c.899dupC variant affects the critical JAK2-binding Box 1 region
of the GHR intracellular domain; the duplication predicted a frameshift and early
protein termination.
OBJECTIVE: The individual and synergistic effect(s) of the p.R229H and c.899dupC 
mutations on GHR function(s) were evaluated in reconstitution studies.
RESULTS: The recombinant human GHR (hGHR):p.R229H variant was readily expressed, 
and unexpectedly, GH-induced signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b 
(STAT5b) phosphorylation was comparable to that induced by wild-type hGHR. The
truncated, immunodetected hGHR:c.899dupC variant, in contrast, was unresponsive
to GH. To mimic a compound heterozygous state, the two variants were coexpressed,
and strikingly, the presence of the hGHR:c.899dupC effectively abolished the
GH-induced STAT5b activities that were observed with hGHR:p.R229H alone.
Furthermore, hGHR:c.899dupC dose-dependently reduced the GH-induced STAT5b
activities associated with hGHR:p.R229H. This dominant negative effect was also
observed when hGHR:c.899dupC was coexpressed with wild-type hGHR.
CONCLUSION: The p.R229H variant, contrary to an earlier report, appeared to
function like wild-type GHR and, therefore, is unlikely to cause GHI. The
c.899dupC variant is a novel dominant negative mutation that disrupted normal GHR
signaling and is the cause for the GHI phenotype of the reported patient.

PMID: 21900382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 20;108(38):15984-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113416108. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Crosstalk between the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor and EGF
receptor variant III supports survival and growth of glioblastoma cells.

Hu J(1), Jo M, Cavenee WK, Furnari F, VandenBerg SR, Gonias SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

A truncated and constitutively active form of the EGF receptor, variant III
(EGFRvIII), is a major determinant of tumor growth and progression in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Extensive bidirectional crosstalk occurs in the
cell-signaling pathways downstream of the EGFR and the urokinase-type plasminogen
activator receptor (uPAR); however, crosstalk between EGFRvIII and uPAR has not
been examined. Here, we show that uPAR does not regulate ERK activation in
EGFRvIII-expressing GBM cells; however, in GBM cells isolated from four separate 
xenografts in which EGFRvIII expression was down-regulated in vivo, uPAR assumed 
a major role in sustaining ERK activation. Phosphorylation of Tyr-845 in the
EGFR, which is mediated by Src family kinases, depended on uPAR in
EGFRvIII-expressing GBM cells. Activation of the mitogenic and prosurvival
transcription factor, STAT5b, downstream of EGFRvIII, also required uPAR. The
EGFR-selective tyrosine kinase inhibitors, erlotinib and gefitinib, blocked not
only EGFRvIII signaling to ERK but also uPAR-dependent STAT5b activation. uPAR
gene silencing in EGFRvIII-expressing GBM cells and in cells from tumors that
escaped dependency on EGFRvIII decreased cell survival and proliferation.
Xenografts of EGFRvIII-expressing cancer cell lines and a human GBM, which was
propagated as a xenograft, were robustly immunopositive for uPAR and
phospho-Tyr-845 by immunohistochemistry. A human GBM in which the EGFR gene was
amplified without truncation was immunonegative for both uPAR and
phospho-Tyr-845. These studies identify distinct cell-signaling activities for
uPAR in GBM cells that express EGFRvIII and in cells released from dormancy when 
EGFRvIII is neutralized. uPAR and its crosstalk pathways with EGFRvIII emerge as 
logical targets for therapeutics development in GBM.

PMCID: PMC3179096
PMID: 21896743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Control Release. 2012 Jan 30;157(2):279-86. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.08.014.
Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Nanoparticle delivery of a peptide targeting EGFR signaling.

Kim SK(1), Huang L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pharmaceutics, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

EGFR serves as an important therapeutic target because of its over-expression in 
many cancers. In this study, we investigated a peptide-based therapy aimed at
blocking intracellular protein-protein interactions during EGFR signaling and
evaluated a targetable lipid carrier system that can deliver peptides to
intracellular targets in human cancer cells. EEEEpYFELV (EV), a nonapeptide
mimicking the Y845 site of EGFR which is responsible for STAT5b phosphorylation, 
was designed to block EGFR downstream signaling. EV was loaded onto LPH
nanoparticles that are comprised of a membrane/core structure including a
surface-grafted polyethylene glycol (PEG) used to evade the reticuloendothelial
system (RES) and anisamide (AA) for targeting the sigma receptor over-expressed
in H460 human lung cancer cells. EV formulated with PEGylated and targeted LPH
(LPH-PEG-AA) was taken up by the tumor cells and trafficked to the cytoplasm with
high efficiency. Using this approach, EV acted as a dominant negative inhibitor
of STAT5b phosphorylation, arrested cell proliferation, and induced massive
apoptosis. Intravenous administration of EV loaded in LPH-PEG-AA led to efficient
EV peptide delivery to the tumor in a xenograft mouse model, and multiple
injections inhibited tumor growth in a dose-dependent manner. Our findings offer 
proof-of-concept for an intracellular peptide-mediated cancer therapy that is
delivered by carefully designed nanoparticles.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3229664
PMID: 21871507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jun;227(6):2421-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22977.

STAT5 isoforms regulate colorectal cancer cell apoptosis via reduction of
mitochondrial membrane potential and generation of reactive oxygen species.

Du W(1), Wang YC, Hong J, Su WY, Lin YW, Lu R, Xiong H, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School 
of Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Although the two isoforms of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(STAT5) protein, STAT5a and STAT5b, have 94% sequence identity, they are encoded 
by different genes. Previous studies have been unable to define clearly the roles
of the STAT5 genes in colorectal cancer (CRC). To investigate the role of STAT5
isoforms in CRC oncogenesis, immunohistochemical staining was performed.
Colorectal adenocarcinomas showed higher expression of STAT5a/5b than normal
colonic mucosa (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), and STAT5b expression was significantly higher than
that of STAT5a in colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Furthermore,
STAT5b expression was significantly associated with TNM stage. To delineate the
roles of STAT5a/5b in CRC carcinogenesis, we studied CRC cells depleted of each
isoform by treating the cells with small interfering RNA. Both STAT5a and STAT5b 
were found to be involved in cell growth, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis
of CRC cells, and exerted their effects via the regulation of downstream targets 
of the STAT genes. However, STAT5b influenced CRC cell apoptosis more than STAT5a
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), reducing mitochondrial membrane potential and generating reactive
oxygen species. In conclusion, both isoforms of STAT5 are involved in the growth 
and cell cycle progression of CRC cells, STAT5b could play a more important role 
than STAT5a in the clinicopathological characteristics of CRC and CRC cell
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21826656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 15;31(11):1431-41. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.332. Epub 2011 Aug 8.

Functional interactions between Choline kinase a, epidermal growth factor
receptor and c-Src in breast cancer cell proliferation.

Miyake T(1), Parsons SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cancer Center, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family members and c-Src are
co-overexpressed in many cancers. The synergistic effect of EGFR and c-Src has
been shown in the tumorigenesis of breast and other cancers. Reported mechanisms 
of synergy include transcriptional regulation by STAT5b and the regulation of
cellular ATP production by mitochondrial protein COX II. Here, we report a new
mechanism of EGFR-c-Src synergy through choline kinase a (CHKA). The first enzyme
of the phosphatidyl choline production pathway, CHKA, is overexpressed in many
cancers, and the product of the enzyme, phosphocholine, is also increased in
tumor cells. In this report, we find that CHKA forms a complex with EGFR in a
c-Src-dependent manner. Endogenous CHKA and EGFR co-immunoprecipitated from a
variety of breast cancer cell lines and immortalized mammary epithelial cells.
CHKA interacted with the EGFR kinase domain upon c-Src co-overexpression and was 
phosphorylated in a c-Src-dependent manner on Y197 and Y333. Overexpression of
EGFR and c-Src increased total cellular activity and protein levels of CHKA.
Mutation of CHKA Y197 and Y333 reduced complex formation, EGFR-dependent
activation of CHKA enzyme activity and epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent
DNA synthesis. Furthermore, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of CHKA in
MCF-7 and MCF-10A cells reduced EGF-dependent cell proliferation. Together, these
results strongly implicate a new c-Src-dependent link between CHKA and EGFR,
which contributes to the regulation of cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3213328
PMID: 21822308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. ACS Chem Biol. 2011 Oct 21;6(10):1008-14. doi: 10.1021/cb2001796. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

Selective targeting of disease-relevant protein binding domains by
O-phosphorylated natural product derivatives.

Gräber M, Janczyk W, Sperl B, Elumalai N, Kozany C, Hausch F, Holak TA, Berg T.

Phosphorylation-dependent protein binding domains are crucially important for
intracellular signaling pathways and thus highly relevant targets in chemical
biology. By screening of chemical libraries against 12 structurally diverse
phosphorylation-dependent protein binding domains, we have identified fosfosal
and dexamethasone-21-phosphate as selective inhibitors of two antitumor targets: 
the SH2 domain of the transcription factor STAT5b and the substrate-binding
domain of the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1, respectively. Both compounds are
phosphate prodrugs with documented clinical use as anti-inflammatory agents in
humans and were discovered with a high hit rate from a small subgroup within the 
screening library. Our study indicates O-phosphorylation of appropriately
preselected natural products or natural product derivatives as a generally
applicable strategy for the identification of non-reactive and non-peptidic
ligands of phosphorylation-dependent protein binding domains. Moreover, our data 
indicate that it would be advisable to monitor the bioactivities of clinically
used prodrugs in their uncleaved state against phosphorylation-dependent protein 
binding domains.

PMID: 21797253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Aug;94(8):4220-3. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4144.

Short communication: expression and alternative splicing of POU1F1 pathway genes 
in preimplantation bovine embryos.

Laporta J(1), Driver A, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA.

Early embryo loss is a major contributing factor to cow infertility and that 70
to 80% of this loss occurs between d 8 and 16 postfertilization. However, little 
is known about the molecular mechanisms and the nature of genes involved in
normal and abnormal embryonic development. Moreover, information is limited on
the contributions of the genomes of dams and of embryos to the development and
survival of preimplantation embryos. We hypothesized that proper gene expression 
level in the developing embryo is essential for embryo survival and pregnancy
success. As such, the characterization of expression profiles in early embryos
could lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in normal and
abnormal embryo development. To test this hypothesis, 2 d-8 embryo populations
(degenerate embryos and blastocysts) that differed in morphology and
developmental status were investigated. Expression levels of POU1F1 pathway genes
were estimated in 4 sets of biological replicate pools of degenerate embryos and 
blastocysts. The OPN and STAT5A genes were found to be upregulated in degenerate 
embryos compared with blastocysts, whereas STAT5B showed similar expression
levels in both embryo groups. Analysis of splice variants of OPN and STAT5A
revealed expression patterns different from the total expression values of these 
genes. As such, measuring expression of individual transcripts should be
considered in gene expression studies.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21787958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(3):347-55.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 and breast cancer prognosis.

Sato T(1), Neilson LM, Peck AR, Liu C, Tran TH, Witkiewicz A, Hyslop T,
Nevalainen MT, Sauter G, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) is frequently
activated in breast cancer and multiple lines of evidence suggest that Stat3
promotes tumor progression. However, the prognostic value of Stat3 in human
breast cancer remains controversial and associations range from favorable to
unfavorable based on four outcome studies of 62, 102, 255 and 517 patients.
Cellular Stat3 protein expression was measured in three studies whereas nuclear
localized, tyrosine phosphorylated Stat3 (Nuc-pYStat3) was used as the readout in
only one study. We therefore retrospectively analyzed the prognostic value of
Nuc-pYStat3 in a larger material of 721 breast cancer specimens. Overall,
patients whose tumors were positive for Nuc-pYStat3 tended to have improved
survival, but the trend did not reach statistical significance (P=0.08). When
specimens were stratified by tumor grade, patients with low grade but not high
grade tumors that were positive for Nuc-pYStat3 had significantly prolonged
overall survival in univariate analysis (P=0.014) but not in multivariate
analyses. Unexpectedly, quantitative immunofluoresence detection revealed highest
levels of Nuc-pYStat3 in normal breast epithelia and gradual loss of Nuc-pYStat3 
during progression from DCIS, invasive ductal carcinoma, and lymph node
metastases. Levels of Nuc-pYStat3 correlated positively with levels of
Nuc-pYStat5, a favorable prognostic marker, in invasive ductal carcinomas.
Furthermore, NucpYStat3 levels correlated strongly with protein levels of nuclear
localized Stat5a (r=0.633, P<0.001) but not Stat5b. Our data does not support the
notion that Nuc-pYStat3 is an independent marker of prognosis in breast cancer,
although future studies may reveal prognostic utility within molecularly
characterized subtypes of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3138712
PMID: 21776434  [PubMed]


265. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):4177-83. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1202-7. Epub 2011
Jul 16.

Single nucleotide polymorphism in the STAT5b gene is associated with body weight 
and reproductive traits of the Jinghai Yellow chicken.

Zhao XH(1), Wang JY, Zhang GX, Wei Y, Gu YP, Yu YB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
225009, China.

In our research, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b)
gene was studied as candidate gene associated with body weight and reproductive
traits of Jinghai Yellow chicken. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
STAT5b gene were examined in both Jinghai Yellow chicken and three reference
chicken populations including the Bian, Youxi and Arbor Acre chickens. Two SNPs
(C-1591T and G-250A) were detected in the 5' flanking region of STAT5b gene.
Association indicated that the C-1591T mutation is significantly associated with 
age at fist egg, The G-250A mutation is significantly related with hatch weight
and body weight at 300 days. Additionally four STAT5b haplotypes (H1, CG; H2, TG;
H3, AC and H4, TA) and their frequency distributions were estimated using the
phase program. Diplotype H3H4 is dominant for 8, 16 week-age-weight and body
weight at first egg. Thus STAT5b gene may be served as a potential genetic marker
for growth and reproduction traits evaluation of the Jinghai Yellow chicken. This
study will provide valuable information for the protection and breeding of
Jinghai Yellow chicken.

PMID: 21766180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;96(9):E1496-501. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0322.
Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Variants in STAT5B associate with serum TC and LDL-C levels.

Kornfeld JW(1), Isaacs A, Vitart V, Pospisilik JA, Meitinger T, Gyllensten U,
Wilson JF, Rudan I, Campbell H, Penninger JM, Sexl V, Moriggl R, van Duijn C,
Pramstaller PP, Hicks AA.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
jkornfel@uni-koeln.de

CONTEXT: Known genetic variants influencing serum lipid levels do not adequately 
account for the observed population variability of these phenotypes. The
GH/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway is
an evolutionary conserved system that exerts strong effects on metabolism,
including that of lipids.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the association of 11 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) spanning the STAT5B/STAT5A/STAT3 locus with serum lipid
levels in six European populations (n = 5162 nondiabetic individuals).
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, sex, alcohol use, smoking, and body mass
index, we identified STAT5B variants (rs8082391 and rs8064638) in novel
association with total cholesterol (TC; P = 0.001 and P = 0.002) and low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (P = 0.002 and P = 0.004) levels. The minor alleles of
these single-nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly enriched in
hyperlipidemic individuals across the six discovery populations (P = 0.004 and P 
= 0.006). In transgenic mice deficient for hepatic STAT5A and STAT5B, reduced
serum TC levels coincided with reduced hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis as
demonstrated using gene expression profiling and pathway enrichment analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in STAT5B are associated with TC and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels among six populations. Mechanistically, STAT5B
transcriptionally regulates hepatic cholesterol homeostasis.

PMID: 21752895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;30(11):931-6. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1179. Epub 2011 Jun
13.

Association of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 gene
polymorphisms with cervical cancer in Chinese women.

Wang K(1), Zhou B, Zhang J, Xin Y, Lai T, Wang Y, Hou Q, Song Y, Chen Y, Quan Y, 
Xi M, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) plays an important role
in regulating cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Previous
studies revealed that abnormal expression/activation of STAT family members were 
present in a large group of human malignant tumors. In the present study, using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length polymorphism, DNA
sequencing, and Taqman probe real-time PCR techniques, we analyzed two
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the STAT5B and STAT3 genes (rs6503691
and rs4769793, respectively) in 275 Chinese cervical cancer patients and 340
controls. Our results indicated that the genotype and allele frequencies of SNP
rs4769793 were significantly different between the cervical cancer patients and
normal subjects (p < 0.05, odds ratio = 1.35, 95% confidence interval = 1.
07-1.70). In addition, stratified analyses revealed that the polymorphism of
rs4769793 was also associated with poor tumor differentiation and positive
parametrial invasion (p < 0. 05). In contrast, SNP rs6503691 did not show any
difference between patients and controls or association with patient clinical
characteristics. Collectively, these findings suggested that STAT3 gene
polymorphism (rs4769793) was associated with the susceptibility as well as poor
differentiation and parametrial invasion of cervical cancer in Chinese women.

PMID: 21668356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Neuroendocrinology. 2011;94(2):148-57. doi: 10.1159/000328280. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Effect of progesterone withdrawal on hypothalamic mechanisms related to prolactin
release in late pregnant rats.

Bonafede MM(1), Valdez SR, Arboccó FC, Pennacchio GE, Soaje M, Jahn GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Reproducción y Lactancia, IMBECU, CRICYT-CONICET, Mendoza,
Argentina. mbonafede@mendoza-conicet.gov.ar

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Progesterone (P(4)) fall provoked by spontaneous or
prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a)-induced luteolysis in late pregnant rats triggers a
prolactin (PRL) surge 12-24 h later.
METHODS: To investigate the hypothalamic mechanism mediating this response, we
determined expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), PRL receptors (long form,
PRLR(long)), estrogen-a (ERa) and ERß, P(4) (PR) A and B receptors, and STAT5a,
STAT5b, suppressors of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), SOCS3 and CIS at mRNA (by
semiquantitative and real-time RT-PCR) and protein (by Western blot only for TH, 
ERa and PRs) levels, and dopamine and DOPAC (by high-performance liquid
chromatography) contents in the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) 24 h after
luteolysis induced by a PGF2a analogue (cloprostenol, 25 µg/rat s.c. at 8 and 12 
h on day 19 of pregnancy).
RESULTS: PGF2a treatment decreased circulating P(4) and estradiol and increased
PRL and the estradiol/P(4) ratio. MBH DOPAC and DOPAC/dopamine ratio fell,
indicating decreased dopaminergic transmission. PRLR(long), PRB and ERa mRNA
increased. ERa and PR proteins were not modified. However, TH protein and mRNA
did not change. PRA, the small PR isoform, was much more abundant than PRB, the
isoform considered to mediate P(4) genomic actions. STAT5a, SOCS1 and SOCS3 mRNA 
were also increased.
CONCLUSION: The P(4) fall induced by PGF2a treatment induces PRL release through 
diminution in MBH dopaminergic transmission without change in TH expression. The 
increased PRLR along with elevated circulating PRL may be responsible for
maintaining high TH expression through activation of short-loop feedback
mechanisms, counteracting the effect of the fall in circulating P(4). In
parallel, SOCS expression contributes to limit PRL signaling.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21654155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 Oct;73(10):1295-302. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Screening of therapeutic targets for canine mast cell tumors from a variety of
kinase molecules.

Takeuchi Y(1), Fujino Y, Watanabe M, Nakagawa T, Ohno K, Sasaki N, Sugano S,
Tsujimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Options of systemic treatment for canine MCT have been still limited and most
canine cases with MCTs eventually undergo relapses even after achievement of a
remission. Thus additional therapies are required to establish for the tumor. To 
identify the novel candidate therapeutic targets for canine MCT, the mRNA
expression and phosphorylation statuses of several receptor or non-receptor
kinases as well as the inhibitory effect of 95 specific inhibitors on the growth 
were assessed in three canine MCT cell lines (HRMC, VIMC1 and CMMC1). Among the
14 targets, the mRNAs of 11, 7 and 7 kinases were amplified in HRMC, VIMC1 and
CMMC1, respectively. The mRNAs of VEGFR3, PDGFRa, SRC, YES, LCK and FYN were
detected in all cell lines. The phosphorylation of 12, 8 and 7 kinases was
observed by using specific antibody arrays in HRMC, VIMC1 and CMMC1,
respectively. DTK, EPHB6, AMPKa1, CREB, STAT5a and STAT5b were phosphorylated in 
all cell lines. The 10, 9 and 17 inhibitors exhibited the biological activity
against the growth of HRMC, VIMC1 and CMMC1, respectively. Only three inhibitors 
such as SB218078 (for Chk1), PDGF RTK inhibitor IV (for PDGFR) and radicicol (for
Hsp90) suppressed the growth of all three cell lines. The present study indicated
that several kinases, such as Chk1, PDGFR and Hsp90, could be used as therapeutic
targets in the treatment for canine MCT. Further studies and clinical trials are 
warranted to apply the inhibitors for the treatment of the tumor.

PMID: 21646751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Exp Med. 2011 Jun 6;208(6):1135-49. doi: 10.1084/jem.20101947. Epub 2011 May
23.

Ebf1 or Pax5 haploinsufficiency synergizes with STAT5 activation to initiate
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Heltemes-Harris LM(1), Willette MJ, Ramsey LB, Qiu YH, Neeley ES, Zhang N, Thomas
DA, Koeuth T, Baechler EC, Kornblau SM, Farrar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, The Cancer Center, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

As STAT5 is critical for the differentiation, proliferation, and survival of
progenitor B cells, this transcription factor may play a role in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Here, we show increased expression of activated
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5), which is correlated
with poor prognosis, in ALL patient cells. Mutations in EBF1 and PAX5, genes
critical for B cell development have also been identified in human ALL. To
determine whether mutations in Ebf1 or Pax5 synergize with STAT5 activation to
induce ALL, we crossed mice expressing a constitutively active form of STAT5
(Stat5b-CA) with mice heterozygous for Ebf1 or Pax5. Haploinsufficiency of either
Pax5 or Ebf1 synergized with Stat5b-CA to rapidly induce ALL in 100% of the mice.
The leukemic cells displayed reduced expression of both Pax5 and Ebf1, but this
had little effect on most EBF1 or PAX5 target genes. Only a subset of target
genes was deregulated; this subset included a large percentage of potential tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes. Further, most of these genes appear to be jointly
regulated by both EBF1 and PAX5. Our findings suggest a model whereby small
perturbations in a self-reinforcing network of transcription factors critical for
B cell development, specifically PAX5 and EBF1, cooperate with STAT5 activation
to initiate ALL.

PMCID: PMC3173246
PMID: 21606506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):24726-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175364. Epub
2011 May 18.

Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) p65 interacts with Stat5b in growth plate
chondrocytes and mediates the effects of growth hormone on chondrogenesis and on 
the expression of insulin-like growth factor-1 and bone morphogenetic protein-2.

Wu S(1), Morrison A, Sun H, De Luca F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology and Diabetes, St. Christopher's Hospital for
Children, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19134, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) stimulates growth plate chondrogenesis and longitudinal bone 
growth with its stimulatory effects primarily mediated by insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) both systemically and locally in the growth plate. It has been
shown that the transcription factor Stat5b mediates the GH promoting effect on
IGF-1 expression and on chondrogenesis, yet it is not known whether other
signaling molecules are activated by GH in growth plate chondrocytes. We have
previously demonstrated that nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B p65 is a transcription factor
expressed in growth plate chondrocytes where it facilitates chondrogenesis. We
have also shown that fibroblasts isolated from a patient with growth failure and 
a heterozygous mutation of inhibitor-<U+03BA>Ba (I<U+03BA>B; component of the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling pathway) exhibit GH insensitivity. In this study, we cultured
rat metatarsal bones in the presence of GH and/or pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
(PDTC), a known NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor. The GH-mediated stimulation of metatarsal
longitudinal growth and growth plate chondrogenesis was neutralized by PDTC. In
cultured chondrocytes isolated from rat metatarsal growth plates, GH induced
NF-<U+03BA>B-DNA binding and chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation and prevented
chondrocyte apoptosis. The inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 expression and activity (by
NF-<U+03BA>B p65 siRNA and PDTC, respectively) in chondrocytes reversed the GH-mediated 
effects on chondrocyte proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Lastly, the
inhibition of Stat5b expression in chondrocytes prevented the GH promoting
effects on NF-<U+03BA>B-DNA binding, whereas the inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 expression or
activity prevented the GH-dependent activation of IGF-1 and bone morphogenetic
protein-2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3137048
PMID: 21592969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2443-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.34.2014. Epub 2011
May 16.

Stat5: from breast development to cancer prognosis, prediction, and progression.

Tweardy D, Chang JC.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2448-58.

PMID: 21576641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2448-58. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.30.3552. Epub
2011 May 16.

Loss of nuclear localized and tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5 in breast cancer
predicts poor clinical outcome and increased risk of antiestrogen therapy
failure.

Peck AR(1), Witkiewicz AK, Liu C, Stringer GA, Klimowicz AC, Pequignot E, Freydin
B, Tran TH, Yang N, Rosenberg AL, Hooke JA, Kovatich AJ, Nevalainen MT, Shriver
CD, Hyslop T, Sauter G, Rimm DL, Magliocco AM, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S 10th St,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):2443-4.
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Dec 10;29(35):4718; author reply 4718-9.

PURPOSE: To investigate nuclear localized and tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5
(Nuc-pYStat5) as a marker of prognosis in node-negative breast cancer and as a
predictor of response to antiestrogen therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Levels of Nuc-pYStat5 were analyzed in five archival
cohorts of breast cancer by traditional diaminobenzidine-chromogen immunostaining
and pathologist scoring of whole tissue sections or by immunofluorescence and
automated quantitative analysis (AQUA) of tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: Nuc-pYStat5 was an independent prognostic marker as measured by
cancer-specific survival (CSS) in patients with node-negative breast cancer who
did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy, when adjusted for common pathology
parameters in multivariate analyses both by standard chromogen detection with
pathologist scoring of whole tissue sections (cohort I; n = 233) and quantitative
immunofluorescence of a tissue microarray (cohort II; n = 291). Two distinct
monoclonal antibodies gave concordant results. A progression array (cohort III; n
= 180) revealed frequent loss of Nuc-pYStat5 in invasive carcinoma compared to
normal breast epithelia or ductal carcinoma in situ, and general loss of
Nuc-pYStat5 in lymph node metastases. In cohort IV (n = 221), loss of Nuc-pYStat5
was associated with increased risk of antiestrogen therapy failure as measured by
univariate CSS and time to recurrence (TTR). More sensitive AQUA quantification
of Nuc-pYStat5 in antiestrogen-treated patients (cohort V; n = 97) identified by 
multivariate analysis patients with low Nuc-pYStat5 at elevated risk for therapy 
failure (CSS hazard ratio [HR], 21.55; 95% CI, 5.61 to 82.77; P < .001; TTR HR,
7.30; 95% CI, 2.34 to 22.78; P = .001). CONCLUSION Nuc-pYStat5 is an independent 
prognostic marker in node-negative breast cancer. If confirmed in prospective
studies, Nuc-pYStat5 may become a useful predictive marker of response to
adjuvant hormone therapy.

PMCID: PMC3675698
PMID: 21576635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jan;39(1):167-76. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0722-5. Epub 2011
May 10.

STAT3/NF-<U+03BA>B interactions determine the level of haptoglobin expression in male
rats exposed to dietary restriction and/or acute phase stimuli.

Uskokovic A(1), Dinic S, Mihailovic M, Grdovic N, Arambašic J, Vidakovic M,
Bogojevic D, Ivanovic-Matic S, Martinovic V, Petrovic M, Poznanovic G, Grigorov
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute for Biological Research, University
of Belgrade, Bulevar Despota Stefana 142, 11060, Belgrade, Serbia.
auskokovic@ibiss.bg.ac.rs

Haptoglobin is a constitutively expressed protein which is predominantly
synthesized in the liver. During the acute-phase (AP) response haptoglobin is
upregulated along with other AP proteins. Its upregulation during the AP response
is mediated by cis-trans interactions between the hormone-responsive element
(HRE) residing in the haptoglobin gene and inducible transcription factors STAT3 
and C/EBP ß. In male rats that have been subjected to chronic 50% dietary
restriction (DR), the basal haptoglobin serum level is decreased. The aim of this
study was to characterize the trans-acting factor(s) responsible for the
reduction of haptoglobin expression in male rats subjected to 50% DR for 6 weeks.
Protein-DNA interactions between C/EBP and STAT families of transcription factors
and the HRE region of the haptoglobin gene were examined in livers of male rats
subjected to DR, as well as during the AP response that was induced by turpentine
administration. In DR rats, we observed associations between the HRE and
C/EBPa/ß, STAT5b and NF-<U+03BA>B p50, and the absence of interactions between STAT3 and
NF-kB p65. Subsequent induction of the AP response in DR rats by turpentine
administration elicited a normal, almost 2-fold increase in the serum haptoglobin
level that was accompanied by HRE-binding of C/EBPß, STAT3/5b and NF-kB p65/p50, 
and the establishment of interaction between STAT3 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65. These results
suggest that STAT3 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 crosstalk plays a central role while C/EBPß
acquires an accessory role in establishing the level of haptoglobin gene
expression in male rats exposed to DR and AP stimuli.

PMID: 21556775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2011 May;21(4):616-24. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e3182150e98.

Tissue factor-factor VIIa complex induces epithelial ovarian cancer cell invasion
and metastasis through a monocytes-dependent mechanism.

Ma Z(1), Zhang T, Wang R, Cheng Z, Xu H, Li W, Wang Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Tumor-associated macrophage infiltration and up-regulation of tissue
factor-factor VII (TF-FVIIa) complex have been observed in the peritoneum and
stroma of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). However, it is not clear how
tumor-associated macrophage and TF-FVIIa complex promotes EOC invasion. In the
present study, we aimed to determine the mechanism by which interaction of
TF-FVIIa and monocytes (MOs) promotes EOC metastasis.
METHOD: Matrigel invasion assay was used to analyze the potential of EOC
metastasis. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and real-time polymerase chain
reaction were used to detect expressions of cytokines and chemokines.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting was used to count the percentage of CD14,
CD68, and CD163 of MOs.
RESULTS: We found that the TF-FVIIa complex caused dynamic changes in MOs
cytokine and chemokine expression. CD14 and CD163 were also upregulated on MOs by
TF-FVIIa. Epithelial ovarian cancer cells were cocultured with
TF-FVIIa-stimulated MOs, demonstrating increased invasion potential. Interleukin 
8 (IL-8) was proposed as the major chemoattractant mediating EOC invasion based
on MOs messenger RNA and protein expression profiles. Anti-IL-8 monoclonal
neutralizing antibody attenuated EOC cell invasion in a concentration-dependent
manner, and tumor necrosis factor a from TF-FVIIa-stimulated MOs was observed to 
amplify IL-8 production. The following transcription factors in MOs were
activated by TF-FVIIa and inhibited by the tissue factor pathway inhibitor:
oncogenes HIF-1a, HIF-1ß, Oct I, Oct II, and Egr-1; inflammatory mediators c-Fos 
and c-Rel; and STAT family members STAT5A and STAT5B.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that the interaction between the TF-FVIIa
complex might play a role in mediating EOC invasion and metastasis depending on
MOs mechanism.

PMID: 21543928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Feb 10;21(3):465-75. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0591. Epub 2011
Jun 15.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma/signal transducers and
activators of transcription 5A pathway plays a key factor in adipogenesis of
human bone marrow-derived stromal cells and 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.

Jung HS(1), Lee YJ, Kim YH, Paik S, Kim JW, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Adipogenesis is largely dependent on the signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) pathway. However, the molecular mechanism of the STAT
pathway in the adipogenesis of human bone marrow-derived stromal cells (hBMSCs)
remains not well understood. The purpose of this research was to characterize the
transcriptional regulation involved in expression of STAT5A and STAT5B during
adipogenesis in hBMSCs and 3T3-L1 cells. The expression of STAT5A and STAT5B
increases with the onset of adipogenesis in hBMSCs and 3T3-L1 cells. The PPAR
response elements regulatory element of STAT5A exists at a promoter region
ranging from -346 to -101, and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
regulatory element is located at -196 to -118 of the STAT5B promoter. C/EBPß and 
C/EBPa bound to the STAT5B promoter region, whereas peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) bound to STAT5A. RNA interference of
STAT5A completely blocked differentiation, whereas the inhibition of STAT5B only 
partially blocked differentiation. We propose that C/EBPa, C/EBPß, and PPAR<U+03B3>
control adipogenesis by regulating STAT5B and STAT5A and that STAT5A is
necessary, whereas STAT5B plays a supplementary role during adipogenesis.
Further, the regulation of PPAR<U+03B3>-STAT5 by C/EBPß signaling seems to be the
crucial adipogenesis pathway-initiating cascade of the various adipogenic genes.

PMCID: PMC3272248
PMID: 21542777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 20;6(4):e18878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018878.

Proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2) promotes cell motility of hepatocellular
carcinoma through induction of epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Sun CK(1), Ng KT, Lim ZX, Cheng Q, Lo CM, Poon RT, Man K, Wong N, Fan ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Cancer Research,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

AIMS: Proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2), a non-receptor tyrosine kinase of
the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) family, is up-regulated in more than 60% of the
tumors of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. Forced overexpression of Pyk2 
can promote the proliferation and invasion of HCC cells. In this study, we aimed 
to explore the underlying molecular mechanism of Pyk2-mediated cell migration of 
HCC cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrated that Pyk2 transformed the
epithelial HCC cell line Hep3B into a mesenchymal phenotype via the induction of 
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), signified by the up-regulation of
membrane ruffle formation, activation of Rac/Rho GTPases, down-regulation of
epithelial genes E-cadherin and cytokeratin as well as promotion of cell motility
in presence of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). Suppression of Pyk2 by overexpression
of dominant negative PRNK domain in the metastatic HCC cell line MHCC97L
transformed its fibroblastoid phenotype to an epithelial phenotype with
up-regulation of epithelial genes, down-regulation of mesenchymal genes
N-cadherin and STAT5b, and reduction of LPA-induced membrane ruffle formation and
cell motility. Moreover, overexpression of Pyk2 in Hep3B cells promoted the
phosphorylation and localization of mesenchymal gene Hic-5 onto cell membrane
while suppression of Pyk2 in MHCC97L cells attenuated its phosphorylation and
localization.
CONCLUSION: These data provided new evidence of the underlying mechanism of Pyk2 
in controlling cell motility of HCC cells through regulation of genes associated 
with EMT.

PMCID: PMC3080371
PMID: 21533080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Endocr Rev. 2011 Aug;32(4):472-97. doi: 10.1210/er.2010-0023. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

Evidence for a continuum of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical abnormalities in
children with growth hormone insensitivity.

David A(1), Hwa V, Metherell LA, Netchine I, Camacho-Hübner C, Clark AJ,
Rosenfeld RG, Savage MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Barts and the London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, London, United Kingdom.

GH insensitivity (GHI) presents in childhood as growth failure and in its severe 
form is associated with dysmorphic and metabolic abnormalities. GHI may be caused
by genetic defects in the GH-IGF-I axis or by acquired states such as chronic
illness. This article discusses the former category. The field of GHI due to
mutations affecting GH action has evolved considerably since the original
description of the extreme phenotype related to homozygous GH receptor (GHR)
mutations over 40 yr ago. A continuum of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical
abnormalities can be defined associated with clinically relevant defects in
linear growth. The role and mechanisms of the GH-IGF-I axis in normal human
growth is discussed, followed by descriptions of mutations in GHR, STAT5B,
PTPN11, IGF1, IGFALS, IGF1R, and GH1 defects causing bioinactive GH or anti-GH
antibodies. These defects are associated with a range of genetic, clinical, and
hormonal characteristics. Genetic abnormalities causing growth failure that is
less severe than the extreme phenotype are emphasized, together with an analysis 
of height and serum IGF-I across the spectrum of different types of GHR defects. 
An overall view of genotype and phenotype relationships is presented, together
with an updated approach to the assessment of the patient with GHI, focusing on
investigation of the GH-IGF-I axis and relevant molecular studies contributing to
this diagnosis.

PMID: 21525302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):551-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2030. Epub 2011 Apr 24.

Modulation of cytokine receptors by IL-2 broadly regulates differentiation into
helper T cell lineages.

Liao W(1), Lin JX, Wang L, Li P, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6): 2 p following 559.

Helper T cells control host defense against pathogens. The receptors for
interleukin 12 (IL-12), IL-4 and IL-6 are required for differentiation into the
T(H)1, T(H)2 and T(H)17 subsets of helper T cells, respectively. IL-2 signaling
via the transcription factor STAT5 controls T(H)2 differentiation by regulating
both the T(H)2 cytokine gene cluster and expression of Il4ra, the gene encoding
the IL-4 receptor a-chain. Here we show that IL-2 regulated T(H)1
differentiation, inducing STAT5-dependent expression of the IL-12 receptor
ß2-chain (IL-12Rß2) and the transcription factor T-bet, with impaired human T(H)1
differentiation when IL-2 was blocked. T(H)1 differentiation was also impaired in
mouse Il2(-/-) T cells but was restored by IL-12Rß2 expression. Consistent with
the inhibition of T(H)17 differentiation by IL-2, treatment with IL-2 resulted in
lower expression of the genes encoding the IL-6 receptor a-chain (Il6ra) and the 
IL-6 signal transducer gp130 (encoded by Il6st), and retroviral transduction of
Il6st augmented T(H)17 differentiation even when IL-2 was present. Thus, IL-2
influences helper T cell differentiation by modulating the expression of cytokine
receptors to help specify and maintain differentiated states.

PMCID: PMC3304099
PMID: 21516110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Dis Markers. 2011;30(2-3):101-10. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0764.

Genetic markers for PTSD risk and resilience among survivors of the World Trade
Center attacks.

Sarapas C(1), Cai G, Bierer LM, Golier JA, Galea S, Ising M, Rein T, Schmeidler
J, Müller-Myhsok B, Uhr M, Holsboer F, Buxbaum JD, Yehuda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA.

We have previously reported the differential expression of 17 probe sets in
survivors of the 9/11 attacks with current posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
compared to similarly exposed survivors with no lifetime PTSD. The current study 
presents an expanded analysis of these subjects, including genotype at FKBP5, a
modulator of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) sensitivity. It includes data from
additional subjects who developed PTSD following 9/11 but then recovered,
distinguishing expression profiles associated with risk for developing PTSD,
resilience, and symptom recovery. 40 Caucasians (20 with and 20 without PTSD,
matched for exposure, age, and gender) were selected from a
population-representative sample of persons exposed to the 9/11 attacks from
which longitudinal data had been collected in four previous waves. Whole blood
gene expression and cortisol levels were obtained and genome-wide gene expression
was analyzed. 25 probe sets were differentially expressed in PTSD. Identified
genes were generally involved in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, signal
transduction, or in brain and immune cell function. STAT5B, a direct inhibitor of
GR, and nuclear factor I/A, both showed reduced expression in PTSD. Comparison of
lifetime versus current PTSD identified overlapping genes with altered expression
suggesting enduring markers, while some markers present only in current PTSD may 
reflect state measures. As a follow-up, direct comparisons of expression in
current PTSD, lifetime-only PTSD, and control groups identified FKBP5 and MHC
Class II as state markers, and also identified several trait markers. An analysis
of indirect effects revealed that homozygosity for any of 4 PTSD risk-related
polymorphisms at FKBP5 predicted FKBP5 expression, which mediated indirect
effects of genotype on plasma cortisol and PTSD severity.

PMCID: PMC3825240
PMID: 21508514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 May;74(5):611-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.03980.x.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B gene polymorphism
contributes to the cholesterol metabolism in Japanese children with growth
hormone deficiency.

Makimura M(1), Ihara K, Kojima-Ishii K, Nozaki T, Ohkubo K, Kohno H, Kishimoto J,
Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: GH plays a significant role in the lipid metabolism. In this
study, we focused on the JAK2 - signal transducer and activator of the
transcription 5 (STAT5) pathway, which transmit the signals from the GH receptor,
and selected the STAT5A/B gene as a candidate for the regulation of lipid
metabolism in GH deficiency (GHD).
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: The study population comprised 83 children with
idiopathic GHD. The serum total cholesterol (TC), high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C) and the non-HDL cholesterol (non-HDL-C) levels were monitored
before and at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months after starting GH treatment. The height,
weight, body mass index, and serum insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) level
were also measured before and 12 months after starting the GH treatment. For the 
genetic analysis of the STAT5A/B gene, five tag SNPs were selected using the tag 
SNP picker programme on the homepage of the HapMap project. The evaluation of
promoter activity of the -44816A/G SNP in the STAT5B gene was performed by a
luciferase assay in vitro.
RESULTS: The TC and non-HDL-C levels were gradually decreased during the GH
treatment. Five tag SNPs (rs4029774, rs6503691, rs9900213, rs16967637 and
rs2272087) were picked up for the STAT5A/B gene, and the genetic study
demonstrated that the paediatric GHD patients who were heterozygotes or
homozygotes of minor alleles of the analysed SNPs in the same block of the STAT5B
gene showed significantly higher serum TC or non-HDL-C levels both before and
after GH treatment for 12 months. Most of the SNPs also demonstrated significant 
differences among genotypes in the decreases in serum TC or non-HDL-C levels
during the 12 months of GH treatment. A luciferase assay showed that the
-44816A/G SNP (rs4029774) in the STAT5B gene functionally affected the expression
level in vitro.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that STAT5B may therefore play a role in
regulating the cholesterol metabolism in children with GHD.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21470284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Eur J Haematol. 2011 May;86(5):442-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01595.x. Epub
2011 Mar 30.

Identification of the STAT5B-RARa fusion transcript in an acute promyelocytic
leukemia patient without FLT3, NPM1, c-Kit and C/EBPa mutation.

Qiao C(1), Zhang SJ, Chen LJ, Miao KR, Zhang JF, Wu YJ, Qiu HR, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China.

T(15;17) is the most common chromosomal aberration in patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), leading to the formation of PML-RARa fusion gene.
In a small subset of patients with APL, the RARa gene is fused with different
partners. Here, we report a rare APL case with STAT5B-RARa fusion transcript.
Cytomorphologic and immunophenotypic analyses showed typical features of APL.
However, cytogenetic analysis showed normal karyotype, and interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed PML-RARa negative. Quantitative 
RT-PCR also showed PML-RARa negative but STAT5B-RARa positive and sequencing
analysis confirmed the result. Molecular markers including FLT3, NPM1, c-Kit and 
C/EBPa mutation were all negative. To our knowledge, this is the first APL
patient with STAT5B-RARa in Chinese population and the fifth patient around the
world according to published paper.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21447089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Dairy Res. 2011 May;78(2):242-9. doi: 10.1017/S0022029911000148. Epub 2011 Mar 
25.

Association of bovine CD4 and STAT5b single nucleotide polymorphisms with somatic
cell scores and milk production traits in Chinese Holsteins.

He Y(1), Chu Q(1), Ma P(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang Q(1), Sun D(1), Zhang Y(1), Yu Y(1),
Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal
Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 100193, Beijing, P.R.
China.

CD4+ T cells play a key role in the immune response of pathogen-induced mastitis 
in dairy cattle. Mammary gland factor STAT5b is involved in the regulation of
CD4+T cell differentiation during inflammatory response and milk production.
Little is known about the genetic variation effects of bovine CD4 and STAT5b
genes on somatic cell score (SCS) and milk production traits in dairy cattle. The
aim of the study was to investigate the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
bovine CD4 and STAT5b in Chinese Holsteins and to analyse their association with 
estimated breeding values (EBVs) for SCS and milk production traits. In the
present study, SNPs of CD4 (NC_007303 g.13598C>T) and STAT5b (NC_007317 g.31562
T>C) were identified and genotyped in Chinese Holstein population. The results
showed that both SNPs were significantly associated with the EBVs for milk yield 
and protein yield in Chinese Holstein cows, and the SNP in CD4 was associated
with the EBV for SCS (P<0.01). The additive effect of CD4 SNP on protein yield
was significant (P<0.05), and the dominant effect of STAT5b SNP was significant
on milk yield and protein yield (P<0.01). Cows with combination genotype C7
(CCTT: CD4 g.13598C>T and STAT5b g.31562 T>C) had the highest SCS EBV but lower
milk yield, while cows with C2 (TTTC) produced more milk, fat and protein than
the other eight combination genotypes. These results suggested that the SNPs in
CD4 and STAT5b may be potential genetic markers for SCS and milk/protein yields
selecting and warrant further functional research.

PMID: 21435309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Environ Health Prev Med. 2011 Jul;16(4):247-52. doi: 10.1007/s12199-010-0193-7.
Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Constitutively active Stat5A and Stat5B promote adipogenesis.

Wakao H(1), Wakao R, Oda A, Fujita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, 
North 15 West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan. hwakao@med.hokudai.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The metabolic syndrome is an important social problem affecting many
people in developed countries. Obesity is a leading cause of this syndrome, hence
understanding molecular mechanisms underlying obesity is of prime importance for 
preventive medicine to develop novel methods to alleviate the corresponding
social cost as well as for pharmaceutical companies to develop antimetabolic
drugs.
METHODS: Since adipocytes play an important role in obesity, we explored the
signaling pathways leading to differentiation of adipocytes. We used a
preadipocyte cell line to monitor the differentiation of adipocytes, and
virus-mediated gene transfer to assess the role of the transcription factor Stat5
in adipogenesis. Adipocyte differentiation was assessed by Northern blot and
Western blot analyses as well as accumulation of fat droplets in cells. Promoter 
activity of the proadipogenic transcription factor peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) was evaluated by luciferase assay.
RESULTS: Virus-mediated gene transfer of the constitutively active form of both
Stat5A and Stat5B resulted in enhanced adipocyte differentiation in the absence
of fetal bovine serum (FBS) as judged by expression of proadipogenic factors as
well as accumulation of fat droplets in cells. Such a proadipogenic effect of
Stat5 is, in part, mediated by its ability to enhance transcription of PPAR<U+03B3>, a
master transcriptional regulator in adipogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The constitutively active form of Stat5A and Stat5B promoted
adipocyte differentiation in the absence of FBS via induction of PPAR<U+03B3>.

PMCID: PMC3117211
PMID: 21431790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Pediatr. 2011 May;158(5):701-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.042. Epub 2011 Mar
17.

STAT5b deficiency: an unsuspected cause of growth failure, immunodeficiency, and 
severe pulmonary disease.

Nadeau K(1), Hwa V, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
knadeau@stanford.edu

Erratum in
    J Pediatr. 2011 Aug;159(2):356.

PMID: 21414633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;25(1):61-75. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2010.09.003.

STAT5b deficiency: lessons from STAT5b gene mutations.

Hwa V(1), Nadeau K, Wit JM, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR
97239, USA. hwav@ohsu.edu

Growth hormone (GH) regulates insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production
primarily through activation of the GH receptor (GHR)-signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)-5b signaling cascade. One of four STAT proteins
(STAT1, -3, -5a and -5b) activated by the GH-GHR system, the critical importance 
of STAT5b in IGF-I production became evident with the identification of
homozygous, autosomal recessive STAT5b mutations in patients who presented with
severe postnatal growth failure, growth hormone insensitivity syndrome (GHIS) and
marked IGF-I deficiency. Unlike GHIS due to GHR mutations, patients carrying
STAT5b mutations also presented with chronic pulmonary disease and evidence of
perturbations of T-cell homeostasis. At present, no single treatment(s) is
available to improve both poor statural growth and immune deficiency. Continued
clinical evaluations of patients with STAT5b mutations and elucidating the impact
of the mutation on STAT5b structure and function, are important to understanding 
the pathophysiology of this rare, complex, disease (MIM 245590).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;25(1):1-17. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2010.06.007.

Genetic evaluation of short stature.

Wit JM(1), Kiess W, Mullis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, J6S Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.m.wit@lumc.nl

After a proper medical history, growth analysis and physical examination of a
short child, followed by radiological and laboratory screening, the clinician may
decide to perform genetic testing. We propose several clinical algorithms that
can be used to establish the diagnosis. GH1 and GHRHR should be tested in
children with severe isolated growth hormone deficiency and a positive family
history. A multiple pituitary dysfunction can be caused by defects in several
genes, of which PROP1 and POU1F1 are most common. GH resistance can be caused by 
genetic defects in GHR, STAT5B, IGF1, IGFALS, which all have their specific
clinical and biochemical characteristics. IGF-I resistance is seen in
heterozygous defects of the IGF1R. If besides short stature additional
abnormalities are present, these should be matched with known dysmorphic
syndromes. If no obvious candidate gene can be determined, a whole genome
approach can be taken to check for deletions, duplications and/or uniparental
disomies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Lab Invest. 2011 May;91(5):764-77. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.208. Epub 2011 Feb
14.

Interferon-<U+03B3>-induced increases in intestinal epithelial macromolecular
permeability requires the Src kinase Fyn.

Smyth D(1), Phan V, Wang A, McKay DM.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Group, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,
Calvin, Phoebe and Joan Snyder Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) is an important immunoregulatory cytokine that can also
decrease intestinal epithelial barrier function. Little is known about the
intracellular signalling events immediately subsequent to IFN<U+03B3>/IFN<U+03B3> receptor
interaction that mediate increases in epithelial permeability; data that could be
used to ablate this effect of IFN<U+03B3> while leaving its immunostimulatory effects
intact. This study assessed the potential involvement of Src family kinases in
IFN<U+03B3>-induced increases in epithelial permeability using confluent filter-grown
monolayers of the human colon-derived T84 epithelial cell line. Inhibition of Src
kinase with the pharmacologic PP1 and use of Fyn kinase-specific siRNA
significantly reduced IFN<U+03B3>-induced increases in epithelial permeability as gauged
by translocation of noninvasive E. coli (HB101 strain) and flux of horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) across monolayers of T84 cells. However, the drop in
transepithelial resistance elicited by IFN<U+03B3> was not affected by either treatment.
Immunoblotting revealed that IFN<U+03B3> activated the transcription factor STAT5 in T84
cells, and immunoprecipitation studies identified an IFN<U+03B3>-inducible interaction
between STAT5b and the PI3K regulatory subunit p85a through formation of a
complex requiring the adaptor molecule Gab2. siRNA targeting STAT5b and Gab2
reduced IFN<U+03B3>-induced increases in epithelial permeability and phosphorylation of 
PI3K(p85a). PP1 and Fyn siRNA reduced IFN<U+03B3>-induced PI3K activity (indicated by
decreased phospho-Akt) and the formation of the STAT5b/PI3K(p85a) complex.
Collectively, the results suggest the formation of a Fyn-dependent
STAT5b/Gab2/PI3K complex that links IFN<U+03B3> to PI3K signalling and the regulation of
macromolecular permeability in a model enteric epithelium.

PMID: 21321534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Endocrinol. 2011 May;209(2):245-54. doi: 10.1530/JOE-10-0219. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Genome-wide screening in human growth plates during puberty in one patient
suggests a role for RUNX2 in epiphyseal maturation.

Emons J(1), Dutilh BE, Decker E, Pirzer H, Sticht C, Gretz N, Rappold G, Cameron 
ER, Neil JC, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ, Wit JM, Post JN, Karperien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 ZA Leiden,
The Netherlands. j.emons@lumc.nl

In late puberty, estrogen decelerates bone growth by stimulating growth plate
maturation. In this study, we analyzed the mechanism of estrogen action using two
pubertal growth plate specimens of one girl at Tanner stage B2 and Tanner stage
B3. Histological analysis showed that progression of puberty coincided with
characteristic morphological changes: a decrease in total growth plate height
(P=0.002), height of the individual zones (P<0.001), and an increase in
intercolumnar space (P<0.001). Microarray analysis of the specimens identified
394 genes (72% upregulated and 28% downregulated) that changed with the
progression of puberty. Overall changes in gene expression were small (average
1.38-fold upregulated and 1.36-fold downregulated genes). The 394 genes mapped to
13 significantly changing pathways (P<0.05) associated with growth plate
maturation (e.g. extracellular matrix, cell cycle, and cell death). We next
scanned the upstream promoter regions of the 394 genes for the presence of
evolutionarily conserved binding sites for transcription factors implicated in
growth plate maturation such as estrogen receptor (ER), androgen receptor, ELK1, 
STAT5B, cyclic AMP response element (CREB), and RUNX2. High-quality motif sites
for RUNX2 (87 genes), ELK1 (43 genes), and STAT5B (31 genes), but not ER, were
evolutionarily conserved, indicating their functional relevance across primates. 
Moreover, we show that some of these sites are direct target genes of these
transcription factors as shown by ChIP assays.

PMID: 21307122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Jan;36(1):9-22.

Sex and circadian modulatory effects on rat liver as assessed by transcriptome
analyses.

Hirao J(1), Nishimura M, Arakawa S, Niino N, Mori K, Furukawa T, Sanbuissho A,
Manabe S, Nishihara M, Mori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Safety Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Fukuroi,
Shizuoka, Japan. hirao.jun.hw@daiichisankyo.co.jp

The present study was designed to fully uncover sex and circadian modulatory
effects on rat liver. Hepatic transcriptome analyses were performed at 4 hr
intervals of a day-night cycle using young adult male and female rats. Sexually
dimorphic genes, which were identified by a cross-sex comparison of time series
data, included representative sex-predominant genes such as male- or
female-predominant cytochrome P450 subfamilies (Cyp2c11, Cyp2c12, Cyp2c13, and
Cyp3a2), sulfotransferases, and glutathione S-transferase Yc2. The identified
sexually dimorphic genes were over-represented in the metabolism of retinols,
xenobiotics, linoleic acids, or androgen and estrogen, or bile acid biosynthesis.
Furthermore, transcription factor targets modeling suggested that transcription
factors SP1, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4-alpha), and signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) serve as core nodes in the 
regulatory networks. On the other hand, Fourier transform analyses extracted
universal circadian-regulated genes in both sexes. The circadian-regulated genes 
included clock or clock-controlled genes such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator-like (Arntl), period homolog 2 (Per2), and D site albumin
promoter binding protein (Dbp). The extracted cyclic genes were over-represented 
in major tissue activities, e.g. the urea cycle and the metabolism of amino
acids, fatty acids, or glucose, indicating that the major liver functions are
under circadian control. The transcription factor targets modeling suggested that
transcription factors SP1, HNF4-alpha, and c-Myc proto-oncogene protein (c-MYC)
serve as major hubs in the circadian-regulatory gene networks. Interestingly,
transcription factors SP1 and HNF4-alpha are likely to orchestrate not only
sexually dimorphic, but also circadian-regulated genes even though each criterion
was rather mutually exclusive. This suggests the cross-talk between those
regulations. Sexual dimorphism is likely to interact with circadian rhythmicity
via overlapping gene regulatory networks on rat liver.

PMID: 21297337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Transl Oncol. 2011 Feb 1;4(1):47-58.

STAT-Related Profiles Are Associated with Patient Response to Targeted Treatments
in Locally Advanced SCCHN.

Kotoula V(1), Lambaki S, Televantou D, Kalogera-Fountzila A, Nikolaou A, Markou
K, Misailidou D, Syrigos KN, Fountzilas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.

The anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody cetuximab (Erbitux, CTX) is
currently used for the treatment of locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck (LA-SCCHN), as yet with modest effectiveness, prompting for the
identification of response predictors to this treatment and for the targeting of 
additional pathways implicated in this disease. Within this scope, we
investigated the effect of SRC/STAT pathway components on LA-SCCHN patient
outcome. SRC, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, ANXA1, CAV1, IGFBP2, EPHA2, EPHB2,
and MSN relative gene expression, as well as Stat protein activation, were
assessed on LA-SCCHN tumor tissues from 35 patients treated with combined
radiotherapy (RT) and CTX-based regimens. Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5 proteins were
usually found activated in neoplastic nuclei (70.4%, 85.7%, and 70.8%,
respectively). Activated Stat3 and Stat5 were associated with each other (P =
.017) and with a CAV1(high)/MSN(high)/IGFBP2(low) profile. All patients with
tumors expressing high STAT5A/EPHA2 experienced a complete response on
RT-CTX-based treatments (12/15 complete responders, P < .0001) and a longer
progression-free survival (P = .024). Few tumors expressed high ANXA1/CAV1/EPHA2 
and low IGFBP2, a putative dasatinib response-related profile, whereas high ANXA1
was associated with shorter overall survival (P = .003). In conclusion, Stat
activation is common in LA-SCCHN, where overexpression of STAT5A and EPHA2 may
predict for response to RT-CTX treatments. The STAT5A/EPHA2 profile seems of
particular interest for validation in larger cohorts and in multiple tumor types 
because markers for the positive selection of patients to benefit from
CTX-containing treatments are currently lacking.

PMCID: PMC3026408
PMID: 21286377  [PubMed]


292. Proteomics. 2011 Feb;11(3):490-4. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000569. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

One-source peptide/phosphopeptide standards for accurate phosphorylation degree
determination.

Hahn B(1), Böhm M, Raia V, Zinn N, Möller P, Klingmüller U, Lehmann WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure Analysis, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

Reversible protein phosphorylation is a key mediator for intracellular signal
transduction. Here we report an innovative method for accurate, site-specific
protein phosphorylation degree determination by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. A stable
isotope-labeled pair of peptide/phosphopeptide standards with volumetrically
defined molar ratio is used as reference, providing an internal standard for both
the analyte peptide and the phosphopeptide. For the preparation of one-source
peptide/phosphopeptide standards, an aliquot of the labeled phosphopeptide
standard is quantitatively dephosphorylated, yielding an equimolar solution of
the peptide standard. Subsequently, the two solutions are mixed at a 1:1 or other
volumetric ratio, which equals the molar ratio. This procedure assures a defined 
concentration ratio of both components that is independent from their absolute
concentration. We demonstrate the applicability of the one-source
peptide/phosphopeptide standard method by determining the phosphorylation degree 
of the signalling proteins STAT5A/B and STAT6.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21268278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Endocrinology. 2011 Mar;152(3):856-68. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1258. Epub 2011 Jan
14.

Differential and complementary effects of glucose and prolactin on islet DNA
synthesis and gene expression.

Arumugam R(1), Fleenor D, Lu D, Freemark M.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The mechanisms by which lactogenic hormones promote ß-cell expansion remain
poorly understood. Because prolactin (PRL) up-regulates ß-cell glucose
transporter 2, glucokinase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase activities, we reasoned
that glucose availability might mediate or modulate the effects of PRL on ß-cell 
mass. Here, we used male rat islets to show that PRL and glucose have
differential but complementary effects on the expression of cell cyclins, cell
cycle inhibitors, and various other genes known to regulate ß-cell replication,
including insulin receptor substrate 2, IGF-II, menin, forkhead box protein M1,
tryptophan hydroxylase 1, and the PRL receptor. Differential effects on gene
expression are associated with synergistic effects of glucose and PRL on islet
DNA synthesis. The effects of PRL on gene expression are mirrored by ß-cell
overexpression of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b and are
opposed by dexamethasone. An ad-small interfering RNA specific for cyclin D2
attenuates markedly the effects of PRL on islet DNA synthesis. Our studies
suggest a new paradigm for the control of ß-cell mass and insulin production by
hormones and nutrients. PRL up-regulates ß-cell glucose uptake and utilization,
whereas glucose increases islet PRL receptor expression and potentiates the
effects of PRL on cell cycle gene expression and DNA synthesis. These findings
suggest novel targets for prevention of neonatal glucose intolerance and
gestational diabetes and may provide new insight into the pathogenesis of ß-cell 
hyperplasia in obese subjects with insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3198965
PMID: 21239441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Apr;120(2):284-96. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq390. Epub 2010 Dec
30.

Activation of c-Src/HER1/STAT5b and HER1/ERK1/2 signaling pathways and cell
migration by hexachlorobenzene in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line.

Pontillo CA(1), García MA, Peña D, Cocca C, Chiappini F, Alvarez L, Kleiman de
Pisarev D, Randi AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Efectos Biológicos de Contaminantes Ambientales, Departamento
de Bioquímica Humana, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) is a widespread environmental pollutant. It is a
dioxin-like compound and a weak ligand of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
protein. HCB is a tumor cocarcinogen in rat mammary gland and an inducer of cell 
proliferation and c-Src kinase activity in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. This study 
was carried out to investigate HCB action on c-Src and the human epidermal growth
factor receptor (HER1) activities and their downstream signaling pathways, Akt,
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2), and signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) 5b, as well as on cell migration in a human
breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231. We also investigated whether the AhR is
involved in HCB-induced effects. We have demonstrated that HCB (0.05µM) produces 
an early increase of Y416-c-Src, Y845-HER1, Y699-STAT5b, and ERK1/2
phosphorylation. Moreover, our results have shown that the pesticide (15 min)
activates these pathways in a dose-dependent manner (0.005, 0.05, 0.5, and 5µM). 
In contrast, HCB does not alter T308-Akt activation. Pretreatment with a specific
inhibitor for c-Src (4-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(t-butyl)
pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine [PP2]) prevents Y845-HER1 and Y699-STAT5b
phosphorylation. AG1478, a specific HER1 inhibitor, abrogates HCB-induced STAT5b 
and ERK1/2 activation, whereas 4,7-orthophenanthroline and a-naphthoflavone, two 
AhR antagonists, prevent HCB-induced STAT5b and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. HCB
enhances cell migration evaluated by scratch motility and transwell assays.
Pretreatment with PP2, AG1478, and 4,7-orthophenanthroline suppresses HCB-induced
cell migration. These results demonstrate that HCB stimulates c-Src/HER1/STAT5b
and HER1/ERK1/2 signaling pathways in MDA-MB-231. c-Src, HER1, and AhR are
involved in HCB-induced increase in cell migration. The present study makes a
significant contribution to the molecular mechanism of action of HCB in mammary
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 21205633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cancer Sci. 2011 Apr;102(4):756-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01842.x. Epub
2011 Jan 23.

Involvement of STAP-2 in Brk-mediated phosphorylation and activation of STAT5 in 
breast cancer cells.

Ikeda O(1), Mizushima A, Sekine Y, Yamamoto C, Muromoto R, Nanbo A, Oritani K,
Yoshimura A, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Signal-transducing adaptor protein (STAP)-2 is a recently identified adaptor
protein that contains Pleckstrin homology and Src homology 2-like domains, and is
also known to be a substrate of breast tumor kinase (Brk). In a previous study,
we found that STAP-2 upregulated Brk-mediated activation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 3 in breast cancer cells. Here, we examined the
involvement of STAP-2 in Brk-mediated STAT5 activation in breast cancer cells.
Ectopic expression of STAP-2 induced Brk-mediated transcriptional activity of
STAT5. Furthermore, STAP-2-knockdown in T47D breast cancer cells induced a marked
decrease in proliferation that was as strong as that after Brk- or
STAT5b-knockdown. Regarding the mechanism, the Pleckstrin homology domain of
STAP-2 is likely to participate in the process by which Brk phosphorylates and
activates STAT5. Taken together, our findings provide insights toward the
development of novel therapeutic strategies as well as novel prognostic values in
breast carcinomas.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21205088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Front Oncol. 2011 Oct 25;1:35. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2011.00035. eCollection 2011.

Development of real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays to track
treatment response in retinoid resistant acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Jovanovic JV(1), Rennie K, Culligan D, Peniket A, Lennard A, Harrison J, Vyas P, 
Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics,
King's College London School of Medicine London, UK.

Molecular detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) has become established to
assess remission status and guide therapy in patients with ProMyelocytic
Leukemia-RARA+ acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). However, there are few data on
tracking disease response in patients with rarer retinoid resistant subtypes of
APL, characterized by PLZF-RARA and STAT5b-RARA. Despite their rarity (<1% of
APL) we identified 6 cases (PLZF-RARA, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5; STAT5b-RARA, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1), established
the respective breakpoint junction regions and designed reverse
transcription-quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assays
to detect leukemic transcripts. The relative level of fusion gene expression in
diagnostic samples was comparable to that observed in t(15;17) - associated APL, 
affording assay sensitivities of ~1 in 10(4)-10(5). Serial samples were available
from two PLZF-RARA APL patients. One showed persistent polymerase chain reaction 
positivity, predicting subsequent relapse, and remains in CR2, ~11<U+2009>years
post-autograft. The other, achieved molecular remission (CRm) with combination
chemotherapy, remaining in CR1 at 6<U+2009>years. The STAT5b-RARA patient failed to
achieve CRm following frontline combination chemotherapy and ultimately proceeded
to allogeneic transplant on the basis of a steadily rising fusion transcript
level. These data highlight the potential of RT-qPCR detection of MRD to
facilitate development of more individualized approaches to the management of
rarer molecularly defined subsets of acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3356041
PMID: 22655241  [PubMed]


297. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2011 Dec 12;2:95. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2011.00095.
eCollection 2011.

Genetic Defects in the Growth Hormone-IGF-I Axis Causing Growth Hormone
Insensitivity and Impaired Linear Growth.

Savage MO(1), Hwa V, David A, Rosenfeld RG, Metherell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry London, UK.

Human genetic defects in the growth hormone (GH)-IGF-I axis affecting the IGF
system present with growth failure as their principal clinical feature. This is
usually associated with GH insensitivity (GHI) presenting in childhood as severe 
or mild short stature. Dysmorphic features and metabolic abnormalities may also
be present. The field of GHI due to mutations affecting GH action has evolved
rapidly since the first description of the extreme phenotype related to
homozygous GH receptor (GHR) mutations in 1966. A continuum of genetic,
phenotypic, and biochemical abnormalities can be defined associated with
clinically relevant defects in linear growth. The mechanisms of the GH-IGF-I axis
in the regulation of normal human growth is discussed followed by descriptions of
mutations in GHR, STAT5B, IGF-I, IGFALS, IGF1R, and GH1 defects causing
bio-inactive GH or anti-GH antibodies. These GH-IGF-I axis defects are associated
with a range of clinical, and hormonal characteristics. An up-dated approach to
the clinical assessment of the patient with GHI focusing on investigation of the 
GH-IGF-I axis and relevant molecular studies contributing to the identification
of causative genetic defects is also discussed.

PMCID: PMC3356141
PMID: 22654835  [PubMed]


298. Hum Cell. 2010 Nov;23(4):164-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-0774.2010.00097.x.

Novel functional hepatocyte cell line derived from spontaneous dwarf rat: model
of growth hormone function in vitro.

Ishikawa M(1), Tachibana T, Yoshino G, Hashimoto H, Tanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
m-ishikawa@med.toho-u.ac.jp

Currently there is no good hepatocyte model for studying growth hormone (GH)
function that reflects its normal physiological roles. Here we report the
establishment of a functional hepatocyte cell line, SDRL-1, from the liver of
young male spontaneous dwarf rats (SDR), with isolated GH deficiency. This line
has been maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)/F12 medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) with retention of a near diploid
karyotype for extended periods of time. When grown as a monolayer sheet, it
displayed a pavement-like appearance and contact inhibition. These cells have a
poorly developed rough endoplasmic reticulum (r-ER), few mitochondria and
glycogen granules, and produce a small amount of albumin and a-fetoprotein, that 
is enhanced when grown on a collagen gel sponge. Human recombinant GH stimulated 
JAK2 and STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation and IGF-I production in a
concentration-dependent manner. When the cells were cultured with GH-supplemented
medium, the number of mitochondria and glycogen granules increased together with 
the r-ER and Golgi apparatus. A number of microvilli were observed on the surface
of the cultured cells, further suggesting that this cell line is composed of
normally functioning hepatocytes. In summary, we established a novel hepatocyte
cell line (SDRL-1), that appears to display normal function, which we propose can
serve as a good in vitro model for studying GH-target organ interactions.

2010 The Authors. Human Cell 2010 Japan Human Cell Society.

PMID: 21166888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5034-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.155903. Epub 2010 
Nov 24.

The tumor suppressor hTid1 inhibits STAT5b activity via functional interaction.

Dhennin-Duthille I(1), Nyga R, Yahiaoui S, Gouilleux-Gruart V, Régnier A,
Lassoued K, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U925, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, UFR de Médecine, 3 Rue des
Louvels, 80036 Amiens, France.

STAT5a and -5b (signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a and 5b)
proteins play an essential role in hematopoietic cell proliferation and survival 
and are frequently constitutively active in hematologic neoplasms and solid
tumors. Because STAT5a and STAT5b differ mainly in the carboxyl-terminal
transactivation domain, we sought to identify new proteins that bind specifically
to this domain by using a bacterial two-hybrid screening. We isolated hTid1, a
human DnaJ protein that acts as a tumor suppressor in various solid tumors. hTid1
interacts specifically with STAT5b but not with STAT5a in hematopoietic cell
lines. This interaction involves the cysteine-rich region of the hTid1 DnaJ
domain. We also demonstrated that hTid1 negatively regulates the expression and
transcriptional activity of STAT5b and suppresses the growth of hematopoietic
cells transformed by an oncogenic form of STAT5b. Our findings define hTid1 as a 
novel partner and negative regulator of STAT5b.

PMCID: PMC3037615
PMID: 21106534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Methods Enzymol. 2010;485:583-96. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381296-4.00030-0.

Design and use of constitutively active STAT5 constructs.

Farrar MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, USA.

The transcription factor Signal Tranducer and Activator of Transcription 5
(STAT5) plays an important role in numerous biological processes including, but
not limited to, (i) homeostasis of hematopoietic stem cells, (ii) development of 
essentially all blood cell lineages, (iii) growth hormone effects, (iv)
differentiation of mammary epithelium, and (v) central nervous system control of 
metabolism. Two key tools for deciphering STAT5 biology have involved the use of 
mice in which the Stat5a and Stat5b genes can be conditionally deleted
(Stat5(FL/FL) mice) and the development of systems in which STAT5a or STAT5b is
rendered constitutively active. In this chapter, the distinct mechanisms that
have been developed to render STAT5 constitutively active and their use in
probing biological processes are discussed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21050937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Hepatology. 2010 Nov;52(5):1808-18. doi: 10.1002/hep.23882.

The transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A
(STAT5A) and STAT5B negatively regulate cell proliferation through the activation
of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2b (Cdkn2b) and Cdkn1a expression.

Yu JH(1), Zhu BM, Wickre M, Riedlinger G, Chen W, Hosui A, Robinson GW,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Although the cytokine-inducible transcription factor signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) promotes proliferation of a wide range of
cell types, there are cell-specific and context-specific cases in which loss of
STAT5 results in enhanced cell proliferation. Here, we report that loss of STAT5 
from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) leads to enhanced proliferation, which
was linked to reduced levels of the cell cycle inhibitors p15(INK4B) and
p21(CIP1). We further demonstrate that growth hormone, through the transcription 
factor STAT5, enhances expression of the Cdkn2b (cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2B) gene and that STAT5A binds to interferon-gamma-activated sequence
sites within the promoter. We recently demonstrated that ablation of STAT5 from
liver results in hepatocellular carcinoma upon CCl4 treatment. We now establish
that STAT5, like in MEFs, activates expression of the Cdkn2b gene in liver
tissue. Loss of STAT5 led to diminished p15(INK4B) and increased hepatocyte
proliferation.CONCLUSION: This study for the first time demonstrates that
cytokines, through STAT5, induce the expression of a key cell cycle inhibitor.
These experiments therefore shed mechanistic light on the context-specific role
of STAT5 as tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3152209
PMID: 21038417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010 Jul;20(5):724-31.

Gene expression profiling and cancer-related pathways in type I endometrial
carcinoma.

Saghir FS(1), Rose IM, Dali AZ, Shamsuddin Z, Jamal AR, Mokhtar NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

INTRODUCTION: Malignant transformation of type I endometrium involves alteration 
in gene expression with subsequent uncontrolled proliferation of altered cells.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of the present study was to identify the
cancer-related genes and gene pathways in the endometrium of healthy and cancer
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty endometrial tissues from healthy and type I EC
patients were subjected to total RNA isolation. The RNA samples with good
integrity number were hybridized to a new version of Affymetrix Human Genome
GeneChip 1.0 ST array. We analyzed the results using the GeneSpring 9.0 GX and
the Pathway Studio 6.1 software. For validation assay, quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction was used to analyze 4 selected genes in normal and EC
tissue.
RESULTS: Of the 28,869 genes profiled, we identified 621 differentially expressed
genes (2-fold) in the normal tissue and the tumor. Among these genes, 146 were
up-regulated and 476 were down-regulated in the tumor as compared with the normal
tissue (P < 0.001). Up-regulated genes included the v-erb-a erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homolog 3 (ErbB3), ErbB4, E74-like factor 3 (ELF3), and
chemokine ligand 17 (CXCL17). The down-regulated genes included signal transducer
and activator transcription 5B (STAT5b), transforming growth factor A receptor
III (TGFA3), caveolin 1 (CAV1), and protein kinase C alpha (PKCA). The gene set
enrichment analysis showed 10 significant gene sets with related genes (P <
0.05). The quantitative polymerase chain reaction of 4 selected genes using
similar RNA confirmed the microarray results (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of molecular pathways with their genes related to
type I EC contribute to the understanding of pathophysiology of this cancer,
probably leading to identifying potential biomarkers of the cancer.

PMID: 20973258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;75(3):187-99. doi: 10.1159/000320461. Epub 2010 Oct 21.

A novel Y332C missense mutation in the intracellular domain of the human growth
hormone receptor does not alter STAT5b signaling: redundancy of GHR intracellular
tyrosines involved in STAT5b signaling.

Derr MA(1), Fang P, Sinha SK, Ten S, Hwa V, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
97239-3098, USA.

BACKGROUND: The growth hormone receptor (GHR), upon binding with GH, induces
JAK2-mediated phosphorylation of GHR intracellular tyrosines, which then recruit 
STAT5b. Aberrancies in STAT5b signaling, due to mutations in GHR or STAT5b genes,
result in poor responses to GH and severe short stature.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and compare the role of a novel Y332C GHR variant
identified in a patient with short stature to the other GHR intracellular
tyrosines in the GHR-STAT5b signaling process.
RESULTS: Recombinant human GHR constructs carrying Y332C or single Y to F changes
for each of the 7 intracellular tyrosines did not alter GH-induced GHR-STAT5b
signaling in reconstitution studies. However, GH-induced STAT5b activation was
specifically abrogated in an hGHR variant in which all 7 tyrosines were
inactivated (MYF). When hGHR variants carrying single intracellular tyrosines
were evaluated, STAT5b activation was comparable to that of wild-type hGHR only
with variants carrying Y534, Y566 or Y627.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence that in human GHR, 3 intracellular tyrosines are 
critical and redundant in the GH-induced STAT5b signaling process. This
redundancy may explain why an Y332C variant did not alter STAT5b signaling.
Identification of missense variants in human GHR intracellular domain should be
interpreted with caution and rigorously analyzed.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20962506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;42(12):2037-46. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.09.008. Epub 2010 Sep 18.

N-terminal truncation of Stat5a/b circumvents PIAS3-mediated transcriptional
inhibition of Stat5 in prostate cancer cells.

Dagvadorj A(1), Tan SH, Liao Z, Xie J, Nurmi M, Alanen K, Rui H, Mirtti T,
Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Transcription factor Stat5a/b is critical for prostate cancer cell survival and
for prostate xenograft tumor growth. In addition, the Stat5a/b signaling pathway 
may contribute to progression of organ-confined prostate cancer to
castration-resistant and/or metastatic disease. Expression of nuclear Stat5a/b is
clustered to high grade human prostate cancers, and nuclear Stat5a/b in primary
prostate cancer predicts early disease recurrence after initial treatment. Here, 
we show by Western blotting and electromobility shift assay that Stat5a/b protein
in human prostate cancer is N-terminally truncated. This short form of Stat5a/b
is generated post-translationally in vivo in prostate cancer cells and is the
predominant form of Stat5a/b that binds to DNA. We further demonstrate by
mutagenesis and co-immunoprecipitations that the N-domain of Stat5a/b is required
for binding to PIAS3, and that PIAS3 inhibits transcriptional activity of
Stat5a/b in breast cancer cells but not in prostate cancer cells. Thus, the
proteolytic cleavage of the N-terminus of Stat5a/b may be a mechanism by which
Stat5 evades the transcriptional repression by PIAS3 in prostate cancer cells,
and results in increased Stat5-driven gene expression and prostate cancer
progression.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2982800
PMID: 20854925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Anal Chem. 2010 Oct 1;82(19):8186-93. doi: 10.1021/ac101521y.

Quenched substrates for live-cell labeling of SNAP-tagged fusion proteins with
improved fluorescent background.

Stöhr K(1), Siegberg D, Ehrhard T, Lymperopoulos K, Öz S, Schulmeister S, Pfeifer
AC, Bachmann J, Klingmüller U, Sourjik V, Herten DP.

Author information: 
(1)CellNetworks Cluster and Institute of Physical Chemistry, Heidelberg
University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Recent developments in fluorescence microscopy raise the demands for bright and
photostable fluorescent tags for specific and background free labeling in living 
cells. Aside from fluorescent proteins and other tagging methods, labeling of
SNAP-tagged proteins has become available thereby increasing the pool of
potentially applicable fluorescent dyes for specific labeling of proteins. Here, 
we report on novel conjugates of benzylguanine (BG) which are quenched in their
fluorescence and become highly fluorescent upon labeling of the SNAP-tag, the
commercial variant of the human O(6)-alkylguanosyltransferase (hAGT). We
identified four conjugates showing a strong increase, i.e., >10-fold, in
fluorescence intensity upon labeling of SNAP-tag in vitro. Moreover, we screened 
a subset of nine BG-dye conjugates in living Escherichia coli and found them all 
suited for labeling of the SNAP-tag. Here, quenched BG-dye conjugates yield a
higher specificity due to reduced contribution from excess conjugate to the
fluorescence signal. We further extended the application of these conjugates by
labeling a SNAP-tag fusion of the Tar chemoreceptor in live E. coli cells and the
eukaryotic transcription factor STAT5b in NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblast cells. Aside
from the labeling efficiency and specificity in living cells, we discuss possible
mechanisms that might be responsible for the changes in fluorescence emission
upon labeling of the SNAP-tag, as well as problems we encountered with
nonspecific labeling with certain conjugates in eukaryotic cells.

PMID: 20815338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):32704-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141804. Epub 2010
Aug 18.

The gene encoding the hematopoietic stem cell regulator CCN3/NOV is under direct 
cytokine control through the transcription factors STAT5A/B.

Kimura A(1), Martin C, Robinson GW, Simone JM, Chen W, Wickre MC, O'Shea JJ,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. kimuraa@mail.nih.gov

Cytokines control the biology of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor
cells in part through the transcription factors STAT5A/B. To investigate the
target genes of STAT5A/B activated by cytokines in HSCs and progenitors, we
performed microarray analyses using Lineage(-) Sca-1(+) c-Kit(+) (KSL) cells in
the presence and absence of STAT5A/B. Stimulation with a mixture containing IL-3,
IL-6, stem cell factor, thrombopoietin, and Flt3 ligand induced Ccn3/Nov mRNA
over 100-fold in WT (control) but not Stat5a/b-null KSL cells. CCN3/NOV is a
positive regulator of human HSC self-renewal and development of committed blood
cells. Without stimulation, the Ccn3/Nov signal level was low in control KSL
cells similar to Stat5a/b-null KSL cells. To determine which cytokine activates
the Ccn3/Nov gene, we analyzed Lineage(-) c-Kit(+) (KL) and 32D cells using
quantitative PCR and ChIP assays. Although stimulation with a mixture lacking
IL-3 prevented the induction of Ccn3/Nov in control KL cells, IL-3 alone could
induce Ccn3/Nov mRNA in control KL and 32D cells. ChIP assays using 32D cells
revealed IL-3-induced binding of STAT5A/B to a <U+03B3>-interferon-activated sequences
site in the Ccn3/Nov gene promoter. This is the first report that Ccn3/Nov is
directly induced by cytokines through STAT5A/B.

PMCID: PMC2963365
PMID: 20720003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Oct 1;21(19):3340-51. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-01-0040. Epub 2010
Aug 11.

ZFP36L1 negatively regulates erythroid differentiation of CD34+ hematopoietic
stem cells by interfering with the Stat5b pathway.

Vignudelli T(1), Selmi T, Martello A, Parenti S, Grande A, Gemelli C,
Zanocco-Marani T, Ferrari S.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche,
Sezione di Chimica Biologica, 41100, Modena, Italy.

ZFP36L1 is a member of a family of CCCH tandem zinc finger proteins (TTP family) 
able to bind to AU-rich elements in the 3'-untranslated region of mRNAs, thereby 
triggering their degradation. The present study suggests that such mechanism is
used during hematopoiesis to regulate differentiation by posttranscriptionally
modulating the expression of specific target genes. In particular, it
demonstrates that ZFP36L1 negatively regulates erythroid differentiation by
directly binding the 3' untranslated region of Stat5b encoding mRNA. Stat5b
down-regulation obtained by ZFP36L1 overexpression results, in human
hematopoietic progenitors, in a drastic decrease of erythroid colonies formation.
These observations have been confirmed by silencing experiments targeting Stat5b 
and by treating hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells with drugs able to induce
ZFP36L1 expression. Moreover, this study shows that different members of ZFP36L1 
family act redundantly, because cooverexpression of ZFP36L1 and family member
ZFP36 determines a cumulative effect on Stat5b down-regulation. This work
describes a mechanism underlying ZFP36L1 capability to regulate hematopoietic
differentiation and suggests a new target for the therapy of hematopoietic
diseases involving Stat5b/JAK2 pathway, such as chronic myeloproliferative
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2947470
PMID: 20702587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;24(10):2038-49. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0234. Epub 2010 Aug
11.

Defining the epigenetic actions of growth hormone: acute chromatin changes
accompany GH-activated gene transcription.

Chia DJ(1), Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland Oregon 
97239-3098, USA.

Many of the long-term physiological effects of GH require hormone-mediated
changes in gene expression. The transcription factor signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) plays a critical role in the actions of GH
on growth and metabolism by regulating a large number of GH-dependent genes by
incompletely understood mechanisms. Here we have assessed the impact of
GH-initiated and Stat5b-mediated signaling on the chromatin landscape of
hormone-regulated genes in the liver of pituitary-deficient young adult male
rats. In the absence of GH there was minimal ongoing transcription at the Socs2, 
Cish, Igfals, and Spi 2.1 promoters, minimal occupancy of Stat5b at proximal
promoter sites, and relatively closed chromatin, as evidenced by low levels of
core histone acetylation. In contrast, transcriptionally silent Igf1 promoter 1
appeared poised to be activated, based on binding of coactivators p300 and
Med1/Trap220, high levels of histone acetylation, and the presence of RNA
polymerase II. GH treatment led to a 8- to 20-fold rise in transcriptional
activity of all five genes within 30-60 min and was accompanied by binding of
Stat5b to the proximal Socs2, Cish, Igfals, and Spi 2.1 promoters and to seven
distal Igf1 Stat5b elements, by enhanced histone acetylation at all five
promoters, by recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the Socs2, Cish, Igfals, and
Spi 2.1 promoters, and by loss of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6 from Socs2, 
Cish, and Igfals Stat5b sites, but not from two Igf1 Stat5b domains. We conclude 
that GH actions induce rapid and dramatic changes in hepatic chromatin at target 
promoters and propose that the chromatin signature of Igf1 differs from other
GH-and Stat5b-dependent genes.

PMCID: PMC2954634
PMID: 20702579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Aug 5;4:106. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-106.

Model-based extension of high-throughput to high-content data.

Pfeifer AC(1), Kaschek D, Bachmann J, Klingmüller U, Timmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German
Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: High-quality quantitative data is a major limitation in systems
biology. The experimental data used in systems biology can be assigned to one of 
the following categories: assays yielding average data of a cell population,
high-content single cell measurements and high-throughput techniques generating
single cell data for large cell populations. For modeling purposes, a combination
of data from different categories is highly desirable in order to increase the
number of observable species and processes and thereby maximize the
identifiability of parameters.
RESULTS: In this article we present a method that combines the power of
high-content single cell measurements with the efficiency of high-throughput
techniques. A calibration on the basis of identical cell populations measured by 
both approaches connects the two techniques. We develop a mathematical model to
relate quantities exclusively observable by high-content single cell techniques
to those measurable with high-content as well as high-throughput methods. The
latter are defined as free variables, while the variables measurable with only
one technique are described in dependence of those. It is the combination of data
calibration and model into a single method that makes it possible to determine
quantities only accessible by single cell assays but using high-throughput
techniques. As an example, we apply our approach to the nucleocytoplasmic
transport of STAT5B in eukaryotic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented procedure can be generally applied to systems that
allow for dividing observables into sets of free quantities, which are easily
measurable, and variables dependent on those. Hence, it extends the information
content of high-throughput methods by incorporating data from high-content
measurements.

PMCID: PMC2928782
PMID: 20687942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 15;70(16):6516-26. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4566. Epub 
2010 Aug 3.

KRAB zinc finger protein ZNF382 is a proapoptotic tumor suppressor that represses
multiple oncogenes and is commonly silenced in multiple carcinomas.

Cheng Y(1), Geng H, Cheng SH, Liang P, Bai Y, Li J, Srivastava G, Ng MH, Fukagawa
T, Wu X, Chan AT, Tao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South
China/Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Sir YK Pao Center for Cancer, Hong Kong
Cancer Institute, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Zinc finger transcription factors are involved broadly in development and
tumorigenesis. Here, we report that the little studied zinc finger transcription 
factor ZNF382 functions as a tumor suppressor in multiple carcinomas. Although
broadly expressed in normal tissues, ZNF382 expression was attenuated in multiple
carcinoma cell lines due to promoter CpG methylation. ZNF382 was also frequently 
methylated in multiple primary tumors (nasopharyngeal, esophageal, colon,
gastric, and breast). Ectopic expression of ZNF382 in silenced tumor cells
significantly inhibited their clonogenicity and proliferation and induced
apoptosis. We further found that ZNF382 inhibited NF-kappaB and AP-1 signaling
and downregulated the expression of multiple oncogenes including MYC, MITF,
HMGA2, and CDK6, as well as the NF-kappaB upstream factors STAT3, STAT5B, ID1,
and IKBKE, most likely through heterochromatin silencing. ZNF382 could suppress
tumorigenesis through heterochromatin-mediated silencing, as ZNF382 was
colocalized and interacted with heterochromatin protein HP1 and further changed
the chromatin modifications of ZNF382 target oncogenes. Our data show that ZNF382
is a functional tumor suppressor frequently methylated in multiple carcinomas.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMID: 20682794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Nov;38(21):7446-57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq634. Epub 2010
Jul 17.

A novel role of CPEB3 in regulating EGFR gene transcription via association with 
Stat5b in neurons.

Peng SC(1), Lai YT, Huang HY, Huang HD, Huang YS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
104, Taiwan.

CPEB3 is a sequence-specific RNA-binding protein and represses translation of its
target mRNAs in neurons. Here, we have identified a novel function of CPEB3 as to
interact with Stat5b and inhibit its transcription activity in the nucleus
without disrupting dimerization, DNA binding and nuclear localization of Stat5b. 
Moreover, CPEB3 is a nucleocytoplasm-shuttling protein with predominant residence
in the cytoplasm; whereas activation of NMDA receptors accumulates CPEB3 in the
nucleus. Using the knockdown approach, we have found the receptor tyrosine
kinase, EGFR, is a target gene transcriptionally activated by Stat5b and
downregulated by CPEB3 in neurons. The increased EGFR expression in CPEB3
knockdown neurons, when stimulated with EGF, alters the kinetics of downstream
signaling. Taken together, CPEB3 has a novel function in the nucleus as to
suppress Stat5b-dependent EGFR gene transcription. Consequently, EGFR signaling
is negatively regulated by CPEB3 in neurons.

PMCID: PMC2995057
PMID: 20639532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 2;5(7):e11422. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011422.

Gammadelta T cells are reduced and rendered unresponsive by hyperglycemia and
chronic TNFalpha in mouse models of obesity and metabolic disease.

Taylor KR(1), Mills RE, Costanzo AE, Jameson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Epithelial cells provide an initial line of defense against damage and pathogens 
in barrier tissues such as the skin; however this balance is disrupted in obesity
and metabolic disease. Skin gammadelta T cells recognize epithelial damage, and
release cytokines and growth factors that facilitate wound repair. We report here
that hyperglycemia results in impaired skin gammadelta T cell proliferation due
to altered STAT5 signaling, ultimately resulting in half the number of gammadelta
T cells populating the epidermis. Skin gammadelta T cells that overcome this
hyperglycemic state are unresponsive to epithelial cell damage due to chronic
inflammatory mediators, including TNFalpha. Cytokine and growth factor production
at the site of tissue damage was partially restored by administering neutralizing
TNFalpha antibodies in vivo. Thus, metabolic disease negatively impacts
homeostasis and functionality of skin gammadelta T cells, rendering host defense 
mechanisms vulnerable to injury and infection.

PMCID: PMC2896399
PMID: 20625397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Am J Transl Res. 2010 Apr 10;2(3):210-22.

Influence of hypoxia induced by minimally invasive prostatectomy on gene
expression: implications for biomarker analysis.

Erickson HS(1), Josephson JW, Vira M, Albert PS, Gillespie JW, Rodriguez-Canales 
J, Pinto PA, Chuaqui RF, Emmert-Buck MR, Coleman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA; Pathogenetics Unit,
Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Handling and processing of clinical specimens during and after surgical resection
may significantly skew the molecular data obtained from analysis of those
samples. Minimally invasive prostatectomy was used as a model to specifically
study effects of surgical ischemia on gene expression in human clinical samples. 
Normal prostatic urethra cup biopsies were procured from 12 patients at three
time points during laparoscopic radical prostatectomy. Homogeneous cells (stroma 
and epithelium) were microdissected. Transcript analysis of 3 oxygen-dependent, 3
oxygen-independent, and 3 control class genes was performed using quantitative
RT-PCR. Data were analyzed by relative quantitation and two-sided t-test. Patient
demographic and time covariates were fit by a linear mixed model. VEGF, an
oxygen-dependent gene, showed significant expression alterations across three
time points in epithelium (p=0.008), but not in stroma (p=0.66). Expression
levels of VHL, STAT5B, and CYPA showed significant changes at the p<0.05 level in
the stroma only. Effects of age, PSA, prostate size, Gleason score, surgery type,
total surgery time, total ischemia time, and estimated blood loss on VEGF
expression over time were not significant at the p<0.01 level. Therefore,
surgical manipulation and tissue processing methods need to be taken into account
when assessing prostatic biomarkers; however, resection does not dramatically
alter mRNA profiles in prostate specimens.

PMCID: PMC2892411
PMID: 20589162  [PubMed]


314. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 18;5(6):e11198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011198.

Oncoproteomic analysis reveals co-upregulation of RELA and STAT5 in carboplatin
resistant ovarian carcinoma.

Jinawath N(1), Vasoontara C, Jinawath A, Fang X, Zhao K, Yap KL, Guo T, Lee CS,
Wang W, Balgley BM, Davidson B, Wang TL, Shih IeM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal types of female malignancy. 
Although most patients are initially responsive to platinum-based chemotherapy,
almost all develop recurrent chemoresistant tumors and succumb to their diseases.
Elucidating the pathogenesis underlying drug resistance is fundamental to the
development of new therapeutics, leading to improved clinical outcomes in these
patients.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We compared the proteomes of paired primary and recurrent
post-chemotherapy ovarian high-grade serous carcinomas from nine ovarian cancer
patients using CIEF/Nano-RPLC coupled with ESI-Tandem MS. As compared to their
primary tumors, more than half of the recurrent tumors expressed higher levels of
several proteins including CP, FN1, SYK, CD97, AIF1, WNK1, SERPINA3, APOD, URP2, 
STAT5B and RELA (NF-kappaB p65), which were also validated by quantitative
RT-PCR. Based on shRNA screening for the upregulated genes in in vitro
carboplatin-resistant cells, we found that simultaneous knockdown of RELA and
STAT5B was most effective in sensitizing tumor cells for carboplatin treatment.
Similarly, the NF-kappaB inhibitor, BMS-345541, and the STAT5 inhibitor,
Dasatinib, significantly enhanced cell sensitivity to carboplatin. Moreover, both
RELA and STAT5 are known to bind to the promoter region of Bcl-X, regulating its 
promoter activity. In this regard, augmented Bcl-xL expression was detected in
carboplatin-resistant cells. Combined ectopic expression of RELA and STAT5B
enhanced Bcl-xL promoter activity while treatment with BMS-345541 and Dasatinib
decreased it. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of the Bcl-X promoter region using a 
STAT5 antibody showed induction of RELA and STAT5 DNA-binding segments both in
naïve cells treated with a high concentration of carboplatin as well as in
carboplatin-resistant cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Proteomic analysis identified RELA and STAT5 as two major proteins
associated with carboplatin resistance in ovarian tumors. Our results further
showed that NF-kappaB and STAT5 inhibitor could sensitize carboplatin-resistant
cells and suggest that such inhibitors can be used to benefit patients with
carboplatin-resistant recurrent ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2887843
PMID: 20585448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Aug;163(2):349-55. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0272. Epub 2010 Jun
10.

A novel STAT5B mutation causing GH insensitivity syndrome associated with
hyperprolactinemia and immune dysfunction in two male siblings.

Pugliese-Pires PN(1), Tonelli CA, Dora JM, Silva PC, Czepielewski M, Simoni G,
Arnhold IJ, Jorge AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Hospital das Clinicas, Faculdade
de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo (FMUSP), São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: GH insensitivity (GHI) syndrome caused by STAT5B mutations was
recently reported, and it is characterized by extreme short stature and immune
dysfunction. Treatment with recombinant human IGF1 (rhIGF1) is approved for
patients with GHI, but the growth response to this therapy in patients with
STAT5B mutations has not been reported.
OBJECTIVES: To report the clinical features, molecular findings, and the
short-term growth response to rhIGF1 therapy in patients with STAT5B mutation.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Hormonal and immunological evaluations were performed in
two male siblings with GHI associated with atopic eczema, interstitial lung
disease, and thrombocytopenic purpura. STAT5B genes were directly sequenced. The 
younger sibling was treated with rhIGF1 at a dose of 110 microg/kg BID.
RESULTS: Both siblings had laboratory findings compatible with GHI associated
with hyperprolactinemia. Lymphopenia and reduced number of natural killer cells
without immunoglobulin abnormalities were observed. STAT5B sequence revealed a
homozygous frameshift mutation (p.L142fsX161) in both siblings. The younger
sibling (9.9 years of age) was treated with rhIGF1 at appropriate dosage, and he 
did not present any significant change in his growth velocity (from 2.3 to 3.0
cm/year after 1.5 years of therapy). The presence of a chronic illness could
possibly be responsible for the poor result of rhIGF1 treatment. Further studies 
in patients with STAT5B defects are necessary to define the response to rhIGF1
treatment in this disorder.
CONCLUSION: GHI associated with immune dysfunction, especially interstitial lung 
disease, and hyperprolactinemia is strongly suggestive of a mutation in STAT5B in
both sexes.

PMID: 20538865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Oct;225(1):214-22. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22246.

PTP1B deficiency enhances liver growth during suckling by increasing the
expression of insulin-like growth factor-I.

Escrivá F(1), González-Rodriguez A, Fernández-Millán E, Rondinone CM, Alvarez C, 
Valverde AM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enferemdades
Metabólicas Asociadas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is a negative regulator of insulin and
tyrosine kinase growth factor signaling. We have recently demonstrated that PTP1B
deficiency increases GLUT2/insulin receptor (IR) A complexes and glucose uptake
in suckling, but not adult, primary hepatocytes. Herein we have investigated
intrahepatic glucose utilization in 3-5 days old wild-type and PTP1B(-/-) mice.
PTP1B deficiency decreased glycogen, lactate, and pyruvate content in the livers 
from suckling mice. Conversely, the activity of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PD), the rate limiting enzyme of the pentose phosphate cycle (PPC) which
provides substrates for DNA synthesis, was enhanced in the liver of PTP1B(-/-)
animals. Liver weight, liver-to-body mass ratio, DNA content, and PCNA expression
were increased in PTP1B(-/-) suckling mice compared to the wild-type controls. At
the molecular level, STAT 5B phosphorylation, IGF-I mRNA, and protein levels as
well as IGF-IR tyrosine phosphorylation were increased in the livers of
PTP1B-deficient neonates. Unexpectedly, hepatic and serum triglycerides (TG) were
increased by PTP1B deficiency, although the expression of lipogenic enzymes
remained as in the wild-type controls. However, the analysis of milk composition 
revealed higher TG content in lactating females lacking PTP1B. The effects of
PTP1B deficiency on G6PD activity, STAT 5B/IGF-I/IGF-IR axis, PCNA expression and
liver growth during suckling were maintained by transferring PTP1B(-/-) embryos
(PTP1B(-/-T)) to a wild-type female. Conversely, PTP1B(-/-T) mice did not show
hepatic fat accumulation. In conclusion, the present study suggests that PTP1B
plays a unique role in the control of the physiological liver development after
birth.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20506299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):466-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-252825. Epub 2010
May 4.

Constitutively active Stat5b in CD4+ T cells inhibits graft-versus-host disease
lethality associated with increased regulatory T-cell potency and decreased T
effector cell responses.

Vogtenhuber C(1), Bucher C, Highfill SL, Koch LK, Goren E, Panoskaltsis-Mortari
A, Taylor PA, Farrar MA, Blazar BR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division
of Bone Marrow Transplantation, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Overexpression of a constitutively active form of Stat5b (Stat5b-CA) increases
regulatory T cells (Tregs). We show that Stat5b-CA transgenic (TG) CD4(+) T cells
had a markedly reduced graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) capacity versus wild-type
(WT) T cells. Stat5b-CA TG versus WT CD4(+) T cells had a higher proportion of
Tregs, which were superior in suppressing alloresponses mediated by CD4(+)CD25(-)
effector T cells (Teffs). By day 5 after transplantation, Stat5b-CA TG Tregs had 
expanded approximately 3-fold more than WT Tregs. Purified Stat5b-CA TG Tregs
added to WT CD4(+)CD25(-) Teffs were superior on a per-cell basis for inhibiting 
GVHD versus WT Tregs. Surprisingly, rigorously Treg-depleted Stat5b-CA TG versus 
WT CD4(+)CD25(-) Teffs caused less GVHD lethality associated with diminished Teff
proinflammatory and increased Th2 anti-inflammatory cytokine responses. Reduced
GVHD by Stat5b-CA TG versus WT Teffs could not be explained by conversion into
Tregs in day 10 posttransplantation spleen or small intestine. In addition,
Stat5b-CA TG Teffs retained a graft-versus-leukemia response. These results
indicate a major role for Stat5 in Treg expansion and potency along with a lesser
but significant role in Teff activation and suggest a strategy of pharmacologic
Stat5b up-regulation as a means of decreasing GVHD while retaining a
graft-versus-leukemia effect.

PMCID: PMC2913456
PMID: 20442366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Neuropharmacology. 2010 Sep;59(3):139-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.04.010. 
Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Multi-component signaling complexes of the delta-opioid receptor with STAT5B and 
G proteins.

Georganta EM(1), Agalou A, Georgoussi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Signaling and Molecular Pharmacology, Institute of
Biology, National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, 15310 Ag.
Paraskevi-Attikis, Athens, Greece.

Besides mediating opioid responses in the nervous system and the peripheral
tissues, opioid receptors are implicated in signaling mechanisms shared by
cytokine receptors. Recent observations have shown that the Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription 5A (STAT5A) interacts with the mu-opioid receptor
(mu-OR) and is phosphorylated upon mu-OR stimulation (Mazarakou and Georgoussi,
2005). In the present study we demonstrate that another member of the STAT
family, STAT5B, associates constitutively with the C-terminal tail of the
delta-opioid receptor (delta-CT). [D-Ser(2), Leu(5), Thr(6)]-enkephalin-exposure 
of HEK293 cells, expressing stably the delta-opioid receptor (delta-OR), leads to
receptor-dependent STAT5B tyrosine phosphorylation and transcriptional
activation. This phosphorylation occurs in a G protein-dependent manner and is
carried out by a c-Src kinase. Co-immunoprecipitation studies indicate that
STAT5B forms pairs with selective Galpha and Gbetagamma subunits of G proteins
and activated c-Src kinase in HEK293 cells. These interactions are formed either 
constitutively, or upon receptor stimulation. We also demonstrate that the
delta-CT serves as a platform for the formation of a multi-component signaling
complex (signalosome), consisting of STAT5B, c-Src and selective G protein
members. We can thus conclude that STAT5B signaling can be modulated by its
coupling with a specific subset of G protein subunits, revealing a novel
signaling mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of STAT5B-dependent genes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20433855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2010 Jun;30(3):178-88. doi:
10.3109/10799891003786218.

Deregulation of STAT-5 isoforms in the development of HPV-mediated cervical
carcinogenesis.

Sobti RC(1), Singh N, Hussain S, Suri V, Bharadwaj M, Das BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Panjab University, Sector-14, Chandigarh, India. 
rcsobti@pu.ac.in

BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer and is leading cause
of cancer related deaths in women worldwide. High Risk-Human papillomavirus (HPV)
types play an important role in cervical carcinogenesis. Considering the
important role of signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 (STAT-5), an
important member of JAK/STAT family which plays a crucial role in various cancers
and HPV as a key mediator in the development of cervical carcinogenesis, the
purpose of the current study was to examine the possible relationship between HPV
infection and expression of STAT-5 gene isoforms in cervical cancer.
METHODS: A total of 120 fresh cervical tissue specimens comprising precancer (n =
12), cancer (n = 78) and normal controls (n = 30) were analyzed for HPV infection
and expression pattern of STAT-5 mRNA (both isoforms STAT-5a and STAT-5b) and
protein in different stages of cervical carcinoma biopsies by
reverse-transcriptase-PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: A significantly increased expression of STAT-5 was detected in most of
the cervical tumors (P < 0.001), whereas it was almost undetectable in normal
controls. Also the study of relative contribution of STAT-5 isoforms revealed a
higher expression pattern of STAT-5b and was associated with severity of the
disease. On the contrary, STAT-5a was found to be significantly downregulated in 
cervical tumor tissues (P < 0.001). HPV infection was found in 90% of the
cervical cancer cases and was significantly associated with STAT-5 overexpression
(P = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We observed for the first time the differential expression pattern
of STAT-5 isoforms in cervical cancer and that STAT-5 may play an important role 
in the progression of HPV-mediated cervical cancer.

PMID: 20415542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Br J Haematol. 2010 Jun;149(6):844-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08174.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 12.

Gene expression profiling of erythroblasts from refractory anaemia with ring
sideroblasts (RARS) and effects of G-CSF.

Nikpour M(1), Pellagatti A, Liu A, Karimi M, Malcovati L, Gogvadze V, Forsblom
AM, Wainscoat JS, Cazzola M, Zhivotovsky B, Grandien A, Boultwood J,
Hellström-Lindberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Experimental Haematology, Department of Medicine (Huddinge),
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Refractory anaemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS) is characterized by anaemia,
erythroid apoptosis, cytochrome c release and mitochondrial ferritin
accumulation. Granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) inhibits the first
three of these features in vitro and in vivo. To dissect the molecular mechanisms
underlying the RARS phenotype and anti-apoptotic effects of G-CSF, erythroblasts 
generated from normal (NBM) and RARS marrow CD34(+) cells were cultured +/-G-CSF 
and subjected to gene expression analysis (GEP). Several
erythropoiesis-associated genes that were deregulated in RARS CD34(+) cells
showed normal expression in erythroblasts, underscoring the importance of
differentiation-specific GEP. RARS erythroblasts showed a marked deregulation of 
several pathways including apoptosis, DNA damage repair, mitochondrial function
and the JAK/Stat pathway. ABCB7, transporting iron from mitochondria to cytosol
and associated with inherited ring sideroblast formation was severely suppressed 
and expression decreased with differentiation, while increasing in NBM cultures. 
The same pattern was observed for the mitochondrial integrity gene MFN2. Other
downregulated key genes included STAT5B, HSPA5, FANCC and the negative apoptosis 
regulator MAP3K7. Methylation status of key downregulated genes was normal. The
mitochondrial pathway including MFN2 was significantly modified by G-CSF, and
several heat shock protein genes were upregulated, as evidence of anti-apoptotic 
protection of erythropoiesis. By contrast, G-CSF had no effect on iron-transport 
or erythropoiesis-associated genes.

PMID: 20408843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 May 1;77(1):244-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.033.

Bystander effects induced by medium from irradiated cells: similar transcriptome 
responses in irradiated and bystander K562 cells.

Herok R(1), Konopacka M, Polanska J, Swierniak A, Rogolinski J, Jaksik R, Hancock
R, Rzeszowska-Wolny J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice, Poland.

PURPOSE: Cells exposed to ionizing radiation release factors that induce
deoxyribonucleic acid damage, chromosomal instability, apoptosis, and changes in 
the proliferation rate of neighboring unexposed cells, phenomena known as
bystander effects. This work analyzes and compares changes in global transcript
levels induced by direct irradiation and by bystander effects in K562 (human
erythroleukemia) cells.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Cells were X-irradiated with 4 Gy or transferred into
culture medium collected from cells 1 h after irradiation
(irradiation-conditioned medium). Global transcript profiles were assessed after 
36 h of growth by use of Affymetrix microarrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and
the kinetics of change of selected transcripts by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The level of the majority (72%) of transcripts changed similarly
(increase, decrease, or no change) in cells grown in irradiation-conditioned
medium or irradiated, whereas only 0.6% showed an opposite response. Transcript
level changes in bystander and irradiated cells were significantly different from
those in untreated cells grown for the same amount of time and were confirmed by 
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for selected genes. 
Signaling pathways in which the highest number of transcripts changed in both
conditions were found in the following groups: neuroactive ligand-receptor,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, Janus Kinase-Signal Transducers and
Activators of Transcription (JAK-STAT) and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase
(MAPK) In control cells more transcripts were downregulated than in irradiated
and bystander cells with transcription factors YBX1 and STAT5B, heat shock
protein HSPA1A, and ribonucleic acid helicase DDX3X as examples.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptomes of cells grown in medium from X-irradiated cells 
or directly irradiated show very similar changes. Signals released by irradiated 
cells may cause changes in the transcriptome of neighboring cells that sustain
their survival.

PMID: 20394856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 4;285(23):17636-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.117697. Epub 2010
Apr 7.

Dispersed Chromosomal Stat5b-binding elements mediate growth hormone-activated
insulin-like growth factor-I gene transcription.

Chia DJ(1), Varco-Merth B, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University,Portland, Oregon 
97239-3098, USA.

The growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) axis regulates
somatic growth during childhood and orchestrates tissue repair throughout the
life span. Recently described inactivating mutations in Stat5b in humans with
impaired growth have focused attention on this transcription factor as a key
agent linking GH-stimulated signals to IGF-I gene expression, and several
putative Stat5b sites have been identified in the IGF-I gene. Here, we define and
characterize potential GH- and Stat5b-activated chromosomal enhancers that can
regulate IGF-I gene transcription. Of 89 recognizable Stat5 sequences in 200 kb
centering on the rat IGF-I gene, 22 resided within conserved regions and/or were 
identical among different species. Only 15 of these sites, organized into 7
distinct domains, were found to bind Stat5b by quantitative chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in liver chromatin of rats, but only after acute GH
treatment. These sites could bind Stat5b in vitro, and individual domains could
mediate GH- and Stat5b-stimulated IGF-I promoter activity in cultured cells.
Further analyses revealed that four Stat5b domains possessed chromatin signatures
of enhancers, including binding of co-activators p300 and Med1, and RNA
polymerase II. These modifications preceded GH-stimulated recruitment of Stat5b, 
as did lysine 4 monomethylation of histone H3, which was enriched in 6/7
Stat5b-binding elements. In contrast, histone acetylation was induced by GH but
was limited to Stat5b binding domains found within the IGF-I transcription unit. 
We conclude that GH stimulates recruitment of Stat5b to multiple dispersed
regions within the igf1 locus, including several with properties consistent with 
long range transcriptional enhancers that collectively regulate GH-activated
IGF-I gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2878528
PMID: 20378540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Kidney Int. 2010 Jul;78(1):89-95. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.85. Epub 2010 Apr 7.

Uremia attenuates growth hormone-stimulated insulin-like growth factor-1
expression, a process worsened by inflammation.

Chen Y(1), Biada J, Sood S, Rabkin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) resistance is common in uremia and together with resistance
to insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) contributes to uremic growth retardation 
and muscle wasting. Previously, we found decreased GH-stimulated janus-kinase
2-signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) phosphorylation
and nuclear translocation in uremia; however, it is unclear whether there are
more distal defects. Therefore, we tested whether the binding of phosphorylated
STAT5b to DNA is intact in uremia. Using uremic rats we found that in addition to
impaired hepatic STAT5b phosphorylation, the binding of available phospho-STAT5b 
to DNA is decreased thus contributing to impaired IGF-1 gene expression. As
sepsis-induced inflammation causes a loss of body protein and as Gram-negative
infections are relatively common in uremia, we also characterized mechanisms in
which acute inflammation might contribute to GH resistance in uremia.
Endotoxin-induced inflammation markedly increased the resistance to GH-mediated
STAT5b signaling, and further decreased STAT5b binding to DNA and IGF-1 gene
expression. These perturbations appear to be related to increased cytokine
expression. Thus, our findings indicate that hepatic resistance to GH-induced
IGF-1 expression in uremia arises due to defects in STAT5b phosphorylation and
its impaired binding to DNA, processes further aggravated by inflammation.

PMID: 20375991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Int J Oncol. 2010 May;36(5):1243-51.

Hemin inhibits cyclin D1 and IGF-1 expression via STAT5b under hypoxia in
ERalpha-negative MDA-MB 231 breast cancer cells.

Lim EJ(1), Joung YH, Jung SM, Park SH, Park JH, Kim SY, Hwang TS, Hong DY, Chung 
SC, Ye SK, Moon ES, Park EU, Park T, Chung IM, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Institute of Biomedical
Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Korea.

Cyclin D1 and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) are key regulators
of cell proliferation that are overexpressed in most breast cancers. The purpose 
of the present study was to investigate the molecular mechanism by which hemin
exerts its inhibitory effects on aggressive breast cancer cells. We found that
hemin regulates cyclin D1 and IGF-1R proteins and insulin-like growth factor-1
gene expression through STAT5b in breast cancer cells. We confirmed that STAT5b, 
cyclin D1, and IGF-1R is up-regulated by hypoxia, and the increased STAT5b binds 
strongly to the STAT5-binding sites contained within the distal 5'-flanking
region of IGF-1 gene in breast cancer cells. EMSA studies showed that STAT5
binding activity to the IGF-1 and cyclin D1 promoter was distinctly decreased by 
hemin in STAT5b-transfected COS-7 or MDA-MB 231 cells. IGF-1 gene expression was 
also decreased by hemin in mammary epithelial cells. STAT5b expression was
inhibited in siRNA experiments and by hemin, leading to decreased levels of
IGF-1. These results provide a basis for molecular targets in cancer treatment
via the STAT5b/IGF-1 or /cyclin D1 pathway in solid tumor cells. These data
indicate that hemin inhibits the cyclin D1 and IGF-1 expression via STAT5b under 
hypoxia in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells. These findings are valuable
toward understanding the role of hemin-induced inhibition of cyclin D1 and IGF-1 
expression under hypoxia in invasive and metastatic breast cancer.

PMID: 20372799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):909-12. Epub 2010 Mar 6.

Biologic and experimental variation of measured cancer stem cells.

Heuser M(1), Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Whereas it has become clear that measured stem cell frequencies in tumors greatly
depend on the assay system used, the research focus now shifts towards
identification of the biologic variability of cancer stem cells in different
disease subsets. In a recent study we quantified the frequency and in vitro
expansion potential of leukemia initiating cells in a murine model of acute
myeloid leukemia driven either by retroviral overexpression of MN1 and a control 
vector, or by MN1 and a HOX gene through limiting dilution transplantation assays
in syngeneic mice. Both leukemia-initiating cell frequency and expansion
potential were increased by over two orders of magnitude in the two-oncogene
compared to the one-oncogene model, documenting the functional heterogeneity of
leukemia-initiating cells. Loss-of-function studies showed that STAT5b and STAT1 
are critical for the enhanced self-renewal activity. Here we discuss implications
of our findings and potential sources of experimental variability of measured
leukemia or cancer stem cell frequencies.

PMID: 20348851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 May;24(5):1062-76. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0355. Epub 2010 Mar 
19.

Tyrosines 868, 966, and 972 in the kinase domain of JAK2 are autophosphorylated
and required for maximal JAK2 kinase activity.

Argetsinger LS(1), Stuckey JA, Robertson SA, Koleva RI, Cline JM, Marto JA, Myers
MG Jr, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5622, USA.

Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) is activated by a majority of cytokine family receptors
including receptors for GH, leptin, and erythropoietin. To identify novel
JAK2-regulatory and/or -binding sites, we set out to identify autophosphorylation
sites in the kinase domain of JAK2. Two-dimensional phosphopeptide mapping of in 
vitro autophosphorylated JAK2 identified tyrosines 868, 966, and 972 as sites of 
autophosphorylation. Phosphorylated tyrosines 868 and 972 were also identified by
mass spectrometry analysis of JAK2 activated by an erythropoietin-bound chimeric 
erythropoietin receptor/leptin receptor. Phosphospecific antibodies suggest that 
the phosphorylation of all three tyrosines increases in response to GH. Compared 
with wild-type JAK2, which is constitutively active when overexpressed, JAK2
lacking tyrosine 868, 966, or 972 has substantially reduced activity.
Coexpression with GH receptor and protein tyrosine phosphatase1B allowed us to
investigate GH-dependent activation of these mutated JAK2s in human embryonic
kidney 293T cells. All three mutated JAK2s are activated by GH, although to a
lesser extent than wild-type JAK2. The three mutated JAK2s also mediate GH
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3), signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) and ERK1, but at reduced
levels. Coexpression with Src-homology 2B1beta (SH2B1beta), like coexpression
with GH-bound GH receptor, partially restores the activity of all three JAK2
mutants. Based on these results and the crystal structure of the JAK2 kinase
domain, we hypothesize that small changes in the conformation of the regions of
JAK2 surrounding tyrosines 868, 966, and 972 due to e.g. phosphorylation, binding
to a ligand-bound cytokine receptor, and/or binding to Src-homology 2B1, may be
essential for JAK2 to assume a maximally active conformation.

PMCID: PMC2870937
PMID: 20304997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Am J Pathol. 2010 Apr;176(4):1959-72. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090653. Epub 2010 
Feb 18.

Transcription factor Stat3 stimulates metastatic behavior of human prostate
cancer cells in vivo, whereas Stat5b has a preferential role in the promotion of 
prostate cancer cell viability and tumor growth.

Gu L(1), Dagvadorj A, Lutz J, Leiby B, Bonuccelli G, Lisanti MP, Addya S, Fortina
P, Dasgupta A, Hyslop T, Bubendorf L, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Medical Oncology, Urology, Kimmel Cancer Center,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Identification of the molecular changes that promote viability and metastatic
behavior of prostate cancer is critical for the development of improved
therapeutic interventions. Stat5a/b and Stat3 are both constitutively active in
locally-confined and advanced prostate cancer, and both transcription factors
have been reported to be critical for the viability of prostate cancer cells. We 
recently showed that Stat3 promotes metastatic behavior of human prostate cancer 
cells not only in vitro but also in an in vivo experimental metastases model. In 
this work, we compare side-by-side Stat5a/b versus Stat3 in the promotion of
prostate cancer cell viability, tumor growth, and induction of metastatic
colonization in vivo. Inhibition of Stat5a/b induced massive death of prostate
cancer cells in culture and reduced both subcutaneous and orthotopic prostate
tumor growth, whereas Stat3 had a predominant role over Stat5a/b in promoting
metastases formation of prostate cancer cells in vivo in nude mice. The molecular
mechanisms underlying the differential biological effects induced by these two
transcription factors involve largely different sets of genes regulated by
Stat5a/b versus Stat3 in human prostate cancer model systems. Of the two Stat5
homologs, Stat5b was more important for supporting growth of prostate cancer
cells than Stat5a. This work provides the first mechanistic comparison of the
biological effects induced by transcription factors Stat5a/b versus Stat3 in
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2843484
PMID: 20167868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;24(4):779-89. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0430. Epub 2010 Feb
16.

Distinct alterations in chromatin organization of the two IGF-I promoters precede
growth hormone-induced activation of IGF-I gene transcription.

Chia DJ(1), Young JJ, Mertens AR, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon 97239, USA.

Many of the physiological actions of GH are mediated by IGF-I, a secreted
70-residue peptide whose gene expression is induced by GH in the liver and other 
tissues via mechanisms that remain incompletely characterized but depend on the
transcription factor Stat5b. Here we investigate the chromatin landscape of the
IGF-I gene in the liver of pituitary-deficient young adult male rats and assess
the impact of a single systemic GH injection. Despite minimal ongoing
transcription in the absence of GH, both IGF-I promoters appear to reside in open
chromatin environments, at least as inferred from relatively high levels of
acetylation of core histones H3 and H4 when compared with adjacent intergenic DNA
and from enhanced trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4. This landscape of
open chromatin may reflect maturation of the liver. Surprisingly, in the absence 
of hormone, IGF-I promoter 1 appears poised to be activated, as evidenced by the 
presence of the transcriptional coactivator p300 and recruitment of RNA
polymerase (Pol) II into a preinitiation complex. By contrast, chromatin
surrounding IGF-I promoter 2 is devoid of both p300 and RNA Pol II. Systemic GH
treatment causes an approximately 15-fold increase in transcription from each
IGF-I promoter within 60 min of hormone administration, leading to a sustained
accumulation of IGF-I mRNA. The coordinated induction of both IGF-I promoters by 
GH is accompanied by hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 in
promoter-associated chromatin, a decline in monomethylation at lysine 4 of
histone H3, and recruitment of RNA Pol II to IGF-I promoter 2. We conclude that
GH actions induce rapid and dramatic changes in hepatic chromatin at the IGF-I
locus and activate IGF-I gene transcription in the liver by distinct
promoter-specific mechanisms: at promoter 1, GH causes RNA Pol II to be released 
from a previously recruited paused preinitiation complex, whereas at promoter 2, 
hormone treatment facilitates recruitment and then activation of RNA Pol II to
initiate transcription.

PMCID: PMC2852351
PMID: 20160126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochimie. 2010 May;92(5):425-44. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.02.009. Epub 2010
Feb 13.

STAT1 and pathogens, not a friendly relationship.

Najjar I(1), Fagard R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 978, SMBH, 74 rue Marcel Cachin, Bobigny-cedex 93017, France.
imen.najjar@inserm.fr

STAT1 belongs to the STAT family of transcription factors, which comprises seven 
factors: STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6. STAT1 is a 91 kDa 
protein originally identified as the mediator of the cellular response to
interferon (IFN) alpha, and thereafter found to be a major component of the
cellular response to IFNgamma. STAT1 is, in fact, involved in the response to
several cytokines and to growth factors. It is activated by cytokine receptors
via kinases of the JAK family. STAT1 becomes phosphorylated and forms a dimer
which enters the nucleus and triggers the transcription of its targets. Although 
not lethal at birth, selective gene deletion of STAT1 in mice leads to rapid
death from severe infections, demonstrating its major role in the response to
pathogens. Similarly, in humans who do not express STAT1, there is a lack of
resistance to pathogens leading to premature death. This indicates a key,
non-redundant function of STAT1 in the defence against pathogens. Thus, to
successfully infect organisms, bacterial, viral or parasitic pathogens must
overcome the activity of STAT1, and almost all the steps of this pathway can be
blocked or inhibited by proteins produced in infected cells. Interestingly, some 
pathogens, like the oncogenic Epstein-Barr virus, have evolved a strategy which
uses STAT1 activation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20159032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program. 2010;65:225-34; discussion 234-7. doi: 
10.1159/000281170. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

Endocrinology of growth.

Rosenfeld RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

Growth is a remarkably complex biological phenomenon, requiring the coordinated
production of multiple hormones and growth factors. Human growth is characterized
by several distinct features, including: (1) rapid growth in late gestation; (2) 
growth deceleration immediately following birth; (3) a prolonged childhood and a 
mid-childhood growth spurt; (4) a pubertal growth spurt; (5) relatively late
attainment of adult height, and (6) minimal sexual dimorphism of adult stature.
Secular changes in the height of humans probably reflect nutritional and
environmental factors, rather than major genomic changes. While multiple hormones
impact growth, the growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis
plays a central role in both intrauterine and postnatal growth. GH, after being
secreted by the pituitary, binds to a transmembrane receptor and activates a
postreceptor signaling cascade, ultimately leading to phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b. STAT5b transcriptionally
regulates the genes for IGF-I and for key IGF-binding proteins. IGF-I, in turn,
binds to the type 1 IGF receptor, resulting in chondrocyte proliferation and
statural growth. IGF-deficient states may be divided into secondary forms,
reflecting defects in GH production, and primary forms. Molecular defects of the 
GH-IGF axis have been identified in humans, with phenotypes that correspond to
the specific genetic lesions. Therapy with GH or IGF-I can now be matched to
specific defects in the GH-IGF axis.

Copyright (c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20139685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Immunol Methods. 2010 Mar 31;354(1-2):45-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2010.01.010.
Epub 2010 Feb 4.

A receptor-independent, cell-based JAK activation assay for screening for
JAK3-specific inhibitors.

Oh K(1), Joo KM, Jung YS, Lee J, Kang H, Lee HY, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Anatomy, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Republic of Korea.

New immunosuppressive compounds with less systemic toxicity that could replace
calcineurin inhibitors are urgently needed. For identification of specific
inhibitors of JAK3, a potential new drug target, from large chemical libraries we
developed a cell-based screening system. TEL-JAK fusion proteins composed of an
oligomerization domain of TEL and kinase and/or pseudokinase domains of JAKs
provided constitutive activation of JAKs without receiving a signal from the
cytokine receptors. These fusion proteins also induced STAT5b phosphorylation in 
the absence of cytokine receptors. Both the kinase and pseudokinase domains of
JAKs were required for full activation of the JAKs, and four copies of STAT5
response elements provided the greatest luciferase activity. The sensitivity and 
specificity of the system was evaluated using specific JAK3, JAK2, or MEK
inhibitors. Thus, we generated a receptor-independent, cell-based selective
screening system for specific JAK3 inhibitors, which is easily convertible to a
high-throughput screening platform.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20138049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1711-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2314. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Prolactin inhibits BCL6 expression in breast cancer through a Stat5a-dependent
mechanism.

Tran TH(1), Utama FE, Lin J, Yang N, Sjolund AB, Ryder A, Johnson KJ, Neilson LM,
Liu C, Brill KL, Rosenberg AL, Witkiewicz AK, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor that recognizes DNA target sequences similar 
to those recognized by signal transducer and activator of transcriptions 5
(Stat5). BCL6 disrupts differentiation of breast epithelia, is downregulated
during lactation, and is upregulated in poorly differentiated breast cancer. In
contrast, Stat5a mediates prolactin-induced differentiation of mammary epithelia,
and loss of Stat5 signaling in human breast cancer is associated with
undifferentiated histology and poor prognosis. Here, we identify the mammary cell
growth factor prolactin as a potent suppressor of BCL6 protein expression in
human breast cancer through a mechanism that requires Stat5a, but not
prolactin-activated Stat5b, MEK-ERK, or PI3K-AKT pathways. Prolactin rapidly
suppressed BCL6 mRNA in T47D, MCF7, ZR75.1, and SKBr3 breast cancer cell lines,
followed by prolonged reduction of BCL6 protein levels within 3 hours. Prolactin 
suppression of BCL6 was enhanced by overexpression of Stat5a but not Stat5b, was 
mimicked by constitutively active Stat5a, but did not require the transactivation
domain of Stat5a. Stat5 chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated physical
interaction with a BCL6 gene regulatory region, and BCL6 transcript repression
required histone deacetylase activity based on sensitivity to trichostatin A.
Functionally, BCL6 overexpression disrupted prolactin induction of Stat5 reporter
genes. Prolactin suppression of BCL6 was extended to xenotransplant tumors in
nude mice in vivo and to freshly isolated human breast cancer explants ex vivo.
Quantitative immunohistochemistry revealed elevated BCL6 in high-grade and
metastatic breast cancer compared with ductal carcinoma in situ and nonmalignant 
breast, and cellular BCL6 protein levels correlated negatively with nuclear
Stat5a (r = -0.52; P < 0.001) but not with Stat5b. Loss of prolactin-Stat5a
signaling and concomitant upregulation of BCL6 may represent a regulatory switch 
facilitating undifferentiated histology and poor prognosis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2822876
PMID: 20124477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Horm Res. 2009 Dec;72 Suppl 2:52-6. doi: 10.1159/000243781. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Response to growth hormone in short children with Noonan syndrome: correlation to
genotype.

Binder G(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Tubingen, Germany.
gerhard.binder@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Short stature is a major characteristic of Noonan syndrome (NS), the biological
basis of which is not yet clear. In around half of all individuals with NS, the
cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 encoded by PTPN11 is mutated and predicted 
to be overactive. While SHP2 enhances Ras-MAPK signaling, it downregulates
Jak2/STAT5b signaling of the growth hormone (GH) receptor, according to in vitro 
data. Decreased IGF-I levels have been measured in those children with NS who
carried PTPN11 mutations suggesting a mode of mild GH insensitivity. The
short-term responsiveness to GH therapy in NS with respect to PTPN11 mutations
has been addressed in 3 studies in the past. The number of treated children was
small and gene analysis was restricted to PTPN11, excluding the recent discovered
candidate genes KRAS, RAF1 and SOS1. All 3 studies showed that GH responsiveness 
was mildly reduced in the presence of PTPN11 mutations; relevant long-term data, 
however, are missing. In a small subgroup of patients with NS, tumor risk is
increased and related to specific mutations of Ras-MAPK pathway genes, including 
PTPN11. Therefore, when long-term GH therapy is intended to promote growth in
children with NS, it has to be considered in relation to the genotype, the
effective promotion of growth and the potentially increased tumor risk. Progress 
in the understanding of cell regulation by Ras-MAPK signaling will hopefully
provide more evidence on which therapy might be helpful in the care of children
with NS.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20029239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jan 14;11:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-30.

Variable structure motifs for transcription factor binding sites.

Reid JE(1), Evans KJ, Dyer N, Wernisch L, Ott S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Biostatistics Unit, Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Cambridge,
CB2 0SR, UK. john.reid@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Classically, models of DNA-transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs)
have been based on relatively few known instances and have treated them as sites 
of fixed length using position weight matrices (PWMs). Various extensions to this
model have been proposed, most of which take account of dependencies between the 
bases in the binding sites. However, some transcription factors are known to
exhibit some flexibility and bind to DNA in more than one possible physical
configuration. In some cases this variation is known to affect the function of
binding sites. With the increasing volume of ChIP-seq data available it is now
possible to investigate models that incorporate this flexibility. Previous work
on variable length models has been constrained by: a focus on specific zinc
finger proteins in yeast using restrictive models; a reliance on hand-crafted
models for just one transcription factor at a time; and a lack of evaluation on
realistically sized data sets.
RESULTS: We re-analysed binding sites from the TRANSFAC database and found
motivating examples where our new variable length model provides a better fit. We
analysed several ChIP-seq data sets with a novel motif search algorithm and
compared the results to one of the best standard PWM finders and a recently
developed alternative method for finding motifs of variable structure. All the
methods performed comparably in held-out cross validation tests. Known motifs of 
variable structure were recovered for p53, Stat5a and Stat5b. In addition our
method recovered a novel generalised version of an existing PWM for Sp1 that
allows for variable length binding. This motif improved classification
performance.
CONCLUSIONS: We have presented a new gapped PWM model for variable length DNA
binding sites that is not too restrictive nor over-parameterised. Our comparison 
with existing tools shows that on average it does not have better predictive
accuracy than existing methods. However, it does provide more interpretable
models of motifs of variable structure that are suitable for follow-up structural
studies. To our knowledge, we are the first to apply variable length motif models
to eukaryotic ChIP-seq data sets and consequently the first to show their value
in this domain. The results include a novel motif for the ubiquitous
transcription factor Sp1.

PMCID: PMC2824720
PMID: 20074339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):148-52. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.011510.

A polymorphism associated with STAT3 expression and response of chronic myeloid
leukemia to interferon a.

Kreil S(1), Waghorn K, Ernst T, Chase A, White H, Hehlmann R, Reiter A, Hochhaus 
A, Cross NC; German CML Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
UK.

Interferon alpha (IFN) induces variable responses in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML), with 8-30% of early chronic phase cases achieving a complete cytogenetic
response. We hypothesized that polymorphic differences in genes encoding IFN
signal transduction components might account for different patient responses. We 
studied 174 IFN-treated patients, of whom 79 achieved less than 35%
Philadelphia-chromosome (Ph) positive metaphases (responders) and 95 failed to
show any cytogenetic response (more than 95% Ph-positive metaphases;
non-responders). We compared 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at IFNAR1,
IFNAR2, JAK1, TYK2, STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5a/b between the two groups and found a 
significant difference for rs6503691, a SNP tightly linked to STAT5a, STAT5b and 
STAT3 (minor allele frequency 0.16 for non-responders; 0.06 for responders,
P=0.007). Levels of STAT3 mRNA correlated with rs6503691 genotype (P<0.001) as
assessed by real time quantitative PCR and therefore we conclude that rs6503691
is associated with the STAT3 expression levels and response of CML patients to
IFN.

PMCID: PMC2805737
PMID: 20065083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Blood. 2010 Feb 18;115(7):1416-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-234963. Epub 2009
Dec 14.

STAT5 requires the N-domain for suppression of miR15/16, induction of bcl-2, and 
survival signaling in myeloproliferative disease.

Li G(1), Miskimen KL, Wang Z, Xie XY, Brenzovich J, Ryan JJ, Tse W, Moriggl R,
Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH 44106-7284, USA.

Phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a
biomarker and potential molecular target for hematologic malignancies. We have
shown previously that lethal myeloproliferative disease (MPD) in mice mediated by
persistently activated STAT5 (STAT5a(S711F)) requires the N-domain, but the
mechanism was not defined. We now demonstrate by retrovirally complementing
STAT5ab(null/null) primary mast cells that relative to wild-type STAT5a, STAT5a
lacking the N-domain (STAT5aDeltaN) ineffectively protected against cytokine
withdrawal-induced cell death. Both STAT5a and STAT5aDeltaN bound to a site in
the bcl-2 gene and both bound near the microRNA 15b/16 cluster. However, only
STAT5a could effectively induce bcl-2 mRNA and reciprocally suppress miR15b/16
leading to maintained bcl-2 protein levels. After retroviral complementation of
STAT5ab(null/null) fetal liver cells and transplantation, persistently active
STAT5a(S711F) lacking the N-domain (STAT5aDeltaN(S711F)) was insufficient to
protect c-Kit(+)Lin(-)Sca-1(+) (KLS) cells from apoptosis and unable to induce
bcl-2 expression, whereas STAT5a(S711F) caused robust KLS cell expansion,
induction of bcl-2, and lethal MPD. Severe attenuation of MPD by
STAT5aDeltaN(S711F) was reversed by H2k/bcl-2 transgenic expression. Overall,
these studies define N-domain-dependent survival signaling as an Achilles heel of
persistent STAT5 activation and highlight the potential therapeutic importance of
targeting STAT5 N-domain-mediated regulation of bcl-2 family members.

PMCID: PMC2826763
PMID: 20008792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Endocrinology. 2010 Jan;151(1):43-55. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0651. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5A and STAT5B
differentially regulate human mammary carcinoma cell behavior.

Tang JZ(1), Zuo ZH, Kong XJ, Steiner M, Yin Z, Perry JK, Zhu T, Liu DX, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, 2-6 Park Avenue, Private Bag
92019, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

Increased activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5
has been reported in various malignancies including mammary carcinoma. However,
it is only recently that potentially distinct roles of STAT5A and STAT5B in
neoplasia have begun to emerge. Herein we systematically delineate the functions 
of STAT5A and STAT5B in human mammary carcinoma cell lines MCF-7 and T47D. Forced
expression of constitutively active (CA) STAT5A enhanced both survival and
anchorage-independent growth of human mammary carcinoma cells but concordantly
suppressed cell motility as revealed in colony scattering, cell migration, and
invasion assays. In contrast, forced expression of CA STAT5B exhibited lower
potency than CA STAT5A in enhancing survival and anchorage-independent growth of 
mammary carcinoma cells and exerted no effects on cell motility. Differential
expression of genes that regulate cellular survival and motility was
concomitantly observed on forced expression of CA STAT5A or CA STAT5B. Small
interfering RNA-mediated depletion of STAT5A significantly impaired
anchorage-independent growth of human mammary carcinoma cells, whereas a smaller 
reduction was observed upon small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of STAT5B.
Depletion of endogenous STAT5A also significantly enhanced cell motility, whereas
depletion of endogenous STAT5B exhibited no effect. Xenograft studies provided
data concordant with the in vitro effects of the two STAT5 isoforms. We therefore
demonstrate that STAT5A and STAT5B differentially regulate behavior of human
mammary carcinoma cells.

PMID: 19966185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):3582-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.053843. Epub 2009
Nov 18.

Protein phosphatase 2A regulates interleukin-2 receptor complex formation and
JAK3/STAT5 activation.

Ross JA(1), Cheng H, Nagy ZS, Frost JA, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas, El Paso, Texas 79968, 
USA.

Reversible protein phosphorylation plays a key role in interleukin-2 (IL-2)
receptor-mediated activation of Janus tyrosine kinase 3 (JAK3) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) in lymphocytes. Although the 
mechanisms governing IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of
JAK3/STAT5 have been extensively studied, the role of serine/threonine
phosphorylation in controlling these effectors remains to be elucidated. Using
phosphoamino acid analysis, JAK3 and STAT5 were determined to be serine and
tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to IL-2 stimulation of the human natural
killer-like cell line, YT. IL-2 stimulation also induced serine/threonine
phosphorylation of IL-2Rbeta, but not IL-2Rgamma. To investigate the regulation
of serine/threonine phosphorylation in IL-2 signaling, the roles of protein
phosphatase 1 (PP1) and 2A (PP2A) were examined. Inhibition of phosphatase
activity by calyculin A treatment of YT cells resulted in a significant induction
of serine phosphorylation of JAK3 and STAT5, and serine/threonine phosphorylation
of IL-2Rbeta. Moreover, inhibition of PP2A, but not PP1, diminished IL-2-induced 
tyrosine phosphorylation of IL-2Rbeta, JAK3, and STAT5, and abolished STAT5 DNA
binding activity. Serine/threonine phosphorylation of IL-2Rbeta by a
staurosporine-sensitive kinase also blocked its association with JAK3 and
IL-2Rgamma in YT cells. Taken together, these data indicate that serine/threonine
phosphorylation negatively regulates IL-2 signaling at multiple levels, including
receptor complex formation and JAK3/STAT5 activation, and that this regulation is
counteracted by PP2A. These findings also suggest that PP2A may serve as a
therapeutic target for modulating JAK3/STAT5 activation in human disease.

PMCID: PMC2823499
PMID: 19923221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Dec;94(12):4717-27. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1502. Epub
2009 Oct 28.

Two short children born small for gestational age with insulin-like growth factor
1 receptor haploinsufficiency illustrate the heterogeneity of its phenotype.

Ester WA(1), van Duyvenvoorde HA, de Wit CC, Broekman AJ, Ruivenkamp CA, Govaerts
LC, Wit JM, Hokken-Koelega AC, Losekoot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Endocrinology, Erasmus Medical Center
Sophia Children's Hospital, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
w.ester@erasmusmc.nl

CONTEXT: Small for gestational age (SGA)-born children comprise a heterogeneous
group in which only few genetic causes have been identified.
OBJECTIVE: To determine copy number variations in 18 growth-related genes in 100 
SGA children with persistent short stature.
METHODS: Copy number variations in 18 growth-related genes (SHOX, GH1, GHR, IGF1,
IGF1R, IGF2, IGFBP1-6, NSD1, GRB10, STAT5B, ALS, SOCS2, and SOCS3) were
determined by an "in house" multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification kit.
The deletions were further characterized by single-nucleotide polymorphism array 
analysis.
RESULTS: Two heterozygous de novo insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R)
deletions were found: a deletion of the complete IGF1R gene (15q26.3, exons
1-21), including distally flanking sequences, and a deletion comprising exons
3-21, extending further into the telomeric region. In one case, serum IGF-I was
low (-2.78 sd score), probably because of a coexisting growth hormone (GH)
deficiency. Both children increased their height during GH treatment (1 mg/m(2)
per day). Functional studies in skin fibroblast cultures demonstrated similar
levels of IGF1R autophosphorylation and a reduced activation of protein kinase
B/Akt upon a challenge with IGF-I in comparison with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: IGF1R haploinsufficiency was present in 2 of 100 short SGA children.
GH therapy resulted in moderate catch-up growth in our patients. A review of the 
literature shows that small birth size, short stature, small head size,
relatively high IGF-I levels, developmental delay, and micrognathia are the main 
predictors for an IGF1R deletion.

PMID: 19864454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Nov;7(11):1835-44. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0244. Epub 
2009 Oct 20.

Repeated treatment with subtoxic doses of TRAIL induces resistance to apoptosis
through its death receptors in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Yoshida T(1), Zhang Y, Rivera Rosado LA, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Therapeutic Proteins, Office of Biotechnology Products, Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(rhTRAIL) is being evaluated clinically in treating various malignancies.
Previous studies have shown that repeated application of high doses of rhTRAIL
results in a subpopulation of parental cells that is unresponsive to the death
ligand. However, it is not clear whether TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells could
acquire resistance to TRAIL treatment. Here, we found that MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells, which are highly sensitive to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, became
resistant to TRAIL killing after a prolonged exposure to subtoxic doses of
rhTRAIL. The resulting TRAIL-resistant cells were cross-resistant to antibodies
against its death receptors (DR4 and DR5); however, they retained sensitivity to 
several clinically relevant chemotherapies. Surface expression of DR4 and DR5 was
significantly reduced in the selected cells, resulting in failure in
death-inducing signaling complex formation and caspase activation. In addition,
real-time PCR analysis revealed an upregulation in multiple apoptosis-regulator
genes, including c-FLIP, Stat5a, and Stat5b. Inhibition of Janus-activated
kinase, an upstream activator of signal transducer and activator of transcription
5 (Stat5), or knockdown of Stat5 itself partially restored cellular sensitivity
to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, suggesting that Stat5 signaling is also involved in
the development of TRAIL resistance. Furthermore, we showed that acquired TRAIL
resistance was effectively eliminated by combination with etoposide, doxorubicin,
or paclitaxel. These results suggest that tumor cells could acquire resistance to
TRAIL therapy especially when they are repeatedly exposed to low levels of the
death ligand, highlighting the necessity of combination with therapies that
target the resistance mechanisms.

PMID: 19843632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;23(11):1914-26. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0242. Epub 2009 Oct
1.

Male-specific hepatic Bcl6: growth hormone-induced block of transcription
elongation in females and binding to target genes inversely coordinated with
STAT5.

Meyer RD(1), Laz EV, Su T, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The transcriptional repressor Bcl6 is a male-specific rat liver gene product and 
one of 24 early GH-response genes encoding DNA-binding proteins. Presently, the
sex specificity of Bcl6 was shown to emerge at puberty, when hepatic Bcl6 mRNA
was induced in males and repressed in females by the female plasma GH profile.
Hepatic Bcl6 mRNA was increased to near-normal male levels in hypophysectomized
females and was extinguished in intact males given a continuous GH infusion
(female-like GH pattern). Bcl6 was also repressed in adult male
somatostatin-deficient mice, where plasma GH profiles are female like. Hepatic
Bcl6 RNA was rapidly down-regulated by GH pulse treatment, both in
hypophysectomized male rats and in primary rat hepatocytes. Bcl6 was
substantially induced in female mice deficient in hepatic signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)5a/STAT5b, suggesting that these STAT
transcriptional mediators of GH signaling repress Bcl6. Indeed, STAT5 was bound
to Bcl6 STAT5-binding region-B, previously associated with Bcl6 repression, in
both male and female liver chromatin. STAT5 also bound to Bcl6 region-A in male
chromatin but only during a plasma GH pulse. Analysis of primary transcripts
(heterogeneous nuclear RNA) across the Bcl6 gene revealed a novel mechanism of
GH-dependent sex specificity, with two apparent blocks in Bcl6 transcription
elongation seen in female liver and in continuous GH-treated male liver, one
early in intron 4 and one in exon 5, which together reduced transcription beyond 
exon 5 more than 300-fold. Finally, Bcl6 was bound to a subset of STAT5-binding
sites in male liver chromatin, including a Socs2 STAT5-binding site where Bcl6
binding increased substantially between plasma GH pulses, i.e. when STAT5 binding
was low. Bcl6 and STAT5 binding are thus inversely coordinated by the endogenous 
pulses of pituitary GH release, suggesting this male-specific transcriptional
repressor modulates hepatic GH signaling to select STAT5 target genes.

PMCID: PMC2775936
PMID: 19797429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Blood. 2009 Nov 19;114(21):4721-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216390. Epub 2009
Sep 24.

The transcription factors STAT5A/B regulate GM-CSF-mediated granulopoiesis.

Kimura A(1), Rieger MA, Simone JM, Chen W, Wickre MC, Zhu BM, Hoppe PS, O'Shea
JJ, Schroeder T, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Neutrophils play a vital role in the immune defense, which is evident by the
severity of neutropenia causing life-threatening infections. Granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) controls homeostatic and emergency 
development of granulocytes. However, little is known about the contribution of
the downstream mediating transcription factors signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5A and 5B (STAT5A/B). To elucidate the function of this pathway, we
generated mice with complete deletion of both Stat5a/b genes in hematopoietic
cells. In homeostasis, peripheral neutrophils were markedly decreased in these
animals. Moreover, during emergency situations, such as myelosuppression,
Stat5a/b-mutant mice failed to produce enhanced levels of neutrophils and were
unable to respond to GM-CSF. Both the GM-CSF-permitted survival of mature
neutrophils and the generation of granulocytes from granulocyte-macrophage
progenitors (GMPs) were markedly reduced in Stat5a/b mutants. GMPs showed
impaired colony-formation ability with reduced number and size of colonies on
GM-CSF stimulation. Moreover, continuous cell fate analyses by time-lapse
microscopy and single cell tracking revealed that Stat5a/b-null GMPs showed both 
delayed cell-cycle progression and increased cell death. Finally, transcriptome
analysis indicated that STAT5A/B directs GM-CSF signaling through the regulation 
of proliferation and survival genes.

PMCID: PMC2780307
PMID: 19779039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Drug Metab. 2009 Jun;10(5):508-19.

Transcriptional regulation of cytochrome p450 genes by the nuclear receptor
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha.

Jover R(1), Moya M, Gómez-Lechón MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de investigación, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
ramiro.jover@uv.es

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4alpha, NR2A1) is a nuclear receptor (NR)
required for liver development and for controlling the expression of many
hepatic-specific genes associated with important metabolic pathways. Many studies
have also identified HNF4alpha as a direct transactivator of numerous
xenobiotic-metabolizing cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes, suggesting that this factor 
is a global regulator which supports CYP transcription in the liver. Moreover,
HNF4alpha expression displays a significant variability in human liver which may 
account for a proportion of the inter-individual variability in the expression of
drug-metabolism genes and the clearance rate of a wide variety of prescribed
drugs. In the last few years, a number of complex interactions and cross-talks
between HNF4alpha and other transcription factors and coregulators have also
surfaced, and the impact on CYP gene expression has been demonstrated. Thus, it
is now clear that HNF4alpha modulates CYP expression in the liver by interacting 
with the xenosensor receptors (PXR and CAR), the glucocorticoid receptor (GR),
the feeding-fasting cycle target PGC-1alpha, the sexual-dimorphism factor Stat5b,
and other liver-enriched factors, such as C/EBPs. In addition to regulating drug 
elimination pathways, HNF4alpha also triggers pleiotropic effects on cholesterol 
and fatty acid metabolism, glucose homeostasis and inflammation. As a whole,
current evidence indicates that HNF4alpha is a central regulator in the network
of NRs that integrates drug-metabolism not only with the liver intermediate
metabolism, but also with a number of patho-physiological conditions where the
CYP expression is altered. The purpose of this review is to summarize and discuss
these studies and their conclusions, with particular emphasis on the role of
HNF4alpha in the regulation of drug-metabolizing CYP genes in the human liver.

PMID: 19689247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Blood. 2009 Nov 5;114(19):3983-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227603. Epub 2009
Aug 10.

Modeling the functional heterogeneity of leukemia stem cells: role of STAT5 in
leukemia stem cell self-renewal.

Heuser M(1), Sly LM, Argiropoulos B, Kuchenbauer F, Lai C, Weng A, Leung M, Lin
G, Brookes C, Fung S, Valk PJ, Delwel R, Löwenberg B, Krystal G, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3
Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Nov 5;114(19):3976-7.

Although the cancer stem cell (CSC) concept implies that CSCs are rare, recent
reports suggest that CSCs may be frequent in some cancers. We hypothesized that
the proportion of leukemia stem cells would vary as a function of the number of
dysregulated pathways. Constitutive expression of MN1 served as a 1-oncogene
model, and coexpression of MN1 and a HOX gene served as a 2-oncogene model.
Leukemia-initiating cell (LIC) number and in vitro expansion potential of LICs
were functionally assessed by limiting dilution analyses. LIC expansion potential
was 132-fold increased in the 2- compared with the 1-oncogene model, although
phenotypically, both leukemias were similar. The 2-oncogene model was
characterized by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
hypersensitivity and activated STAT/ERK signaling. GM-CSF hypersensitivity of the
2-oncogene model (MN1/HOXA9) was lost in Stat5b(-/-) cells, and the LIC expansion
potential was reduced by 86- and 28-fold in Stat5b(-/-) and Stat1(-/-) cells,
respectively. Interestingly, in 201 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients,
coexpression of MN1 and HOXA9 was restricted to patients with the poorest
prognosis and was associated with highly active STAT signaling. Our data
demonstrate the functional heterogeneity of LICs and show that STAT signaling is 
critical for leukemia stem cell self-renewal in MN1- and HOXA9-expressing
leukemias.

PMID: 19667399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R52. doi: 10.1186/bcr2341. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

A novel role for signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) in 
beta1-integrin-mediated human breast cancer cell migration.

Bernaciak TM(1), Zareno J, Parsons JT, Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, 1300 Jefferson Park
Avenue, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. tmb5d@virginia.edu

INTRODUCTION: Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b is a
transcription factor involved in pro-proliferative and pro-survival signaling in 
a number of solid tumors, including breast cancer. The contribution of STAT5b to 
breast cancer cell motility has not been explored. This work aims to elucidate
the role of STAT5b in breast cancer cell migration.
METHODS: STAT5b was knocked down by using siRNA in two aggressive, highly
migratory breast cancer cell lines (BT-549 and MDA-MB-231), and transwell
migration assays were performed to determine the importance of STAT5b for their
migration. Knockdown-rescue experiments were used to validate the specificity of 
STAT5b knockdown and to determine which regions/functions of STAT5b are necessary
for its role in migration. Live-cell imaging of wound healing and spreading was
carried out to examine cell morphology and motility after STAT5b knockdown.
RESULTS: Knockdown of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, inhibited migration of BT-549 and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells to serum by 60% to 80%, and inhibited migration
equally over a range of serum concentrations (0.1% to 10% serum). Migratory
inhibition upon STAT5b knockdown could be rescued by reintroduction of wild-type 
STAT5b, as well as Y699F- and dominant-negative STAT5b mutants, but not an SH2
domain defective R618K-STAT5b mutant. beta1- integrin-mediated migration of
breast cancer cells to fibronectin was inhibited with STAT5b knockdown, and loss 
of STAT5b correlated with loss of directional migration and formation of
multiple, highly contractile protrusions upon attachment to fibronectin.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented here demonstrate that STAT5b is integral to
breast cancer cell migration and identify a novel, SH2-dependent function of
STAT5b in regulating beta1-integrin-mediated migration of highly aggressive
breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2750113
PMID: 19630967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Eur J Haematol. 2009 Nov;83(5):499-501. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01324.x.
Epub 2009 Jul 18.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia harboring a STAT5B-RARA fusion gene and a G596V
missense mutation in the STAT5B SH2 domain of the STAT5B-RARA.

Iwanaga E, Nakamura M, Nanri T, Kawakita T, Horikawa K, Mitsuya H, Asou N.

Comment on
    Eur J Haematol. 2008 May;80(5):444-7.

PMID: 19624718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Folia Biol (Praha). 2009;55(3):107-15.

Differences between molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of
haptoglobin gene expression during the acute phase response and dietary
restriction.

Uskokovic A(1), Arambasic J, Bogojevic D, Ivanovic-Matic S, Mihailovic M, Dinic
S, Grigorov I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute for Biological Research, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

Haptoglobin is a glycoprotein involved in the acute phase response. Previously we
reported that haptoglobin gene expression was up-regulated during dietary
restriction in young female rats. The present study aimed at determining whether 
chronic dietary restriction affects haptoglobin blood levels through changing
levels and/or activities of IL-6-related transcription factors STAT and C/EBP in 
the liver as is the case during the acute phase response. To this end, we
compared a female Wistar rat model of 50% 6-week-long dietary restriction with
the standard laboratory model for the acute phase response induced by turpentine 
administration. During the turpentine-induced acute phase response, the
transitory 5.4-fold increase of rat haptoglobin expression was accompanied by a
prominent rise of serum IL-6 concentration and the increased binding of STAT3 and
35kD C/EBPbeta/LAP transcription factors to the haptoglobin gene
hormone-responsive element. Results obtained after immunoblotting and DNA
affinity chromatography (using hormone-responsive element) suggest that the
stable 1.7-fold increase of serum haptoglobin level during dietary restriction
was the result of increased amounts and activities of constitutive transcription 
factors C/EBPalpha and STAT5b, and to a smaller extent of STAT3. When dietary
restriction rats were administered turpentine, a 8.7-fold increase in haptoglobin
expression was followed by a considerable increase in the amount and
hormone-responsive element binding activity of STAT3 but not 35kD C/EBPbeta/LAP. 
We concluded that haptoglobin gene up-regulation during chronic dietary
restriction was regulated by different mechanisms than during the acute phase
response, and that it depended on the amount(s) and activit(ies) of transcription
factor(s) that characterize low-grade inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 19545490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Semin Oncol. 2009 Apr;36(2 Suppl 1):S27-35. doi:
10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.02.007.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-induced malignancies: novel mechanisms of cell
transformation and potential therapeutic approaches.

Wasik MA(1), Zhang Q, Marzec M, Kasprzycka M, Wang HY, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. wasik@mail.med.upenn.edu

Among the many oncogenic variants of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK),
nucleophosmin 1 (NPM)/ALK fusion protein expressed in the subset of T-cell
lymphoma (ALK(+)TCL) is currently the best characterized. NPM/ALK activates
several signal transduction pathways, including PI3K/AKT, MEK/ERK, mTORC1, STAT3,
and STAT5b. In turn, the pathways modulate expression and function of many genes 
and proteins involved in the key cellular functions such as proliferation,
growth, survival, metabolism, and angiogenesis. Recent data indicate that NPM/ALK
also promotes immune evasion of the ALK(+)TCL by inducing through STAT3
activation the expression of immunosuppressive cytokines interleukin-10 (IL-10)
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGFss) and cell surface protein CD274
(PD-L1, B7-H1). In addition, NPM/ALK protects its own expression by mediating via
STAT3 and at least one member of the DNA methyltransferase family DNMT1
epigenetic silencing of the SHP-1 and STAT5a genes. In ALK+TCL cells, SHP-1 and
STAT5a proteins act as potent tumor suppressors by promoting degradation of the
NPM/ALK protein and inhibiting expression of the NPM/ALK gene, respectively.
These findings provide further rationale to therapeutically target ALK and its
effector proteins, foremost STAT3. They also suggest that immunotherapeutic
approaches to ALK(+)TCL and, possibly, other ALK-driven malignancies may require 
inhibition of ALK and STAT3 to achieve the optimal clinical efficacy.

PMID: 19393833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Endocrinology. 2009 Aug;150(8):3620-6. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1703. Epub 2009 May
14.

Endotoxin-induced growth hormone resistance in skeletal muscle.

Chen Y(1), Sood S, Krishnamurthy VM, Rotwein P, Rabkin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Inflammation-induced skeletal muscle wasting is a serious clinical problem and
arises in part because of resistance to GH-stimulated IGF-I expression. Although 
it is established that in the liver, resistance develops because of impaired
signaling through the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) transduction pathway, together with a more distal defect 
in STAT5 DNA-binding activity, the situation in skeletal muscle is unclear.
Accordingly, we set out to characterize the mechanisms behind the skeletal muscle
resistance to GH in rats with acute inflammation induced by endotoxin. Endotoxin 
caused significant declines in GH-stimulated STAT5a/b phosphorylation and IGF-I
gene expression, and this occurred despite a lack of change in signaling protein 
levels or phosphorylation of JAK2. In whole muscle, GH-stimulated
phospho-STAT5a/b levels were reduced by half, and in the nucleus, phospho-STAT5b 
levels were similarly reduced. Furthermore, the binding of phosphorylated STAT5b 
to DNA was reduced and to a similar extent to the reduction in nuclear
phosphorylated STAT5b. Interestingly, GH-induced androgen receptor gene
expression was also suppressed. Thus, it appears that skeletal muscle resistance 
to GH-stimulated IGF-I expression in acute endotoxemia arises from a defect in
STAT5b signaling, with a proportionate reduction in STAT5b DNA binding. Finally, 
it appears that resistance to GH-induced androgen receptor expression also
develops and, together with the attenuated GH-induced IGF-I expression, likely
plays an important role in the muscle wasting that arises in endotoxin-induced
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2717874
PMID: 19443577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Clin Exp Immunol. 2009 Jun;156(3):419-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.03917.x.

c-Src tyrosine kinase co-associates with and phosphorylates signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b which mediates the proliferation of normal human B 
lymphocytes.

Cayer MP(1), Proulx M, Ma XZ, Sakac D, Giguère JF, Drouin M, Néron S, Branch DR, 
Jung D.

Author information: 
(1)Héma-Québec R&D, Québec, QC, Canada.

c-Src is the normal human cellular protein homologue of the viral oncogene v-src.
c-Src activity was reported recently to increase in CD40-activated human B
lymphocytes, suggesting its involvement in proliferation. To elucidate the exact 
role of c-Src in this process, we investigated the effects of c-Src
over-expression on normal B lymphocyte growth. B lymphocytes purified from human 
peripheral blood were infected with Ad5/F35 vector encoding either a
constitutively active c-Src (c-Src/dominant-positive) or a dominant-negative
c-Src (c-Src/DN). Little variation of B lymphocytes expansion could be observed
between control enhanced yellow fluorescent protein and
c-Src/dominant-positive-infected cells. In contrast, over-expression of c-Src/DN 
results in a 40% inhibition of B lymphocyte expansion. These results suggest that
DN c-Src may compete with endogenous c-Src, resulting in partial inhibition of a 
transcriptional pathway involved in B lymphocyte proliferation. We demonstrate
further that c-Src can phosphorylate signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b) on tyrosine 699 and that c-Src and STAT5b co-associate 
during B lymphocyte proliferation. These results confirm an important role for
c-Src in the expansion of normal human B lymphocytes in vitro, in which c-Src may
regulate STAT5b in the intracellular signalling pathway important for the
proliferation of normal human B lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2691969
PMID: 19438593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. FASEB J. 2009 Sep;23(9):3140-8. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-128215. Epub 2009 May 5.

Skeletal muscle growth and fiber composition in mice are regulated through the
transcription factors STAT5a/b: linking growth hormone to the androgen receptor.

Klover P(1), Chen W, Zhu BM, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. kloverp@niddk.nih.gov

In skeletal muscle, STAT5a/b transcription factors are critical for normal
postnatal growth, whole-animal glucose homeostasis, and local IGF-1 production.
These observations have led us to hypothesize that STAT5a/b are critical for
maintenance of normal muscle mass and function. To investigate this, mice with a 
skeletal muscle-specific deletion of the Stat5a/b genes (Stat5MKO) were used.
Stat5MKO mice displayed reduced muscle mass, altered fiber-type distribution and 
reduced activity. On a molecular level, gene expression in skeletal muscle of
Stat5MKO and control mice was analyzed by microarrays and real-time PCR, both in 
the presence and absence of growth hormone (GH) stimulation. Expression of
several genes involved in muscle growth and fiber type were significantly
changed. Specifically, in the quadriceps, a muscle almost exclusively composed of
type II fibers, the absence of STAT5a/b led to increased expression of several
genes associated with type I fibers and the de novo appearance of type I fibers. 
In addition, it is shown here that expression of the androgen receptor gene (Ar) 
is controlled by GH through STAT5a/b. The link between STAT5a/b and Ar gene is
likely through direct transcriptional regulation, as chromatin immunoprecipitaion
of the Ar promoter region in C2C12 myoblasts was accomplished by antibodies
against STAT5a. These experiments demonstrate an important role for STAT5a/b in
skeletal muscle physiology, and they provide a direct link to androgen signaling.

PMCID: PMC2735360
PMID: 19417088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Horm Res. 2009 Apr;71 Suppl 2:36-40. doi: 10.1159/000192434. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

The growth hormone cascade and its role in mammalian growth.

Rosenfeld RG(1), Hwa V.

Author information: 
(1)Lucile Packard Foundation for Children's Health, Stanford University, Palo
Alto, CA 94301, USA. ron.rosenfeld@lpfch.org

The myriad actions of growth hormone (GH) are still incompletely understood,
despite decades of research. Although it is a major regulator of post-natal
growth in mammals, much of its effects on skeletal growth are recognized to be
mediated indirectly, through the stimulation of production of insulin-like growth
factor (IGF)-I, as well as some of the major serum carrier proteins for IGF-I and
-II, such as IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) and the acid-labile subunit (ALS).
The regulation of IGF-I production by GH appears to be mediated entirely by
signalling through the Janus kinase (JAK) 2 pathway, via the phosphorylation of
the transcription factor, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
5b. GH also signals, however, through additional pathways that are likely to be
critical to the metabolic actions of GH.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19407495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Oct 1;66(7):708-11. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.02.034.
Epub 2009 Apr 25.

Gene expression patterns associated with posttraumatic stress disorder following 
exposure to the World Trade Center attacks.

Yehuda R(1), Cai G, Golier JA, Sarapas C, Galea S, Ising M, Rein T, Schmeidler J,
Müller-Myhsok B, Holsboer F, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine and James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Bronx, New York 10458, USA. rachel.yehuda@va.gov

BACKGROUND: Although genetic risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) in similarly traumatized cohorts can be confounded with risk for type of
exposure, the primary risk for exposure to the 9/11 attack on New York City was
proximity, allowing study of PTSD risk in a sample that is not confounded by
exposure-related risk.
METHODS: Thirty-five Caucasians (15 with PTSD, stratified for exposure, age, and 
gender) were selected from a population-representative sample of persons exposed 
to the attack from which longitudinal data had been collected in four previous
waves. Whole blood gene expression and cortisol levels were obtained.
RESULTS: Seventeen probe sets were differentially expressed in PTSD. Identified
genes were generally involved in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis,
signal transduction, or brain and immune cell function. FKBP5, a modulator of
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) sensitivity, showed reduced expression in PTSD,
consistent with enhanced GR responsiveness. FKBP5 expression was predicted by
cortisol when entered with PTSD severity in regression analysis. Quantitative
polymerase chain reaction confirmed significant reductions in FKBP5. Also less
expressed in PTSD were STAT5B, a direct inhibitor of GR, and major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) Class II.
CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with observations of HPA axis dysfunction in PTSD,
several genes involved in glucocorticoid signaling are differentially expressed
among those with current PTSD.

PMID: 19393990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Endocrinology. 2009 Aug;150(8):3627-36. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0985. Epub 2009 Apr 
9.

Regulation of rapid signal transducer and activator of transcription-5
phosphorylation in the resting cells of the growth plate and in the liver by
growth hormone and feeding.

Gevers EF(1), Hannah MJ, Waters MJ, Robinson IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Medical Research Council National
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United
Kingdom. egevers@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

GH has physiological functions in many tissues, but the cellular targets for
direct effects of GH remain ill defined in complex tissues such as the growth
plate in which the contribution of direct vs. indirect actions of GH remains
controversial. The Janus kinase (Jak)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-5 pathway is activated by GH, so we developed a method to
visualize nuclear Stat5b and phosphorylated Stat5 in single cells in response to 
a pulse of GH. Hep2 cells did not show a Stat5 phosphorylation (pY-Stat5)
response to GH except in cells transfected to express GH receptors. ATDC5 cells
express GH receptors and showed GH-induced pY-Stat5 responses, which varied with 
their state of chondrocyte differentiation. In vivo, Stat5b(+ve) nuclei were seen
in the resting and prehypertrophic chondrocytes of the growth plate. After a
single ip pulse of human GH or mouse GH, but not prolactin, pY-Stat5 responses
were visible in cells in the resting zone and groove of Ranvier, 10-45 min later.
Prehypertrophic chondrocytes showed no pY-Stat5 response to GH. GH target cells
were also identified in other tissues, and a marked variability in spatiotemporal
pY-Stat5 responses was evident. Endogenous hepatic pY-Stat5 was detected in mice 
with intact GH secretion but only during a GH pulse. Fasting and chronic exposure
to GH attenuated the pY-Stat5 response to an acute GH injection. In conclusion,
pY-Stat5 responses to GH vary in time and space, are sensitive to nutritional
status, and may be inhibited by prior GH exposure. In the growth plate, our data 
provide direct in vivo support for an early role of GH to regulate the fate of
immature chondrocytes.

PMID: 19359380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):6023-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-183210. Epub 2009
Apr 6.

The 15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid-induced angiogenesis requires Janus kinase
2-signal transducer and activator of transcription-5B-dependent expression of
interleukin-8.

Cheranov SY(1), Wang D, Kundumani-Sridharan V, Karpurapu M, Zhang Q, Chava KR,
Rao GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

To understand the molecular basis underlying 15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
(15(S)-HETE)-induced angiogenesis, we have studied the role of the Janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak-STAT) signaling. The
15(S)-HETE stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2 in a time-dependent manner
in human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (HRMVECs). Inhibition of Jak2
activation via adenovirus-mediated expression of its dominant-negative mutant
attenuated 15(S)-HETE-induced HRMVEC migration and tube formation and Matrigel
plug angiogenesis. Similarly, 15(S)-HETE activated tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT-5B in a time-dependent manner. Dominant-negative mutant-mediated
interference of STAT-5B activation suppressed 15(S)-HETE-induced HRMVEC migration
and tube formation and Matrigel plug angiogenesis. The 15(S)-HETE induced
interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression in Jak2-STAT-5B-dependent manner in HRMVECs. In
addition, neutralizing anti-IL-8 antibodies reduced 15(S)-HETE-induced HRMVEC
migration and tube formation and Matrigel plug angiogenesis. Cloning and Transfac
analysis of IL-8 promoter revealed the presence of 1 putative STAT-binding
sequence at -476 nt, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed the binding of STAT-5B to this site in
response to 15(S)-HETE. Mutational analysis showed that STAT binding site is
essential for 15(S)-HETE-induced IL-8 promoter activity. Together, these
observations suggest that 15(S)-HETE-induced angiogenesis requires
Jak2-STAT-5B-dependent expression of IL-8.

PMCID: PMC2700333
PMID: 19349617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Immunol Methods. 2009 May 15;344(1):45-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2009.03.001. Epub
2009 Mar 17.

Ex vivo expansion of memory CD8 T cells from lymph nodes or spleen through in
vitro culture with interleukin-7.

Kittipatarin C(1), Khaled AR.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Science Center, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32826, USA.

Interleukin-7 (IL-7) increases lymphocyte numbers, a critical feature of immune
reconstitution, through mechanisms that are still poorly understood. Part of the 
problem is that IL-7 is produced in limited amounts by non-lymphoid cells, making
in vivo studies of the cytokine's activity a challenge. To overcome this, we
developed an in vitro system by which lymphocytes from secondary immune organs
could be cultured to produce IL-7 responsive cells. Using this method, we showed 
that CD8(hi)CD44(hi) T cells accumulate in culture with IL-7 from a population of
lymph node or splenic cells. These results were validated when a similar
lymphocyte subset was found in mice expressing a constitutively active form of
STAT5b, a key transducer of IL-7 signals. Interestingly, IL-7-expanded cells also
up regulated the activation marker, CD69. The IL-7-derived CD44(hi)CD69(hi) cells
were not generated from naïve cells, but expanded from an existing population,
since culture in IL-7 of naïve lymphocytes from OT-1/Rag1(-/-) mice did not
produce CD44(hi)CD69(hi) cells. Using the in vitro culture system to study
lymphocytes from mice deficient in the apoptotic protein, BIM, we were able to
attribute the expansion of CD8(hi)CD44(hi)CD69(hi) T cells to the proliferative
and not survival activity of IL-7. The in vitro culture system provides an
important new methodology to examine the activities of this essential as well as 
immunotherapeutic cytokine.

PMCID: PMC2674979
PMID: 19298821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Poult Sci. 2009 Apr;88(4):722-7. doi: 10.3382/ps.2008-00497.

Polymorphisms of three neuroendocrine-correlated genes associated with growth and
reproductive traits in the chicken.

Ou JT(1), Tang SQ, Sun DX, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

The identification and utilization of potential candidate genes for QTL with
significant effects on economically important traits are becoming increasingly
important in poultry breeding programs. Chicken insulin-like growth factor
binding protein 1 and 3 and signal transducers and activators of transcription 5B
(STAT5B) genes are 3 essential nodes for signaling pathways and gene networks of 
growth and reproduction. The pooled DNA sequencing approach was used for
identification of 9 SNP of the 5' upstream region of the 3 genes. A total of 826 
individuals from Beijing You chicken were genotyped for 5 SNP using a modified
PCR-RFLP method and the association with chicken growth and reproductive traits
was studied using the GLM procedure. The T56039403C (T-808C) SNP of the
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 gene was associated with BW at 10 wk
of age (P = 0.0061), and the C56072547T (C-968T) SNP of the insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 3 gene was associated with BW at 8 and 10 wk of age (P =
0.0056 and P = 0.0016, respectively). The C4535156T (C-1591T), G4533815A
(G-250A), and G4533675C (G-110C) SNP of the STAT5B gene were associated with age 
at first egg (P = 0.0143, P = 0.0088, and P = 0.0114, respectively). Moreover,
Lewontin's D' (|D'|) and r(2) of C4535156T and G4533815A SNP, C4535156T and
G4533675C SNP, and G4533815A and G4533675C SNP of the STAT5B gene were 0.939 and 
0.852, 0.967 and 0.858, and 0.971 and 0.896, respectively. The 3 SNP were
strong-linked with each other and lay within a haplotype block. Our results
suggest that these SNP were significantly associated with early growth or with
sexual maturation in chickens, or both, and may be potential molecular markers
for MAS.

PMID: 19276414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;11(2):133-7.

[Effects of montelukast and BCG-PSN on the expression of STAT5b mRNA and IL-4
mRNA in blood mononuclearcells of rats with asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin YJ(1), Song ZY, Hu Y, Qian XB, Wang XY, He XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Jinhua College of Profession and Technology, Jinhua,
Zhejiang 321007, China. jinyj999@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b) mRNA and interleukin-4 (IL-4) mRNA in blood
mononuclearcells in a rat model of asthma and the effect of montelukast (MK) and 
BCG-polysaccharide and nucleic acid injection (BCG-PSN) on STAT5b mRNA and IL-4
mRNA expression.
METHODS: Fifty-two male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight:140-200 g) were randomly
divided into four groups: asthma, MK treated and BCG-PSN-treated and control
groups. Rat model of asthma was prepared by ovalbumin (OVA) sensitization. The
rats were sacrificed 24 hrs after the last sensitization. Blood eosinophils (EOS)
were counted. Plasma contens of IL-4 and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) were
measured using ELISA. Expression of STAT5b mRNA and IL-4 mRNA in blood
mononuclearcells was detected with SYBR GREEN I fluorescent quantitation PCR
method.
RESULTS: Blood contents of STAT5b mRNA and IL-4 mRNA in the untreated asthma
group were significantly higher than those in the other three groups (<0.01).
Blood EOS count and plasma IL-4 contents in the untreated asthma group
significantly increased, while plasma IFN-gamma contents significantly decreased 
compared with the other three groups (<0.01). There were no significant
differences in the parameters measured among the MK-treated, the BCG-PSNjtreated 
and the control groups. STAT5b mRNA expression was positively correlated to IL-4 
mRNA expression, IL-4 content and EOS count (r=0.730,0.650, 0.664, respectively; 
<0.01), but negatively correlated to IFN-gamma content (r=-0.798; <0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: STAT5b mRNA and IL-4 mRNA were strongly expressed in blood
mononuclearcells in rats with asthma, and there was a positive correlation
between them. MK and BCG-PSN had inhibitory effects on the expression of STAT5b
mRNA and IL-4 mRNA, which might be contributed to suppression of airway
inflammation in asthma.

PMID: 19222952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. FEBS J. 2009 Mar;276(6):1720-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06902.x. Epub 2009 
Feb 13.

Synergistic co-operation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B
with activator protein 1 in angiotensin II-induced angiotensinogen gene
activation in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Han M(1), Li AY, Meng F, Dong LH, Zheng B, Hu HJ, Nie L, Wen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.

The binding sequences for signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
and activator protein 1 have been found in the promoter region of the
angiotensinogen gene. We examined whether the elements for activator protein 1
and STAT5B function in angiotensinogen gene activation induced by angiotensin II 
in vascular smooth muscle cells. Stimulation with angiotensin II increased the
level of angiotensinogen mRNA by 2.1-fold in vascular smooth muscle cells. The
increased level of angiotensinogen mRNA occurred with concurrent elevations in
the levels of STAT5B and c-Jun phosphorylation after stimulation with angiotensin
II. Likewise, angiotensin II resulted in similar enhancements of the DNA-binding 
activity of STAT5B and c-Jun in angiotensin II-induced angiotensinogen
expression. Notably, the STAT5B-DNA complex interacted with the c-Jun-DNA complex
by forming a stable quaternary complex in angiotensin II-induced angiotensinogen 
expression. Our findings support a model in which co-operative interaction of
STAT5B and activator protein 1 bound to the the promoter region provides maximal 
activation of angiotensinogen expression by angiotensin II in vascular smooth
muscle cells.

PMID: 19220857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Apr 1;106(5):929-36. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22069.

JAK pathway induction of c-Myc critical to IL-5 stimulation of cell proliferation
and inhibition of apoptosis.

Lee WH(1), Liu FH, Lin JY, Huang SY, Lin H, Liao WJ, Huang HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Medical University-Wan Fang
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) induction of c-Myc expression is associated with IL-5
inhibition of apoptosis in hematopoietic cells. In this study, TFalpha1 and
TFalpha8 cells with stable overexpression of IL-5 receptor alpha (IL-5Ralpha)
subunit in TF-1 cells, a human hematopoietic progenitor cell line which expressed
low levels of IL-5Ralpha, were used to explored how IL-5 up-regulate c-Myc and
the role of c-Myc in IL-5 signaling. First, we demonstrate that IL-5 induced
c-Myc RNA and protein expressions, as well as activated Janus kinases (JAK1 and
JAK2) and signal transducer and activator of transcription-5b (STAT5b). JAK
inhibitor AG490 and c-Myc inhibitor 10058-F4, both, reduced IL-5-mediated cell
proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Both, AG490 and 10058-F4,
also reduced IL-5-mediated anti-apoptotic activity. Furthermore, AG490 inhibited 
IL-5-mediated c-Myc induction and promoter activity. We further examined the role
of JAK1 and JAK2 in the induction of c-Myc expression using the CDJAK fusion
proteins, which consisted of a CD16 extracellular domain, a CD7 transmembrane
domain, and either JAK1 (CDJAK1) or JAK2 (CDJAK2) as intracellular domains.
Simultaneous activation of JAK1 and JAK2 by anti-CD16 antibody crosslinking of
CDJAK1 and CDJAK2 could induced c-Myc expression and promoter activity; AG490
inhibited CDJAK1 and CDJAK2-mediated effects. These results suggest that IL-5
induces cell proliferation and anti-apoptosis through the JAK/c-Myc pathway, and 
that JAK1 and JAK2 activation participate in IL-5-induced up-regulation of c-Myc.

PMID: 19180571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Mar;94(3):965-72. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1385. Epub
2008 Dec 9.

Impact of fasting on growth hormone signaling and action in muscle and fat.

Moller L(1), Dalman L, Norrelund H, Billestrup N, Frystyk J, Moller N, Jorgensen 
JO.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department M, Aarhus Sygehus, Norrebrogade 44, DK-8000 Aarhus,
Denmark. louisem@dadlnet.dk

CONTEXT: Whether GH promotes IGF-I production or lipolysis depends on nutritional
status, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of fasting on GH-mediated changes in
substrate metabolism, insulin sensitivity, and signaling pathways.
DESIGN: We conducted a randomized crossover study.
SUBJECTS: Ten healthy men (age 24.3 +/- 0.6 yr, body mass index 23.1 +/- 0.4
kg/m(2)) participated.
INTERVENTION: A GH bolus administered 1) postabsorptively and 2) in the fasting
state (37.5 h). Skeletal muscle and adipose tissue biopsies were taken, and a
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp was performed on both occasions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Metabolic clearance rate (MCR) of GH, substrate
metabolism, and insulin sensitivity were measured. Biopsies were subjected to
Western blotting for expression of signaling proteins and to RT-PCR for
expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling protein 3 and IGF-I mRNA.
RESULTS: Fasting was associated with reduced MCR of GH (P < 0.01), enhanced
lipolytic responsiveness to GH, decreased insulin sensitivity (P < 0.01), and
reduced IGF-I bioactivity (P = 0.04). After the GH bolus, phosphorylation of
signal transducers and activators of transcription protein 5b (pSTAT5b) were
observed in both conditions; however, the phospho-STAT5b/STAT5b ratio was
significantly decreased in the fasting state (muscle P = 0.02 and fat P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: The combination of fasting and GH exposure translates into enhanced
lipolysis, reduced IGF-I activity and insulin sensitivity, and blunted activation
of the Janus kinase (JAK)/STAT pathway. Whether this change in signaling activity
is related to the change in MCR of GH and/or the concomitant shift in the
metabolic effects of GH merits future attention.

PMID: 19066303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2009 Feb;234(2):164-70. doi: 10.3181/0808-RM-251. Epub
2008 Dec 8.

Serum IGF-I-deficiency does not prevent compensatory skeletal muscle hypertrophy 
in resistance exercise.

Matheny RW(1), Merritt E, Zannikos SV, Farrar RP, Adamo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Longevity
and Aging Studies, MSC 7760, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

Erratum in
    Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2009 Oct;234(10):1. Matheny, Wayne [corrected to Matheny,
Ronald W].

The involvement of circulating insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) in the
skeletal muscle response to resistance exercise is currently unclear. To address 
this, we utilized the liver IGF-I-deficient (LID) mouse model, in which the igf1 
gene has been disrupted in the hepatocytes, resulting in ~80% reduction in serum 
IGF-I. Twelve- to 13-month-old male LID and control (L/L) mice were subjected to 
16 weeks of resistance training. Resistance exercise resulted in equal strength
gains in both L/L and LID mice. Basal IGF-I mRNA levels were greater in LID
muscles than in L/L, and exercise increased IGF-I mRNA in quadriceps,
gastrocnemius, and plantaris muscles. LID mice had elevated tyrosine
phosphorylation of IGF-IR and Stat5b, the latter possibly reflective of increased
serum GH. Tyrosine phosphorylation of IGF-IR was increased, while phospho-Stat5b 
was reduced after resistance training of both wild-type and LID mice. These data 
suggest that: 1) performance and recovery in response to resistance training is
normal even when there is severe deficiency of circulating IGF-I; and 2)
upregulation of local IGF-I may be involved in the compensatory growth of muscle 
that occurs in response to resistance training. Decreased levels of p-Stat5b in
exercised mice suggests that the upregulation of local IGF-I gene expression in
response to exercise may be GH-independent.

PMID: 19064939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Feb 1;315(3):419-31. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.11.005. Epub
2008 Nov 20.

TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis is prevented by erythropoietin treatment on SH-SY5Y
cells.

Pregi N(1), Wenker S, Vittori D, Leirós CP, Nesse A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Pabellón II, Piso 4, Ciudad Universitaria,
(C1428EHA), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. npregi@qb.fcen.uba.ar

The growth factor erythropoietin (Epo) has shown neuronal protective action in
addition to its well known proerythroid activity. Furthermore, Epo has dealt with
cellular inflammation by inhibiting the expression of several proinflammatory
cytokines, such as IL-1 and TNF-alpha. The action of TNF can have both apoptotic 
and antiapoptotic consequences due to altered balance between different cell
signalling pathways. This work has focused on the apoptotic effects of this
cytokine and the potential protective action of Epo. The model we used was
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells cultured in the presence of 25 ng/ml TNF-alpha or
pretreated with 25 U/ml Epo for 12 h before the addition of TNF-alpha. Apoptosis 
was evaluated by differential cell count after Hoechst staining, analysis of DNA 
ladder pattern, and measurement of caspase activity. Despite its ability to
induce NF-kappaB nuclear translocation, TNF-alpha induced cell death, which was
found to be associated to upregulation of TNF Receptor 1 expression. On the other
hand, cells activated by Epo became resistant to cell death. Prevention of death 
receptor upregulation and caspase activation may explain this antiapoptotic
effect of Epo, which may be also favoured by the induction of a higher expression
of protective factors, such as Bcl-2 and NF-kappaB, through mechanisms involving 
Jak/STAT and PI3K signalling pathways.

PMID: 19056379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Blood. 2009 Feb 12;113(7):1483-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-166355. Epub 2008
Dec 1.

BLNK suppresses pre-B-cell leukemogenesis through inhibition of JAK3.

Nakayama J(1), Yamamoto M, Hayashi K, Satoh H, Bundo K, Kubo M, Goitsuka R,
Farrar MA, Kitamura D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Research Institute for Biological Sciences,
Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Japan.

Pre-B-cell leukemia spontaneously develops in BLNK-deficient mice, and pre-B-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells in children often lack BLNK protein
expression, demonstrating that BLNK functions as a tumor suppressor. However, the
mechanism by which BLNK suppresses pre-B-cell leukemia, as well as the
identification of other genetic alterations that collaborate with BLNK deficiency
to cause leukemogenesis, are still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the
JAK3/STAT5 signaling pathway is constitutively activated in pre-B leukemia cells 
derived from BLNK(-/-) mice, mostly due to autocrine production of IL-7.
Inhibition of IL-7R signaling or JAK3/STAT5 activity resulted in the induction of
p27(kip1) expression and cell-cycle arrest, accompanied by apoptosis in the
leukemia cells. Transgene-derived constitutively active STAT5 (STAT5b-CA)
strongly synergized with the loss of BLNK to initiate leukemia in vivo. In the
leukemia cells, exogenously expressed BLNK inhibited autocrine JAK3/STAT5
signaling, resulting in p27(kip1) induction, cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis.
BLNK-inhibition of JAK3 was dependent on the binding of BLNK to JAK3. These data 
indicate that BLNK normally regulates IL-7-dependent proliferation and survival
of pre-B cells through direct inhibition of JAK3. Thus, somatic loss of BLNK and 
concomitant mutations leading to constitutive activation of Jak/STAT5 pathway
result in the generation of pre-B-cell leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2644075
PMID: 19047679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Physiol. 2009 Feb 1;587(3):669-77. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.161521. Epub 2008
Dec 1.

The decrease in mature myostatin protein in male skeletal muscle is
developmentally regulated by growth hormone.

Oldham JM(1), Osepchook CC, Jeanplong F, Falconer SJ, Matthews KG, Conaglen JV,
Gerrard DF, Smith HK, Wilkins RJ, Bass JJ, McMahon CD.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Physiology Group, AgResearch Ltd., Hamilton, New Zealand.

Myostatin inhibits myogenesis and there is reduced abundance of the mature
protein in skeletal muscles of adult male compared with female mice. This
reduction probably occurs after translation, which suggests that it is a
regulated mechanism to reduce the availability of myostatin in males. Reduced
myostatin may, thereby, contribute to the development of sexually dimorphic
growth of skeletal muscle. Our first objective was to determine if the decrease
in mature myostatin protein occurs before the linear growth phase to aid growth, 
or afterwards to maintain the mass of adult muscle. Mice were killed from 2 to 32
weeks and the gastrocnemius muscle was excised. Myostatin mRNA increased from 2
to 32 weeks and was higher in males than females (P < 0.001). In contrast, mature
protein decreased in males after 6 weeks (P < 0.001). Our second objective was to
determine if growth hormone (GH) induces the decrease in mature myostatin
protein. GH increased myostatin mRNA and decreased the abundance of mature
protein in hypophysectomised mice (P < 0.05). Our final objective was to
determine if the decrease in mature protein occurs in skeletal muscles of male
Stat5b(-/-) mice (Stat5b mediates the actions of GH). As expected, mature
myostatin protein was not reduced in Stat5b(-/-) males compared with females.
However, myostatin mRNA remained higher in males than females irrespective of
genotype. These data suggest that: (1) the decrease in mature myostatin protein
is developmentally regulated, (2) GH acting via Stat5b regulates the abundance of
mature myostatin and (3) GH acts via a non-Stat5b pathway to regulate myostatin
mRNA.

PMCID: PMC2670088
PMID: 19047209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(6):R94. doi: 10.1186/bcr2193. Epub 2008 Nov 13.

Heat shock protein-90-alpha, a prolactin-STAT5 target gene identified in breast
cancer cells, is involved in apoptosis regulation.

Perotti C(1), Liu R, Parusel CT, Böcher N, Schultz J, Bork P, Pfitzner E, Groner 
B, Shemanko CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, 2500 University
Drive NW, Calgary, AB, T2N 1N4, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The prolactin-Janus-kinase-2-signal transducer and activator of
transcription-5 (JAK2-STAT5) pathway is essential for the development and
functional differentiation of the mammary gland. The pathway also has important
roles in mammary tumourigenesis. Prolactin regulated target genes are not yet
well defined in tumour cells, and we undertook, to the best of our knowledge, the
first large genetic screen of breast cancer cells treated with or without
exogenous prolactin. We hypothesise that the identification of these genes should
yield insights into the mechanisms by which prolactin participates in cancer
formation or progression, and possibly how it regulates normal mammary gland
development.
METHODS: We used subtractive hybridisation to identify a number of
prolactin-regulated genes in the human mammary carcinoma cell line SKBR3.
Northern blotting analysis and luciferase assays identified the gene encoding
heat shock protein 90-alpha (HSP90A) as a prolactin-JAK2-STAT5 target gene, whose
function was characterised using apoptosis assays.
RESULTS: We identified a number of new prolactin-regulated genes in breast cancer
cells. Focusing on HSP90A, we determined that prolactin increased HSP90A mRNA in 
cancerous human breast SKBR3 cells and that STAT5B preferentially activated the
HSP90A promoter in reporter gene assays. Both prolactin and its downstream
protein effector, HSP90alpha, promote survival, as shown by apoptosis assays and 
by the addition of the HSP90 inhibitor, 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin
(17-AAG), in both untransformed HC11 mammary epithelial cells and SKBR3 breast
cancer cells. The constitutive expression of HSP90A, however, sensitised
differentiated HC11 cells to starvation-induced wild-type p53-independent
apoptosis. Interestingly, in SKBR3 breast cancer cells, HSP90alpha promoted
survival in the presence of serum but appeared to have little effect during
starvation.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to identifying new prolactin-regulated genes in breast
cancer cells, we found that prolactin-JAK2-STAT5 induces expression of the HSP90A
gene, which encodes the master chaperone of cancer. This identifies one mechanism
by which prolactin contributes to breast cancer. Increased expression of HSP90A
in breast cancer is correlated with increased cell survival and poor prognosis
and HSP90alpha inhibitors are being tested in clinical trials as a breast cancer 
treatment. Our results also indicate that HSP90alpha promotes survival depending 
on the cellular conditions and state of cellular transformation.

PMCID: PMC2656886
PMID: 19014541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009 Jun;70(6):898-906. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03431.x. Epub 2008 Sep 24.

Changes in the expression of suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS) 2 in the
colonic mucosa of acromegalic patients are associated with hyperplastic polyps.

Bogazzi F(1), Ultimieri F, Raggi F, Russo D, Costa A, Marciano E, Bartalena L,
Martino E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Italy.
f.bogazzi@endoc.med.unipi.it

BACKGROUND: Acromegalic patients have increased prevalence of colonic polyps.
Development of hyperplastic polyps was related to suppressor of cytokine
signalling (SOCS) 2 haploinsufficiency in animal models of acromegaly.
OBJECTIVE AND PATIENTS: To evaluate whether variations in SOCS2 expression in the
colonic mucosa of acromegalic patients might be associated to hyperplastic
polyps, patients with active acromegaly or disease in remission with or without
hyperplastic polyps were studied; controls were non-acromegalic subjects age- and
sex- matched with or without polyps.
MEASUREMENTS: Expression of SOCS1-3 was evaluated by RT-PCR, immunofluorescence
and Western blot in the colonic mucosa. Coimmunoprecipatiton was used to evaluate
multimeric protein complexes.
RESULTS: Acromegalic patients with active disease and hyperplastic polyps had
higher levels of SOCS2 transcripts; on the contrary, SOCS1 and SOCS3 transcripts 
did not differ among the study groups. While the expression of SOCS2 and SOCS3
protein was indistinguishable with that of the corresponding transcripts, SOCS1
protein expression was reduced in active acromegalic patients with polyps. SOCS1 
protein was reduced owing to its increased proteasome degradation mediated by
SOCS2. The increased SOCS2 and reduced SOCS1 led to increased STAT5b expression, 
suggesting a higher GH signalling transduction.
CONCLUSIONS: Acromegalic patients with active disease and hyperplastic polyps
have high levels of SOCS2 and increased SOCS1 degradation, leading to reduced
negative feedback on GH signalling, likely favouring a hyperplastic polyps
phenotype.

PMID: 18844680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Blood. 2009 Jan 29;113(5):1027-36. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-133405. Epub 2008
Oct 6.

SHD1 is a novel cytokine-inducible, negative feedback regulator of
STAT5-dependent transcription.

Nakajima H(1), Tamura T, Ito M, Shibata F, Kuroda K, Fukuchi Y, Watanabe N,
Kitamura T, Ikeda Y, Handa M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. hnakajim@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

STAT5 is a critical mediator of a variety of cytokine signaling whose
transcriptional activity is regulated by associating with various proteins.
During a search for STAT5-interacting proteins, we identified SHD1, a mammalian
homologue of yeast gene Sac3, as a potential interacter. SHD1 was localized in
the nucleus, and induced by cytokines that activate STAT5, such as
erythropoietin, interleukin-2 (IL-2), or IL-3. SHD1 interacted specifically with 
STAT5A and STAT5B, and interestingly, it specifically repressed STAT5-dependent
transcription in vitro without affecting the stability or phosphorylation of
STAT5 protein. Gene disruption study revealed that T, B, or bone marrow cells
from mice lacking SHD1 were hyperresponsive to T-cell-receptor engagement, or
stimulation with various STAT5-activating cytokines. These results suggest that
SHD1 is a novel cytokine-inducible negative feedback regulator of STAT5.

PMID: 18838617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Steroids. 2009 Jan;74(1):20-9. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2008.09.002. Epub 2008 Sep
11.

Increased SULT1E1 activity in HepG2 hepatocytes decreases growth hormone
stimulation of STAT5b phosphorylation.

Li L(1), He D, Wilborn TW, Falany JL, Falany CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Mouse models of cystic fibrosis (CF) display increased sulfotransferase 1E1
(SULT1E1) activity in hepatocytes of cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor
(CFTR)-deficient animals. SULT1E1 is responsible for the sulfation and
inactivation of beta-estradiol (E2) at physiological concentrations. IGF-1
message levels in CFTR(-/-) mouse livers were positively correlated with body
weight and negatively correlated with SULT1E1 activity. Growth hormone (GH) is
important in the regulation of hepatic IGF-1 expression indicating that E2 levels
are involved with GH signaling in hepatocytes. To investigate the effects of E2
and SULT1E1 activity on GH signal transduction in human hepatocytes, SULT1E1 was 
stably expressed in HepG2 cells. Effects of increased E2 sulfation on the GH
signaling pathway and E2-regulated gene expression were examined. Pretreatment of
HepG2 cells with 10nM E2 prior to GH stimulation increased STAT5b phosphorylation
and IGF-1 expression. In SULT1E1-transfected HepG2 cells, GH-stimulated STAT5b
phosphorylation was significantly decreased. E2 treatment had no effect on STAT5b
phosphorylation in the absence of GH stimulation. E2 also had no effect on Jak-2 
phosphorylation. E2 has an apparent rapid action on increasing GH-stimulated
STAT5b phosphorylation that was not attenuated by the estrogen receptor
antagonist, ICI 182,780. Physiological levels of E2 in HepG2 cells increase GH
stimulation of IGF-1 production apparently through increased phosphorylated
STAT5b levels and transcriptional activation of the IGF-1 gene. The enhanced
SULT1E1 activity may have a role in inhibiting GH-stimulated STAT5b
phosphorylation and IGF-1 synthesis via the sulfation and inactivation of E2.

PMCID: PMC2633718
PMID: 18831980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nat Immunol. 2008 Nov;9(11):1288-96. doi: 10.1038/ni.1656. Epub 2008 Sep 28.

Priming for T helper type 2 differentiation by interleukin 2-mediated induction
of interleukin 4 receptor alpha-chain expression.

Liao W(1), Schones DE, Oh J, Cui Y, Cui K, Roh TY, Zhao K, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

T helper type 2 (T(H)2) cells are essential for humoral immunity and host
defense. Interleukin 4 (IL-4) drives T(H)2 differentiation and IL-2 augments the 
accessibility of Il4 chromatin. Here we demonstrate that IL-2, by inducing
binding of STAT5 to the Il4ra locus, which encodes IL-4 receptor alpha-chain
(IL-4Ralpha), was essential for inducing and maintaining IL-4Ralpha expression.
Although IL-4 induced IL-4Ralpha expression, T cell receptor-induced IL-4Ralpha
expression was normal in Il4(-/-) cells but was much lower in Il2(-/-) cells.
Notably, forced IL-4Ralpha expression restored the T(H)2 differentiation of
Il2(-/-) cells. Moreover, genome-wide mapping by chromatin immunoprecipitation
coupled with sequencing showed broad interaction of the transcription factors
STAT5A and STAT5B with genes associated with T(H)2 differentiation. Our results
identify a previously unappreciated function for IL-2 in 'priming' T cells for
T(H)2 differentiation and in maintaining the expression of Il4ra and other genes 
in T(H)2-committed cells.

PMCID: PMC2762127
PMID: 18820682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Lett. 2009 Jan 8;273(1):164-71. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.08.011. Epub
2008 Sep 14.

Inhibition of transcription factor STAT5b suppresses proliferation, induces G1
cell cycle arrest and reduces tumor cell invasion in human glioblastoma
multiforme cells.

Liang QC(1), Xiong H, Zhao ZW, Jia D, Li WX, Qin HZ, Deng JP, Gao L, Zhang H, Gao
GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tang-Du Hospital, Institute for Functional
Neurosurgery of P.L.A., Fourth Military Medical University, Xin-Si Road, Xi'an
710038, China.

Abnormalities in the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5)
signaling are involved in the oncogenesis of several cancers. However, previous
studies have not elucidated clear and distinct roles for each STAT5 gene in
cancers. To investigate the role of STAT5a, -5b isoforms in human glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) progression, we depleted each STAT5 isoforms with siRNA. Our
results demonstrate that STAT5b is involved in GBM cell growth, cell cycle
progression, invasion and migration through regulation of gene expression, such
as Bcl-2, p21(waf1/cip1), p27(kip1), FAK and VEGF. Moreover, immunohistochemical 
staining reveals that cytoplasm staining of STAT5b is markedly increased in GBM
(57.1%) compared with that in normal cortex (22.2%) and diffuse astrocytoma
(27.3%), suggesting that STAT5b could have important implications in astrocytoma 
biology. Therefore, our findings illustrate the biological significance of STAT5b
in GBM progression, and provide novel evidence that STAT5b may serve as a
therapeutic target in the prevention of human glioblastoma multiforme.

PMID: 18793823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Blood. 2008 Nov 15;112(10):4098-108. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-148726. Epub 2008
Aug 20.

PTP1B is a negative regulator of interleukin 4-induced STAT6 signaling.

Lu X(1), Malumbres R, Shields B, Jiang X, Sarosiek KA, Natkunam Y, Tiganis T,
Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is a ubiquitously expressed enzyme shown 
to negatively regulate multiple tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent signaling
pathways. PTP1B can modulate cytokine signaling pathways by dephosphorylating
JAK2, TYK2, and STAT5a/b. Herein, we report that phosphorylated STAT6 may serve
as a cytoplasmic substrate for PTP1B. Overexpression of PTP1B led to STAT6
dephosphorylation and the suppression of STAT6 transcriptional activity, whereas 
PTP1B knockdown or deficiency augmented IL-4-induced STAT6 signaling.
Pretreatment of these cells with the PTK inhibitor staurosporine led to sustained
STAT6 phosphorylation consistent with STAT6 serving as a direct substrate of
PTP1B. Furthermore, PTP1B-D181A "substrate-trapping" mutants formed stable
complexes with phosphorylated STAT6 in a cellular context and endogenous PTP1B
and STAT6 interacted in an interleukin 4 (IL-4)-inducible manner. We delineate a 
new negative regulatory loop of IL-4-JAK-STAT6 signaling. We demonstrate that
IL-4 induces PTP1B mRNA expression in a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent
manner and enhances PTP1B protein stability to suppress IL-4-induced STAT6
signaling. Finally, we show that PTP1B expression may be preferentially elevated 
in activated B cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. These observations
identify a novel regulatory loop for the regulation of IL-4-induced STAT6
signaling that may have important implications in both neoplastic and
inflammatory processes.

PMCID: PMC2582009
PMID: 18716132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int J Oncol. 2008 Sep;33(3):477-84.

Enhancement of hypoxia-induced apoptosis of human breast cancer cells via STAT5b 
by momilactone B.

Joung YH(1), Lim EJ, Kim MS, Lim SD, Yoon SY, Lim YC, Yoo YB, Ye SK, Park T,
Chung IM, Bae KY, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Bio-Food and Drug Research
Center, Konkuk University, Chungju City 380-701, Korea.

We have shown previously that hypoxia activates the cyclin D1 promoter via the
Jak2/STAT5b pathway in breast cancer cells. Most solid tumors contain hypoxic
components and overexpression of cyclin D1. The purpose of the present study was 
to investigate the molecular mechanism by which momilactone B exerts its
inhibitory effects on breast cancer cells. Momilactone B, extracted from Korean
rice hulls, suppressed hypoxia-induced increases in phospho-STAT5, STAT5b, cyclin
D1, and cdk4 protein levels in human breast cancer cells. STAT5b expression was
inhibited by siRNA experiments leading to decreased cyclin D1. The effects of
momilactone B on cell growth and apoptosis-related gene expression were
investigated in breast cancer cells under hypoxic conditions (2% O2). Bax and p21
expression was found to be up-regulated, whereas ppRb and bcl-2 were
down-regulated in momilactone B-treated cells under hypoxic conditions. However, 
the p53 protein level did not change. Flow cytometry with Annexin-FITC staining
showed that the number of apoptotic cells increased in hypoxic cells treated with
momilactone B compared with untreated hypoxic cells. Furthermore, caspase
activity increased upon treatment with momilactone B under hypoxic conditions.
These results indicate that momilactone B inhibits the growth of breast cancer
cells, regulates the expression of apoptosis-related genes, and induces apoptosis
through STAT5b and a caspase-3 dependent pathway. We suggest that momilactone B
accelerates hypoxia-induced apoptosis of human breast cancer cells through
STAT5b, and may represent an effective chemopreventive or therapeutic agent
against breast cancer.

PMID: 18695876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):49-58. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.145094. Epub 2008 Aug 7.

Regulation of intestinal barrier function by signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b.

Han X(1), Ren X, Jurickova I, Groschwitz K, Pasternak BA, Xu H, Wilson TA, Hogan 
SP, Denson LA.

Author information: 
(1)MLC 2010, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

BACKGROUND: Colon epithelial cell (CEC) apoptosis and nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB) activation may compromise barrier function, and it has been reported 
that signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b)-deficient mice 
exhibit increased susceptibility to colitis. It is hypothesised that the growth
hormone (GH) target STAT5b maintains mucosal barrier integrity by promoting CEC
survival and inhibiting NF-kappaB activation.
METHODS: The GH effect upon mucosal injury due to 2,4,6-trinitro-benzenesulfonic 
acid (TNBS) administration was determined in STAT5b-deficient mice and wild-type 
(WT) controls. The effect of STAT5b deficiency upon CEC survival and NF-kappaB
activation was determined and related to differences in intestinal permeability
and bacterial translocation. RNA interference (RNAi) was used to knock down
STAT5b expression in the T84 CEC line, and the effect upon basal and GH-dependent
regulation of proapoptotic and inflammatory pathways induced by tumour necrosis
factor alpha (TNFalpha) was determined.
RESULTS: GH suppression of mucosal inflammation in TNBS colitis was abrogated in 
STAT5b-deficient mice. STAT5b deficiency led to activation of a proapoptotic
pattern of gene expression in the colon, and increased mucosal permeability. The 
frequency of apoptotic CECs was increased in STAT5b-deficient mice while tight
junction protein abundance was reduced. This was associated with upregulation of 
CEC Toll-like receptor 2 expression and NF-kappaB activation. STAT5b knockdown in
T84 CEC increased TNFalpha-dependent NF-kappaB and caspase-3 activation. GH
inhibition of TNFalpha signalling was prevented by STAT5b knockdown.
CONCLUSION: STAT5b maintains colonic barrier integrity by modulating CEC survival
and NF-kappaB activation. STAT5b activation may therefore represent a novel
therapeutic target in inflammatory bowel disease.

PMCID: PMC4041491
PMID: 18687707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):2071-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-12-127480. Epub 2008
Jun 13.

Hematopoietic-specific Stat5-null mice display microcytic hypochromic anemia
associated with reduced transferrin receptor gene expression.

Zhu BM(1), McLaughlin SK, Na R, Liu J, Cui Y, Martin C, Kimura A, Robinson GW,
Andrews NC, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDKD), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. bingmei@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1553-4.

Iron is essential for all cells but is toxic in excess, so iron absorption and
distribution are tightly regulated. Serum iron is bound to transferrin and enters
erythroid cells primarily via receptor-mediated endocytosis of the transferrin
receptor (Tfr1). Tfr1 is essential for developing erythrocytes and reduced Tfr1
expression is associated with anemia. The transcription factors STAT5A/B are
activated by many cytokines, including erythropoietin. Stat5a/b(-/-) mice are
severely anemic and die perinatally, but no link has been made to iron
homeostasis. To study the function of STAT5A/B in vivo, we deleted the floxed
Stat5a/b locus in hematopoietic cells with a Tie2-Cre transgene. These mice
exhibited microcytic, hypochromic anemia, as did lethally irradiated mice that
received a transplant of Stat5a/b(-/-) fetal liver cells. Flow cytometry and RNA 
analyses of erythroid cells from mutant mice revealed a 50% reduction in Tfr1
mRNA and protein. We detected STAT5A/B binding sites in the first intron of the
Tfr1 gene and found that expression of constitutively active STAT5A in an
erythroid cell line increased Tfr1 levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments confirmed the binding of STAT5A/B to these sites. We conclude that
STAT5A/B is an important regulator of iron update in erythroid progenitor cells
via its control of Tfr1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2518907
PMID: 18552213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;22(8):1781-96. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0419. Epub 2008 Jun 
11.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b, c-Src, and epidermal growth 
factor receptor signaling play integral roles in estrogen-stimulated
proliferation of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells.

Fox EM(1), Bernaciak TM, Wen J, Weaver AM, Shupnik MA, Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

17beta-Estradiol (E2) acts through the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) to
stimulate breast cancer proliferation. Here, we investigated the functional
relationship between ERalpha and signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)5b activity in ER+ MCF-7 and T47D human breast cancer cells after specific 
knockdown of STAT5b. STAT5b small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited E2-induced
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation in both cell lines, as well as the
E2-induced increase in MCF-7 cell number, cyclin D1 and c-myc mRNA, and cyclin D1
protein expression, indicating that STAT5b is required for E2-stimulated breast
cancer proliferation. E2 treatment stimulated STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation at 
the activating tyrosine Y699, resulting in increased STAT5-mediated
transcriptional activity, which was inhibited by a Y669F STAT5b mutant.
E2-induced STAT5-mediated transcriptional activity was inhibited by
overexpressing a kinase-defective epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), or the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor tyrphostin AG1478, indicating a requirement for
EGFR kinase activity. Both E2-induced STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation and
STAT5-mediated transcription were also inhibited by the ER antagonist ICI 182,780
and the c-Src inhibitor PP2, indicating additional requirements for the ER and
c-Src kinase activity. EGFR and c-Src kinase activities were also required for
E2-induced cyclin D1 and c-myc mRNA. Together, these studies demonstrate positive
cross talk between ER, c-Src, EGFR, and STAT5b in ER+ breast cancer cells.
Increased EGFR and c-Src signaling is associated with tamoxifen resistance in ER+
breast cancer cells. Here we show that constitutively active STAT5b not only
increased basal DNA synthesis, but also conferred tamoxifen resistance. Because
STAT5b plays an integral role in E2-stimulated proliferation and tamoxifen
resistance, it may be an effective therapeutic target in ER+ breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC2505329
PMID: 18550772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Jun;15(2):367-90. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0013.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A/B in prostate and breast
cancers.

Tan SH(1), Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, 233 South 10th Street, BLSB 309, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107,
USA.

Protein kinase signaling pathways, such as Janus kinase 2-Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5A/B (JAK2-STAT5A/B), are of significant interest in
the search for new therapeutic strategies in both breast and prostate cancers. In
prostate cancer, the components of the JAK2-STAT5A/B signaling pathway provide
molecular targets for small-molecule inhibition of survival and growth signals of
the cells. At the same time, new evidence suggests that the STAT5A/B signaling
pathway is involved in the transition of organ-confined prostate cancer to
hormone-refractory disease. This implies that the active JAK2-STAT5A/B signaling 
pathway potentially provides the means for pharmacological intervention of
clinical prostate cancer progression. In addition, active STAT5A/B may serve as a
prognostic marker for identification of those primary prostate cancers that are
likely to progress to aggressive disease. In breast cancer, the role of STAT5A/B 
is more complex. STAT5A/B may have a dual role in the regulation of malignant
mammary epithelium. Data accumulated from mouse models of breast cancer suggest
that in early stages of breast cancer STAT5A/B may promote malignant
transformation and enhance growth of the tumor. This is in contrast to
established breast cancer, where STAT5A/B may mediate the critical cues for
maintaining the differentiation of mammary epithelium. In addition, present data 
suggest that activation of STAT5A/B in breast cancer predicts favorable clinical 
outcome. The dual nature of STAT5A/B action in breast cancer makes the
therapeutic use of STAT5 A/B more complex.

PMID: 18508994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Front Biosci. 2008 May 1;13:6237-54.

The different functions of Stat5 and chromatin alteration through Stat5 proteins.

Kornfeld JW(1), Grebien F, Kerenyi MA, Friedbichler K, Kovacic B, Zankl B, Hoelbl
A, Nivarti H, Beug H, Sexl V, Muller M, Kenner L, Mullner EW, Gouilleux F,
Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.

Stat5 proteins modulate gene transcription upon cytokine- and growth factor
action. Stat5a and Stat5b proteins alone are weak activators of transcription.
They can modify chromatin organization through oligomerization and they act
predominantly in co-operation and interaction with other proteins. The
conservative view of exclusively nuclear functions of Stat5 was challenged by the
observation of additional Stat5 effects in the cytoplasm, resulting in activation
of the PI3K-Akt pathway. We summarize biological consequences of mutations in
conserved domains of Stat5 or of deletions in the N- or C-terminal domains with
impact on target gene transcription. Formation of higher-order oligomers is
dramatically changed upon amino- or carboxyterminal deletions in Stat5 proteins. 
Mutations in or deletion of the Stat5 N-terminus leads to diminished leukemogenic
potential of oncogenic Stat5, probably due to the inability to form Stat5
tetramers. The Stat5 N-terminal domain prevents persistent activation and can act
as a DNA-docking platform for the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The corresponding
protocols should facilitate follow-up studies on Stat5 proteins and their
contribution to normal physiological versus pathological processes through
differential chromatin binding.

PMCID: PMC2976847
PMID: 18508657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3802-18. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn271. Epub 2008
May 20.

In vivo identification of novel STAT5 target genes.

Basham B(1), Sathe M, Grein J, McClanahan T, D'Andrea A, Lees E, Rascle A.

Author information: 
(1)Schering-Plough Biopharma, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

STAT5A and STAT5B proteins belong to the family of signal transducers and
activators of transcription. They are encoded by two separate genes with 91%
identity in their amino acid sequences. Despite their high degree of
conservation, STAT5A and STAT5B exert non-redundant functions, resulting at least
in part from differences in target gene activation. To better characterize the
differential contribution of STAT5A and STAT5B in gene regulation, we performed
single or double knockdown of STAT5A and STAT5B using small interfering RNA.
Subsequent gene expression profiling and RT-qPCR analyses of IL-3-stimulated
Ba/F3-beta cells led to the identification of putative novel STAT5 target genes. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays analyzing the corresponding gene loci
identified unusual STAT5 binding sites compared to conventional STAT5 responsive 
elements. Some of the STAT5 targets identified are upregulated in several human
cancers, suggesting that they might represent potential oncogenes in
STAT5-associated malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2441806
PMID: 18492722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Jul 15;34(2):135-43. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00048.2008. Epub 2008 May 6.

Genomic dissection of the cytokine-controlled STAT5 signaling network in liver.

Hosui A(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-0822, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) controls the physiology and pathophysiology of the liver, and
its signals are conducted by two members of the family of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription, STAT5A and STAT5B. Mice in which the Stat5a/b locus 
has been inactivated specifically in hepatocytes display GH resistance, the
sex-specific expression of genes associated with liver metabolism and the
cytochrome P-450 system is lost, and they develop hepatosteatosis. Several groups
have shown by global gene expression profiling that a cadre of STAT5A/B target
genes identify genetic cascades induced by GH and other cytokines. Evidence is
accumulating that in the absence of STAT5A/B GH aberrantly activates STAT1 and
STAT3 and their downstream target genes and thereby offers a partial explanation 
of some of the physiological alterations observed in Stat5a/b-null mice and human
patients. We hypothesize that phenotypic changes observed in the absence of
STAT5A/B are due to two distinct molecular consequences: first, the failure of
STAT5A/B target genes to be activated by GH and second, the rerouting of GH
signaling to other members of the STAT family. Rerouting of GH signaling to STAT1
and STAT3 might partially compensate for the loss of STAT5A/B, but it certainly
activates biological programs distinct from STAT5A/B. Here we discuss the extent 
to which studies on global gene expression profiling have fostered a better
understanding of the biology behind cytokine-STAT5A/B networks in hepatocytes. We
also explore whether this wealth of information on gene activity can be used to
further understand the roles of cytokines in liver disease.

PMCID: PMC2494844
PMID: 18460640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Exp Physiol. 2008 May;93(5):570-8. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2007.014269.

Angiotensin-(1-7) has a dual role on growth-promoting signalling pathways in rat 
heart in vivo by stimulating STAT3 and STAT5a/b phosphorylation and inhibiting
angiotensin II-stimulated ERK1/2 and Rho kinase activity.

Giani JF(1), Gironacci MM, Muñoz MC, Turyn D, Dominici FP.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas, Facultad de Farmacia y
Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Angiotensin (ANG) II contributes to cardiac remodelling by inducing the
activation of several signalling molecules, including ERK1/2, Rho kinase and
members of the STAT family of proteins. Angiotensin-(1-7) is produced in the
heart and inhibits the proliferative actions of ANG II, although the mechanisms
of this inhibition are poorly understood. Accordingly, in the present study we
examined whether ANG-(1-7) affects the ANG II-mediated activation of ERK1/2 and
Rho kinase, STAT3 and STAT5a/b in rat heart in vivo. We hypothesized that
ANG-(1-7) inhibits these growth-promoting pathways, counterbalancing the trophic 
action of ANG II. Solutions of normal saline (0.9% NaCl) containing ANG II (8
pmol kg(-1)) plus ANG-(1-7) in increasing doses (from 0.08 to 800 pmol kg(-1))
were administered via the inferior vena cava to anaesthetized male Sprague-Dawley
rats. After 5 min, hearts were removed and ERK1/2, Rho kinase, STAT3 and STAT5a/b
phosphorylation was determined by Western blotting using phosphospecific
antibodies. Angiotensin II stimulated ERK1/2 and Rho kinase phosphorylation (2.3 
+/- 0.2- and 2.1 +/- 0.2-fold increase over basal values, respectively), while
ANG-(1-7) was without effect. The ANG II-mediated phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and
Rho kinase was prevented in a dose-dependent manner by ANG-(1-7) and disappeared 
in the presence of the Mas receptor antagonist d-Ala7-ANG-(1-7). Both ANG II and 
ANG-(1-7) increased STAT3 and STAT5a/b phosphorylation to a similar extent
(130-140% increase). The ANG-(1-7)-stimulated STAT phosphorylation was blocked by
the AT(1) receptor antagonist losartan and not by d-Ala7-ANG-(1-7). Our results
show a dual action of ANG-(1-7), that is, a stimulatory effect on STAT3 and 5a/b 
phosphorylation through AT(1) receptors and a blocking action on ANG
II-stimulated ERK1/2 and Rho kinase phosphorylation through Mas receptor
activation. The latter effect could be representative of a mechanism for a
protective role of ANG-(1-7) in the heart by counteracting the effects of locally
generated ANG II.

PMID: 18448663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1765-75. doi: 10.1172/JCI33037.

Human and simian immunodeficiency viruses deregulate early hematopoiesis through 
a Nef/PPARgamma/STAT5 signaling pathway in macaques.

Prost S(1), Le Dantec M, Augé S, Le Grand R, Derdouch S, Auregan G, Déglon N,
Relouzat F, Aubertin AM, Maillere B, Dusanter-Fourt I, Kirszenbaum M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunovirology Division and Innovative Therapy Division, Institute of Emerging
Diseases and Innovative Therapies, CEA, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
stephane.prost@cea.fr

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1622-5.

Infection of primates by HIV-1 and SIV induces multiple hematological
abnormalities of central hematopoietic origin. Although these defects greatly
contribute to the pathophysiology of HIV-1 infection, the molecular basis for
altered BM function remains unknown. Here we show that when cynomolgus macaques
were infected with SIV, the multipotent potential of their hematopoietic
progenitor cells was lost, and this correlated with downregulation of STAT5A and 
STAT5B expression. However, forced expression of STAT5B entirely rescued the
multipotent potential of the hematopoietic progenitor cells. In addition, an
accessory viral protein required for efficient SIV and HIV replication and
pathogenicity, "Negative factor" (Nef), was essential for SIV-mediated impairment
of the multipotent potential of hematopoietic progenitors ex vivo and in vivo.
This newly uncovered property of Nef was both conserved between HIV-1 and SIV
strains and entirely dependent upon the presence of PPARgamma in targeted cells. 
Further, PPARgamma agonists mimicked Nef activity by inhibiting STAT5A and STAT5B
expression and hampering the functionality of hematopoietic progenitors both ex
vivo and in vivo. These findings have extended the role of Nef in the
pathogenicity of HIV-1 and SIV and reveal a pivotal role for the PPARgamma/STAT5 
pathway in the regulation of early hematopoiesis. This study may provide a basis 
for investigating the potential therapeutic benefits of PPARgamma antagonists in 
both patients with AIDS and individuals with hematopoietic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2323187
PMID: 18431514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1622-5. doi: 10.1172/JCI35487.

Is Nef the elusive cause of HIV-associated hematopoietic dysfunction?

Kirchhoff F(1), Silvestri G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
frank.kirchhoff@uniklinik-ulm.de

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1765-75.

HIV-associated hematological abnormalities involve all lineages of blood cells,
thus implying that the virus impairs the function of early HSCs. However, the
underlying mechanisms of this defect are unknown, particularly since HSCs are
largely resistant to HIV-1 infection. In this issue of the JCI, Prost and
colleagues show that the viral accessory protein Negative factor (Nef) plays a
potentially critical role in the pathogenesis of HIV/SIV-associated hematopoietic
dysfunction by affecting the clonogenic potential of HSCs (see the related
article beginning on page 1765). Soluble Nef induces PPARgamma in uninfected
HSCs, thereby suppressing the expression of STAT5A and STAT5B, two factors
necessary for proper HSC function. The identification of this novel activity of
extracellular Nef defines a new mechanism of HIV/SIV pathogenesis and suggests
that approaches aimed at increasing STAT5A and STAT5B expression may be
considered in HIV-infected individuals with prominent hematological
abnormalities. The results also raise the question of whether dysregulation of
hematopoiesis by extracellular Nef plays a role in the development of T cell
immunodeficiency and the high levels of chronic immune activation associated with
AIDS.

PMCID: PMC2323195
PMID: 18431512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 11;283(28):19465-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710157200. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Box 2 region of the oncostatin M receptor determines specificity for recruitment 
of Janus kinases and STAT5 activation.

Hintzen C(1), Evers C, Lippok BE, Volkmer R, Heinrich PC, Radtke S, Hermanns HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universitätsklinikum RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstrasse 30,
52074 Aachen, Germany.

Human and murine oncostatin M (OSM) induce their bioactivities through a
heterodimeric receptor complex consisting of gp130 and the OSM receptor (OSMR),
which initiates a signaling pathway involving Janus kinases (JAKs) and
transcription factors of the signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT) family. In contrast to the signal transducing receptor subunit gp130, the 
OSMR allows strong activation of STAT5B. The underlying molecular mechanism,
however, remained unclear. Here we demonstrate that the human and murine OSM
receptors use distinct mechanisms for STAT5B activation. The human receptor
contains a STAT5B recruiting tyrosine motif (Tyr837/Tyr839) C-terminal to the box
1/2 region, which is absent in the mouse receptor. In contrast, the murine
receptor initiates STAT5 activation directly via the receptor bound Janus
kinases. Intriguingly, the murine receptor preferentially recruits JAK2, whereas 
the human receptor seems to have a higher affinity for JAK1. We identify a single
amino acid (Phe820) in the human receptor that is responsible for this
preference. Exchange by the murine counterpart (Cys815) allows recruitment of
JAK2 by the human receptor and consequently activation of STAT5B independently of
receptor tyrosine motifs. STAT5B interacts directly with JAK2 only in response to
activation of the murine OSMR or the mutated human OSMR. Additionally, we show
that OSM-induced STAT1 phosphorylation occurs independently of receptor tyrosine 
motifs and is mediated directly by Janus kinases, whereas the two C-terminally
located tyrosine residues Tyr917/Tyr945 of the OSMR are crucial for STAT3
activation.

PMID: 18430728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Immunol. 2008 May 1;180(9):5898-906.

Deacetylase activity is required for STAT5-dependent GM-CSF functional activity
in macrophages and differentiation to dendritic cells.

Sebastián C(1), Serra M, Yeramian A, Serrat N, Lloberas J, Celada A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine and University of Barcelona, Barcelona
Science Park, Josep Samitier 105, Barcelona, Spain.

After interaction with its receptor, GM-CSF induces phosphorylation of the
beta-chain in two distinct domains in macrophages. One induces activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases and the PI3K/Akt pathway, and the other induces
JAK2-STAT5. In this study we describe how trichostatin A (TSA), which inhibits
deacetylase activity, blocks JAK2-STAT5-dependent gene expression but not the
expression of genes that depend on the signal transduction induced by the other
domain of the receptor. TSA treatment inhibited the GM-CSF-dependent
proliferation of macrophages by interfering with c-myc and cyclin D1 expression. 
However, M-CSF-dependent proliferation, which requires ERK1/2, was unaffected.
Protection from apoptosis, which involves Akt phosphorylation and p21(waf-1)
expression, was not modified by TSA. GM-CSF-dependent expression of MHC class II 
molecules was inhibited because CIITA was not induced. The generation of
dendritic cells was also impaired by TSA treatment because of the inhibition of
IRF4, IRF2, and RelB expression. TSA mediates its effects by preventing the
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter of STAT5 target genes and by
inhibiting their expression. However, this drug did not affect STAT5A or STAT5B
phosphorylation or DNA binding. These results in GM-CSF-treated macrophages
reveal a relationship between histone deacetylase complexes and STAT5 in the
regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 18424709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2008 May;28(2):315-27, viii-ix. doi:
10.1016/j.iac.2008.02.002.

Immune dysregulation in primary immunodeficiency disorders.

Torgerson TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Washington
School of Medicine and Children's Hospital Regional Medical Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. troy.torgerson@seattlechildrens.org

The past several years have brought an increased awareness of the prevalence of
autoimmunity and immune dysregulation among patients who have primary
immunodeficiency disorders (PIDD). The recent clinical and molecular definition
of PIDD, in which the primary defect is in the immunoregulatory compartment of
the immune system, has offered insight into the basic mechanisms of immune
tolerance, which has provided new targets and new techniques to study immune
tolerance in PIDD. Many of these studies have focused on the presence and
function of regulatory T (T(REG)) cells in PIDD, particularly since the discovery
of murine and human syndromes associated with T(REG) deficiency. This article
focuses on the current state of knowledge regarding the role of T(REG) in various
PIDD that have clinical features indicative of dysregulated immunity.

PMID: 18424335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jul;198(1):71-82. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0648. Epub 2008 Apr 17.

Developmental changes in the human GH receptor and its signal transduction
pathways.

Kenth G(1), Mergelas JA, Goodyer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

We previously reported the presence of functional human GH receptors (hGHRs) in
the human fetal hepatocyte (FH) as early as the first trimester. Interestingly,
fetal serum levels of hGH are in the acromegalic range, yet certain hGH-dependent
factors are expressed at very low levels (IGF-I, IGF-binding protein-3),
suggesting that fetal liver has limited responsiveness to hGH. To determine
whether this is due to the fetal tissue levels of hGHR or factors in the hGH/hGHR
axis that might influence hGHR function, we compared hGHR isoforms and downstream
signaling proteins in FH versus human adult liver (HAL).
Immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting (IB) analyses found similar precursor and
mature hGHR forms while RT-PCR assays of truncated (T) hGHR(1-279), dominant
negative for the full-length (FL) receptor, showed similar T/FL mRNA ratios in FH
and HAL. IB demonstrated that Janus kinase (JAK) 2, signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT(1, 3, 5A/B)), and suppressors of cytokine
signaling (SOCS(1, 2, 3, cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS)))
proteins were detectable in all FH and HAL tested (12 weeks of fetal age to 60
years); the levels were similar (STAT5B) or lower (JAK2/STAT1/STAT3/STAT5A:
38-53%, SOCS/CIS: 58-76%) in FH compared with HAL. Our studies to date
demonstrate that, during hepatocyte development, hGHR levels are lower in the
fetal cells but the hGHR isoforms, including the relative amount of truncated
versus FL, remain unchanged. The JAK2/STAT/SOCS signaling molecules are present
in the FH as early as the first trimester. However, they are generally at <50%
level in postnatal liver. These data suggest that low expression of both hGHR and
major hGHR signaling components may explain the limited responsiveness of the
fetal cells to the high circulating levels of hGH.

PMID: 18420710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Mar;114(2):233-42. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0003-8. 
Epub 2008 Apr 11.

Transcriptional profiles of progestogen effects in the postmenopausal breast.

Wood CE(1), Register TC, Cline JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology/Section on Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1040, USA.
chwood@wfubmc.edu

Estrogen plus progestin hormone therapy has been associated with increased breast
proliferation, breast density, and breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women,
beyond that seen with estrogen alone. The goal of this study was to evaluate
progestogen effects on gene expression profiles in the breast contributing to
this promotional effect. Twenty-five ovariectomized adult female cynomolgus
monkeys were given the following treatments (expressed as equivalent doses for
women) in a randomized crossover design: (1) placebo; (2) oral estradiol (E2, 1
mg/day); (3) E2 + micronized progesterone (P4, 200 mg/day); and (4) E2 +
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA, 2.5 mg/day). Treatments were given for two
months, and breast biopsies were taken after each treatment period. On microarray
analysis E2 + MPA treatment resulted in a greater number of significantly
regulated genes compared to E2 + P4 and E2 alone (P < 0.0001). Treatment with E2 
alone induced modest effects on select genes related to epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) activity which were augmented by the addition of MPA but not P4, 
consistent with patterns of epithelial cell proliferation. Genes induced by E2 + 
MPA included the EGFR ligands EGF, TGFA, and AREG, and downstream targets such as
STAT5A, STAT5B, SRC, EIF4EBP1, and MYC. Progestogens showed mixed antagonistic
effects on E2-induced genes which tended to be greater for P4 than MPA. These
findings suggest that a standard dose of oral E2 + MPA has a more pronounced
effect on gene expression in the breast compared to E2 alone or E2 + P4 and that 
promotional effects of E2 + MPA may be mediated in part by increased EGFR
activity.

PMID: 18404370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):711-21. doi: 10.1101/gad.1643908.

Interpretation of cytokine signaling through the transcription factors STAT5A and
STAT5B.

Hennighausen L(1), Robinson GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA. hennighausen@nih.gov

Transcription factors from the family of Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription (STAT) are activated by numerous cytokines. Two members of this
family, STAT5A and STAT5B (collectively called STAT5), have gained prominence in 
that they are activated by a wide variety of cytokines such as interleukins,
erythropoietin, growth hormone, and prolactin. Furthermore, constitutive STAT5
activation is observed in the majority of leukemias and many solid tumors.
Inactivation studies in mice as well as human mutations have provided insight
into many of STAT5's functions. Disruption of cytokine signaling through STAT5
results in a variety of cell-specific effects, ranging from a defective immune
system and impaired erythropoiesis, the complete absence of mammary development
during pregnancy, to aberrant liver function. On a molecular level, STAT5 has
been linked to cell specification, proliferation, differentiation, and survival. 
Evidence is growing that the diverse outcomes of STAT5 signaling are not only
determined by the expression of specific receptors but also by the interaction of
STAT5 with cofactors and the cell-specific activity of members of the SOCS
family, which negatively regulate STAT function. In this review, we focus on
emerging concepts and challenges in the field of Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT5
signaling. First, we discuss unique functions of STAT5 in three distinct systems:
mammary epithelial cells, hepatocytes, and regulatory T cells. Second, we present
an example of how STAT5 can achieve cell specificity in hepatocytes through a
physical and functional interaction with the glucocorticoid receptor. Third, we
focus on the relevance of STAT5 in the development and progression of leukemia.
Next, we discuss lessons derived from human mutations and disease. Finally, we
address an emerging issue that the interpretation of experiments from
STAT5-deficient mice and cells might be compromised as these cells might reroute 
and reprogram cytokine signals to the "wrong" STATs and thus acquire
inappropriate cues. We propose that mice with mutations in various components of 
the JAK-STAT signaling pathway are living laboratories, which will provide
insight into the versatility of signaling hardware and the adaptability of the
software.

PMCID: PMC2394721
PMID: 18347089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Endocrinology. 2008 Jun;149(6):3206-14. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1623. Epub 2008 Mar 
6.

Hormonal regulation of suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) messenger
ribonucleic acid in the arcuate nucleus during late pregnancy.

Steyn FJ(1), Anderson GM, Grattan DR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroendocrinology and Department of Anatomy and Structural
Biology, University of Otago School of Medical Sciences, PO Box 913, Dunedin
9054, New Zealand.

Prolactin stimulates tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons in the arcuate nucleus
of the hypothalamus, mediated by signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b (STAT5b). During late pregnancy, these neurons become unresponsive to
prolactin, with a loss of prolactin-induced activation of STAT5b and decreased
dopamine secretion. Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins inhibit
STAT-mediated signaling, and SOCS mRNAs are specifically elevated in the arcuate 
nucleus during late pregnancy. We hypothesized that changes in circulating
ovarian steroids during late pregnancy might induce expression of SOCS mRNAs,
thus disrupting STAT5b-mediated prolactin signaling. Rats were ovariectomized on 
d 18 of pregnancy and treated with ovarian steroids to simulate an advanced,
normal, or delayed decline in progesterone. Early progesterone withdrawal caused 
an early increase in prolactin secretion, and increased SOCS-1 and -3 and
cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) mRNA levels in the arcuate
nucleus. Prolonged progesterone treatment prevented these changes. To determine
whether ovarian steroids directly alter SOCS mRNA levels, estrogen- and/or
progesterone-treated ovariectomized nonpregnant rats were acutely injected with
prolactin (300 microg sc) or vehicle. SOCS-1 and -3 and CIS mRNA levels in the
arcuate nucleus were significantly increased by estrogen or prolactin, whereas
progesterone treatment reversed the effect of estrogen. Results demonstrate that 
estrogen and prolactin can independently induce SOCS mRNA in the arcuate nucleus 
and that this effect is negatively regulated by progesterone. This is consistent 
with the hypothesis that declining progesterone and high levels of estrogen
during late pregnancy induce SOCS in the tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons,
thus contributing to their insensitivity to prolactin at this time.

PMID: 18325991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):946-55. doi: 10.1172/JCI32704.

Csf3r mutations in mice confer a strong clonal HSC advantage via activation of
Stat5.

Liu F(1), Kunter G, Krem MM, Eades WC, Cain JA, Tomasson MH, Hennighausen L, Link
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 Mar;118(3):847-50.

A fundamental property of leukemic stem cells is clonal dominance of the bone
marrow microenvironment. Truncation mutations of CSF3R, which encodes the G-CSF
receptor (G-CSFR), are implicated in leukemic progression in patients with severe
congenital neutropenia. Here we show that expression of a truncated mutant Csf3r 
in mice confers a strong clonal advantage at the HSC level that is dependent upon
exogenous G-CSF. G-CSF-induced proliferation, phosphorylation of Stat5, and
transcription of Stat5 target genes were increased in HSCs isolated from mice
expressing the mutant Csf3r. Conversely, the proliferative advantage conferred by
the mutant Csf3r was abrogated in myeloid progenitors lacking both Stat5A and
Stat5B, and HSC function was reduced in mice expressing a truncated mutant Csf3r 
engineered to have impaired Stat5 activation. These data indicate that in mice,
inappropriate Stat5 activation plays a key role in establishing clonal dominance 
by stem cells expressing mutant Csf3r.

PMCID: PMC2248325
PMID: 18292815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. PLoS One. 2008 Feb 20;3(2):e1639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001639.

Loss of cytokine-STAT5 signaling in the CNS and pituitary gland alters energy
balance and leads to obesity.

Lee JY(1), Muenzberg H, Gavrilova O, Reed JA, Berryman D, Villanueva EC, Louis
GW, Leinninger GM, Bertuzzi S, Seeley RJ, Robinson GW, Myers MG, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are critical
components of cytokine signaling pathways. STAT5A and STAT5B (STAT5), the most
promiscuous members of this family, are highly expressed in specific populations 
of hypothalamic neurons in regions known to mediate the actions of cytokines in
the regulation of energy balance. To test the hypothesis that STAT5 signaling is 
essential to energy homeostasis, we used Cre-mediated recombination to delete the
Stat5 locus in the CNS. Mutant males and females developed severe obesity with
hyperphagia, impaired thermal regulation in response to cold, hyperleptinemia and
insulin resistance. Furthermore, central administration of GM-CSF mediated the
nuclear accumulation of STAT5 in hypothalamic neurons and reduced food intake in 
control but not in mutant mice. These results demonstrate that STAT5 mediates
energy homeostasis in response to endogenous cytokines such as GM-CSF.

PMCID: PMC2237899
PMID: 18286195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 May;22(5):1274-86. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0564. Epub 2008 Feb 
14.

Liver-specific hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha deficiency: greater impact on
gene expression in male than in female mouse liver.

Holloway MG(1), Miles GD, Dombkowski AA, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is a liver-enriched transcription factor
that regulates numerous liver-expressed genes including several sex-specific
cytochrome P450 genes. Presently, a liver-specific HNF4alpha-deficient mouse
model was used to characterize the impact of liver HNF4alpha deficiency on a
global scale using 41,174 feature microarrays. A total of 4994
HNF4alpha-dependent genes were identified, of which about 1000 fewer genes
responded to the loss of HNF4alpha in female liver as compared with male liver.
Sex differences in the impact of liver HNF4alpha deficiency were even more
dramatic when genes showing sex-specific expression were examined. Thus, 372 of
the 646 sex-specific genes characterized by a dependence on HNF4alpha responded
to the loss of HNF4alpha in males only, as compared with only 61 genes that
responded in females only. Moreover, in male liver, 78% of 508 male-specific
genes were down-regulated and 42% of 356 female-specific genes were up-regulated 
in response to the loss of HNF4alpha, with sex specificity lost for 90% of
sex-specific genes. This response to HNF4alpha deficiency is similar to the
response of male mice deficient in the GH-activated transcription factor signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b), where 90% of male-specific
genes were down-regulated and 61% of female-specific genes were up-regulated,
suggesting these two factors cooperatively regulate liver sex specificity by
mechanisms that are primarily active in males. Finally, 203 of 648 genes
previously shown to bind HNF4alpha near the transcription start site in mouse
hepatocytes were affected by HNF4alpha deficiency in mouse liver, with the
HNF4alpha-bound gene set showing a 5-fold enrichment for genes positively
regulated by HNF4alpha. Thus, a substantial fraction of the HNF4alpha-dependent
genes reported here are likely to be direct targets of HNF4alpha.

PMCID: PMC2366185
PMID: 18276827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2219-29. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1320. Epub 2008 Feb 
14.

Transcriptional activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) 3 and STAT5B partially mediate homeobox A1-stimulated oncogenic
transformation of the immortalized human mammary epithelial cell.

Mohankumar KM(1), Perry JK, Kannan N, Kohno K, Gluckman PD, Emerald BS, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute and National Research Centre for Growth and Development,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

We have previously demonstrated that the p44/42 MAPK pathway is one pathway
involved in homeobox (HOX) A1-stimulated oncogenesis. However, inhibition of MAPK
kinase 1 does not completely prevent HOXA1-stimulated oncogenic transformation,
suggesting the involvement of additional signal transduction pathways. Here, we
report that forced expression of HOXA1 in immortalized human mammary epithelial
cells significantly increased levels of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 3, 5A, and 5B mRNA by transcriptional up-regulation. The
protein levels of STAT3 and 5B, but not STAT5A, and protein phosphorylation
levels of STAT3 and 5B were significantly increased by forced expression of
HOXA1. Forced expression of STAT3 or STAT5B was sufficient to transform
oncogenically an immortalized human mammary epithelial cell line. Accordingly,
inhibition of STAT3 or STAT5B activity with dominant negative STAT3 or STAT5B
abrogated the ability of HOXA1 to stimulate cell proliferation, survival,
oncogenic transformation, and generation of large disorganized multiacinar
structures in three-dimensional culture. These results suggest that HOXA1
partially mediates oncogenic transformation of the immortalized human mammary
epithelial cell through modulation of the STAT3 and STAT5B pathways.

PMID: 18276758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Proteins. 2008 Aug;72(2):779-92. doi: 10.1002/prot.21970.

Genome wide analysis of pathogenic SH2 domain mutations.

Lappalainen I(1), Thusberg J, Shen B, Vihinen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Division of Biochemistry,
FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

The authors have made a genome-wide analysis of mutations in Src homology 2 (SH2)
domains associated with human disease. Disease-causing mutations have been
detected in the SH2 domains of cytoplasmic signaling proteins Bruton tyrosine
kinase (BTK), SH2D1A, Ras GTPase activating protein (RasGAP), ZAP-70, SHP-2,
STAT1, STAT5B, and the p85alpha subunit of the PIP3. Mutations in the BTK,
SH2D1A, ZAP70, STAT1, and STAT5B genes have been shown to cause diverse
immunodeficiencies, whereas the mutations in RASA1 and PIK3R1 genes lead to basal
carcinoma and diabetes, respectively. PTPN11 mutations cause Noonan sydrome and
different types of cancer, depending mainly on whether the mutation is inherited 
or sporadic. We collected and analyzed all known pathogenic mutations affecting
human SH2 domains by bioinformatics methods. Among the investigated protein
properties are sequence conservation and covariance, structural stability, side
chain rotamers, packing effects, surface electrostatics, hydrogen bond formation,
accessible surface area, salt bridges, and residue contacts. The majority of the 
mutations affect positions essential for phosphotyrosine ligand binding and
specificity. The structural basis of the SH2 domain diseases was elucidated based
on the bioinformatic analysis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18260110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Anal Biochem. 2008 Apr 15;375(2):249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2008.01.017. Epub 2008
Jan 18.

A high-throughput assay for signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b
based on fluorescence polarization.

Müller J(1), Schust J, Berg T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular Biology, and
Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM), Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152
Martinsried, Germany.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) is constitutively
activated in many human tumors. Activity of STAT5b requires binding of its Src
homology 2 (SH2) domain to certain phosphotyrosine-containing sequences. We have 
developed a high-throughput assay based on fluorescence polarization that allows 
screening of chemical libraries for compounds that inhibit STAT5b by interfering 
with the function of its SH2 domain. The assay, which is based on binding between
a fluorescein-labeled phosphotyrosine peptide derived from the erythropoietin
receptor to the STAT5b SH2 domain, is stable with regard to dimethyl sulfoxide
concentration and time and has a Z' value of 0.66+/-0.11 in a 384-well format.

PMID: 18258175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Oncogene. 2008 Jun 19;27(27):3831-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.8. Epub 2008 Feb 4.

Bcr-Abl induces autocrine IGF-1 signaling.

Lakshmikuttyamma A(1), Pastural E, Takahashi N, Sawada K, Sheridan DP, DeCoteau
JF, Geyer CR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine and Pathobiology Research Group, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Bcr-Abl oncogene is responsible for the initial phase of chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML), which is effectively treated by the Bcr-Abl inhibitor imatinib.
Over time patients become resistant to treatment and progress to blast crisis, an
event that is driven by additional genetic and epigenetic aberrations. Recently, 
we showed that Riz1 expression decreases in blast crisis and that re-expression
of Riz1 inhibits IGF-1 expression. IGF-1 signaling is required in many stages of 
hematopoiesis and inappropriate activation of autocrine IGF-1 signaling may
facilitate transformation to blast crisis. We observed that in 8 out of 11
matched CML patient biopsies the IGF-1 expression is elevated in blast crisis. We
examined mechanisms used by CML blast crisis cell lines to activate IGF-1
expression. We found that Bcr-Abl activates autocrine IGF-1 signaling using Hck
and Stat5b. Inhibition of these signaling components using small molecule drugs
or shRNA decreases proliferation and enhances apoptosis. Together, our study
suggests that aberrant IGF-1 signaling is an important event in blast crisis
transformation and it provides a mechanism to explain the activity of IGF-1R and 
Hck inhibitors in blocking CML blast crisis phenotypes.

PMID: 18246120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Eur J Haematol. 2008 May;80(5):444-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2008.01042.x. Epub
2008 Jan 23.

Detection of the STAT5B-RARA fusion transcript in acute promyelocytic leukemia
with the normal chromosome 17 on G-banding.

Kusakabe M(1), Suzukawa K, Nanmoku T, Obara N, Okoshi Y, Mukai HY, Hasegawa Y,
Kojima H, Kawakami Y, Ninomiya H, Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Comment in
    Eur J Haematol. 2009 Nov;83(5):499-501.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by chromosomal rearrangements
of 17q21, leading to fusion of the gene-encoding retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARA) with a number of alternative partner genes. Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 beta (STAT5B) is one of the alternative partners. We
report a rare case of APL with STAT5B-RARA fusion transcript and the normal
chromosome 17 on G-banding. Administration of all trans-retinoic acid improved
disseminated intravascular coagulation without decrease of the leukemia cells in 
his peripheral blood and bone marrow. The molecular mechanism of fusion between
STAT5B and RARA by chromosomal rearrangement is discussed based on the data from 
genome database. Clinical characteristics of APL with STAT5B-RARA are also
discussed.

PMID: 18221386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Arch Pediatr. 2008 Feb;15(2):179-88. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2007.10.023. Epub 2008
Jan 18.

[New molecular mechanisms of growth hormone insensitivity].

[Article in French]

Edouard T(1), Raynal P, Yart A, Conte-Auriol F, Salles JP, Tauber M.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'endocrinologie pédiatrique, hôpital des enfants, place du
Docteur-Baylac, 330 avenue de Grande-Bretagne, 31059 Toulouse cedex, France.
edouard.t@chu-toulouse.fr

Growth hormone (GH), secreted by the anterior pituitary into the circulation,
binds to membrane receptors in target tissues to stimulate body growth; most of
its effects is mediated by the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). In addition 
to promoting growth, GH has important metabolic actions. The syndrome of GH
insensitivity (GHI) was first identified in 1966 by Laron et al. in three
children with clinical phenotype characteristic of growth hormone deficiency but 
associated with elevated serum concentration of GH. Direct evidence of a GH
receptor (GHR) abnormality was provided in 1989. More recently, molecular
abnormalities in the postreceptor signalling mechanism were found. Mutations of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) were reported in
patients with growth retardation and primary immunodeficiency. Mutations of the
tyrosin phosphatase Shp2 were identified in patients affected by Noonan syndrome 
characterized by short stature, cardiopathy and increased risk of leukaemia. The 
unmasking of the molecular bases for these defects will contribute greatly to our
future understanding of both normal and aberrant growth. Moreover, this knowledge
should bring insight on cancerogenesis or immunodeficiency caused by cytokines
resistance.

PMID: 18207712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Immunity. 2008 Jan;28(1):112-21. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.11.022.

Linked T cell receptor and cytokine signaling govern the development of the
regulatory T cell repertoire.

Burchill MA(1), Yang J, Vang KB, Moon JJ, Chu HH, Lio CW, Vegoe AL, Hsieh CS,
Jenkins MK, Farrar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology, The
Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, 312 Church Street SE, 6-116 Nils Hasselmo
Hall, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.

Appropriate development of regulatory T (Treg) cells is necessary to prevent
autoimmunity. Neonatal mice, unlike adults, lack factors required for Treg cell
development. It is unclear what these missing factors are. However, signals
emanating from the T cell receptor (TCR), the costimulatory receptor CD28, and
the family of gammac-dependent cytokine receptors are required for Treg cell
development. Herein we demonstrate that expression of a constitutively active
Stat5b transgene (Stat5b-CA) allowed for Treg cell development in neonatal mice
and restored Treg cell numbers in Cd28(-/-) mice. Sequence analysis of TCR genes 
in Stat5b-CA Treg cells indicated that ectopic STAT5 activation resulted in a TCR
repertoire that more closely resembled that of naive T cells. Using MHCII
tetramers to identify antigen-specific T cells, we showed that STAT5 signals
diverted thymocytes normally destined to become naive T cells into the Treg cell 
lineage. Our data support a two-step model of Treg cell differentiation in which 
TCR and CD28 signals induce cytokine responsiveness and STAT5-inducing cytokines 
then complete the program of Treg cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2430111
PMID: 18199418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Trends Genet. 2008 Jan;24(1):41-7. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

How growth hormone controls growth, obesity and sexual dimorphism.

Lichanska AM(1), Waters MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, School of Dentistry, University of
Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Understanding the molecular basis for the many actions of growth hormone (GH) has
been challenging because many of these actions are only evident in vivo.
Recently, STAT5b has emerged as a key GH signaling intermediate in the regulation
of postnatal growth, adiposity and sexual dimorphism of hepatic gene expression. 
This realization is based on targeted disruption or mutation of the GH receptor
and its signaling components, together with clinical studies of GH-insensitive
mutants. Microarray analysis of liver from GH receptor and signal transducer and 
activation of transcription 5b (STAT5b)-deleted mice have identified a range of
relevant transcripts regulated by the Janus kinase 2/STAT5b signaling pathway. In
addition, many transcripts are regulated independently of STAT5b, presumably as a
result of PtdIns 3-kinase, extracellular-regulated kinase and Src signaling by
this pleiotropic cytokine receptor.

PMID: 18063438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Endocrine. 2007 Oct;32(2):227-34. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

Role of the GH/IGF-I axis in the growth retardation of weaver mice.

Yao W(1), Bethin K, Yang X, Zhong J, Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

IGF-I is a well-established anabolic growth factor essential for growth and
development. Although the role of the GH/IGF-I axis is established for normal
postnatal growth, its functional state in neurodegenerative diseases is not fully
characterized. The weaver mutant mouse is a commonly used model for studying
hereditary cerebellar ataxia and provides an opportunity to investigate the
function of IGF-I in postnatal growth following neurodegeneration. Previously, we
reported that weaver mice are growth retarded and their body weights correlate
with a decrease in circulating IGF-I levels. Because weaver mice have the same
food intake/body weight ratios as their wild type littermates, our observation
suggests that an impairment of the GH/IGF-I axis, rather than poor nutrition,
likely contributes to their growth retardation. This study further investigated
the etiology of reduced circulating IGF-I levels. We found that GH levels in
weaver mice were reduced following acute insulin injection, but the hepatic GH
receptor transduction pathway signaled normally as evidenced by increased STAT5b 
phosphorylation and IGF-I mRNA levels in response to acute GH administration. In 
addition, 2-week GH treatment induced a significant increase in body weight and
circulating IGF-I levels in homozygous weaver mice but not in wild type
littermates. In summary, a deficiency in the GH/IGF-I axis may be partially
responsible for postnatal growth retardation in weaver mutant mice. This
deficiency may occur at the level of the pituitary and/or hypothalamus and can be
improved with GH administration.

PMID: 18040896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(6):R79.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b: a new target of breast tumor
kinase/protein tyrosine kinase 6.

Weaver AM(1), Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are
mediators of cytokine and growth factor signaling. In recent years, STAT5b has
emerged as a key regulator of tumorigenesis. STAT5b phosphorylation and
activation is mediated by several kinases known to be overexpressed in breast
cancer, such as epidermal growth factor receptor, HER2, and c-Src. Breast tumor
kinase (Brk), also known as protein tyrosine kinase 6, is a nonreceptor tyrosine 
kinase expressed in more than 60% of breast cancers. Only a few substrates of the
Brk tyrosine kinase have been identified, the most recent being STAT3. In the
present article we investigate the potential role of Brk in the phosphorylation
and activation STAT5b.
METHODS: To determine whether Brk can phosphorylate STAT5b, transient
transfection and in vitro kinase assays were performed. Luciferase reporter
assays were used to measure Brk-induced STAT5b transcriptional activity. siRNA
technology was utilized to investigate the biological significance of Brk-induced
activation of STAT5b in breast cancer cell models.
RESULTS: Phosphospecific antibodies, mutational analysis, and in vitro kinase
assays demonstrated that Brk specifically mediated STAT5b phosphorylation at the 
activating tyrosine, Y699. Transient transfection of Brk into the Brk-negative
BT-549 breast cancer cell line enhanced STAT5b transcriptional activity, as
measured by a STAT5-specific luciferase reporter. Furthermore, overexpression of 
kinase active c-Src enhanced Brk-induced STAT5b transcriptional activity. In
Brk-positive breast cancer cell lines BT-20 and SKBr3, knockdown of Brk protein
or of STAT5b protein using siRNA methodology resulted in a decrease in DNA
synthesis. Knockdown of Brk and STAT5b together did not further decrease DNA
synthesis compared with each alone, suggesting that Brk and STAT5b converge on
the same pathway, ultimately leading to cellular proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Our studies demonstrate that Brk phosphorylates STAT5b on Y699,
leading to increased STAT5b transcriptional activity. Furthermore, analysis of
DNA synthesis suggests that STAT5b and Brk are converging upon the same
proproliferative signaling pathway in breast cancer cells. We propose that Brk,
like other tyrosine kinases, signals downstream to STAT5b to mediate
proliferation of breast cancer cells. These results further establish STAT5b as
well as Brk as potential targets for breast cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC2246177
PMID: 17997837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Dec;7(6):515-21.

Regulatory T cells in primary immunodeficiency diseases.

Torgerson TR(1), Ochs HD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Immunology, Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Children's Hospital, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Several primary immune deficiency disorders are associated
with autoimmunity and malignancy, suggesting a state of immune dysregulation.
Here, we review the role of regulatory T-cell deficits in mediating the immune
dysregulation associated with certain primary immune deficiency disorder
syndromes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Systematic studies in primary immune deficiency disorders and
their associated animal models have led to an increased understanding of both
central and peripheral tolerance mechanisms, and in particular have yielded new
insights into regulatory T-cell function, development and maintenance.
SUMMARY: Single-gene defects identified in patients with multiple autoimmune
phenomena have defined new primary immune deficiency disorder syndromes in which 
the primary deficit is in the establishment or maintenance of immune tolerance.
The disorder that has been most informative with regard to understanding the
function and development of regulatory T cells is forkhead box P3 deficiency,
known as immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy and X-linked
syndrome in humans and Scurfy in the mouse. Recent studies in patients with other
primary immune deficiency disorders, including autoimmune polyendocrinopathy,
candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy syndrome, CD25 deficiency, STAT5b
deficiency, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, have added to our understanding of
regulatory T-cell biology. The study of patients with rare primary immune
deficiency disorder syndromes provides an unparalleled opportunity to understand 
mechanisms of autoimmunity and immune tolerance in humans.

PMID: 17989528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Int J Hematol. 2007 Oct;86(3):246-9.

Successful all-trans retinoic acid treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia in a
patient with NPM/RAR fusion.

Okazuka K(1), Masuko M, Seki Y, Hama H, Honma N, Furukawa T, Toba K, Kishi K,
Aizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital,
Niigata, Japan. okazuka@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a reciprocal chromosomal
translocation involving the gene for retinoic acid receptor alpha(RAR). Most APL 
patients have a t(15;17) translocation that generates the PML-RAR fusion gene,
and such patients respond well to treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). 
Some APL cases also involve rearrangements that fuse RAR to partner genes other
than PML, including nucleophosmin (NPM), promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF), nuclear mitotic apparatus (NUMA), and Stat5b, but the clinical
characteristics of APL without PML-RAR have not been fully clarified. We describe
a 64-year-old man with NPM-RAR-positive APL who was receiving hemodialysis
therapy for chronic uremia. Complete remission was achieved with ATRA monotherapy
and was maintained for 18 months with consolidation chemotherapy. These findings 
suggest that ATRA can be used to treat APL patients with NPM/RAR as well as APL
with PML/RAR.

PMID: 17988991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Endocr Dev. 2007;11:6-15.

Genetic defects of the growth-hormone-IGF axis associated with growth hormone
insensitivity.

Woods K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Doernbecher Children's
Hospital, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA. woodsk@ohsu.edu

The central feature of growth hormone (GH) insensitivity is deficiency of
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in association with elevated GH secretion.
This condition is also known as primary IGF deficiency. There are currently four 
known genetic causes of GH insensitivity/primary IGF deficiency: GH receptor
deficiency (also known as Laron syndrome or GH insensitivity syndrome), IGF-1
deficiency, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b)
deficiency and acid labile subunit (ALS) deficiency. Despite sharing the
classical biochemical features of GH insensitivity, the phenotype in each of
these conditions is quite distinct. This review will discuss each of these causes
in turn, highlighting the insights these rare causes of growth failure afford
into the functioning of the human GH-IGF-1 axis.

PMID: 17986822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Exp Hematol. 2007 Nov;35(11):1684-94.

STAT5 requires the N-domain to maintain hematopoietic stem cell repopulating
function and appropriate lymphoid-myeloid lineage output.

Li G(1), Wang Z, Zhang Y, Kang Z, Haviernikova E, Cui Y, Hennighausen L, Moriggl 
R, Wang D, Tse W, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University, School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a
critical regulator of hematopoietic development and its impaired activation is
associated with hematopoietic and immune cell defects. However, much of this
information has been learned from knockout mice that still retain the potential
for expression of STAT5 proteins that are N-terminally truncated due to
alternative internal translation initiation codons. The goal of these studies was
to use transplantation-based assays to analyze the degree of STAT5 deltaN
activity in hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and throughout lymphomyeloid
development.
METHODS: We have directly compared E14.5 fetal liver cells from mice with
potential to express STAT5ab deltaN (STAT5ab(deltaN/deltaN)) with mice completely
lacking STAT5a and STAT5b (STAT5abnull/null). We have also utilized retroviral
complementation of STAT5abnull/null fetal liver HSC to enforce expression of
full-length STAT5a or STAT5a lacking the first 136 amino acids (STAT5a deltaN).
RESULTS: We report that STAT5 is required for HSC, lymphocyte, and erythrocyte
development. We demonstrate that restored expression of STAT5a in
STAT5abnull/null HSC provides a strong selective advantage, correcting T- and
B-lymphocyte and erythrocyte development. Interestingly, Gr-1(+) blood cells were
inversely correlated with B lymphocytes and both were normalized by STAT5a
expression. In contrast, transduction of STAT5a deltaN only provided partial
B-lymphocyte development.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies define the role of STAT5 in maintaining normal
lymphoid vs myeloid balance during hematopoiesis and highlight a major role for
the N-domain in HSC function. The platform of retroviral complementation
described here will be particularly useful for future studies to subdefine the
N-domain regions that are critical for hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2134320
PMID: 17976521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Dec 10;313(20):4120-9. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Microcytosis in ank/ank mice and the role of ANKH in promoting erythroid
differentiation.

Wang J(1), Wang C, Tsui HW, Las Heras F, Cheng EY, Iscove NN, Chiu B, Inman RD,
Pritzker KP, Tsui FW.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Development Division, Toronto Western Research Institute,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Progressive ankylosis (Ank and the human homolog, ANKH) is a transmembrane
protein which regulates transport of inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi). ank/ank mice 
with a mutated ank gene, have calcification and bone ankylosis of the affected
joints. In the course of studying these mutant mice, we found that they have
microcytosis. These mutant mice have lower mean red blood cell volume (MCV) and
lower hemoglobin content in red cells (mean corpuscular hemoglobin, MCH) than
normal mice. Using quantitative real-time PCR analysis, we showed that Ank was
expressed in the E/Meg bipotent precursor, BFU-E, CFU-E, but there was no Ank
expression in the hemoglobinizing erythroblasts. Stable ANKH transfectants in
K562 cells highly expressed two immature erythroid cell markers, E-cadherin and
endoglin. Enhanced Erythropoietin (Epo) expression and downregulation of SHP-1
were detected in these transfectants. Consequently, the autocrine Epo-EpoR
signaling pathway was activated, as evidenced by higher p-Tyr JAK2, p-Tyr EpoR
and p-Tyr STAT5B in the ANKH transfectants. Our results revealed a novel function
of ANKH in the promotion of early erythroid differentiation in K562 cells. We
also showed that ank/ank mice have lower serum levels of Epo than the normal
littermates, and this is the likely cause of microcytosis in these mutant mice.

PMID: 17950726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;157 Suppl 1:S33-7.

Idiopathic short stature: will genetics influence the choice between GH and IGF-I
therapy?

Savage MO(1), Camacho-Hübner C, David A, Metherell LA, Hwa V, Rosenfeld RG, Clark
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Centre, William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary,
University of London, London, EC1M 6BQ UK. m.o.savage@qmul.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic short stature (ISS) includes a range of conditions. Some
are caused by defects in the GH-IGF-I axis. ISS is an approved indication for GH 
therapy in the USA and a similar approval in Europe may be imminent. Genetic
analysis for single-gene defects has made enormous contributions to understanding
the physiology of growth regulation. Can this type of investigation help in
predicting growth responses to GH or IGF-I therapy?
METHODS: The rationale for choice of GH or IGF-I therapy in ISS is reviewed. Many
ISS patients have low IGF-I, but most can generate IGF-I levels in response to
short-term GH administration. Some GH resistance seems to be present. Mutation
analysis in several cohorts of GHIS and ISS patients is reviewed.
RESULTS: Low IGF-I levels suggest either unrecognised GH deficiency or GH
resistance. In classical GHIS patients, there was a positive relationship between
IGFBP-3 levels and height SDS. No relationship exists between mutations and
phenotype. There is a wide variability of phenotype in patients carrying
identical mutations. Heterozygous GH receptor (GHR) mutations were present in <5%
of ISS patients and their role in causing growth defects is questionable.
Exceptions are dominant negative mutations that have been shown to disturb
growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis for single-gene defects does not give sensitive predictions
of phenotype and cannot predict responses to GH or IGF-I therapy. Endocrine
abnormalities have closer correlations with phenotype and may thus be a better
guide to therapeutic responsiveness.

PMID: 17785695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;157 Suppl 1:S27-31.

Pharmacogenomics and pharmacoproteomics in the evaluation and management of short
stature.

Rosenfeld RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lucile Packard Foundation for Children's Health, Stanford University, Oregon
Health and Science University, 400 Hamilton Avenue, Suite 340, Palo Alto,
California 94301, USA. ron.rosenfeld@lpfch.org

It has long been recognized that growth failure encompasses a diverse spectrum of
underlying pathophysiological processes, a characteristic that has significantly 
impacted both the diagnosis and management of growth disorders. This problem is
exacerbated by inherent difficulty in distinguishing the borders between the
'normal range' for stature and defined abnormal growth. Evaluation of GH
secretion has proven problematic, both diagnostically and prognostically, except 
in cases of unequivocal GH deficiency. Measurement of serum concentrations of
IGF-I, IGFBP-3, and ALS have proven useful in the assessment of GH responsiveness
and have contributed to the concept of primary and secondary 'IGF deficiency'.
Nevertheless, there is great need for biochemical and/or molecular biomarkers
that could: i) predict short- and long-term responsiveness to various therapeutic
modalities, such as GH and IGF-I, and ii) predict potential risk for adverse
effects of therapy. Candidate proteins and genes identified to date, and worthy
of further evaluation, include IGF-I, IGF-I receptor, GH receptor and its
variants (such as exon 3-deleted GHR), STAT5b and short stature homeobox.
Proteomic analysis of serum samples pre- and post-treatment and correlation with 
clinical responsiveness should provide additional candidate biomarkers. Molecular
studies to consider include: i) sequencing and mutation analysis of known genetic
components of the GH-IGF axis; ii) evaluation of single nucleotide polymorphisms 
of candidate genes; and iii) identification of new candidate genes. It is
proposed that the major target population to study is that of children currently 
labeled as idiopathic short stature (ISS). These children can be divided into
those with: i) primary IGFD, where the focus should be on genes related to GHR,
GHR signaling, and IGF-I gene expression, or ii) no IGFD (i.e. 'true ISS'), where
the focus should be on genes related to IGFR, IGF signaling and epiphyseal
growth.

PMID: 17785693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Nat Med. 2007 Nov;13(11):1341-8. Epub 2007 Oct 7.

STAT5A is epigenetically silenced by the tyrosine kinase NPM1-ALK and acts as a
tumor suppressor by reciprocally inhibiting NPM1-ALK expression.

Zhang Q(1), Wang HY, Liu X, Wasik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4283, USA.
qian2@mail.med.upenn.edu

Although STAT5A and STAT5B have some nonredundant functional properties, their
distinct contributions to carcinogenesis are not clearly defined. Here we report 
that STAT5A expression is selectively inhibited by DNA methylation of the STAT5A 
gene promoter region in cells expressing the oncogenic tyrosine kinase NPM1-ALK
(also known as NPM-ALK). The DNA methylation is induced by NPM1-ALK itself via
STAT3, and is associated with binding to the promoter of the gene encoding MeCP2 
capping protein and with lack of binding of the STAT5A gene transcription
activator SP1. Reversal of methylation by the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restores SP1 binding and STAT5A gene expression. Notably,
the induced or exogenously expressed STAT5A protein binds to the enhancer and
intron 14 of the NPM1-ALK gene and triggers selective suppression of NPM1-ALK
expression. These results show that NPM1-ALK induces epigenetic silencing of
STAT5A gene and that STAT5A protein can act as a key tumor suppressor by
reciprocally inhibiting expression of NPM1-ALK.

PMID: 17922009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):344-50. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

A Stat5b transgene is capable of inducing CD8+ lymphoblastic lymphoma in the
absence of normal TCR/MHC signaling.

Bessette K(1), Lang ML, Fava RA, Grundy M, Heinen J, Horne L, Spolski R, Al-Shami
A, Morse HC 3rd, Leonard WJ, Kelly JA.

Author information: 
(1)White River Junction Veteran's Association, White River Junction, VT, USA.

Stat5 proteins are critical signaling molecules activated by many cytokines.
Within the immune system, Stat5 plays important roles related to the development 
of thymocytes and proliferation of T cells. Stat5 has been implicated in
malignant transformation, and moreover, the activated tyrosine phosphorylated
form of Stat5 is frequently observed in human lymphomas. We previously
demonstrated the oncogenic potential of Stat5, with thymic lymphoblastic
lymphomas developing in a significant proportion of transgenic (TG) mice
overexpressing Stat5a or Stat5b in lymphocytes. In addition, immunization or
expression of a T-cell receptor (TCR) transgene augmented the rate of tumor
formation. Here, we investigate the mechanism of Stat5-mediated lymphomagenesis
by exploring the contributions of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)/TCR and 
pre-TCR signals. We present data demonstrating that Stat5b TG mice unexpectedly
develop CD8(+) lymphoma even in the absence of either pre-TCR signaling or normal
thymic selection. Indeed, acceleration of Stat5b transgene-mediated lymphoma
occurred on TCRalpha(-/-) and pre-TCRalpha(-/-) backgrounds. In light of these
data, we propose a model in which alterations in T-cell development at the
double-negative/double-positive (DN/DP) stages cooperate with cytokine-mediated
pathways in immature thymocytes to give rise to lymphoblastic T-cell lymphomas in
Stat5b TG mice.

PMCID: PMC2200817
PMID: 17890450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2008 Apr;18(2):148-56. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Vitamin D3 cannot revert desensitization of growth hormone (GH)-induced
STAT5-signaling in GH-overexpressing mice non-calcemic tissues.

Sotelo AI(1), Miquet JG, González L, Bartke A, Turyn D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas (UBA-CONICET), Facultad de
Farmacia y Bioquímica, Junín 956, C1113AAD, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
aisotelo@qb.ffyb.uba.ar

Growth hormone (GH) binding to a membrane receptor dimer triggers multiple
intracellular signaling pathways. Signal transducers and activators of
transcription are the most relevant of these pathways for GH action. GH also
activates several inhibitory mechanisms, particularly suppressors of cytokine
signaling (SOCS/CIS) proteins. GH-overexpressing mice exhibit hepatic
desensitization of the JAK2/STAT5 GH-signaling pathway, associated with an
increased abundance of CIS. Vitamin D3 has been shown to inhibit GH-induced
expression of CIS and SOCS-3 and therefore prolong GH signaling in
osteoblast-like cells. The purpose of the present study is to determine if
vitamin D3 could attenuate CIS expression in GH-overexpressing mice, and
consequently allow GH JAK2/STAT5 signaling in GH-responsive tissues in these
animals. The abundance of CIS, SOCS-2, SOCS-3, STAT5b and GHR, as well as STAT5b 
tyrosine phosphorylation after a GH stimulus, were measured in liver and muscle
of GHRH-transgenic mice treated with 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 for 7 days.
This treatment did not diminish CIS expression in GH-overexpressing mice tissues,
nor did the content of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 significantly vary. GH-induced STAT5b
phosphorylation levels were similar to basal values in transgenic mice liver
treated with or without vitamin D; the refractoriness to GH was also present in
muscle. Therefore, treatment with vitamin D was not sufficient to revert STAT5 GH
signaling desensitization in non-calcemic tissues in GH-overexpressing mice.

PMID: 17881271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2007 Nov;34(11):1097-101.

Modulation of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) factor
pathways during focal cerebral ischaemia: a gene expression array study in rat
hippocampus after middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Sun SL(1), Li TJ, Yang PY, Qiu Y, Rui YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

1. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) factors are a family
of transcription factors that mediate intracellular signalling initiated at
cytokine cell surface receptors and transmitted to the nucleus. In the present
study, we determined the global changes in STAT gene expression in the
hippocampus of rats after focal cerebral ischaemia and reperfusion using
microarray analysis. 2. The present study used middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) to induce ischaemia and reperfusion in Sprague-Dawley rats. Using
superarray Q series Janus tyrosine kinases (Jak)/STAT signalling pathway gene
array, a total of 96 genes was screened in adult male rat hippocampus after
transient focal cerebral ischaemia. 3. The results showed that 23 genes were
upregulated at least twofold by ischaemia treatment and that 12 genes were
downregulated at least threefold by ischaemia treatment compared with controls.
4. After confirmation by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, the
data suggest that the gene expression of STAT2, 5a, 5b, 6 and suppressor of
cytokine signalling (SOCS) 4 was increased by ischaemia, probably due to a
compensatory response of the brain, which may play a protective role in damaged
brain tissue. 5. The results of the present study provide evidence on global
changes in STAT gene expression in the hippocampus of rats after focal cerebral
ischaemia and reperfusion, in which STAT2, 5a, 5b, 6 and SOCS4 were confirmed to 
be significantly modulated during focal cerebral ischaemia.

PMID: 17880360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 3;362(4):1026-30. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

S731 in the transactivation domain modulates STAT5b activity.

Weaver AM(1), Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and the Cancer Center, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

As mediators of cytokine and growth factor signaling, signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STATs) transmit signals from the membrane and
cytoplasm to the nucleus. While Y699 phosphorylation is required for STAT5b
transcriptional activity, our previous studies show that mutation of two
tyrosines in the transactivation domain of STAT5b (Y740/743F) increases Y699
phosphorylation leading to increased transcriptional activity and DNA synthesis
in breast cancer cells [A.M. Weaver, C.M. Silva, Modulation of signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 5b activity in breast cancer cells by mutation of 
tyrosines within the transactivation domain, Molecular Endocrinology 20 (2006)
2392-2405]. In many instances, phosphorylation of serines in the transactivation 
domain also modulates STAT5b activity. Here, we demonstrate for the first time
that EGF stimulation enhances S731 phosphorylation. Furthermore, we show that the
increased activity of the Y740/743F STAT5b mutant requires S731. As STAT5b is
implicated in several cancers, understanding how its activity is regulated
through tyrosine and serine phosphorylation is vital for the development of
potential novel cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC2041903
PMID: 17822672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 19;282(42):31019-27. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

The long form of the leptin receptor regulates STAT5 and ribosomal protein S6 via
alternate mechanisms.

Gong Y(1), Ishida-Takahashi R, Villanueva EC, Fingar DC, Münzberg H, Myers MG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

The action of leptin via the long form of its receptor (LepRb) is central to the 
control of body energy homeostasis and neuroendocrine function, but the
mechanisms by which LepRb regulates intracellular signaling have remained
incompletely understood. Here we demonstrate that leptin stimulates the
phosphorylation of STAT5 and ribosomal protein S6 in the hypothalamic arcuate
nucleus in mice. In cultured cells, we investigate the mechanisms by which leptin
regulates each of these pathways. Our analysis reveals a dominant role for LepRb 
Tyr(1077) (which we demonstrate to be phosphorylated during receptor activation) 
and a secondary role for LepRb Tyr(1138) in the acute phosphorylation of STAT5a
and STAT5b. Tyr(1138) and STAT3 attenuate STAT5-dependent transcription over the 
long-term, however. In contrast, Tyr(985) (the LepRb phosphorylation site
required for ERK activation) mediates the phosphorylation of the ribosomal S6
kinase (RSK) and S6, as well as cap-dependent translation. Thus, these data
demonstrate the phosphorylation of Tyr(1077) on LepRb during receptor activation,
substantiate the hypothalamic regulation of STAT5 and S6 by leptin, and define
the alternate LepRb signaling pathways that mediate each of these signals and
their effects in cultured cells. Dissecting the contributions of these individual
pathways to leptin action will be important for our ultimate understanding of the
processes that regulate energy balance in vivo.

PMID: 17726024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Nov;35(11):2102-10. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Attenuated expression of episodic growth hormone-induced CYP2C11 in female rats
associated with suboptimal activation of the Jak2/Stat5B and other modulating
signaling pathways.

Dhir RN(1), Thangavel C, Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary
Medicine, 3800 Spruce St., Philadelphia, PA 19104-6048, USA.

Inherent sex differences in various parameters of growth, musculoskeletal
function, metabolism, and cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent drug metabolism have
been reported in rats and humans administered typical intermittent/episodic
growth hormone (GH) replacement therapy. Having infused and monitored the
identical physiologic masculine (episodic) growth hormone profile to both
hypophysectomized male and female rats, we observed that induction levels of
hepatic CYP2C11 were 35 to 40% lower in females. Associated with the reduced
expression of the P450 isoform in the episodic GH-treated females were
dramatically lower activation levels of Janus kinase (Jak2), signal transducers
and activators of transcription (Stat5A and 5B) as well as 50% less binding of
Stat5B to the CYP2C11 promoter. Because the Jak2/Stat5B signaling pathway
mediates the effects of the masculine GH profile on its target cells, we conclude
that the lower induction level of CYP2C11 in females exposed to the masculine GH 
profile is probably due, at least in part, to the suboptimum activation of the
Jak2/Stat5B pathway. In addition to the reduced activation of the Jak2/Stat5B
pathway, we observed lower activational levels of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p44/p42) and, indirectly, nuclear factor-kappaB in the episodic
GH-treated females that may be involved in attenuating the activity of the
Jak2/Stat5B pathway diminishing CYP2C11 expression levels.

PMID: 17682071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Int J Surg Pathol. 2007 Jul;15(3):277-81.

Nuclear expression of STAT5 in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the
pancreas.

Kataoka TR(1), Ioka T, Tsukamoto Y, Matsumura M, Ishiguro S, Nishizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Osaka, Japan. trkata@patho.med.osaka

Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are noninvasive lesions of the
pancreas and classified as intraductal papillary mucinous adenomas (IPMAs),
borderline IPMNs, and intraductal papillary mucinous carcinomas (IPMCs).
Expression patterns of the specific genes alter during IPMN progression. Based on
the evidence that signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 5
play important roles in tumor development, we tested STAT5 expression in IPMAs,
borderline IPMNs, and IPMCs by immunohistochemical method. STAT5 frequently
expressed in the nuclei of tumor cells of borderline IPMNs or IPMCs but was not
observed in those of IPMAs. Nuclear expression of STAT5 protein correlated to the
Ki-67 labeling index of the examined IPMNs. STAT5 protein could contribute to the
progression and proliferation of IPMNs.

PMID: 17652536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Hepatology. 2007 Aug;46(2):504-13.

Loss of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 leads to
hepatosteatosis and impaired liver regeneration.

Cui Y(1), Hosui A, Sun R, Shen K, Gavrilova O, Chen W, Cam MC, Gao B, Robinson
GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA.

Growth hormone controls many facets of a cell's biology through the transcription
factors Stat5a and Stat5b (Stat5). However, whole body deletion of these genes
from the mouse does not provide portentous information on cell-specific cytokine 
signaling. To explore liver-specific functions of Stat5, the entire Stat5 locus
was deleted in hepatocytes using Cre-mediated recombination. Notably,
Stat5-mutant mice developed fatty livers and displayed impaired proliferation of 
hepatocytes upon partial hepatectomy (PHx). Loss of Stat5 led to molecular
consequences beyond the reduced expression of Stat5 target genes, such as those
encoding suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2), Cish, and insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1). In particular, circulating growth hormone levels were
increased and correlated with insulin resistance and increased insulin levels.
Aberrant growth hormone (GH)-induced activation of the transcription factors
Stat1 and Stat3 was observed in mutant livers. To test whether some of the
defects observed in liver-specific Stat5 deficient mice were due to aberrant
Stat1 expression and activation, we generated Stat1(-/-) mice with a
hepatocyte-specific deletion of Stat5. Concomitant loss of both Stat5 and Stat1
restored cell proliferation upon PHx but did not reverse fatty liver development.
Thus the molecular underpinnings of some defects observed in the absence of Stat5
are the consequence of a deregulated activation of other signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) family members.CONCLUSION: Aberrant
cytokine-Stat5 signaling in hepatocytes alters their physiology through increased
activity of Stat1 and Stat3. Such cross-talk between different pathways could add
to the complexity of syndromes observed in disease.

PMID: 17640041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Jun;14(2):267-77.

Polymorphisms in the Janus kinase 2 (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) genes: putative association of the STAT gene region with
familial breast cancer.

Vaclavicek A(1), Bermejo JL, Schmutzler RK, Sutter C, Wappenschmidt B, Meindl A, 
Kiechle M, Arnold N, Weber BH, Niederacher D, Burwinkel B, Bartram CR, Hemminki
K, Försti A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology C050, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. a.vaclavicek@dkfz.de

The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
pathway mediates the signals of a wide range of cytokines, growth factors and
hormones. Thus, aberrant activation of the JAK/STAT pathway may predispose to
malignancy due to deregulation of proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. In
this study, we investigated whether genetic variation in the JAK2 gene and the
STAT gene region (STAT3, STAT5A and STAT5B) is associated with breast cancer (BC)
risk. We carried out a case-control study using a German sample set with 441
familial, unrelated BC cases and 552 controls matched by age, ethnicity and
geographical region. A second similar set (381 cases, 460 controls) was applied
to validate the findings. Haplotypes in the JAK2 gene were not associated with
the risk of BC. In the STAT gene region, the rare haplotype CAGCC containing the 
variant alleles of each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was associated with 
an increased risk odds ratio (OR = 5.83, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.51-26.28). According to Akaike's information criterion, the best model to
describe the relationship between the haplotypes and BC was based on the SNPs
rs6503691 (STAT5B) and rs7211777 (STAT3). Carriers of the AC haplotype, which
represents the variant alleles of both SNPs, were at an increased risk (OR =
1.41, 95% CI 1.09-1.82). A decreased risk was observed for carriers of the AT
haplotype (OR = 0.60, 95% CI 0.38-0.94). Furthermore, individuals with the AC/GC 
diplotype were at a significantly increased risk (OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.13-3.14).
The observed genetic variation may also influence the inter-individual variation 
in response to STAT-signalling targeted therapy.

PMID: 17639043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Nov 1;85(14):3064-70.

Expression profile of cancer-related genes in human adult bone marrow-derived
neural stemlike cells highlights the need for tumorigenicity study.

Zhu R(1), Xu R, Jiang X, Cai Y, Zou Y, Du M, Qin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.

Human adult bone marrow-derived neural stemlike cells (MDNSCs) may serve as ideal
seed cells for cell replacement therapy for human neurological disorders and
injuries. However, the long-term safety of this cell population after
transplantation must be thoroughly explored before clinical application, and
tumorigenicity is a major concern. In this study, we generated MDNSCs capable of 
forming neurospherelike aggregates and with the potency to differentiate into
neural lineage cells in vitro and investigated hundreds of cancer-related genes
in MDNSCs in order to determine whether there were any characteristics that could
help in the evaluation of their tumorigenic potential. According to the results
of testing by PCR and DNA sequencing, there were no mutations at the frequent
mutation sites of tumor-suppressor genes p53, p16, and Rb1. Of the 440
cancer-related genes covered by Oligo GEArray Human Cancer Microarray OHS-802, 63
were found to be significantly overexpressed compared with that in fresh normal
human adult bone marrow depleted of red blood cells (RBCs). In particular, the
overexpressed genes included those promoting cell proliferation and cell invasion
and metastasis and members of several oncogenic signaling pathways. The
overexpression of MYC, MMP2, Notch2, STC1, ITGA3, STAT5b, RhoC, and Wnt1 was also
revealed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Because it has been shown that
activation of some of these genes promote tumorigenesis, our findings highlight
the need for further studies of long-term tumorigenicity in MDNSCs.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17638301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 15;179(2):1068-79.

Stat5 is essential for early B cell development but not for B cell maturation and
function.

Dai X(1), Chen Y, Di L, Podd A, Li G, Bunting KD, Hennighausen L, Wen R, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

The two closely related Stat5 (Stat5A and Stat5B) proteins are activated by a
broad spectrum of cytokines. However, with the complication of the involvement of
Stat5A/5B in stem cell function, the role of Stat5A/5B in the development and
function of lymphocytes, especially B cells, is not fully understood. In this
study, we demonstrated that Stat5A/5B(-/-) fetal liver cells had severe
diminution of B cell progenitors but clearly had myeloid progenitors.
Consistently, the mutant fetal liver cells could give rise to hemopoietic
progenitors and myeloid cells but not B cells beyond pro-B cell progenitors in
lethally irradiated wild-type or Jak3(-/-) mice. Deletion of Stat5A/5B in vitro
directly impaired IL-7-mediated B cell expansion. Of note, reintroduction of
Stat5A back into Stat5A/5B(-/-) fetal liver cells restored their abilities to
develop B cells. Importantly, CD19-Cre-mediated deletion of Stat5A/5B in the B
cell compartment specifically impaired early B cell development but not late B
cell maturation. Moreover, the B cell-specific deletion of Stat5A/5B did not
impair splenic B cell survival, proliferation, and Ig production. Taken together,
these data demonstrate that Stat5A/5B directly control IL-7-mediated early B cell
development but are not required for B cell maturation and Ig production.

PMID: 17617599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;21(10):2503-15. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Regulation of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOC3) by growth hormone in
pro-B cells.

Barclay JL(1), Anderson ST, Waters MJ, Curlewis JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Queensland 4072,
Australia.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) is expressed by lymphoid cells and can
modulate the sensitivity of these cells to cytokine stimulation through
inhibition of Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) signaling pathways. This study employed a mouse pro-B cell
line expressing the human GH receptor (BaF/3-GHR), to elucidate the signal
transduction pathways used by GH to elicit SOCS3 expression. GH treatment of
these cells caused a rapid, dose-dependent increase in SOCS3 mRNA expression,
which was independent of de novo protein synthesis. As expected, GH treatment
increased JAK-dependent STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation, which bound to the
proximal STAT response element (pSRE) on the SOCS3 promoter. This process
appeared to involve STAT5b, rather than STAT5a. In addition, GH activation of the
SOCS3 promoter required a nearby activator protein (AP) 1/cAMP response element
(CRE), which bound cAMP response element binding protein, c-Fos, and c-Jun.
Moreover, inhibitors of p38 MAPK and c-Jun N-terminal kinase prevented
GH-stimulation of SOCS3 mRNA expression in these cells, suggesting a role for
these kinases in SOCS3 transcription. Importantly, GH stimulation increased
binding of FOXO3a to the SOCS3 promoter at a site overlapping the AP1/CRE
response element, and overexpression of FOXO3a in these cells augmented SOCS3
promoter activation. In addition, we show a direct interaction between FOXO3a and
STAT5 in these cells, which may provide a link between STAT5 and the AP1
transcription factors on the SOCS3 promoter. We conclude that regulation of SOCS3
expression by GH in a pro-B cell involves not only the pSRE, but also a
transcriptionally active complex involving cAMP response element binding
protein/c-Fos/c-Jun and FOXO3a. This study has implications for cytokine
regulation of SOCS gene expression in lymphoid cells.

PMID: 17609438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep;1773(9):1455-61. Epub 2007 May 29.

The transcription factors Stat5a/b are not required for islet development but
modulate pancreatic beta-cell physiology upon aging.

Lee JY(1), Gavrilova O, Davani B, Na R, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Room 101, Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA.

In insulinoma cell lines proliferation and insulin gene transcription are
stimulated by growth hormone and prolactin, which convey their signals through
the transcription factors Stat5a and 5b (referred to as Stat5). However, the
contribution of Stat5 to the physiology of beta-cells in vivo could not be
assessed directly since Stat5-null mice die perinataly. To explore the
physiological role of Stat5 in the mouse, the corresponding gene locus targeted
with loxP sites was inactivated in beta-cells using two lines of Cre recombinase 
expressing transgenic mice. While the RIP-Cre transgene is active in pancreatic
beta-cells and the hypothalamus, the Pdx1-Cre transgene is active in precursor
cells of the endocrine and exocrine pancreas. Mice carrying two floxed
Stat5alleles and a RIP-Cre transgene developed mild obesity, were hyperglycemic
and exhibited impaired glucose tolerance. Since RIP-Cre transgenic mice by
themselves display some glucose intolerance, the significance of these data is
unclear. In contrast, mice, in which the Stat5 locus had been deleted with the
Pdx1-Cre transgene, developed functional islets and were glucose tolerant. Mild
glucose intolerance occurred with age. We conclude that Stat5 is not essential
for islet development but may modulate beta-cell function.

PMCID: PMC2695665
PMID: 17599554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Acta Biochim Pol. 2007;54(2):331-40. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Nuclear localization and binding affinity of STAT5b for the
alpha(2)-macroglobulin gene promoter during rat liver development and the
acute-phase response.

Mihailovic M(1), Dinic S, Bogojevic D, Ivanovic-Matic S, Uskokovic A, Arambasic
J, Grigorov I, Grdovic N, Vidakovic M, Martinovic V, Petrovic M, Poznanovic G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute for Biological Research, Belgrade, 
Serbia. mista@ibiss.bg.ac.yu

Expression of the rat alpha(2)-macroglobulin (MG) gene undergoes dynamic changes 
throughout an individual's life and during the acute-phase (AP) response. Details
of the participation of the STAT family of transcription factors in its control
remain incompletely understood. Here we examined the involvement of STAT5b in MG 
gene expression during development and the AP response. Immuno-blot analysis
revealed the highest nuclear level of STAT5b in the fetus and during postnatal
development, whereas in the adult it decreased. Stimulation of MG expression
during the AP response was accompanied by a decrease in STAT5b. Examination of
STAT5b localization revealed that the relative concentrations of STAT5b were
higher in the nuclear matrix than in the nuclear extract. Affinity chromatography
with the extended promoter region of the MG gene (-825/+12), followed by
immuno-blot analysis, revealed dynamic changes in STAT5b binding. The highest
concentration of the promoter-binding form of STAT5b was observed in the fetus.
As postnatal development progressed, the level of promoter-bound STAT5b decreased
and in the adult liver it was the lowest. Stimulation of MG gene expression
during the AP response in both the fetus and adult was accompanied by
significantly decreased STAT5b binding to the MG promoter. The AP response was
accompanied by lower levels of STAT5b serine and tyrosine phosphorylation in both
fetus and adult. In the nuclear matrix derived from adult tissues, tyrosine
phosphorylated species were completely absent. We conclude that
developmental-stage differences in the mechanisms that determine STAT5b nuclear
localization contribute to its activity in vivo.

PMID: 17565389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Sep;21(9):2218-32. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Coactivation of janus tyrosine kinase (Jak)1 positively modulates prolactin-Jak2 
signaling in breast cancer: recruitment of ERK and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)3 and enhancement of Akt and Stat5a/b pathways.

Neilson LM(1), Zhu J, Xie J, Malabarba MG, Sakamoto K, Wagner KU, Kirken RA, Rui 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) receptors (PRLRs) have been considered selective activators of
Janus tyrosine kinase (Jak)2 but not Jak1, Jak3, or Tyk2. We now report marked
PRL-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak1, in addition to Jak2, in a series of
human breast cancer cell lines, including T47D, MCF7, and SKBR3. In contrast, PRL
did not activate Jak1 in immortalized, noncancerous breast epithelial lines HC11,
MCF10A, ME16C, and HBL-100, or in CWR22Rv1 prostate cancer cells or MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. However, introduction of exogenous PRLR into MCF10A, ME16C, 
or MDA-MB-231 cells reconstituted both PRL-Jak1 and PRL-Jak2 signals. In vitro
kinase assays verified that PRL stimulated enzymatic activity of Jak1 in T47D
cells, and PRL activated Jak1 and Jak2 with indistinguishable time and dose
kinetics. Relative Jak2 deficiency did not cause PRLR activation of Jak1, because
overexpression of Jak2 did not interfere with PRL activation of Jak1. Instead,
PRL activated Jak1 through a Jak2-dependent mechanism, based on disruption of PRL
activation of Jak1 after Jak2 suppression by 1) lentiviral delivery of Jak2 short
hairpin RNA, 2) adenoviral delivery of dominant-negative Jak2, and 3) AG490
pharmacological inhibition. Finally, suppression of Jak1 by lentiviral delivery
of Jak1 short hairpin RNA blocked PRL activation of ERK and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)3 and suppressed PRL activation of Jak2, Stat5a,
Stat5b, and Akt, as well as tyrosine phosphorylation of PRLR. The data suggest
that PRL activation of Jak1 represents a novel, Jak2-dependent mechanism that may
serve as a regulatory switch leading to PRL activation of ERK and Stat3 pathways,
while also serving to enhance PRL-induced Stat5a/b and Akt signaling.

PMID: 17550976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;122(2):129-39. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Common genetic variation in eight genes of the GH/IGF1 axis does not contribute
to adult height variation.

Lettre G(1), Butler JL, Ardlie KG, Hirschhorn JN.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Seven Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Stature (adult height) is one of the most heritable human traits, yet few genes, 
if any, have been convincingly associated with adult height variation in the
general population. Here, we selected 150 tag SNPs from eight candidate genes in 
the growth hormone (GH)/insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1) axis (GHR, GHRH,
GHRHR, IGF1, IGFALS, IGFBP3, JAK2, STAT5B), and genotyped them in approximately
2,200 individuals ascertained for short or tall stature. Nominally significant
tag SNPs were then tested in three additional replication cohorts, including a
family-based panel to rule out spurious associations owing to population
stratification. Across the four height cohorts (N = 6,075 individuals), we did
not observe any consistent associations between stature and common variants (> or
=5% minor allele frequency) in these eight genes, including a common deletion of 
the growth hormone receptor gene exon 3. Tests of epistatic interactions between 
these genes did not yield any results beyond those expected by chance. Although
we have not tested all genes in the GH/IGF1 axis, our results indicate that
common variation in these GH/IGF1 axis genes is not a major determinant of
stature, and suggest that if common variation contributes to adult height
variation in the general population, the variants are in other, possibly
unanticipated genes.

PMID: 17546465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Sep 19;31(1):63-74. Epub 2007 May 29.

Role of STAT5a in regulation of sex-specific gene expression in female but not
male mouse liver revealed by microarray analysis.

Clodfelter KH(1), Miles GD, Wauthier V, Holloway MG, Zhang X, Hodor P, Ray WJ,
Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Massachusetts, USA.

Sexual dimorphism in mammalian liver impacts genes affecting hepatic physiology, 
including inflammatory responses, diseased states, and the metabolism of steroids
and foreign compounds. Liver sex specificity is dictated by sex differences in
pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretion, with the transcription factor signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5b required for intracellular
signaling initiated by the pulsatile male plasma GH profile. STAT5a, a minor
liver STAT5 form >90% identical to STAT5b, also responds to sexually dimorphic
plasma GH stimulation but is unable to compensate for the loss of STAT5b and the 
associated loss of sex-specific liver gene expression. A large-scale gene
expression study was conducted using 23,574-feature oligonucleotide microarrays
and livers of male and female mice, both wild-type and Stat5a-inactivated mice,
to elucidate any dependence of liver gene expression on STAT5a. Significant sex
differences in expression were found for 2,482 mouse genes, 1,045 showing higher 
expression in males and 1,437 showing higher expression in females. In contrast
to the widespread effects of the loss of STAT5b, STAT5a deficiency had a limited 
but well-defined impact on liver sex specificity, with 219 of 1,437
female-predominant genes (15%) specifically decreased in expression in
STAT5a-deficient female liver. Analysis of liver RNAs from wild-type mice
representing three mixed or outbred strains identified 1,028 sexually dimorphic
genes across the strains, including 393 female-predominant genes, of which 89
(23%) required STAT5a for normal expression in female liver. These findings
highlight the importance of STAT5a for regulation of sex-specific gene expression
specifically in female liver, in striking contrast to STAT5b, whose major effects
are restricted to male liver.

PMCID: PMC2586676
PMID: 17536022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Endocrinology. 2007 Aug;148(8):3792-802. Epub 2007 May 17.

Growth hormone (GH)-associated nitration of Janus kinase-2 at the 1007Y-1008Y
epitope impedes phosphorylation at this site: mechanism for and impact of a GH,
AKT, and nitric oxide synthase axis on GH signal transduction.

Elsasser TH(1), Li CJ, Caperna TJ, Kahl S, Schmidt WF.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Growth Biology
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland 20705, USA. elsasser@anri.barc.usda.gov

A generalized increase in liver protein tyrosine nitration (3'-nitrotyrosine,
3'-NT) occurs after GH injection in a time frame consistent with observed acute
GH hyporesponsiveness. Here we investigated whether the GH-associated nitration
process might be targeted to the (1007)Y-(1008)Y-phosphorylation epitope of Janus
kinase (JAK)-2 because of its homology to a defined peptide nitration motif.
Using antibodies we developed to the 3'NT-substituted peptide analog of the
(1007)Y-(1008)Y-JAK2 site (nitro-JAK2), we demonstrated a rapid increase in
membrane-associated nitro-JAK2 after GH. In vivo (bovine liver) and in vitro
(porcine hepatocytes), GH-induced cellular levels of nitro-(1007)Y-(1008)Y-JAK2
persisted significantly longer after a stimulatory GH pulse than did levels of
phospho-JAK2. Treatment of cultured cells with inhibitors of AKT or endothelial
nitric oxide synthase prior to GH challenge attenuated the increases in
nitro-JAK2 predominantly in the membrane subcellular fraction. In instances in
which GH effected orthophosphorylation of (694)Y-signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT)-5b, the addition of AKT and endothelial nitric oxide
synthase inhibitors prior to GH significantly increased the levels of
phospho-(694)Y-STAT5b and phospho-(1007)Y-JAK2 over those arising from GH alone. 
Nuclear magnetic resonance molecular modeling of natural and 3'-NT- and
orthophosphate-substituted peptide analogs of the (1007)Y-(1008)Y site
demonstrated significant effects of 3'-nitration on the planar orientation and
intramolecular stabilizing points of the affected tyrosines. When these peptides 
were used as substrates for in vitro tyrosine kinase phosphorylation reactions,
3'-NT in the (1007)Y and/or (1008)Y positions blocked the generation of
(1007)Y-phosphotyrosine. The data suggest that the nitration of JAK2 may act as
an inhibitory counterpart to phosphorylation activation, reflecting a very
localized break on the progression of GH signal transduction processes spanning
JAK-STAT-AKT interactions.

PMID: 17510232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jul 6;358(3):733-8. Epub 2007 May 8.

Hypoxia activates the IGF-1 expression through STAT5b in human HepG2 cells.

Joung YH(1), Lee MY, Lim EJ, Kim MS, Hwang TS, Kim SY, Ye SK, Lee JD, Park T, Woo
YS, Chung IM, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, and Bio-Food and Drug Research
Center, Konkuk University, Chungju City 380-701, Republic of Korea.

Insulin-like growth factors (IGF), polypeptides that regulate growth,
differentiation, and survival in cells and tissues, were found to enhance gene
expression from both heterologous and homologous promoters in the presence of
constitutively active STAT5. This highly conserved 700-bp DNA region contains two
closely located consensus STAT5-binding sites. Hypoxia regulates the IGF-1 gene
expression through the STAT5b. We confirmed STAT5b is up-regulated under hypoxic 
conditions, and the increased STAT5b binds strongly to the STAT5-binding sites 1 
and 2 contained within the distal 5'-flanking region of IGF-1 gene in HepG2
cells. EMSA studies showed that STAT5-binding activities to the IGF-1 promoter
distinctly increased under hypoxia in STAT5b-transfected COS-7 cells. The IGF-1
gene expression was also increased by hypoxia in HepG2 cells. STAT5b expression
was inhibited by siRNA experiments leading to decreased IGF-1. These results
provide a basis of molecular targets for cancer treatment via the STAT5b-IGF-1
pathway in solid tumor cells.

PMID: 17509524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Genes Dev. 2007 May 15;21(10):1157-62.

Direct glucocorticoid receptor-Stat5 interaction in hepatocytes controls body
size and maturation-related gene expression.

Engblom D(1), Kornfeld JW, Schwake L, Tronche F, Reimann A, Beug H, Hennighausen 
L, Moriggl R, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The glucocorticoid receptor regulates transcription through DNA binding as well
as through cross-talk with other transcription factors. In hepatocytes, the
glucocorticoid receptor is critical for normal postnatal growth. Using
hepatocyte-specific and domain-selective mutations in the mouse we show that
Stat5 in hepatocytes is essential for normal postnatal growth and that it
mediates the growth-promoting effect of the glucocorticoid receptor through a
direct interaction involving the N-terminal tetramerization domain of Stat5b.
This interaction mediates a selective and unexpectedly extensive part of the
transcriptional actions of these molecules since it controls the expression of
gene sets involved in growth and sexual maturation.

PMCID: PMC1865487
PMID: 17504935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Transl Res. 2007 May;149(5):274-81.

Advanced glycation end-product-induced mitogenesis is dependent on Janus kinase
2-induced heat shock protein 70 in normal rat kidney interstitial fibroblast
cells.

Chen SC(1), Guh JY, Chen HC, Yang YL, Huang JS, Chuang LY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Kidney interstitial fibroblast proliferation is important in the pathogenesis of 
diabetic renal fibrosis. In this regard, advanced glycation end-product
(AGE)-induced proliferation in normal rat kidney interstitial fibroblast
(NRK-49F) cells is dependent on the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) signal transducers and 
activators of transcription (STAT) pathway. Heat shock protein (Hsp) is a
molecular target of JAK/STAT. Thus, the role of Hsp70 in AGE-induced mitogenesis 
in NRK-49F cells was studied. The AGE dose (100-200 microg/mL) and time (16-72 h)
dependently increased Hsp70 protein expression. AGE-induced Hsp70 was attenuated 
by AG-490 (a JAK2 inhibitor) and N-acetylcysteine. AGE also increased tyrosine
phosphorylation of Hsp70, cyclin E, and cyclin D1 (to a lesser extent) while
increasing Hsp70 protein interactions with STAT1, STAT3, STAT5b, cyclin D1, and
cyclin E. AGE-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Hsp70 and cyclin E (but not
cyclin D1) was attenuated by AG-490. AGE-induced mitogenesis, cyclin D1, and
cyclin E were attenuated by Hsp70 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide and
2-aminopurine (an Hsp70 inhibitor). AGE-induced Hsp70 and mitogenesis were also
attenuated by N-acetylcysteine. It was concluded that AGE-induced Hsp70 protein
expression and tyrosine phosphorylation are dependent on JAK2 in NRK-49F cells.
AGE increased protein-protein interactions among Hsp70, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5b,
cyclin D1, and cyclin E. Moreover, AGE-induced mitogenesis is dependent on Hsp70 
and oxidative stress.

PMID: 17466927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Oncogene. 2007 Sep 20;26(43):6341-8. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Stat5 activation inhibits prolactin-induced AP-1 activity: distinct
prolactin-initiated signals in tumorigenesis dependent on cell context.

Gutzman JH(1), Rugowski DE, Nikolai SE, Schuler LA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The essential role of prolactin (PRL) in normal mammary gland growth and
differentiation has implicated this hormone in the development and progression of
breast cancer. Although Stat5 is the best-characterized mediator of PRL signals, 
PRL also activates multiple other signals, whose roles in normal and pathologic
processes are not well understood. We have shown that PRL stimulates activating
protein-1 (AP-1) activity in breast cancer cells, and can cooperate with
estradiol in this pathway. AP-1 modulates many processes critical for
carcinogenesis, including cell proliferation, survival, transformation, invasion 
and angiogenesis, and is elevated in many neoplasms, including breast tumors.
Here, we investigated the relationship between PRL signals to AP-1 and Stat5. We 
found that PRL activation of Stat5a and Stat5b, but not Stat1 or Stat3, reduced
PRL signals to AP-1, without altering estradiol-induced AP-1 activity. The
truncation mutant, Stat5/Delta53C, but not Stat5Y699F, was an effective
inhibitor, consistent with a requirement for Stat5 dimerization and nuclear
accumulation, but not its C-terminal transactivation activity. The association of
Stat5 with AP-1 proteins suggests that this underlies the inhibition.
Predictably, the ability of PRL to activate Stat5 and AP-1 was inversely related 
in mammary cell lines. Further, reduction of Stat5 protein with siRNA in T47D
cells, which contain elevated Stat5, increased PRL-induced AP-1 signals,
transcripts for the AP-1 target, matrix metalloproteinase-2 and associated
invasive behavior. This study points to the importance of cell context in
determining the spectrum of PRL-induced actions, which is critical for
understanding the contributions of PRL to breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3190200
PMID: 17438530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;21(6):1443-57. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5b-mediated inhibition of
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 gene transcription: a mechanism for 
repression of gene expression by growth hormone.

Ono M(1), Chia DJ, Merino-Martinez R, Flores-Morales A, Unterman TG, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, 3181 Southwest Sam Jackson Road, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

GH plays a central role in controlling somatic growth, tissue regeneration, and
intermediary metabolism in most vertebrate species through mechanisms dependent
on the regulation of gene expression. Recent studies using transcript profiling
have identified large cohorts of genes whose expression is induced by GH. Other
results have demonstrated that signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Stat) 5b, a latent transcription factor activated by the GH receptor-associated 
protein kinase, Jak2, is a key agent in the GH-stimulated gene activation that
leads to somatic growth. By contrast, little is known about the steps through
which GH-initiated signaling pathways reduce gene expression. Here we show that
Stat5b plays a critical role in the GH-regulated inhibition of IGF binding
protein-1 gene transcription by impairing the actions of the FoxO1 transcription 
factor on the IGF binding protein-1 promoter. Additional observations using
transcript profiling in the liver indicate that Stat5b may be a general mediator 
of GH-initiated gene repression. Our results provide a model for understanding
how GH may simultaneously stimulate and inhibit the expression of different
cohorts of genes via the same transcription factor, potentially explaining how GH
action leads to integrated biological responses in the whole organism.

PMID: 17426286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3327-37. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Characterization of three growth hormone-responsive transcription factors
preferentially expressed in adult female liver.

Laz EV(1), Holloway MG, Chen CS, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Plasma GH profiles regulate the sexually dimorphic expression of cytochromes P450
and many other genes in rat and mouse liver; however, the proximal
transcriptional regulators of these genes are unknown. Presently, we characterize
three liver transcription factors that are expressed in adult female rat and
mouse liver at levels up to 16-fold [thymus high-mobility group box protein
(Tox)], 73-fold [tripartite motif-containing 24 (Trim24)/transcription initiation
factor-1alpha (TIF1alpha)], and 125-fold [cut-like 2 (Cutl2)/cut homeobox 2
(Cux2)] higher than in adult males, depending on the strain and species, with Tox
expression only detected in mice. In rats, these sex differences first emerged at
puberty, when the high prepubertal expression of Cutl2 and Trim24 was
extinguished in males but was further increased in females. Rat hepatic
expression of Cutl2 and Trim24 was abolished by hypophysectomy and, in the case
of Cutl2, was restored to near-female levels by continuous GH replacement. Cutl2 
and Trim24 were increased to female-like levels in livers of intact male rats and
mice treated with GH continuously (female GH pattern), whereas Tox expression
reached only about 40% of adult female levels. Expression of all three genes was 
also elevated to normal female levels or higher in male mice whose plasma GH
profile was feminized secondary to somatostatin gene disruption. Cutl2 and Trim24
both responded to GH infusion in mice within 10-24 h and Tox within 4 d, as
compared with at least 4-7 d required for the induced expression of several
continuous GH-regulated cytochromes P450 and other female-specific hepatic genes.
Cutl2, Trim24, and Tox were substantially up-regulated in livers of male mice
deficient in either of two transcription factors implicated in GH regulation of
liver sex specificity, namely, signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b (STAT5b) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), with sex-specific
expression being substantially reduced or lost in mice deficient in either
nuclear factor. Cutl2 and Trim24 both display transcriptional repressor activity 
and could thus contribute to the loss of GH-regulated, male-specific liver gene
expression seen in male mice deficient in STAT5b or HNF4alpha. Binding sites for 
Cutl1, whose DNA-binding specificity is close to that of Cutl2, were
statistically overrepresented in STAT5b-dependent male-specific mouse genes,
lending support to this hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC2585771
PMID: 17412818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3307-15. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Growth hormone stimulates hepatic expression of bovine growth hormone receptor
messenger ribonucleic acid through signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 activation of a major growth hormone receptor gene promoter.

Jiang H(1), Wang Y, Wu M, Gu Z, Frank SJ, Torres-Diaz R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Large Animal Clinical Sciences,
3130 Litton Reaves Hall, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061-0306, USA.
hojiang@vt.edu

The objective of this study was to determine whether and how GH regulates hepatic
expression of GH receptor (GHR) mRNA in cattle. Ribonuclease protection assays
revealed that injection of GH in a slow-release formula increased both hepatic
GHR and IGF-I mRNAs 1 wk after the injection. The increases in GHR and IGF-I
mRNAs were highly correlated. Western blot analysis showed that the injection
also increased liver GHR protein level. In cattle and other mammals, hepatic GHR 
mRNA is expressed as variants that differ in the 5'-untranslated region due to
the use of different promoters in transcription and/or alternative splicing. We
found that GH increased the expression of the liver-specific GHR mRNA variant
GHR1A without affecting the other two major GHR mRNA variants in the bovine
liver, GHR1B and GHR1C. In transient transfection analyses, GH could robustly
activate reporter gene expression from a 2.7-kb GHR1A promoter, suggesting that
GH augmentation of GHR1A mRNA expression in the liver is at least partially
mediated at the transcriptional level. Additional transfection analyses of
serially 5'-truncated fragments of this promoter narrowed the GH-responsive
sequence element down to a 210-bp region that contained a putative signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) binding site. EMSAs
demonstrated that this putative STAT5 binding site was able to bind to STAT5b
protein. In cotransfection assays, deletion of this putative STAT5 binding site
abolished most of the GH response of the GHR1A promoter. Like 1-wk GH action, 6-h
(i.e. short-term) GH action also increased liver expression of GHR1A and total
GHR mRNAs in cattle. These observations together suggest that GH directly
stimulates the expression of one GHR mRNA variant, GHR1A, through binding STAT5
to its promoter, thereby increasing GHR mRNA and protein expression in the bovine
liver.

PMID: 17412814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jun;92(6):2223-31. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Primary growth hormone (GH) insensitivity and insulin-like growth factor
deficiency caused by novel compound heterozygous mutations of the GH receptor
gene: genetic and functional studies of simple and compound heterozygous states.

Fang P(1), Riedl S, Amselem S, Pratt KL, Little BM, Haeusler G, Hwa V, Frisch H, 
Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

CONTEXT: Primary GH insensitivity (GHI) or Laron syndrome, caused by mutations of
the GH receptor (GHR) gene, has a clinical phenotype of postnatal growth failure 
associated with normal elevated serum concentrations of GH and low serum levels
of IGF-I.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the clinical and biochemical implications of molecular
defects in the GHR gene in an Austrian family with two daughters who were GHI.
PATIENTS: Patient 1 [height, -4.8 sd score (SDS)] and patient 2 (height, -5.0
SDS) had elevated circulating levels of GH, low-normal levels of GH-binding
protein, and abnormally low IGF-I (-5.0 SDS and -2.6 SDS, respectively) and
IGF-binding protein-3 (-2.6 SDS and -2.0 SDS, respectively).
RESULTS: Both patients carry novel compound, missense, heterozygous GHR
mutations, C94S and H150Q. In vitro reconstitution experiments demonstrated that 
whereas each of the mutants could be stably expressed, GHR(C94S) lost its
affinity for GH and could neither activate signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-5b nor drive STAT5b-dependent gene transcription in response
to GH (1-100 ng/ml). GHR(H150Q) showed normal affinity for GH but impaired
capacity for signal transduction. The compound heterozygote and C94S
heterozygote, but not the H150Q heterozygote, showed significant deficiency in
activating GH-induced gene expression, corroborating diminished GH-induced STAT5b
activation in fibroblasts carrying GHR(C94S) as either a compound heterozygote
(in the patients) or a simple heterozygote (in one parent).
CONCLUSIONS: Each of the compound heterozygous mutations contributed additively
to the pathological condition seen in the patients, and the more detrimental of
the two mutations, C94S, may cause (partial) primary GHI, even in a heterozygous 
state.

PMID: 17405847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Neurochem Int. 2007 May;50(6):834-47. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Microarray analysis of oxidative stress regulated genes in mesencephalic
dopaminergic neuronal cells: relevance to oxidative damage in Parkinson's
disease.

Anantharam V(1), Lehrmann E, Kanthasamy A, Yang Y, Banerjee P, Becker KG, Freed
WJ, Kanthasamy AG.

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's Disorder Research Laboratory, Iowa Center for Advanced
Neurotoxicology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames, 
IA 50011-1250, USA.

Oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death have been implicated in the
dopaminergic cell loss that characterizes Parkinson's disease. While factors
contributing to apoptotic cell death are not well characterized, oxidative stress
is known to activate an array of cell signaling molecules that participate in
apoptotic cell death mechanisms. We investigated oxidative stress-induced
cytotoxicity of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in three cell lines, the dopaminergic
mesencephalon-derived N27 cell line, the GABAergic striatum-derived M213-20 cell 
line, and the hippocampal HN2-5 cell line. N27 cells were more sensitive to
H2O2-induced cell death than M213-20 and HN2-5 cells. H2O2 induced significantly 
greater increases in caspase-3 activity in N27 cells than in M213-20 cells.
H2O2-induced apoptotic cell death in N27 cells was mediated by
caspase-3-dependent proteolytic activation of PKCdelta. Gene expression
microarrays were employed to examine the specific transcriptional changes in N27 
cells exposed to 100 microM H2O2 for 4 h. Changes in genes encoding pro- or
anti-apoptotic proteins included up-regulation of BIK, PAWR, STAT5B, NPAS2, Jun
B, MEK4, CCT7, PPP3CC, and PSDM3, while key down-regulated genes included BNIP3, 
NPTXR, RAGA, STK6, YWHAH, and MAP2K1. Overall, the changes indicate a modulation 
of transcriptional activity, chaperone activity, kinase activity, and apoptotic
activity that appears highly specific, coordinated and relevant to cell survival.
Utilizing this in vitro model to identify novel oxidative stress-regulated genes 
may be useful in unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying dopaminergic
degeneration in Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC1950670
PMID: 17397968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jun;292(6):G1793-803. Epub 2007 Mar
29.

Interleukin-6 inhibits growth hormone-mediated gene expression in hepatocytes.

Ahmed TA(1), Buzzelli MD, Lang CH, Capen JB, Shumate ML, Navaratnarajah M,
Nagarajan M, Cooney RN.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, H070, Pennsylvania State Univ, College of Medicine, Hershey,
PA 17033, USA.

During systemic inflammation, the liver becomes unresponsive to growth hormone
(GH), resulting in decreased plasma insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) with
concomitant reductions in lean body mass. Transgenic mice that overexpress IL-6
also demonstrate impaired growth and decreased IGF-I. To determine whether IL-6
directly inhibits GH-inducible gene expression, CWSV-1 hepatocytes were incubated
with IL-6 (10 ng/ml), then stimulated with recombinant human GH (500 ng/ml, 18
h). The increase in IGF-I and serine protease inhibitor 2.1 (Spi 2.1) mRNA in
GH-treated cells was inhibited by treatment with IL-6 for 24 h. To investigate
potential mechanisms, we examined the effects of IL-6 on GH receptor (GHR)
expression and GH signaling via the JAK/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) and MAP kinase pathways. Incubation of cells with IL-6 (10
ng/ml, 24 h) had no effect on GHR abundance or signaling proteins JAK2, STAT5b,
and ERK1/2. Although GH transiently increased (2- to 5-fold) the tyrosine
phosphorylation of GHR, JAK2, STAT5b, and ERK1/2, IL-6 did not alter these
phosphorylation events. However, nuclear protein from IL-6-treated cells
demonstrated reduced STAT5 DNA binding (by EMSA) at 15 min (-20%) and 60 min
(-43%) after GH stimulation. To determine whether IL-6 inhibits GH-inducible
promoter activity, CWSV-1 cells were transfected with Spi 2.1 or prolactin
receptor promoter luciferase vectors, incubated with or without IL-6, then
stimulated with GH. The induction of both Spi 2.1 (7.5-fold) and prolactin
receptor (4-fold) promoter activity by GH was inhibited by IL-6. In summary, IL-6
mediates hepatic GH resistance by a time-dependent inhibition of GH-inducible
promoter activity that is associated with reductions in STAT5 DNA binding.

PMID: 17395896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 1;282(22):15954-64. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Curcumin prevents tumor-induced T cell apoptosis through Stat-5a-mediated Bcl-2
induction.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Mandal D, Saha B, Sen GS, Das T, Sa G.

Author information: 
(1)Bose Institute, P-1/12 Calcutta Improvement Trust Scheme VII M, Kolkata 700
054, India.

Patients with advanced cancer exhibit multifaceted defects in their immune
capacity, which are likely to contribute to an increased susceptibility to
infections and disease progression. We demonstrated earlier that curcumin
inhibits tumor growth and prevents immune cell death in tumor-bearing hosts. Here
we report that tumor-induced immunodepletion involves apoptosis of thymic
CD4+/CD8+ single/double positive cells as well as loss of circulating CD4+/CD8+ T
cells. Administration of curcumin to tumor-bearing animals resulted in
restoration of progenitor, effecter, and circulating T cells. In fact, tumor
burden decreased the expression level of the pro-proliferative protein Bcl-2
while increasing the pro-apoptotic protein Bax in T cells. Curcumin
down-regulated the Bax level while augmenting Bcl-2 expression in these cells,
thereby protecting the immunocytes from tumor-induced apoptosis. A search for the
upstream mechanism revealed down-regulation of the common cytokine receptor gamma
chain (gammac) expression in T cells by tumor-secreted prostaglandin E2. As a
result, Jak-3 and Stat-5a phosphorylation and to a lesser extent Stat-5b
phosphorylation were also decreased in T cells. These entire phenomena could be
reverted back by curcumin, indicating that this phytochemical restored the
cytokine-dependent Jak-3/Stat-5a signaling pathway in T cells of tumor bearers.
Overexpressed Stat-5a/constitutively active Stat-5a1*6 but not Stat-5b could
efficiently elevate Bcl-2 levels and protect T cells from tumor-induced death,
whereas C-terminal truncated Stat-5a713 overexpression failed to do so,
indicating the importance of Stat-5a signaling in T cell survival. Thus, these
results raise the possibility of inclusion of curcumin in successful therapeutic 
regimens against cancer.

PMID: 17392282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May-Jun;18(4):134-41. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

Defects in growth hormone receptor signaling.

Rosenfeld RG(1), Belgorosky A, Camacho-Hubner C, Savage MO, Wit JM, Hwa V.

Author information: 
(1)Lucile Packard Foundation for Children's Health, 400 Hamilton Avenue, Suite
340, Palo Alto, CA 94201, USA. ron.rosenfeld@lpfch.org

Severe growth failure and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) deficiency were first 
reported 40 years ago in patients who ultimately proved to have mutations in the 
gene encoding the growth hormone receptor (GHR). So far, over 250 similar
patients, encompassing more than 60 different mutations of GHR, have been
reported. The GHR is a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily and has been
shown to signal, at least in part, through the Janus-family tyrosine
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway. Six
patients, from five distinct families, have been reported to have phenotypes
similar to that of patients with GHR defects but with wild-type receptors and
homozygosity for five different mutations of the STAT5b gene. These patients
define a new cause of GH insensitivity and primary IGF deficiency and confirm the
crucial role of STAT5b in GH-mediated IGF-I gene transcription.

PMID: 17391978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Horm Res. 2007;68(5):218-24. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Growth hormone insensitivity and severe short stature in siblings: a novel
mutation at the exon 13-intron 13 junction of the STAT5b gene.

Hwa V(1), Camacho-Hübner C, Little BM, David A, Metherell LA, El-Khatib N, Savage
MO, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland, OR 
97239-3098, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) is characterized by severe
short stature, high serum growth hormone (GH), low serum IGF-I and IGFBP-3 levels
and is classically associated with genetic defects of the GH receptor (GHR).
Recently, mutations of the STAT5b gene have been identified and shown to be
associated with GHI and severe IGF deficiency. We investigated 2 sisters from a
consanguineous family from Kuwait, with clinical and biochemical features of GHI,
in whom no molecular defects in the GHR were identified.
METHODS: Serum and DNA were analyzed.
RESULTS: In addition to GHI, siblings 2 and 1 presented with, respectively, a
diagnosis of juvenile idiopathic arthritis and recurrent pulmonary infections.
Molecular analysis of the STAT5b gene revealed a novel homozygous deletion of a G
at the junction of exon 13-intron 13. The parents, who are of normal height, were
heterozygous for the mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first STAT5b defect to be identified in siblings,
further supporting the autosomal recessive mode of transmission of STAT5b
deficiency. The results affirm that defective STAT5b is an etiology for IGF
deficiency and the GHI phenotype, and emphasize the importance of considering
this diagnosis in patients with IGF deficiency, especially when associated with
diverse immunological problems.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17389811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 11;356(3):655-61. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

Truncated pStat5B is associated with the Idd4 locus in NOD mice.

Davoodi-Semiromi A(1), McDuffie M, Litherland S, Clare-Salzler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. semiromi@pathology.ufl.edu

We investigate JAK-STAT5 activation and its relationship to full-length Stat5B
(FL-Stat5) and constitutive phosphorylated carboxy-truncated Stat5B (ct-pStat5)
in four different strains of mouse. Our electrophoresis mobility shift assays
data indicate constitutive phosphorylation of full-length-Stat5 (p<0.001) and DNA
binding in NOD but not in B6 mice. Our data suggest that the relative ratio of
FL-Stat5: ct-Stat5 in NOD is 5- to 8-fold lower (p<0.0001) when compared with
normal B6 mice. Additionally, EMSAs data from B6.NOD/c11 suggest contribution of 
Idd4 susceptibility locus on chromosome 11 in constitutive phosphorylation of
Stat5 in NOD mice. The presence of ct-pStat5 in regulatory T cells of NOD mice
suggests this form of Stat5 is associated with impaired function of Tregs in NOD 
mouse. In agreement with our previous report the JAK-Stat5B defective pathway in 
NOD mice along with other defective factors is associated with the pathogenesis
of autoimmune type 1 diabetes in NOD mice.

PMID: 17382905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 11;356(3):727-32. Epub 2007 Mar 16.

STAT5 transcriptional activity is impaired by LIF in a mammary epithelial cell
line.

Granillo AR(1), Boffi JC, Barañao L, Kordon E, Pecci A, Guberman A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Pab. II, Piso 2, Ciudad Universitaria, C1428EGA
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Gene regulation mediated by STAT factors has been implicated in cellular
functions with relevance to a variety of processes. Particularly, STAT5 and STAT3
play a crucial role in mammary epithelium displaying reciprocal activation
kinetics during pregnancy, lactation and involution. Here, we show that LIF
treatment of mammary epithelial HC11 cells reduces the phosphorylation levels and
transcriptional activity of p-STAT5 in correlation with STAT3 phosphorylation. We
have also found that STAT5 activity is negatively modulated by this cytokine,
both on a gene whose expression is induced, as well as on a promoter repressed by
STAT5. Besides, our results show that lactogenic hormones increase LIF effect on 
gene induction without modifying STAT3 phosphorylation state. Our findings
strongly suggest that there is crosstalk between STAT5 and STAT3 pathways that
could modulate their ability to regulate gene expression.

PMID: 17382296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Mar;15(3):583-90.

The modulation of STAT5A/GR complexes during fat cell differentiation and in
mature adipocytes.

Baugh JE Jr(1), Floyd ZE, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5A has been
shown to interact with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in adipocytes. The aim of
this study was to investigate the subcellular locations and modulation of
STAT5A/GR complexes during adipogenesis and in mature adipocytes.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Both 3T3-L1 and 3T3-F442A cells were studied by 
performing subcellular fractionations, immunoprecipitation, and Western blotting 
after various treatments.
RESULTS: The formation of nuclear STAT5A/GR complexes was regulated in the
cytosol and in the nucleus at distinct times during adipogenesis and in mature
adipocytes. STAT5A, but not STAT5B, forms a complex with GR in adipocytes. The
STAT5A associated with GR in the nucleus is tyrosine phosphorylated.
DISCUSSION: The association of STAT5A with GR in the nucleus of adipocytes is
modulated by the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A. Both GR and STAT5A are known
to have important roles in adipocyte function. Hence, our data suggest that the
association of these two transcription factors may be important in the regulation
of adipocyte gene expression.

PMID: 17372307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Cell Mol Med. 2007 Jan-Feb;11(1):71-87.

PPARgamma activation by thiazolidinediones (TZDs) may modulate breast carcinoma
outcome: the importance of interplay with TGFbeta signalling.

Jarrar MH(1), Baranova A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Genomics and Bioinformatics, Molecular and Microbiology 
Department, College of Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA.

The thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are a class of synthetic antidiabetic drugs
exerting its action primarily upon activation of the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma). Given the widespread incidence
of diabetes type II and lifelong exposure of these patients to TZDs, there is a
possibility that chronic treatment with TZD modifies clinical phenotypes of other
common human diseases, for example breast carcinoma. There is evidence that TZDs 
act as breast carcinoma suppression agents, at least in the in vitro and animal
models. Stimulation of the PPARgamma by TZDs interferes with oestrogen receptor
signalling, STAT5B and NF-kappaB signalling cascades. On the other hand, TZDs
repress TGFbeta signalling, a well-known suppressor of the initial stages of
breast carcinoma development. Another layer of complexity arises at the later
stages of tumour development, when TGFbeta acts as a tumour promoter: its
overexpression is associated with poor prognosis, higher degree of tumour
vascularization and metastasis. Longitudinal studies of breast carcinoma
development in chronic TZD users are needed. In this review, we dissect possible 
interplays between chronic exposure of breast tis-sue to TZDs and TGFbeta
signalling and predict influence of TZD exposure on cancer-related clinical
outcome.

PMCID: PMC4401221
PMID: 17367502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Endocrinology. 2007 Jun;148(6):2894-903. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

A molecular basis for the sexually dimorphic response to growth hormone.

Thangavel C(1), Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary 
Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6048, USA.

Once reserved solely for the treatment of short stature, the now readily
available recombinant GH has expanded the use of the hormone to include the
treatment of cardiovascular, renal, muscular, skeletal, immunological,
psychosocial, and metabolic abnormalities associated with GH deficiency. There
are also proposals for the widespread use of the hormone to ameliorate or reverse
aging. However, this extensive use of GH has revealed intrinsic sexual
dimorphisms in which females are considerably less responsive to the therapeutic 
regimen than are males. Dynamic changes in the Janus kinase-2 (Jak2)/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stat5B) signaling pathway [as
determined by transducer activation, Stat5B binding to the GH-responsive promoter
of the CYP2C11 gene, and expression levels of the suppressors of cytokine
signaling family (Socs2, Socs3, and Cis)] were examined in male and female
rat-derived primary hepatocyte cultures exposed to the masculine-like episodic GH
profile. We report that the cellular actions of GH normally mediated by
activation of the Jak2/Stat5B pathway are suppressed in female cells possibly due
to an inherent overexpression of Cis, a member of the suppressors of cytokine
signaling family that normally down-regulates the Jak2/Stat5B pathway.

PMID: 17332060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jun;292(6):E1856-62. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Endotoxin attenuates growth hormone-induced hepatic insulin-like growth factor I 
expression by inhibiting JAK2/STAT5 signal transduction and STAT5b DNA binding.

Chen Y(1), Sun D, Krishnamurthy VM, Rabkin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, USA.

Gram-negative sepsis with release of endotoxin is a frequent cause of cachexia
that develops partly because of resistance to growth hormone (GH) with reduced
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) expression. We set out to more fully
characterize the mechanisms for the resistance and to determine whether in
addition to a defect in the janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) 5b pathway, required for GH-induced IGF-I expression,
there might also be a more distal defect. Conscious rats were given endotoxin and
studied 4 h later. In liver of these animals, GH-induced JAK2 and STAT5
phosphorylation was impaired and appeared to be caused, at least in part, by a
marked increase in hepatic tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 mRNA
expression accompanied by elevated levels of inhibitors of GH signaling, namely
cytokine-inducible suppressors of cytokine signaling-1 and -3 and
cytokine-inducible SH2 protein (CIS). Nuclear phosphorylated STAT5b levels were
significantly depressed to 61% of the control values and represent a potential
cause of the reduced GH-induced IGF-I expression. In addition, binding of
phosphorylated STAT5b to DNA was reduced to an even greater extent and averaged
17% of the normal control value. This provides a further explanation for the
impaired IGF-I gene transcription. Interestingly, when endotoxin-treated rats
were treated with GH, there was a marked increase in proinflammatory cytokine
gene expression in the liver. If such a response were to occur in humans, this
might provide a partial explanation for the adverse effect of GH treatment
reported in critically ill patients.

PMID: 17327369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Endocrinology. 2007 May;148(5):1977-86. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Loss of sexually dimorphic liver gene expression upon hepatocyte-specific
deletion of Stat5a-Stat5b locus.

Holloway MG(1), Cui Y, Laz EV, Hosui A, Hennighausen L, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Hepatocyte-specific, albumin-Cre recombinase-mediated deletion of the entire
mouse Stat5a-Stat5b locus was carried out to evaluate the role of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a and 5b (STAT5ab) in the
sex-dependent transcriptional actions of GH in the liver. The resultant
hepatocyte STAT5ab-deficient mice were fertile, and unlike global
STAT5b-deficient male mice, postnatal body weight gain was normal, despite a 50% 
decrease in serum IGF-I. Whole-liver STAT5ab RNA decreased by approximately
65-85%, and residual STAT5 immunostaining was observed in a minority of the
hepatocytes, indicating incomplete excision by Cre-recombinase. Quantitative PCR 
analysis of 20 sexually dimorphic, liver-expressed genes revealed significant
down-regulation of 10 of 11 male-specific genes in livers of male hepatocyte
STAT5ab-deficient mice. Class I female-specific liver genes were markedly
up-regulated (de-repressed), whereas the expression of class II female genes,
belonging to the Cyp3a subfamily, was unaffected by the loss of hepatocyte
STAT5ab. STAT5ab is thus required in the liver for positive regulation of
male-specific genes and for negative regulation of a subset of female-specific
genes. Continuous GH infusion strongly induced (>500-fold) the class II female
gene Cyp3a16 in both wild-type and hepatocyte STAT5ab-deficient male mice,
indicating sex-specific transcriptional regulation by GH that is STAT5ab
independent. In contrast, hepatocyte STAT5ab deficiency abolished the strong
suppression of the male-specific Cyp2d9 by continuous GH seen in control mouse
liver. Analysis of global STAT5a-deficient mice indicated no essential
requirement of STAT5a for expression of these sex-specific liver Cyp genes. Thus,
the major loss of liver sexual dimorphism in hepatocyte STAT5ab-deficient mice
can primarily be attributed to the loss of STAT5b.

PMCID: PMC3282149
PMID: 17317776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;156(2):155-65.

Growth hormone secretion and immunological function of a male patient with a
homozygous STAT5b mutation.

Walenkamp MJ(1), Vidarsdottir S, Pereira AM, Karperien M, van Doorn J, van
Duyvenvoorde HA, Breuning MH, Roelfsema F, Kruithof MF, van Dissel J, Janssen R, 
Wit JM, Romijn JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
m.j.e.walenkamp@humc.nl.

OBJECTIVE: STAT5b is a component of the GH signaling pathway. Recently, we
described a 31-year-old male patient (height, -5.9 SDS) with a novel homozygous
inactivating mutation in the STAT5b gene. The purpose of this study is to
describe the phenotype in detail, including GH secretion and immunological
function. In addition, we report four family members of this patient, all
heterozygous carriers of the mutation.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty-four hour GH and prolactin secretion characteristics
were assessed by blood sampling at 10-min intervals. An IGF-I generation test was
performed. Monocyte function was tested by stimulation of whole blood with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the presence or absence of Interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma). In addition, T cell function was determined by measuring
proliferative responses of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) after
stimulation by various polyclonal activators and Interleukin-2 (IL-2). Clinical
and biochemical characteristics were determined in the carriers of the mutation.
RESULTS: GH secretory parameters were comparable with that of healthy male
controls (mean fat percentage 25), but likely increased in relation to the
patient's 40% body fat. The regularity of GH secretion was diminished. Prolactin 
secretion was increased by sixfold. The IGF-I generation test showed a small
increase in IGF-I and IGF-binding protein-3 on lower GH doses and an increase in 
IGF-I to -2.4 SDS on the highest dose of GH. In vitro, IL-12p40, IL 10, and
tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) production rates by PBMC increased to
values within the normal range upon stimulation of LPS. Heterozygous carriers of 
the mutation did not show abnormalities, although the height of the males was
below the normal range.
CONCLUSIONS: This report shows that GH and prolactin secretion were increased in 
this patient homozygous for a new STAT5b mutation. Although STAT5b plays a role
in signaling within immune cells, clinical immunodeficiency is not an obligatory 
phenomenon of STAT5b deficiency per se. Heterozygous carriers of a STAT5b
mutation show no signs of GH insensitivity.

PMID: 17287404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2007 Jan;115(1):17-23.

Modulation of circulating IGF-I and IGFBP-3 levels by hormonal regulators of
energy homeostasis in obese children.

Woelfle JF(1), Harz K, Roth C.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
joachim.woelfle@ukb.uni-bonn.de

Growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) are key factors in
the control of somatic growth. Recent work revealed a critical role for the
transcription factor STAT5b in GH stimulated IGF-I gene expression. In obesity,
the normal regulation of the GH/IGF-I axis is disturbed, with normal levels of
circulating IGF-I despite blunted GH secretion. We hypothesized that leptin or
other hormonal regulators of energy homeostasis, which can activate
Stat5b-regulated gene expression or exert an effect on GH secretion, might be
able to substitute for GH in terms of IGF-I synthesis. Thus, the aim of this
study was to identify potential regulators of IGF-I serum levels in obesity with 
a particular focus on the interaction of leptin and IGF-I. In a cross-sectional
study, we measured hormonal and auxiological parameters in 99 obese children who 
were referred to our obesity outpatient clinic and analysed correlations between 
unadjusted hormone levels and between hormone concentrations expressed as SDS
values, adjusted for sex, age, and/or puberty and BMI. Serum concentrations of
IGF-I correlated highly significant with IGFBP-3, leptin, fasting ghrelin and
insulin (p<0.001). However, when expressing hormone levels as SDS values, only
leptin SDS and IGFBP-3 SDS correlated significantly with IGF-I SDS (p<0.01). This
correlation between leptin SDS and IGF-I SDS was more pronounced in prepubertal
and in male subjects, with increasing IGF-I SDS values paralleling an increase in
leptin SDS tertiles in prepubertal subjects. In linear regression analyses,
leptin SDS, IGFBP-3 SDS and BMI SDS contributed significantly to the variation of
IGF-I SDS values, and explained 53.3% of the variability of IGF-I SDS levels in
male subjects.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we demonstrated a strong
correlation of age and sex-adjusted standard deviation scores (SDS) for IGF-I and
leptin in obese children, which is modulated by sex, pubertal stage and body
weight. Whether this association results from a direct induction of hepatic IGF-I
gene expression by leptin or reflects a more complex interrelationship between
IGF-I and obesity-related factors should be subject of future research.

PMID: 17286229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Endocrinology. 2007 May;148(5):2326-34. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Decidual prolactin silences the expression of genes detrimental to pregnancy.

Bao L(1), Tessier C, Prigent-Tessier A, Li F, Buzzio OL, Callegari EA, Horseman
ND, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612-7342, USA.

Although the main role of prolactin (PRL) in pregnant rodents is to sustain
progesterone production by the corpus luteum, progesterone treatment of PRL or
PRL receptor (PRL-R) null mice is unable to prevent fetal loss. We have
previously shown that the rat decidua is a site of PRL production and action. In 
this report, we examined the hypothesis, using PRL null mice and rat decidual
cell culture, that the absence of this hormone leads to the expression in the
decidua of genes detrimental to pregnancy. The results show that decidual growth 
is normal in PRL null mice treated with PRL, progesterone, or their combination. 
However, the decidua of mice treated with progesterone starts expressing IL-6 and
20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20alpha-HSD), two proteins absent from the 
decidua of wild-type mice and involved, respectively, in inflammation and
progesterone catabolism. The expression of both IL-6 and 20alpha-HSD is prevented
by PRL treatment. Our results further suggest that PRL inhibition of 20alpha-HSD 
expression is at the level of transcription and that decidual PRL (dPRL) inhibits
20alpha-HSD promoter activity. Inhibitors of Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) but not other 
kinases prevent dPRL down-regulation of the 20alpha-HSD promoter. Furthermore,
cotransfection of the 20alpha-HSD promoter with expression vectors of
constitutively active PRL-R, Jak2, or signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (Stat5b) leads to substantial inhibition of promoter activity.
Taken together, our investigation provides an explanation for the inability of
progesterone to sustain pregnancy in PRL null mice and suggests that dPRL plays
an important role in pregnancy by repressing the expression of IL-6 and
20alpha-HSD in the decidua. The study also demonstrates that PRL signals through 
the Jak2/Stat5 pathway to down-regulate 20alpha-HSD expression in the decidua.

PMID: 17255200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;38(1-2):19-34.

Growth hormone stimulates adipogenesis of 3T3-L1 cells through activation of the 
Stat5A/5B-PPARgamma pathway.

Kawai M(1), Namba N, Mushiake S, Etani Y, Nishimura R, Makishima M, Ozono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Growth hormone-deficient (GHD) patients show a decreased number of adipocytes,
which is normalized by GH replacement, indicating an adipogenic effect of GH.
However, the precise mechanisms underlying this effect remain to be clarified. In
this study, we investigated the adipogenic effect of GH. GH stimulated MDI
(3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, dexamethasone, and insulin)-induced adipogenesis of
3T3-L1 cells with early induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors 
(PPAR)gamma2 expression. This adipogenic effect of GH was suppressed by
overexpression of Stat5A mutant (Stat5A-Y694F), a transcriptional suppressor for 
the GH-Stat5A/5B signaling pathway, with the reduction of PPARgamma2 expression. 
Next, we investigated the relationship between Stat5A/5B and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP)beta/delta orPPARgamma in 3T3-L1 cells. Stat5A/5B
stimulated C/EBPbeta- and C/EBPdelta-induced adipogenesis with enhancement of
PPARgamma2 expression. In addition, Stat5A/5B enhanced the transcriptional
activity of C/EBPbeta/delta in the PPARgamma gene promoter. Furthermore,
Stat5A/5B stimulated PPARgamma-induced adipogenesis and enhanced the
transcriptional activity of PPARgamma. These results suggest that the
GH-Stat5A/5B signaling pathway stimulates adipogenesis in cooperation with
C/EBPbeta/delta and PPARgamma. To completely understand the effect of GH, cDNA
microarray analysis was performed to screen genes affected by GH during
MDI-induced adipogenesis. Among 4277 genes, 18 and 19 genes were up- and
down-regulated respectively. cDNA microarray analysis also indicated the
up-regulation of PPARgamma and the modulation of expression of genes coding for
growth factors or growth factor receptors, suggesting that GH stimulates
adipogenesis in association with the modulation of cell growth. Thus, the
GH-Stat5A/B signaling pathway stimulates adipogenesis through two distinct steps.
In addition, cDNA microarray data provide us the further insights underlying the 
adipogenic effect of GH.

PMID: 17242167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007 Apr 1;73(7):923-33. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

Induction of CYP2C12 expression in senescent male rats is well correlated to an
increase of HNF3beta expression, while the decline of CYP2C11 expression is
unlikely due to a decrease of STAT5 activation.

Wauthier V(1), Dubois P, Verbeeck RK, Calderon PB.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pharmacocinétique, Métabolisme, Nutrition, et Toxicologie (PMNT),
Département des sciences pharmaceutiques, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium.

Ageing affects drugs metabolism influencing the therapeutic efficacy and safety
of drugs. By using the experimental model of aged male rats, we investigated the 
influence of ageing on some CYP2C isoforms, the most important CYP450 sub-family 
in rats. The activity of the male specific CYP2C11 is decreased by 55% in
senescent male rats. This correlates with a significant reduction of both protein
content (80%) and mRNA (60%) indicating a demasculinization process. The
expression of CYP2C12, a female specific isoform, is induced in senescent male
rats indicating a feminization process. Neither the activity nor the expression
of CYP2C6, a female predominant isoform, is modified in senescent male rats.
Thereafter, certain putative GH mediators like some liver enriched transcription 
factors (LETFs) or STAT5b were investigated. The amount of HNF3beta mRNA, a
transcription factor involved in the up-regulation of CYP2C12, has been shown to 
increase by about three-fold in senescent male rats. With regard to STAT5b, which
has been reported to be involved in the male specific regulation of CYP2C11,
large amounts of phosphorylated STAT5 were observed in the liver of senescent
male rats. These results indicate that while the induction of CYP2C12 during
ageing could be due, at least partially, to the enhanced HNF3beta expression, the
decline of CYP2C11 is unlikely related to a decrease of STAT5 activation.

PMID: 17239351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Exp Med. 2007 Jan 22;204(1):65-71. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Helper T cell IL-2 production is limited by negative feedback and STAT-dependent 
cytokine signals.

Villarino AV(1), Tato CM, Stumhofer JS, Yao Z, Cui YK, Hennighausen L, O'Shea JJ,
Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. alejandro.villarino@ucsf.edu

Although required for many fundamental immune processes, ranging from
self-tolerance to pathogen immunity, interleukin (IL)-2 production is transient, 
and the mechanisms underlying this brevity remain unclear. These studies reveal
that helper T cell IL-2 production is limited by a classic negative feedback loop
that functions autonomously or in collaboration with other common gamma chain
(IL-4 and IL-7) and IL-6/IL-12 family cytokines (IL-12 and IL-27). Consistent
with this model for cytokine-dependent regulation, they also demonstrate that the
inhibitory effect can be mediated by several signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) family transcription factors, namely STAT5, STAT4, and
STAT6. Collectively, these findings establish that IL-2 production is limited by 
a network of autocrine and paracrine signals that are readily available during
acute inflammatory responses and, thus, provide a cellular and molecular basis
for its transient pattern of expression.

PMCID: PMC2118423
PMID: 17227909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4368-75. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Nonredundant roles for Stat5a/b in directly regulating Foxp3.

Yao Z(1), Kanno Y, Kerenyi M, Stephens G, Durant L, Watford WT, Laurence A,
Robinson GW, Shevach EM, Moriggl R, Hennighausen L, Wu C, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892-1820, USA.

Stats (signal transducers and activators of transcription) regulate multiple
aspects of T-cell fate. T regulatory (Treg) cells are a critical subset that
limits immune responses, but the relative importance of Stat5a/b versus Stat3 for
Treg cell development has been contentious. We observed that peripheral
CD25(+)CD4(+) T cells were reduced in Stat5(DeltaN) mice; however, the levels of 
Foxp3, a transcription factor that is critical for Treg cells, were normal in
splenic CD4(+) T cells even though they were reduced in the thymus. In contrast, 
complete deletion of Stat5a/b (Stat5(-/-)) resulted in dramatic reduction in
CD25- or Foxp3-expressing CD4(+) T cells. An intrinsic requirement was
demonstrated by reduction of Stat5a/b in CD4-expressing cells and by stem cell
transplantation using Stat5(-/-) fetal liver cells. Stat5a/b were also required
for optimal induction of Foxp3 in vitro and bound directly to the Foxp3 gene.
Reduction of Stat3 in T cells did not reduce the numbers of Treg cells in the
thymus or spleen; however, Stat3 was required for IL-6-dependent down-regulation 
of Foxp3. Therefore, we conclude that Stat5a/b have an essential, nonredundant
role in regulating Treg cells, and that Stat3 and Stat5a/b appear to have
opposing roles in the regulation of Foxp3.

PMCID: PMC1885496
PMID: 17227828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Lin Chuang Er Bi Yan Hou Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Oct;20(20):931-3, 936.

[Expression and its significance of STAT3, STAT5, Survivin and Ki67 in nasal NK/T
cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yue L(1), Cheng J, Zhang Pf, Lin G, Yi Z, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Institute of Otolaryngology, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou,
350005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression and its significance of STAT3, STAT5, Survivin
and Ki67 in the Epstein-Barr virus associated nasal NK/T cell lymphoma.
METHOD: The expression of STAT3, STAT5, Survivin and Ki67 were detected with
immunohistochemistry in 25 cases of nasal NK/T cell lymphoma, and their
relationship was analyzed. Nasal cavity tissues from 20 cases of chronic
sinusitis were as the control group.
RESULT: The positive rates of STAT3 in the lymphoma and in control group were 56%
and 10%, respectively (P <0.01). The positive rates of STAT5 in the lymphoma and 
in control group were 68% and 15%, respectively (P <0.01). The positive rates of 
Survivin and Ki67 of nasal NK/T cell-lymphoma were 68% and 72%, respectively; but
it in the control group was 0% and 20%, respectively, P <0.01. The expression of 
STAT3 was positively related to that of Survivin and Ki67(r =0. 428, P <0. 05 and
r =0. 704, P <0. 01); The expression of STAT5 was not related to that of Survivin
and Ki67.
CONCLUSION: The pathway of STAT may play a role in the development of nasal NK/T 
cell lymphoma. STAT maybe take part in the formation of nasal NK/T cell lymphoma 
through induction of Survivin and Ki67.

PMID: 17225522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3906-14. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

Myeloproliferative disease induced by TEL-PDGFRB displays dynamic range
sensitivity to Stat5 gene dosage.

Cain JA(1), Xiang Z, O'Neal J, Kreisel F, Colson A, Luo H, Hennighausen L,
Tomasson MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University
Siteman Cancer Center, 550 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Expression of the constitutively activated TEL/PDGFbetaR fusion protein is
associated with the t(5;12)(q33;p13) chromosomal translocation found in a subset 
of patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. TEL/PDGFbetaR activates
multiple signal transduction pathways in cell-culture systems, and expression of 
the TEL-PDGFRB fusion gene induces myeloproliferative disease (MPD) in mice. We
used gene-targeted mice to characterize the contribution of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat) and Src family genes to TEL-PDGFRB-mediated
transformation in methylcellulose colony and murine bone marrow
transduction/transplantation assays. Fetal liver hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells harboring targeted deletion of both Stat5a and Stat5b
(Stat5ab(null/null)) genes were refractory to transformation by TEL-PDGFRB in
methylcellulose colony assays. Notably, these cell populations were maintained in
Stat5ab(null/null) fetal livers and succumbed to transformation by c-Myc.
Surprisingly, targeted disruption of either Stat5a or Stat5b alone also impaired 
TEL-PDGFRB-mediated transformation. Survival of TPiGFP-->Stat5a(-/-) and
TPiGFP-->Stat5a(+/-) mice was significantly prolonged, demonstrating significant 
sensitivity of TEL-PDGFRB-induced MPD to the dosage of Stat5a.
TEL-PDGFRB-mediated MPD was incompletely penetrant in TPiGFP-->Stat5b(-/-) mice. 
In contrast, Src family kinases Lyn, Hck, and Fgr and the Stat family member
Stat1 were dispensable for TEL-PDGFRB disease. Together, these data demonstrate
that Stat5a and Stat5b are dose-limiting mediators of TEL-PDGFRB-induced
myeloproliferation.

PMCID: PMC1874559
PMID: 17218386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2007;313:85-100.

The theory of APL revisited.

Scaglioni PP(1), Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue, NY, New York 10021, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with reciprocal and balanced
chromosomal translocations always involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARa) gene on chromosome 17 and variable partner genes (X genes) on distinct
chromosomes. RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the majority of APL cases, and in 
a few cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b genes. As a consequence, X-RARalpha
and RARalpha-X fusion genes are generated encoding aberrant chimeric proteins
that exert critical oncogenic functions. Here we will integrate some of the most 
recent findings in APL research in a unified model and discuss some of the
outstanding questions that remain to be addressed.

PMID: 17217040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1489-97. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

Postnatal body growth is dependent on the transcription factors signal
transducers and activators of transcription 5a/b in muscle: a role for
autocrine/paracrine insulin-like growth factor I.

Klover P(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Building 8, Room 107, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0822, USA. kloverp@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1486-8.

The transcription factors signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT)5a and STAT5b (STAT5) are essential mediators of many actions of GH,
including transcription of the IGF-I gene. Here, we present evidence that
skeletal muscle STAT5 is important for postnatal growth and suggest that this is 
conveyed by the production of localized IGF-I. To investigate the role of STAT5
signaling in skeletal muscle, mice with a skeletal-muscle-specific deletion of
the Stat5a and Stat5b genes (Stat5MKO mice) were used. IGF-I mRNA levels were
reduced by 60% in muscle tissue of these mice. Despite only a 15% decrease in
circulating IGF-I, 8-wk-old male Stat5MKO mice displayed approximately 20%
reduction in body weight that was accounted for by a reduction in lean mass. The 
skeletons of Stat5MKO mice were found to be smaller than controls, indicating the
growth defect was not restricted to skeletal muscle. These results demonstrate an
as yet unreported critical role for STAT5 in skeletal muscle for local IGF-I
production and postnatal growth and suggest the skeletal muscle as a major site
of GH action.

PMID: 17158201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Am J Pathol. 2006 Dec;169(6):1999-2013.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b promotes mucosal tolerance in
pediatric Crohn's disease and murine colitis.

Han X(1), Osuntokun B, Benight N, Loesch K, Frank SJ, Denson LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and
the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, MLC 2010, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) regulates anabolic metabolism via activation of the STAT5b
transcription factor and reduces mucosal inflammation in colitis. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma suppresses mucosal inflammation and 
is regulated by GH through STAT5b. We hypothesized that the GH:STAT5b axis
influences susceptibility to colitis via regulation of local PPARgamma abundance.
Colon biopsies from children with newly diagnosed Crohn's disease (CD) and
controls were exposed to GH in short-term organ culture. Trinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid (TNBS) administration was used to induce colitis in STAT5b-deficient mice
and wild-type controls, with and without rosiglitazone pretreatment. GH receptor,
STAT5b, PPARgamma, and nuclear factor kappaB activation and expression were
determined. Epithelial cell GH receptor expression and GH-dependent STAT5b
activation and PPARgamma expression were reduced in CD colon. STAT5b-deficient
mice exhibited reduced basal PPARgamma nuclear abundance and developed more
severe proximal colitis after TNBS administration. This was associated with a
significant increase in mucosal nuclear factor kappaB activation at baseline and 
after TNBS administration. Rosiglitazone ameliorated colitis in wild-type mice
but not STAT5b-deficient mice. GH-dependent STAT5b activation is impaired in
affected CD colon and contributes to chronic mucosal inflammation via
down-regulation of local PPARgamma expression. Therapeutic activation of the
GH:STAT5b axis therefore represents a novel target for restoring both normal
anabolic metabolism and mucosal tolerance in CD.

PMCID: PMC1762482
PMID: 17148664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Oct;1079:198-204.

Upregulation of Foxp3 expression in mouse and human Treg is IL-2/STAT5 dependent:
implications for the NOD STAT5B mutation in diabetes pathogenesis.

Murawski MR(1), Litherland SA, Clare-Salzler MJ, Davoodi-Semiromi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, 1600 SW Archer Road, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Regulatory T cells (Treg), characterized as CD4(+)/CD25(+hi) T cells, are
critical for sustaining and promoting immune tolerance. Treg are highly dependent
on IL-2 and IL-2 signaling to maintain their numbers and function and
interruption of this pathway promotes autoimmunity. The transcription factor,
Foxp3, is also required for Treg function as defective Foxp3 promotes
autoimmunity in both mice and humans. We previously reported a point mutation in 
the DNA-binding domain of the NOD STAT5B gene that limits DNA binding when
compared to wild-type STAT5 mice. Based on the presence of five STAT5B consensus 
sequences in the Foxp3 promotor, we hypothesized a critical linkage between IL-2 
signaling/STAT5B and Foxp3 expression in Treg. Our data show IL-2 activates
long-form (LF) STAT5 and sustains Foxp3 expression in Treg. In contrast,
CD4(+)/CD25(-) T cells do not active LF STAT5 and do not express Foxp3 under the 
same conditions. In addition, blocking LF STAT5 activation with a Jak inhibitor
(AG-490) significantly reduced Foxp3 expression in Treg. Examination of human
Treg using flow cytometry and intracellular staining for Foxp3 expression
likewise demonstrates that IL-2 maintains Foxp3 expression through LF STAT5
signaling. These studies reveal a critical link between IL-2 mediated JAK-STAT5
signaling and the maintenance of Foxp3 expression in Treg of mice and humans.

PMID: 17130555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):6889-95.

Functional interaction of common gamma-chain and growth hormone receptor
signaling apparatus.

Adriani M(1), Garbi C, Amodio G, Russo I, Giovannini M, Amorosi S, Matrecano E,
Cosentini E, Candotti F, Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

We previously reported on an X-linked SCID (X-SCID) patient, who also had
peripheral growth hormone (GH) hyporesponsiveness and abnormalities of the
protein phosphorylation events following GH receptor (GHR) stimulation. In the
present study, we examined a potential role of common cytokine receptor
gamma-chain (gammac) in GHR signaling using EBV-transformed lymphocytes from
healthy subjects and gammac-negative X-SCID patients. We demonstrated that the
proliferative response to GH stimulation of the B cell lines of gammac-negative
patients was impaired despite a comparable cellular expression of GHR molecules
to controls. In patients, after GH stimulation, no phosphorylation of STAT5 was
observed. In addition, the molecule localization through confocal microscopy
revealed that in B cell lines of patients no nuclear translocation of STAT5b
following GH stimulation occurred differently from controls. Biochemical analysis
of the nuclear extracts of gammac-negative cell lines provided further evidence
that the amount of STAT5b and its phosphorylated form did not increase following 
GH stimulation. In patients, cells reconstituted with wild-type gammac abnormal
biochemical and functional events were restored resulting in nuclear
translocation of STAT5. Confocal experiments revealed that GHR and gammac were
colocalized on the cell membrane. Our study demonstrates the existence of a
previously unappreciated relationship between GHR-signaling pathway and gammac,
which is required for the activation of STAT5b in B cell lines. These data also
confirm that growth failure in X-SCID is primarily related to the genetic
alteration of the IL2RG gene.

PMID: 17082603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;66(20):9948-56.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5b activation enhances
hepatocellular carcinoma aggressiveness through induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Lee TK(1), Man K, Poon RT, Lo CM, Yuen AP, Ng IO, Ng KT, Leonard W, Fan ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong,
China.

Poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is associated with a high
potential of vascular invasion and metastasis. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) is a key event in the tumor invasion process. Recently, signal transducers 
and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) has been linked to tumor progression by
EMT induction. However, the precise roles of STAT5 genes (STAT5a and STAT5b) in
human epithelial cancers have not been elucidated clearly. The aim of this study 
is to analyze the roles of STAT5 isoforms in HCC progression using HCC clinical
samples. We showed that activation of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, was found in HCC
clinical samples and its expression was significantly associated with younger age
(P = 0.037), advanced tumor stages (P = 0.003), venous infiltration (P = 0.016), 
microsatellite formation (P = 0.024), multiple tumor nodules (P = 0.02), and poor
patient survival. To specifically investigate the mechanism underlying
constitutive activation of STAT5b in HCC, EGFP-HBX was introduced into Huh-7
cells. STAT5b activation in HCC is at least partially mediated by HBX activation.
Ectopic STAT5b transfection conferred increased HCC cell motility and
invasiveness by induction of EMT changes. In conclusion, STAT5b activation
enhanced HCC aggressiveness by induction of EMT, which was possibly mediated by
HBX activation. STAT5b could serve as a novel molecular target for HCC treatment.

PMID: 17047057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Oncogene. 2007 Apr 19;26(18):2585-94. Epub 2006 Oct 16.

Urokinase receptor primes cells to proliferate in response to epidermal growth
factor.

Jo M(1), Thomas KS, Takimoto S, Gaultier A, Hsieh EH, Lester RD, Gonias SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) expresses mitogenic activity by a mechanism that
requires the EGF receptor (EGFR). We report that murine embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) proliferate in response to EGF only when these cells express the urokinase
receptor (uPAR). EGFR expression was equivalent in uPAR-/- and uPAR+/+ MEFs. In
response to EGF, these cells demonstrated equivalent overall EGFR tyrosine
phosphorylation and ERK/MAP kinase activation; however, phosphorylation of
Tyr-845 in the EGFR, which has been implicated in cell growth, was substantially 
decreased in uPAR-/- MEFs. STAT5b activation also was decreased. As Tyr-845 is a 
c-Src target, we overexpressed c-Src in uPAR-/- MEFs and rescued EGF mitogenic
activity. Rescue also was achieved by expressing murine but not human uPAR,
suggesting a role for autocrine uPAR cell-signaling. In MDA-MB 231 breast cancer 
cells, EGF mitogenic activity was blocked by uPAR gene silencing, with antibodies
that block uPA-binding to uPAR, and with a synthetic peptide that disrupts
uPAR-dependent cell signaling. Again, c-Src overexpression rescued the mitogenic 
activity of EGF. We conclude that uPAR-dependent cell-signaling may prime cells
to proliferate in response to EGF by promoting Tyr-845 phosphorylation and STAT5b
activation. The importance of this pathway depends on the c-Src level in the
cell.

PMID: 17043637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Int Immunol. 2006 Dec;18(12):1681-90. Epub 2006 Oct 11.

Genetic background influences Th cell differentiation by controlling the capacity
for IL-2-induced IL-4 production by naive CD4+ T cells.

Yagi J(1), Arimura Y, Takatori H, Nakajima H, Iwamoto I, Uchiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tokyo Women's Medical University
School of Medicine, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.
jyagi1@research.twmu.ac.jp

Comparative studies using T(h)2-prone BALB/c and T(h)1-prone C57BL/6 mice were
performed to clarify the influence of genetic background on T(h) cell
differentiation. The results showed IL-4, the production of which is induced by
IL-2, to be much more abundantly produced by BALB/c naive CD4(+) T cells than by 
C57BL/6 naive CD4(+) T cells, thereby leading to a tendency for differentiation
toward T(h)2 in BALB/c naive CD4(+) T cells. This difference in IL-4 production
between the two naive CD4(+) T cells appeared to be attributable to specific
intracellular signaling events. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 
5 (STAT5) was preferentially activated by IL-2 in CD4(+) T cells developing in
BALB/c in contrast to the corresponding cells in C57BL/6. In addition, IL-4 also 
induced stronger STAT5 activation in CD4(+) T cells developing in BALB/c than in 
those developing in C57BL/6, whereas STAT6 was equally activated in these two
cells. Further results supported the involvement of STAT5 in the difference in
T(h) cell differentiation between BALB/c and C57BL/6 naive CD4(+) T cells.
STAT5A(-)(/)(-) naive CD4(+) T cells with the BALB/c genetic background showed
markedly less IL-2-induced IL-4 production than BALB/c naive CD4(+) T cells.
Conversely, forced expression of the constitutively active forms of STAT5A and
STAT5B in C57BL/6 naive CD4(+) T cells promoted the differentiation of T(h)2
cells. Thus, our results indicate IL-2-induced IL-4 production by naive CD4(+) T 
cells, in which STAT5 activation is involved and directly controlled by the
genetic background, to influence T(h) cell differentiation in murine strains.

PMID: 17035345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Pediatrics. 2006 Nov;118(5):e1584-92. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

Characterization of immunodeficiency in a patient with growth hormone
insensitivity secondary to a novel STAT5b gene mutation.

Bernasconi A(1), Marino R, Ribas A, Rossi J, Ciaccio M, Oleastro M, Ornani A, Paz
R, Rivarola MA, Zelazko M, Belgorosky A.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan, Immunology Service, Combate de los Pozos 1881,
C1245AAM Buenos Aires, Argentina.

STAT5 proteins are components of the common growth hormone and interleukin 2
family of cytokines' signaling pathway. Mutations in the STAT5b gene, described
in 2 patients, lead to growth hormone insensitivity that resembles Laron
syndrome. Clinical immunodeficiency was also present, although immunologic
defects have not been well characterized thus far. Here we describe a 16-year-old
girl who suffered generalized eczema and recurrent infections of the skin and
respiratory tract since birth. She also suffered severe chronic lung disease and 
multiple episodes of herpetic keratitis. Clinical features of congenital growth
hormone deficiency were observed, such as persistently low growth rate, severely 
delayed bone age, and postnatal growth failure resulting from growth hormone
resistance. This combined phenotype of growth hormone insensitivity and
immunodeficiency was attributable to a homozygous C-->T transition that resulted 
in a nonsense mutation at codon 152 in exon 5 of the STAT5b gene. This novel
mutation determined a complete absence of protein expression. The main
immunologic findings were moderate T-cell lymphopenia (1274/mm3), normal CD4/CD8 
ratio, and very low numbers of natural killer (18/mm3) and gammadelta T (5/mm3)
cells. T cells presented a chronically hyperactivated phenotype. In vitro T-cell 
proliferation and interleukin 2 signaling were impaired. CD4+ and CD25+
regulatory T cells were significantly diminished, and they probably contributed
to the signs of homeostatic mechanism deregulation found in this patient. This
new case, in accordance with 2 previously reported cases, definitely demonstrates
the significant role of the STAT5b protein in mediating growth hormone actions.
Furthermore, the main immunologic findings bring about an explanation for the
clinical immunodeficiency features and reveal for the first time the relevant
role of STAT5b as a key protein for T-cell functions in humans.

PMID: 17030597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jan;21(1):293-311. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

In vivo transcript profiling and phylogenetic analysis identifies suppressor of
cytokine signaling 2 as a direct signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b target in liver.

Vidal OM(1), Merino R, Rico-Bautista E, Fernandez-Perez L, Chia DJ, Woelfle J,
Ono M, Lenhard B, Norstedt G, Rotwein P, Flores-Morales A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet 17176
Stockholm, Sweden.

The GH-activated signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) is 
an essential regulator of somatic growth. The transcriptional response to STAT5b 
in liver is poorly understood. We have combined microarray-based expression
profiling and phylogenetic analysis of gene regulatory regions to study the
interplay between STAT5b and GH in the regulation of hepatic gene expression. The
acute transcriptional response to GH in vivo after a single pulse of GH was
studied in the liver of hypophysectomized rats in the presence of either
constitutively active or a dominant-negative STAT5b delivered by adenoviral gene 
transfer. Genes showing differential expression in these two situations were
analyzed for the presence of STAT5b binding sites in promoter and intronic
regions that are phylogenetically conserved between rats and humans. Using this
approach, we showed that most rapid transcriptional effects of GH in the liver
are not results of direct actions of STAT5b. In addition, we identified novel
STAT5b cis regulatory elements in genes such as Frizzled-4, epithelial membrane
protein-1, and the suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2). Detailed analysis 
of SOCS2 promoter demonstrated its direct transcriptional regulation by STAT5b
upon GH stimulation. A novel response element was identified within the first
intron of the human SOCS2 gene composed of an E-box followed by tandem STAT5b
binding sites, both of which are required for full GH responsiveness. In summary,
we demonstrate the power of combining transcript profiling with phylogenetic
sequence analysis to define novel regulatory paradigms.

PMID: 17008382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2705-12.

STAT5 activity in pancreatic beta-cells influences the severity of diabetes in
animal models of type 1 and 2 diabetes.

Jackerott M(1), Møldrup A, Thams P, Galsgaard ED, Knudsen J, Lee YC, Nielsen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen,
Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. jackerott@imbg.ku.dk

Pancreatic beta-cell growth and survival and insulin production are stimulated by
growth hormone and prolactin through activation of the transcription factor
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5. To assess the role of
STAT5 activity in beta-cells in vivo, we generated transgenic mice that expressed
a dominant-negative mutant of STAT5a (DNSTAT5) or constitutive active mutant of
STAT5b (CASTAT5) under control of the rat insulin 1 promoter (RIP). When
subjected to a high-fat diet, RIP-DNSTAT5 mice showed higher body weight,
increased plasma glucose levels, and impairment of glucose tolerance, whereas
RIP-CASTAT5 mice were more glucose tolerant and less hyperleptinemic than
wild-type mice. Although the pancreatic insulin content and relative beta-cell
area were increased in high-fat diet-fed RIP-DNSTAT5 mice compared with wild-type
or RIP-CASTAT5 mice, RIP-DNSTAT5 mice showed reduced beta-cell proliferation at 6
months of age. The inhibitory effect of high-fat diet or leptin on insulin
secretion was diminished in isolated islets from RIP-DNSTAT5 mice compared with
wild-type islets. Upon multiple low-dose streptozotocin treatment, RIP-DNSTAT5
mice exhibited higher plasma glucose levels, lower plasma insulin levels, and
lower pancreatic insulin content than wild-type mice, whereas RIP-CASTAT5 mice
maintained higher levels of plasma insulin. In conclusion, our results indicate
that STAT5 activity in beta-cells influences the susceptibility to experimentally
induced type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17003334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Feb;292(2):E461-8. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Degradation of STAT5 proteins in 3T3-L1 adipocytes is induced by TNF-{alpha} and 
cycloheximide in a manner independent of STAT5A activation.

Floyd ZE(1), Segura BM, He F, Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, 202 Life
Sciences Bldg., Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is a multifunctional cytokine that has
been implicated as a causative factor in obesity-linked insulin resistance. It is
commonly accepted that macrophage-derived TNF-alpha acts in a paracrine manner on
adjacent adipocytes to inhibit the expression of various adipocyte genes and to
attenuate insulin signaling. Several studies have revealed that signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT)5 proteins are modulated during adipogenesis
and can modulate the transcription of some adipocyte genes. In this study, we
demonstrate that TNF-alpha treatment, in the presence of cycloheximide, also
results in the rapid turnover of STAT5A and STAT5B in a process that is
independent of STAT5 activation by tyrosine phosphorylation. In addition, STAT5B 
is more labile than STAT5A under these conditions, suggesting that the COOH
terminus of STAT5 may be involved in the turnover of each protein. Initial
characterization of the TNF-alpha and cycloheximide-mediated degradation of STAT5
indicates that inhibition of the proteasome stabilizes both forms of STAT5 in the
presence of TNF-alpha. In addition, the use of an NF-kappaB inhibitor results in 
the stabilization of STAT5A in the presence of TNF-alpha and cycloheximide,
indicating that the degradation of STAT5 proteins under these conditions may
involve the NF-kappaB pathway. STAT5 proteins are abundantly expressed in mature 
adipocytes and are normally extremely stable proteins under a wide range of
conditions. However, our results demonstrate that the potentiation of
TNF-alpha-mediated signaling in the presence of cyclohexmide is associated with a
significant increase in the degradation of STAT5 proteins in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

PMID: 16985255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):33959-70. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Glucocorticoids repress bcl-X expression in lymphoid cells by recruiting STAT5B
to the P4 promoter.

Rocha-Viegas L(1), Vicent GP, Barañao JL, Beato M, Pecci A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, Instituto de
Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias-CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias
Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The bcl-X gene plays a critical role in apoptosis. Six different isoforms
generated by tissue-specific promoter usage and alternative splicing were
described. Some of them exert opposite effects on cell death. In mammary
epithelial cells glucocorticoids induce bcl-X expression and increase the ratio
bcl-X(L) (antiapoptotic)/bcl-X(S) (apoptotic) by activating P4 promoter, which
contains two hormone response elements. Here we show that, on mouse thymocytes
and T lymphocyte derivative S49 cells, glucocorticoids inhibited transcription
from P4 and decreased the ratio bcl-X(L)/bcl-X(S) favoring apoptosis. Upon
hormonal treatment, glucocorticoid receptor (GR), steroid receptor coactivator-1,
and RNA polymerase II were transiently recruited to P4 promoter, whereas STAT5B
was also recruited but remained bound. Concomitant with the release of GR,
silencing mediator for retinoic acid receptor and thyroid hormone receptor and
histone deacetylase 3 were recruited, histone H3 was deacetylated, and RNA
polymerase II left the promoter. Inhibition of STAT5 activity reverted
glucocorticoid repression to activation of transcription and was accompanied by
stable recruitment of GR and RNA polymerase II to P4.

PMID: 16959781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 1;177(5):2770-4.

Cutting edge: Decreased accumulation and regulatory function of CD4+ CD25(high) T
cells in human STAT5b deficiency.

Cohen AC(1), Nadeau KC, Tu W, Hwa V, Dionis K, Bezrodnik L, Teper A, Gaillard M, 
Heinrich J, Krensky AM, Rosenfeld RG, Lewis DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

We show that STAT5b is important for the in vivo accumulation of CD4+ CD25(high) 
T cells with regulatory cell function. A patient homozygous for a missense A630P 
STAT5b mutation displayed immune dysregulation and decreased numbers of CD4+
CD25(high) T cells. STAT5b(A630P/A630P) CD4+ CD25(high) T cells had low
expression of forkhead box P3 and an impaired ability to suppress the
proliferation of or to kill CD4+ CD25- T cells. Expression of CD25, a component
of the high-affinity IL-2R, was also reduced in response to IL-2 or after in
vitro propagation. The impact of the STAT5b mutation was selective in that
IL-2-mediated up-regulation of the common gamma-chain cytokine receptor and
perforin, and activation-induced expressions of CD154 and IFN-gamma were normal. 
These results indicate that STAT5b propagates an important IL-2-mediated signal
for the in vivo accumulation of functional regulatory T cells.

PMID: 16920911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Horm Res. 2006;66(5):221-30.

Genetic disorders in the growth hormone - insulin-like growth factor-I axis.

Walenkamp MJ(1), Wit JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. m.walenkamp@lumc.nl

In the last few years, our knowledge of genetically determined causes of short
stature has greatly increased by reports of challenging patients, who offered the
opportunity to study genes that play a role in growth. Since the first paper that
showed the etiology of Laron syndrome [Godowski PJ, et al: Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1989;86:8083-8087], many mutations in the growth hormone (GH) receptor have been 
identified. Recently, new mutations or deletions have been found in several
components of the GH-insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) axis: a homozygous
mutation of the GH1 gene, resulting in a bio-inactive GH; mutations in the STAT5b
gene, which plays a major role in the GH signal transduction; a homozygous
missense mutation in the IGF-I gene; heterozygous mutations in the IGF-I receptor
gene and a homozygous deletion of the acid-labile subunit gene. In this mini
review, we describe the clinical and biochemical features of these genetic
defects. Genetic analysis has become essential in the diagnostic workup of a
patient with short stature. However, regarding the time consuming nature of
molecular analysis, it is important to carefully select the patient for specific 
genetic evaluation. To help in this selection process, we developed flowcharts,
based on the recently described patients, that can be used as guidelines in the
diagnostic process of patients with severe short stature of unknown origin.

PMID: 16917171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 15;177(4):2216-23.

Constitutive activation of STAT5 supersedes the requirement for cytokine and TCR 
engagement of CD4+ T cells in steady-state homeostasis.

Taylor DK(1), Walsh PT, LaRosa DF, Zhang J, Burchill MA, Farrar MA, Turka LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The transcription factor STAT5 is one of several signaling mediators activated
via common gamma-chain cytokine receptors. As such, it plays an important role in
lymphocyte survival and proliferation during normal homeostasis as well as under 
lymphopenic conditions. Transgenic mice expressing a constitutively activated
form of STAT5b have been shown previously to contain increased numbers of
peripheral CD4+CD25- T cells. To define the mechanism(s) for this occurrence, we 
have used adoptive transfer studies to examine the effects of STAT5 activity on
steady-state CD4+ T cell homeostasis. We observed that constitutive STAT5
signaling induced 4- to 7-fold increased levels of basal steady-state
proliferation, which was accompanied by a comparable increase in T cell recovery.
Most strikingly, steady-state CD4 T cell proliferation occurred independently of 
both MHC class II and IL-15. These observations demonstrate that the STAT5-driven
pathway is important to lymphocyte homeostasis and can supersede the need for
both TCR engagement and cytokine stimulation. This suggests that the need for TCR
stimulation to induce common gamma-chain cytokine receptor expression, and thus
STAT5 activation, is a key factor in maintaining normal CD4+ T cell homeostasis.

PMID: 16887981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem J. 2006 Dec 1;400(2):367-75.

STAT5 proteins are involved in down-regulation of iron regulatory protein 1 gene 
expression by nitric oxide.

Starzynski RR(1), Gonçalves AS, Muzeau F, Tyrolczyk Z, Smuda E, Drapier JC,
Beaumont C, Lipinski P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Jastrzebiec, ul. Postepu 1, 05-552 Wolka Kosowska,
Poland.

RNA-binding activity of IRP1 (iron regulatory protein 1) is regulated by the
insertion/extrusion of a [4Fe-4S] cluster into/from the IRP1 molecule. NO (nitic 
oxide), whose ability to activate IRP1 by removing its [4Fe-4S] cluster is well
known, has also been shown to down-regulate expression of the IRP1 gene. In the
present study, we examine whether this regulation occurs at the transcriptional
level. Analysis of the mouse IRP1 promoter sequence revealed two conserved
putative binding sites for transcription factor(s) regulated by NO and/or changes
in intracellular iron level: Sp1 (promoter-selective transcription factor 1) and 
MTF1 (metal transcription factor 1), plus GAS (interferon-gamma-activated
sequence), a binding site for STAT (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) proteins. In order to define the functional activity of these
sequences, reporter constructs were generated through the insertion of
overlapping fragments of the mouse IRP1 promoter upstream of the luciferase gene.
Transient expression assays following transfection of HuH7 cells with these
plasmids revealed that while both the Sp1 and GAS sequences are involved in basal
transcriptional activity of the IRP1 promoter, the role of the latter is
predominant. Analysis of protein binding to these sequences in EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) using nuclear extracts from mouse RAW
264.7 macrophages stimulated to synthesize NO showed a significant decrease in
the formation of Sp1-DNA and STAT-DNA complexes, compared with controls. We have 
also demonstrated that the GAS sequence is involved in NO-dependent
down-regulation of IRP1 transcription. Further analysis revealed that levels of
STAT5a and STAT5b in the nucleus and cytosol of NO-producing macrophages are
substantially lower than in control cells. These findings provide evidence that
STAT5 proteins play a role in NO-mediated down-regulation of IRP1 gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC1652831
PMID: 16886906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Anim Breed Genet. 2006 Aug;123(4):284-7.

Polymorphism and chromosomal localization of the porcine signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5B gene (STAT5B).

Ballester M(1), Sardina MT, Folch JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciència Animal i dels Aliments, Facultat de Veterinària,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain. maria.ballester@uab.es

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are a family of
transcription factors. STAT5A and 5B are two highly related proteins encoded by
two distinct genes. Transgenic knockout mice studies have indicated the
importance of STAT5 proteins for the regulation of both lactation and growth
performance. Moreover, different studies determine the role of STAT5 proteins in 
the modulation of adipocyte function. In this study, we sequenced one fragment of
STAT5B gene from animals of six breeds (Duroc, Iberian, Landrace, Large White,
Piétrain and Meishan) to identify genetic variants. A G/A single nucleotide
polymorphism in intron 14 creates a polymorphic PstI restriction site and was
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism
in the six breeds. Allele G was only present in Large White, Piétrain and Meishan
populations, detecting only G allele in this last pig breed. The STAT5B gene was 
located by radiation hybrid mapping to porcine chromosome 12, within the
confidence interval for the fatty acid composition quantitative trait loci,
previously identified in an Iberian x Landrace cross.

PMID: 16882096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 1;26(5):745-56. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Neurotensin stimulates mitogenesis of prostate cancer cells through a novel
c-Src/Stat5b pathway.

Amorino GP(1), Deeble PD, Parsons SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Center, University of Virginia Health
Sciences Center, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Neuroendocrine (NE)-like cells are hypothesized to contribute to the progression 
of prostate cancer by producing factors that enhance the growth, survival or
metastatic capabilities of surrounding tumor cells. Many of the factors known to 
be secreted by NE-like cells, such as neurotensin (NT), parathyroid
hormone-related peptide, serotonin, bombesin, etc., are agonists for
G-protein-coupled receptors, but the signaling pathways activated by these
agonists in prostate tumor cells are not fully defined. Identification of such
pathways could provide insights into novel methods of treating late-stage
disease. Using conditioned culture medium (CM) from LNCaP-derived NE-like cells
(as a source of these agonists) or NT (a prototypical component of CM) to treat
PC3 cells, we found that the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) was
transactivated and that such activation was required for maximal PC3 cell
mitogenesis, as measured by 5-bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine incorporation or cell
number. NT also induced a time-dependent increase in EGFR Tyr(845)
phosphorylation and phosphorylation of c-Src and signal transducer and activator 
of transcription 5b (Stat5b) (a downstream effector of Tyr(845)), events that
were blocked by specific inhibition of c-Src (which mediates Tyr(845)
phosphorylation of EGFR) or of EGFR. Introduction of mutant forms of EGFR
(Tyr(845)) or Stat5b in PC3 cells, or treatment with selective, catalytic
inhibitors of EGFR, c-Src and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) resulted in the
loss of NT-induced stimulation of DNA synthesis, relative to wild-type controls. 
These data indicate that the mitogenic effect of NT on prostate cancer cells
requires transactivation of the EGFR by MMPs and a novel downstream pathway
involving c-Src, phosphorylation of EGFR Tyr(845) and activation of Stat5b.

PMID: 16862179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Endocrinology. 2006 Oct;147(10):4996-5005. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Suppression of prolactin-induced signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b signaling and induction of suppressors of cytokine signaling messenger
ribonucleic acid in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus of the rat during late
pregnancy and lactation.

Anderson GM(1), Beijer P, Bang AS, Fenwick MA, Bunn SJ, Grattan DR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroendocrinology and Department of Anatomy and Structural
Biology, University of Otago School of Medical Sciences, Dunedin 9054, New
Zealand. greg.anderson@anatomy.otago.ac.nz

During late pregnancy and lactation, the tuberoinfundibular dopamine (TIDA)
neurons that regulate prolactin secretion by negative feedback become less able
to produce dopamine in response to prolactin, leading to hyperprolactinemia.
Because prolactin-induced activation of dopamine synthesis in these neurons
requires the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b
(STAT5b) signaling pathway, we investigated whether prolactin-induced STAT5b
signaling is reduced during lactation and whether induction of suppressors of
cytokine signaling (SOCS) mRNAs occur at this time and in late pregnancy. During 
lactation, the ability of exogenous prolactin to induce STAT5 phosphorylation and
STAT5b nuclear translocation was markedly reduced when compared with diestrous
rats. In nonpregnant female rats, acute treatment with ovine prolactin markedly
increased levels of SOCS-1 and -3 and cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein
mRNA in arcuate nucleus micropunches. On gestation d 22, SOCS-1 and SOCS-3 mRNA
levels were 10-fold that on G20. SOCS-1 and -3 and cytokine-inducible
SH2-containing protein mRNA levels were also elevated on lactation d 7. At these 
times, dopaminergic activity was decreased and the rats were hyperprolactinemic. 
The high levels of SOCS mRNA were prevented by bromocriptine pretreatment
(gestation d 22) or pup removal (lactation d 7), which suppressed circulating
prolactin to basal levels. These results demonstrate that around the end of
pregnancy, prolactin loses the ability to activate STAT5b, associated with an
increase in SOCS mRNAs. The loss of this stimulating pathway may underlie the
reduced tuberoinfundibular dopamine neuron dopamine output and hyperprolactinemia
that characterizes late pregnancy and lactation. The high maternal levels of SOCS
mRNAs appear to be dependent on prolactin, presumably acting through an
alternative signaling pathway to STAT5b.

PMID: 16857756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):7007-15.

Physical and functional interactions between Cas and c-Src induce tamoxifen
resistance of breast cancer cells through pathways involving epidermal growth
factor receptor and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b.

Riggins RB(1), Thomas KS, Ta HQ, Wen J, Davis RJ, Schuh NR, Donelan SS, Owen KA, 
Gibson MA, Shupnik MA, Silva CM, Parsons SJ, Clarke R, Bouton AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Division of Endocrinology, University of
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

High expression of the adaptor molecule Cas has been linked to resistance to the 
antiestrogen tamoxifen, both in tissue culture and in human tumors. The aim of
this study was to elucidate the mechanism(s) by which overexpression of Cas
confers resistance to tamoxifen. Cas overexpression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells 
was shown to alleviate both tamoxifen-mediated growth inhibition and induction of
apoptosis. This enhancement of cell proliferation/survival occurred in the
absence of detectable effects on estrogen receptor (ER) transcriptional activity 
under conditions where tamoxifen was present, indicating that Cas-dependent
tamoxifen resistance is not the result of a switch to an ER-negative phenotype or
enhanced responses to the partial agonist activity of tamoxifen. Instead, we
present evidence, suggesting that Cas promotes tamoxifen resistance by
deregulation of alternative cell proliferation pathways, particularly those
mediated through enhanced c-Src protein tyrosine kinase activity arising from
Cas/c-Src interactions. Overexpression of Cas was found to drive endogenous c-Src
into complex with Cas, a process that has been shown previously to cause
up-regulation of c-Src tyrosine kinase activity. MCF-7 cells overexpressing Cas
exhibited increased phosphorylation of two c-Src substrates, Tyr845 in the kinase
domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 5b. Importantly, Cas-dependent protection from 
the antiproliferative effects of tamoxifen was reversed by the expression of
dominant inhibitory variants of these substrates (Y845F EGFR and COOH-terminally 
truncated STAT5b). Based on these findings, we suggest that the
Cas/c-Src/EGFR/STAT5 signaling axis is a major regulator of tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer cell growth and survival.

PMID: 16849545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):6947-54.

Gene expression profiling of acute myeloid leukemia with translocation
t(8;16)(p11;p13) and MYST3-CREBBP rearrangement reveals a distinctive signature
with a specific pattern of HOX gene expression.

Camós M(1), Esteve J, Jares P, Colomer D, Rozman M, Villamor N, Costa D, Carrió
A, Nomdedéu J, Montserrat E, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Hematology Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS,
University of Barcelona, Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) is an infrequent
leukemia subtype with characteristic clinicobiological features. This
translocation leads to fusion of MYST3 (MOZ) and CREBBP (CBP) genes, probably
resulting in a disturbed transcriptional program of a myelomonocytic precursor.
Nonetheless, its gene expression profile is unknown. We have analyzed the gene
expression profile of 23 AML patients, including three with molecularly confirmed
MYST3-CREBBP fusion gene, using oligonucleotide U133A arrays (Affymetrix).
MYST3-CREBBP cases clustered together and clearly differentiated from samples
with PML-RARalpha, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFbeta-MYH11 rearrangements. The relative 
expression of 46 genes, selected according to their differential expression in
the high-density array study, was analyzed by low-density arrays in an additional
series of 40 patients, which included 7 MYST3-CREBBP AML cases. Thus, genes such 
as prolactin (PRL) and proto-oncogene RET were confirmed to be specifically
overexpressed in MYST3-CREBBP samples whereas genes such as CCND2, STAT5A, and
STAT5B were differentially underexpressed in this AML category. Interestingly,
MYST3-CREBBP AML exhibited a characteristic pattern of HOX expression, with
up-regulation of HOXA9, HOXA10, and cofactor MEIS1 and marked down-regulation of 
other homeobox genes. This profile, with overexpression of FLT3, HOXA9, MEIS1,
AKR7A2, CHD3, and APBA2, partially resembles that of AML with MLL rearrangement. 
In summary, this study shows the distinctive gene expression profile of
MYST3-CREBBP AML, with overexpression of RET and PRL and a specific pattern of
HOX gene expression.

PMID: 16849538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Sep;91(9):3482-5. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

Clinical and biochemical characteristics of a male patient with a novel
homozygous STAT5b mutation.

Vidarsdottir S(1), Walenkamp MJ, Pereira AM, Karperien M, van Doorn J, van
Duyvenvoorde HA, White S, Breuning MH, Roelfsema F, Kruithof MF, van Dissel J,
Janssen R, Wit JM, Romijn JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics J6-S, Leiden University Medical Center, P.O. Box
9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

CONTEXT: GH insensitivity can be caused by defects in the GH receptor (GHR) or in
the postreceptor signaling pathway. Recently, two female patients with severe
growth retardation and pulmonary and immunological problems were described with a
defect in STAT5b, a critical intermediary of downstream GHR signaling.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to determine the functional characteristics of a
novel STAT5b mutation and describe the phenotype.
PATIENT: We describe an adult male patient with short stature [-5.9 sd score
(SDS)], delayed puberty, and no history of pulmonary or immunological problems.
GH-binding protein level as well as GH secretion characteristics were normal.
Plasma prolactin level was elevated. Extremely low levels of IGF-I (-6.9 SDS),
IGF-binding protein-3 (-12 SDS), and acid-labile subunit (-7.5 SDS) were found.
RESULTS: We found a homozygous frameshift mutation in the STAT5b gene (nucleotide
1102-3insC, Q368fsX376), resulting in an inactive truncated protein, lacking most
of the DNA binding domain and the SH2-domain.
CONCLUSIONS: This report confirms the essential role of STAT5b in GH signaling in
the human. We show for the first time that immunological or pulmonary problems or
elevated GH secretion are not obligatory signs of STAT5b deficiency, whereas
hyperprolactinemia appears to be part of the syndrome. Therefore, in patients
with severe short stature, signs of GH insensitivity, and a normal GHR, analysis 
of the STAT5b gene is recommended.

PMID: 16787985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006 Sep;34(9):1530-8. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Regulation of constitutive mouse hepatic cytochromes P450 and growth hormone
signaling components by 3-methylcholanthrene.

Lee C(1), Hutson JR, Tzau VK, Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical Sciences Building, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

3-Methylcholanthrene (MC) activates the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and increases
expression of cytochrome P450 (P450) enzymes such as CYP1A1. MC also decreases
expression of CYP2C11, the major hepatic P450 in male rats that is regulated by
pulsatile growth hormone (GH) secretion via a pathway partially dependent on
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b). If disruption of
this GH signaling pathway is important for MC's ability to suppress CYP2C11
transcription, we hypothesize that MC suppresses other male-specific genes (e.g.,
mouse Cyp2d9) regulated by pulsatile GH with STAT5b dependence. We examined the
time course of MC's effects on hepatic P450s and GH signaling components in male 
C57BL/6 mice. P450 content, heme content, and NADPH P450 oxidoreductase activity 
were induced 2.3-, 1.8-, and 1.3-fold, respectively, by MC. MC dramatically
induced CYP1A1 mRNA, protein, and catalytic activity. MC caused a 42% decrease in
CYP2D9 protein, a 28% decrease in CYP2D9 mRNA, and a 27% decrease in testosterone
16alpha-hydroxylation activity. MC caused a pronounced decrease in CYP3A protein;
however, there was no apparent change in testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation
activity, and changes in mRNA levels for CYP3A forms were relatively small.
Expression of GH receptor and major urinary protein 2, a gene regulated by GH
with STAT5b dependence, was decreased by MC at the mRNA level. These results show
that MC suppresses mouse Cyp2d9, a pulsatile GH- and STAT5b-dependent
male-specific gene, via a pretranslational mechanism that may involve disrupted
GH signaling. Mouse CYP3A protein levels are dramatically decreased by MC via a
mechanism that is not yet understood.

PMID: 16782765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Gut. 2007 Jan;56(1):73-81. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

Tumour necrosis factor alpha blockade induces an anti-inflammatory growth hormone
signalling pathway in experimental colitis.

Han X(1), Benight N, Osuntokun B, Loesch K, Frank SJ, Denson LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and
the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neutralisation of tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) restores
systemic growth hormone function in patients with Crohn's disease, and induces
mucosal healing. Anabolic effects of growth hormone depend on activation of the
STAT5 transcription factor. Although it has recently been reported that both
administration of growth hormone and neutralisation of TNFalpha reduce mucosal
inflammation in experimental colitis, whether this involved activation of STAT5
in the gut is not known.
AIM: To determine whether TNFalpha blockade in colitis up regulates a growth
hormone:STAT5 signalling pathway in the colon.
METHODS: Interleukin 10-deficient mice and wild-type controls received growth
hormone or anti-TNFalpha antibody, and T84 human colon carcinoma cells were
treated with TNFalpha or growth hormone. Activation and expression of STAT5b,
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma), NFkappaB/IkappaB
and growth hormone receptor were determined.
RESULTS: Growth hormone activated STAT5b and up regulated expression of PPARgamma
in normal mouse colon; inflamed colon was partially resistant to this. Chronic
administration of growth hormone, nevertheless, significantly reduced activation 
of colonic NFkappaB (p = 0.028). Neutralisation of TNFalpha rapidly increased
abundance of growth hormone receptor, activation of STAT5 and abundance of
PPARgamma in the colon, but reduced activation of NFkappaB in colitis. Growth
hormone activated STAT5, and directly reduced TNFalpha activation of NFkappaB, in
T84 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced activation of colonic STAT5 and expression of PPARgamma may 
contribute to persistent mucosal inflammation in colitis. Up regulation of STAT5 
and PPARgamma, either through neutralisation of TNFalpha or chronic
administration of growth hormone, may exert an anti-inflammatory effect in
inflammatory bowel disease.

PMCID: PMC1856672
PMID: 16777921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Biol Reprod. 2006 Oct;75(4):508-17. Epub 2006 Jun 14.

Involvement of the STAT5 signaling pathway in the regulation of mouse
preimplantation development.

Nakasato M(1), Shirakura Y, Ooga M, Iwatsuki M, Ito M, Kageyama S, Sakai S,
Nagata M, Aoki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8562, Japan.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is an essential
factor in the signal transduction pathways for a number of cytokines that
regulate the growth and differentiation of mammalian cells. In this study, we
investigated the STAT5 signaling pathway in mouse embryos, to elucidate the
mechanism of cytokine signal transduction that regulates preimplantation
development. The results of the RT-PCR analysis showed that both STAT5A and B
were expressed throughout preimplantation development. Immunocytochemistry
revealed that the STAT5A/B proteins were located in the nucleus from the early
1-cell stage to the blastocyst stage. STAT5 activation appeared to be regulated
by Janus kinases (JAKs) and SRC family kinases (SFKs), since inhibitors of these 
kinases inhibited the localization of STAT5 proteins to the nucleus. The JAK
inhibitor Ag490 reduced both the developmental rate of the embryos and the
expression levels of the downstream genes of the JAK-STAT5 signaling pathway.
These findings suggest that STAT5 proteins function in preimplantation
development by mediating the signals from cytokines.

PMID: 16775227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Oct;20(10):2392-405. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Modulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b activity in
breast cancer cells by mutation of tyrosines within the transactivation domain.

Weaver AM(1), Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Internal Medicine, Cancer Center, University of
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent
transcription factors activated by a variety of cytokines and growth factors.
Activation leads to phosphorylation on a conserved tyrosine residue. Although
phosphorylation of STAT5b on Y699 is required for activation, it was previously
shown that in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-overexpressing cell lines, 
three tyrosines (Y725, Y740, and Y743) in the STAT5b transactivation domain are
also phosphorylated upon epidermal growth factor stimulation. The significance of
these additional tyrosine phosphorylation sites was analyzed in the context of
the human breast cancer cell line SKBr3, which overexpresses the EGFR and c-Src. 
When compared with wild-type STAT5b, mutation of Y725 decreased basal and
epidermal growth factor-induced DNA synthesis. In contrast, mutation of Y740
and/or Y743 enhanced basal STAT5b Y699 phosphorylation, basal transcriptional
activity, and basal DNA synthesis compared with wtSTAT5b. This indicates that
Y699 and Y725 are positive regulators and Y740 and Y743 are negative regulators
for STAT5b activity. Anti-phospho-Y740/743-specific antibodies demonstrated that 
the c-Src tyrosine kinase inhibits the phosphorylation of these two sites.
Furthermore, Y740 and Y743 were not detectably phosphorylated in breast cancer
cells overexpressing c-Src, but the Y740/743F mutant increased basal activity
suggesting that the conformation of the transactivation domain is important in
regulating STAT5b activity. Mechanistic insight into the inhibitory action of
Y740 and Y743 may lead to the development of therapeutics that specifically
modulate the activity of STAT5b in breast cancer and potentially other
EGFR/c-Src-overexpressing cancers.

PMID: 16772534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cytokine. 2006 May;34(3-4):143-54. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

A role for STAT5A/B in protection of peripheral T-lymphocytes from postactivation
apoptosis: insights from gene expression profiling.

Gatzka M(1), Piekorz R, Moriggl R, Rawlings J, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38120, USA. gatzka.tina@uci.edu

Activation of the transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B by JAK1 and JAK3
tyrosine kinases is a key event in downstream signaling of gammac (common gamma
chain)-family cytokine receptors in lymphoid cells. STAT5A/B-deficiency in mice
causes, among other consequences, a reduced size and altered composition of the
peripheral T-cell pool with predominance of an activated or memory-like
population (CD4(+)/CD44(high)/CD62L(low)) and a proliferative deficiency
following antigenic stimulation and subsequent IL-2 treatment. To further
elucidate the critical function of STAT5A/B in homeostasis and activation of
murine naïve peripheral T-lymphocytes, we have analyzed global gene expression of
STAT5A/B-deficient versus wild-type splenic T-cells by profiling with
high-density oligonucleotide arrays (Affymetrix). Comparison of (1) basal gene
expression of untreated peripheral STAT5A/B-deficient and control T-cells and (2)
immediate early gene induction upon in vitro stimulation of either population
with IL-2 has revealed differential expression of a broad range of genes
potentially contributing to the defects of STAT5A/B deficient T-cells. In the
context of enhanced apoptotic rates of STAT5A/B(-/-)-T-cells in vivo and upon
TCR-stimulation in culture our data suggest a role for STAT5 in post-activation
survival beyond regulation of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins and hence provide new 
insights into the nature of the late proliferative block in the T-cell
compartment caused by STAT5-deficiency.

PMID: 16757175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Oct;126(10):2272-80. Epub 2006 Jun 1.

STAT5 phosphorylation in malignant melanoma is important for survival and is
mediated through SRC and JAK1 kinases.

Mirmohammadsadegh A(1), Hassan M, Bardenheuer W, Marini A, Gustrau A, Nambiar S, 
Tannapfel A, Bojar H, Ruzicka T, Hengge UR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Altered signaling pathways are key regulators of cellular functions in tumor
cells. Constitutive activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)3 and -5 may be involved in tumor formation and progression. 
We have investigated the role of STAT5 in cutaneous melanoma metastases using
various RNA and protein techniques. In melanoma specimens, Stat5b transcripts
were upregulated approximately 3.8-fold. In 13 of 21 (62%) human melanoma
metastases, STAT5 was phosphorylated in comparison to normal human melanocytes
and benign nevi. The STAT5 target gene Bcl-2 was frequently upregulated. The
investigation of the underlying mechanism revealed specific STAT5 activation by
recombinant human epidermal growth factor (rEGF). rEGF-induced activation of
STAT5 occurred in vitro through the non-receptor tyrosine kinases transforming
gene (src) of Rous Sarcoma virus and Janus kinase 1. Inhibition of Stat5b
expression by small interfering RNA strongly reduced the expression of Bcl-2 and 
led to decreased cell viability and increased apoptosis in the melanoma cell
lines A375 and BLM. Transfection with dominant-negative Stat5b caused enhanced
cell death and G1 arrest in A375 cells. Our study identifies phosphorylated STAT5
in melanoma and shows regulation through rEGF; STAT5 may thus act as a survival
factor for growth of human melanoma and may represent a potential target for
molecular therapy.

PMID: 16741510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Horm Res. 2006;66(3):101-10. Epub 2006 May 30.

Growth hormone and prolactin receptors in adipogenesis: STAT-5 activation,
suppressors of cytokine signaling, and regulation of insulin-like growth factor
I.

Fleenor D(1), Arumugam R, Freemark M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA. fleen001@mc.duke.edu

Growth hormone GH stimulates lipolysis in mature adipocytes and primary
preadipocytes but promotes adipogenesis in preadipocyte cell lines. The
lactogenic hormones (prolactin PRL and placental lactogen) also stimulate
adipogenesis in preadipocyte cell lines but have variable lipolytic and lipogenic
effects in mature adipose tissue. We hypothesized that differences in expression 
of GH receptors GHR and PRL receptors PRLR during adipocyte development might
explain some of the differential effects of the somatogens and lactogens on fat
metabolism. To that end, we compared: (a) the expression of GHR and PRLR mRNAs in
3T3-L1 preadipocytes during the course of adipocyte differentiation; (b) the
induction of STAT-5 activity by GH and PRL during adipogenesis; and (c) the acute
effects of GH and PRL on the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS-1-3 and
cytokine-inducible SH2-domain-containing protein CIS) and IGF-I. In confluent,
undifferentiated 3T3-L1 cells, the levels of GHR mRNA were approximately 250-fold
higher than the levels of PRLR mRNA. Following induction of adipocyte
differentiation the levels of PRLR mRNA rose 90-fold but GHR mRNA increased only 
0.8-fold. Expression of both full-length (long) and truncated (short) isoforms of
the PRLR increased during differentiation but the long isoform predominated at
all time points. Mouse GH mGH stimulated increases in STAT-5a and 5b activity in 
undifferentiated as well as differentiating 3T3-L1 cells; mouse PRL mPRL had
little or no effect on STAT-5 activity in undifferentiated cells but stimulated
increases in STAT-5a and 5b activity in differentiating cells. mGH stimulated
increases in SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 mRNAs in undifferentiated cells and SOCS-1-3 and
CIS mRNAs in differentiating cells; mPRL induced CIS in differentiating cells but
had no effect on SOCS-1-3. mPRL and mGH stimulated increases in IGF-I mRNA in
differentiating cells but not in undifferentiated cells; the potency of mGH
(3-6-fold increase, p < 0.01) exceeded that of mPRL (40-90% increase, p < 0.05). 
Our findings reveal disparities in the expression of PRLR and GHR during
adipocyte development and differential effects of the hormones on STAT-5, the
SOCS proteins, CIS, and IGF-I. These observations suggest that somatogens and
lactogens regulate adipocyte development and fat metabolism through distinct but 
overlapping cellular mechanisms.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16735796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Auton Neurosci. 2006 Jun 30;126-127:93-9. Epub 2006 May 26.

Chronic intermittent hypoxia alters hypothalamic transcription of genes involved 
in metabolic regulation.

Volgin DV(1), Kubin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6046, USA.

Epidemiological studies show that the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is 
strongly associated with obesity, hypertension and diabetes, the three conditions
characteristic of the metabolic syndrome. Since metabolic disorders usually
involve altered homeostatic mechanisms both centrally and peripherally, it is
likely that so it is in OSAS, but the underlying mechanisms remain largely
unknown. We used an established rodent model to test whether chronic intermittent
hypoxia (CIH) similar to that experienced by OSAS patients leads to distinct and 
relevant for metabolic regulation transcriptional changes in the posterior
hypothalamus. Using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction,
we found that rats exposed to CIH for 35 days (n=9) had twice higher levels of
the adrenergic alpha2A receptor mRNA than the rats simultaneously submitted to a 
matching sham treatment (n=9). The mRNA levels of three members of the family of 
signal transducers and activators of transcription, STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5b, were
also increased 2-4 times. The increases occurred only in the perifornical region,
whereas no changes were detected in the ventromedial region comprising the
ventromedial and arcuate nuclei or the dorsomedial region comprising the
dorsomedial and paraventricular nuclei. These results show that, at least at the 
transcriptional level, CIH exerts a distinct and regionally selective central
effect on the expression of selected mRNAs involved in metabolic regulation
through adrenergic, leptinergic and inflammatory pathways.

PMID: 16730240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Syst Biol. 2005;1:2005.0008. Epub 2005 May 25.

Phosphotyrosine interactome of the ErbB-receptor kinase family.

Schulze WX(1), Deng L, Mann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Experimental
Bioinformatics, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Interactions between short modified peptide motifs and modular protein domains
are central events in cell signal-transduction. We determined interaction
partners to all cytosolic tyrosine residues of the four members of the
ErbB-receptor family in an unbiased fashion by quantitative proteomics using
pull-down experiments with pairs of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated
synthetic peptides. Each receptor had characteristic preferences for interacting 
proteins and most interaction partners had multiple binding sites on each
receptor. EGFR and ErbB4 had several docking sites for Grb2, while ErbB3 was
characterized by six binding sites for PI3K. We identified STAT5 as a direct
binding partner to EGFR and ErbB4 and discovered new recognition motifs for Shc
and STAT5. The overall pattern of interaction partners of EGFR and ErbB4 suggests
similar roles during signaling through their respective ligands. Phosphorylation 
kinetics of several tyrosine resides was measured by mass spectrometry and
correlated with interaction partner preference. Our results demonstrate that
system-wide mapping of peptide-protein interactions sites is possible, and
suggest shared and unique roles of ErbB-receptor family members in downstream
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1681463
PMID: 16729043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(11):4052-62.

Phosphorylation of JAK2 at serine 523: a negative regulator of JAK2 that is
stimulated by growth hormone and epidermal growth factor.

Mazurkiewicz-Munoz AM(1), Argetsinger LS, Kouadio JL, Stensballe A, Jensen ON,
Cline JM, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

The tyrosine kinase JAK2 is a key signaling protein for at least 20 receptors in 
the cytokine/hematopoietin receptor superfamily and is a component of signaling
for multiple receptor tyrosine kinases and several G-protein-coupled receptors.
In this study, phosphopeptide affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry
identified serine 523 (Ser523) in JAK2 as a site of phosphorylation. A
phosphoserine 523 antibody revealed that Ser523 is rapidly but transiently
phosphorylated in response to growth hormone (GH). MEK1 inhibitor UO126
suppresses GH-dependent phosphorylation of Ser523, suggesting that extracellular 
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) 1 and/or 2 or another kinase downstream of MEK1
phosphorylate Ser523 in response to GH. Other ERK activators, phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate and epidermal growth factor, also stimulate
phosphorylation of Ser523. When Ser523 in JAK2 was mutated, JAK2 kinase activity 
as well as GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of JAK2 and Stat5 was enhanced,
suggesting that phosphorylation of Ser523 inhibits JAK2 kinase activity. We
hypothesize that phosphorylation of Ser523 in JAK2 by ERKs 1 and/or 2 or other
as-yet-unidentified kinases acts in a negative feedback manner to dampen
activation of JAK2 in response to GH and provides a mechanism by which prior
exposure to environmental factors that regulate Ser523 phosphorylation might
modulate the cell's response to GH.

PMCID: PMC1489095
PMID: 16705159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Biochem J. 2006 Jul 1;397(1):159-68.

Signalling cross-talk between hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha and
growth-hormone-activated STAT5b.

Park SH(1), Wiwi CA, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

In the present study, we have characterized signalling cross-talk between STAT5b 
(signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b) and HNF4alpha (hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha), two major regulators of sex-dependent gene expression in 
the liver. In a HepG2 liver cell model, HNF4alpha strongly inhibited beta-casein 
and ntcp (Na+/taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide) promoter activity
stimulated by GH (growth hormone)-activated STAT5b, but had no effect on
interferon-gamma-stimulated STAT1 transcriptional activity. By contrast, STAT5b
synergistically enhanced the transcriptional activity of HNF4alpha towards the
ApoCIII (apolipoprotein CIII) promoter. The inhibitory effect of HNF4alpha on
STAT5b transcription was associated with the inhibition of GH-stimulated STAT5b
tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. The short-chain fatty acid,
butyrate, reversed STAT5b transcriptional inhibition by HNF4alpha, but did not
reverse the inhibition of STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation. HNF4alpha inhibition
of STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation was not reversed by pervanadate or by
dominant-negative phosphotyrosine phosphatase 1B, suggesting that it does not
result from an increase in STAT5b dephosphorylation. Rather, HNF4alpha blocked
GH-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 (Janus kinase 2), a STAT5b
tyrosine kinase. Thus STAT5b and HNF4alpha exhibit bi-directional cross-talk that
may augment HNF4alpha-dependent gene transcription while inhibiting STAT5b
transcriptional activity via the inhibitory effects of HNF4alpha on JAK2
phosphorylation, which leads to inhibition of STAT5b signalling initiated by the 
GH receptor at the cell surface.

PMCID: PMC1479742
PMID: 16584384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jun 10;312(10):1745-52. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Candidate tumor suppressor LUCA-15/RBM5/H37 modulates expression of apoptosis and
cell cycle genes.

Mourtada-Maarabouni M(1), Keen J, Clark J, Cooper CS, Williams GT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Keele University, Keele ST5 5BG, UK.
bia19@biol.keele.ac.uk

RBM5 (RNA-binding motif protein 5/LUCA-15/H37) is encoded at the lung cancer
tumor suppressor locus 3p21.3 and itself has several important characteristics of
a tumor suppressor, including both potentiation of apoptosis and inhibition of
the cell cycle. Here, we report the effects of both upregulation and
downregulation of LUCA-15/RBM5 on gene expression monitored using cDNA
microarrays. Many of the genes modulated by LUCA-15/RBM5 are involved in the
control of apoptosis, the cell cycle, or both. These effects were confirmed for
the most significant genes using real-time RT-PCR and/or Western blotting. In
particular, LUCA-15/RBM5 increased the expression of Stat5b and BMP5 and
decreased the expression of AIB1 (Amplified In Breast Cancer 1), proto-oncogene
Pim-1, caspase antagonist BIRC3 (cIAP-2, MIHC), and CDK2 (cyclin-dependent kinase
2). These effects on multiple genes controlling both apoptosis and proliferation 
are in line with the functional effects of LUCA-15/RBM5 and indicate that it
plays a central role in regulating cell fate consistent with its tumor suppressor
activity.

PMID: 16546166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Sci China C Life Sci. 2006 Feb;49(1):63-72.

Effect of docosahexaenoic acid on interleukin-2 receptor signaling pathway in
lipid rafts.

Li Q(1), Ma J, Tan L, Wang C, Li N, Li Y, Xu G, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Surgery, General Hospital of Nanjing Command, Nanjing
210002, China. liqiurong@yahoo.com

Retraction in
    Sci China C Life Sci. 2007 Feb;50(1):140.

Recent studies have shown that polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) regulated the
functions of membrane receptors in T cells and suppressed T cell -mediated immune
responses. But the molecular mechanisms of immune regulation are not yet
elucidated. Lipid rafts are plasma membrane microdomains, in which many receptors
localized. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of DHA on
IL-2R signaling pathway in lipid rafts. We isolated lipid rafts by discontinuous 
sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation, and found that DHA could change the
composition of lipid rafts and alter the distribution of key molecules of IL-2R
signaling pathway, which transferred from lipid rafts to detergent-soluble
membrane fractions. These results revealed that DHA treatment increased the
proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids especially n-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids in lipid rafts and changed the lipid environment of membrane microdomains
in T cells. Compared with controls, DHA changed the localization of IL-2R, STAT5a
and STAT5b in lipid rafts and suppressed the expression of JAK1, JAK3 and
tyrosine phosphotyrosine in soluble membrane fractions. Summarily, this study
concluded the effects of DHA on IL-2R signaling pathway in lipid rafts and
explained the regulation of PUFAs in T cell-mediated immune responses.

PMID: 16544577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;20(11):2613-29. Epub 2006 Mar 16.

Growth hormone regulation of sex-dependent liver gene expression.

Waxman DJ(1), O'Connor C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA. djw@bu.edu

The liver is a primary target for the action of GH, a pituitary protein hormone
that regulates a broad range of physiological processes, including long bone
growth, fatty acid oxidation, glucose uptake, and hepatic steroid and foreign
compound metabolism. GH exerts sex-dependent effects on the liver in many
species, with many hepatic genes, most notably genes coding for cytochrome P450
(CYP) enzymes, being transcribed in a sex-dependent manner. Sex differences in
CYP expression are most striking in rats and mice (up to 500-fold male-female
differences), but are also seen, albeit to a much smaller degree, in humans,
where they are an important determinant of the sex dependence of hepatic drug and
steroid metabolism. This article examines the mechanisms whereby GH, via its
sex-dependent temporal patterns of pituitary release, activates intracellular
signaling leading to the sexually dimorphic transcription of CYPs and other
liver-expressed genes. Recent findings implicating the GH-regulated transcription
factor STAT5b (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b), hepatocyte
nuclear factors 3beta, 4alpha and 6, and sex differences in DNA methylation and
chromatin structure in the sex-dependent actions of GH are reviewed, and current 
mechanistic models are evaluated.

PMID: 16543404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Immunother. 2006 Mar-Apr;29(2):188-200.

Constitutively active STAT5b induces cytokine-independent growth of the acute
myeloid leukemia-derived MUTZ-3 cell line and accelerates its differentiation
into mature dendritic cells.

Bontkes HJ(1), Ruizendaal JJ, Kramer D, Santegoets SJ, Scheper RJ, de Gruijl TD, 
Meijer CJ, Hooijberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. hj.bontkes@vumc.nl

The CD34(+) human acute myeloid leukemia-derived cell line MUTZ-3 is dependent on
hematopoietic growth factors for its proliferation and is able to differentiate
into dendritic cells (DCs) in response to the combination of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin-4, and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha. This cell line carries human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2.1,
HLA-A3, and HLA-B44, which cover most of the caucasian population, and it could
therefore be used as an off-the-shelf allogeneic DC-based vaccine. Signal
transduction and activation of transcription (STAT) 5b is involved in cytokine
signal transduction, particularly of cytokines involved in DC precursor growth
and differentiation. The constitutively active form of STAT5b induced
cytokine-independent growth of MUTZ-3 cells. Furthermore, STAT5b-transduced cells
differentiated into mature DCs in 3 to 4 days after stimulation with DC
differentiation-inducing cytokines, reducing the culture period to obtain mature 
DCs with 5 days compared with unmodified MUTZ-3-derived mature DC cultures. Both 
DC types expressed DC maturation markers and were equally effective in inducing
primary T-cell responses. DCs derived from the STAT5b-transduced cells had a more
stable mature phenotype after cytokine deprivation, which was reflected in a
better performance in functional assays. In conclusion, these results show that
STAT5b-transduced MUTZ-3 can be propagated in cytokine-free medium and rapidly
differentiated into functional mature DCs that sustain a mature phenotype over a 
period of 3 to 5 days in the absence of differentiation-inducing cytokines. The
simplified propagation and rapid differentiation into mature DCs may facilitate
clinical application of this cell line as an allogeneic DC-based vaccine.

PMID: 16531819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Circ Res. 2006 Apr 14;98(7):913-22. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Novel role for STAT-5B in the regulation of Hsp27-FGF-2 axis facilitating
thrombin-induced vascular smooth muscle cell growth and motility.

Cao H(1), Dronadula N, Rizvi F, Li Q, Srivastava K, Gerthoffer WT, Rao GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Previously, we have demonstrated that STAT-3 plays a role in thrombin-induced
VSMC motility. To learn more about the role of STATs in the mitogenic and
chemotactic signaling events of thrombin, here we have studied the role of
STAT-5. Thrombin activated STAT-5 as measured by its tyrosine phosphorylation,
DNA binding, and reporter gene activity. Inhibition of STAT-5B, but not STAT-5A, 
by adenovirus-mediated expression of its respective dominant-negative mutants
suppressed thrombin-induced VSMC growth and motility. Thrombin induced the
expression of Hsp27 and FGF-2 in a time- and STAT-5B-dependent manner in VSMC. In
addition, small interfering RNA-directed depletion of Hsp27 levels or
adenovirus-mediated expression of its dominant-negative mutant attenuated
thrombin-induced FGF-2 expression, growth, and motility of VSMC. An increased
association of STAT-5B with STAT-3 occurred in response to thrombin and
adenovirus-mediated expression of dnSTAT-3 suppressed thrombin-induced Hsp27 and 
FGF-2 induction, DNA synthesis and motility in VSMC. Together, these results
indicate that thrombin-induced VSMC growth and motility require
STAT-5B/STAT-3-dependent expression of Hsp27 and FGF-2. These observations also
suggest that STAT-5B/STAT-3/Hsp27/FGF-2 signaling via its involvement in the
regulation of VSMC growth and motility may play an important role in the
pathogenesis of vascular diseases such as restenosis after angioplasty.

PMID: 16527988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 15;176(6):3350-5.

Attenuation of IL-7 receptor signaling is not required for allelic exclusion.

Will WM(1), Aaker JD, Burchill MA, Harmon IR, O'Neil JJ, Goetz CA, Hippen KL,
Farrar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, The Cancer Center, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Allelic exclusion prevents pre-B cells from generating more than one functional H
chain, thereby ensuring the formation of a unique pre-BCR. The signaling
processes underlying allelic exclusion are not clearly understood.
IL-7R-dependent signals have been clearly shown to regulate the accessibility of 
the Ig H chain locus. More recent work has suggested that pre-BCR-dependent
attenuation of IL-7R signaling returns the H chain loci to an inaccessible state;
this process has been proposed to underlie allelic exclusion. Importantly, this
model predicts that preventing pre-BCR-dependent down-regulation of IL-7R
signaling should interfere with allelic exclusion. To test this hypothesis, we
made use of transgenic mice that express a constitutively active form of STAT5b
(STAT5b-CA). STAT5b-CA expression restores V(D)J recombination in IL-7R(-/-) B
cells, demonstrating that IL-7 regulates H chain locus accessibility and V(D)J
recombination via STAT5 activation. To examine the effects of constitutively
active STAT5b on allelic exclusion, we crossed STAT5b-CA mice (which express the 
IgM(b) allotype) to IgM(a) allotype congenic mice. We found no difference in the 
percentage of IgM(a)/IgM(b)-coexpressing B cells in STAT5b-CA vs littermate
control mice; identical results were observed when crossing STAT5b-CA mice with
hen egg lysozyme (HEL) H chain transgenic mice. The HEL transgene enforces
allelic exclusion, preventing rearrangement of endogenous H chain genes;
importantly, rearrangement of endogenous H chain genes was suppressed to a
similar degree in STAT5b-CA vs HEL mice. Thus, attenuation of IL-7R/STAT5
signaling is not required for allelic exclusion.

PMID: 16517702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Endocrinology. 2006 Jun;147(6):2909-15. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Maternal care associated with methylation of the estrogen receptor-alpha1b
promoter and estrogen receptor-alpha expression in the medial preoptic area of
female offspring.

Champagne FA(1), Weaver IC, Diorio J, Dymov S, Szyf M, Meaney MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Douglas Hospital Research Center, Montréal, Québec, Canada H4H 1R3.

Variations in maternal behavior are associated with differences in estrogen
receptor (ER)-alpha expression in the medial preoptic area (MPOA) and are
transmitted across generations such that, as adults, the female offspring of
mothers that exhibit increased pup licking/grooming (LG) over the first week
postpartum (i.e. high LG mothers) show increased ERalpha expression in the MPOA
and are themselves high LG mothers. In the present studies, cross-fostering
confirmed an association between maternal care and ERalpha expression in the
MPOA; the biological offspring of low LG mothers fostered at birth to high LG
dams show increased ERalpha expression in the MPOA. Cross-fostering the
biological offspring of high LG mothers to low LG dams produces the opposite
effect. We examined whether the maternal programing of ERalpha expression is
associated with differences in methylation of the relevant ERalpha promoter.
Levels of cytosine methylation across the ERalpha1b promoter were significantly
elevated in the adult offspring of low, compared with high, LG mothers.
Differentially methylated regions included a signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)5 binding site and the results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed decreased Stat5b binding to the ERalpha1b
promoter in the adult offspring of low, compared with high, LG mothers. Finally, 
we found increased Stat5b levels in the MPOA of neonates reared by high, compared
with low, LG mothers. These findings suggest that maternal care is associated
with cytosine methylation of the ERalpha1b promoter, providing a potential
mechanism for the programming of individual differences in ERalpha expression and
maternal behavior in the female offspring.

PMID: 16513834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Horm Res. 2006;65 Suppl 1:15-20. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Molecular mechanisms of IGF-I deficiency.

Rosenfeld RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lucile Packard Foundation for Children's Health, Stanford University, Palo
Alto, CA 94304, USA. ron.rosenfeld@lpfch.org

PMID: 16508329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Aug;291(2):E333-9. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Effect of pulsatile growth hormone administration to the growth-restricted fetal 
sheep on somatotrophic axis gene expression in fetal and placental tissues.

Bloomfield FH(1), van Zijl PL, Bauer MK, Phua HH, Harding JE.

Author information: 
(1)Liggins Institute, Univ. of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New
Zealand. f.bloomfield@auckland.ac.nz

We have previously reported (Bauer MK, Breier BH, Bloomfield FH, Jensen EC,
Gluckman PD, and Harding JE. J Endocrinol 177: 83-92, 2003) that a chronic
pulsatile infusion of growth hormone (GH) to intrauterine growth-restricted
(IUGR) ovine fetuses increased fetal circulating IGF-I levels without increasing 
fetal growth. We hypothesized a cortisol-induced upregulation of fetal hepatic GH
receptor (GH-R) mRNA levels, secondary increases in IGF-I mRNA levels, and
circulating IGF-I levels, but a downregulation of the type I IGF receptor
(IGF-IR) as an explanation. We, therefore, measured mRNA levels of genes of the
somatotrophic axis by real-time RT-PCR in fetal and placental tissues of fetuses 
with IUGR (induced by uteroplacental embolization from 110- to 116-days
gestation) that received either a pulsatile infusion of GH (total dose 3.5
mg/day) or vehicle from 117-126 days and in control fetuses (n = 5 per group).
Tissues were collected at 127 days (term, 145 days). Fetal cortisol
concentrations were significantly increased in IUGR fetuses. However, in liver,
GH-R, but not IGF-I or IGF-IR, mRNA levels were decreased in both IUGR groups. In
contrast, in placenta, GH-R, IGF-I, and IGF-IR expression were increased in IUGR 
vehicle-infused fetuses. GH infusion further increased placental GH-R and IGF-IR,
but abolished the increase in IGF-I mRNA levels. GH infusion reduced IGF-I
expression in muscle and increased GH-R but decreased IGF-IR expression in
kidney. IUGR increased hepatic IGF-binding protein (IGFBP)-1 and placental
IGFBP-2 and -3 mRNA levels with no further effect of GH infusion. In conclusion, 
the modest increases in circulating cortisol concentrations in IUGR fetuses did
not increase hepatic GH-R mRNA expression and, therefore, do not explain the
increased circulating IGF-I levels that we found with GH infusion, which are
likely due to reduced clearance rather than increased production. We demonstrate 
tissue-specific regulation of the somatotrophic axis in IUGR fetuses and a
discontinuity between GH-R and IGF-I gene expression in GH-infused fetuses that
is not explained by alterations in phosphorylated STAT5b.

PMID: 16507606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Diabetes. 2006 Mar;55(3):734-41.

Impaired Crkl expression contributes to the defective DNA binding of Stat5b in
nonobese diabetic mice.

Laloraya M(1), Davoodi-Semiromi A, Kumar GP, McDuffie M, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
1120 15th St., Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

A point mutation in the Stat5b DNA binding domain in the nonobese diabetic (NOD) 
mouse was shown to have weaker DNA binding compared with the B6 Stat5b. Here, we 
assessed the binding ability of the mutant Stat5b in the B6 genetic background
(B6.NOD-c11) and the wild-type Stat5b in the NOD background (NOD.Lc11). To our
surprise, the binding ability of Stat5b is inconsistent with the presence or
absence of the Stat5b mutation in these congenic mice but is correlated with the 
expression levels of the Crkl protein, which was coprecipitated by an anti-Stat5b
antibody. Both the expression of Crkl and the Stat5b binding ability are the
highest in B6.NOD-c11 and the lowest in NOD while intermediate in B6 and NOD.Lc11
mice. We demonstrated that the adapter molecule Crkl can bind Stat5b and that the
Crkl protein is a Stat5b binding cofactor. More importantly, profection of Crkl
recombinant protein significantly increased Stat5b binding ability and rescued
the binding defect of the NOD mutant Stat5b, suggesting that Crkl is a key
regulatory molecule for Stat5b binding. Therefore, the defective Crkl expression 
may contribute to the development of diabetes in the NOD mice by exacerbating the
defective Stat5b binding ability.

PMID: 16505237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4898-906. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Clarifying the role of Stat5 in lymphoid development and Abelson-induced
transformation.

Hoelbl A(1), Kovacic B, Kerenyi MA, Simma O, Warsch W, Cui Y, Beug H,
Hennighausen L, Moriggl R, Sexl V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria.

The Stat5 transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b have been implicated in
lymphoid development and transformation. Most studies have employed
Stat5a/b-deficient mice where gene targeting disrupted the first protein-coding
exon, resulting in the expression of N-terminally truncated forms of Stat5a/b
(Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice). We have now reanalyzed lymphoid development in
Stat5a/b(null/null) mice having a complete deletion of the Stat5a/b gene locus.
The few surviving Stat5a/b(null/null) mice lacked CD8(+) T lymphocytes. A massive
reduction of CD8(+) T cells was also found in Stat5a/b(fl/fl) lck-cre transgenic 
animals. While gammadelta T-cell receptor-positive (gammadeltaTCR(+)) cells were 
expressed at normal levels in Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice, they were completely 
absent in Stat5a/b(null/null) animals. Moreover, B-cell maturation was abrogated 
at the pre-pro-B-cell stage in Stat5a/b(null/null) mice, whereas
Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) B-lymphoid cells developed to the early pro-B-cell stage.
In vitro assays using fetal liver-cell cultures confirmed this observation. Most 
strikingly, Stat5a/b(null/null) cells were resistant to transformation and
leukemia development induced by Abelson oncogenes, whereas
Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN)-derived cells readily transformed. These findings show
distinct lymphoid defects for Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) and Stat5a/b(null/null)
mice and define a novel functional role for the N-termini of Stat5a/b in
B-lymphoid transformation.

PMCID: PMC2875852
PMID: 16493008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jun;20(6):1333-51. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Sex-dependent liver gene expression is extensive and largely dependent upon
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b): STAT5b-dependent
activation of male genes and repression of female genes revealed by microarray
analysis.

Clodfelter KH(1), Holloway MG, Hodor P, Park SH, Ray WJ, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Sexual dimorphism in mammalian liver contributes to sex differences in
physiology, homeostasis, and steroid and foreign compound metabolism. Many
sex-dependent liver genes are regulated by sex differences in pituitary GH
secretion, with the transcription factor, signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT5b), proposed to mediate signaling by the pulsatile, male
plasma GH profile. Presently, a large-scale gene expression study was conducted
using male and female mice, wild type and Stat5b inactivated, to characterize sex
differences in liver gene expression and their dependence on STAT5b. The relative
abundance of individual liver RNAs was determined for each sex-genotype
combination by competitive hybridization to 23,574-feature oligonucleotide
microarrays. Significant sex differences in hepatic expression were seen for 1603
mouse genes. Of 850 genes showing higher expression in males, 767 (90%) were
down-regulated in STAT5b-deficient males. Moreover, of 753 genes showing
female-predominant expression, 461 (61%) were up-regulated in STAT5b-deficient
males. In contrast, approximately 90% of the sex-dependent genes were unaffected 
by STAT5b deficiency in females. Thus: 1) STAT5b is essential for sex-dependent
liver gene expression, a characteristic of approximately 1600 mouse genes (4% of 
the genome); 2) male-predominant liver gene expression requires STAT5b, or
STAT5b-dependent factors, which act in a positive manner; and 3) many
female-predominant liver genes are repressed in males in a STAT5b-dependent
manner. Several of the STAT5b-dependent male genes encode transcriptional
repressors; these may include direct STAT5b targets that repress
female-predominant genes in male liver. Several female-predominant repressors are
elevated in STAT5b-deficient males; these may contribute to the major loss of
male gene expression seen in the absence of STAT5b.

PMID: 16469768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;32(2):79-92. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Temporal response of liver signal transduction elements during in vivo endotoxin 
challenge in cattle: effects of growth hormone treatment.

Li CJ(1), Kahl S, Carbaugh D, Elsasser TH.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Biology Laboratory, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service, Animal and Natural Resources Institute, Building 200, Room 209,
Beltsville, MD 20705, USA. cli@anri.barc.usda.gov

We quantified the changes in abundance of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) 
and associated tissue signal transduction pathway elements (STPEs) in the bovine 
liver in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge and further assessed the 
impact on the LPS-driven variable responses as affected by daily treatment with
recombinant growth hormone (GH) prior to LPS challenge. Twenty-four cross-bred
beef steers were divided into GH-treated (recombinant bovine GH, Monsanto Inc.,
St. Louis, MO; 0.1mg/kg BW, i.m., daily for 12 days) and non-GH-treatment
(control) groups (n=12/group). Liver biopsy samples were obtained from all
animals at 0, 3, 6, and 24h after LPS challenge (E. coli 055:B5, 2.5 microg/kg
BW, i.v. bolus) for Western blot analyses of iNOS and STPEs. In response to LPS, 
tissue levels of iNOS increased significantly (P<0.001) in the first 3h and
persisted at levels greater than those at time 0 until 24h. GH further augmented 
levels of iNOS at 0, 3, and 6h resulting in an overall significant increase in
the iNOS protein level (P<0.01). AKT/protein kinase B (AKT/PKB) phosphorylation
levels at time 0 were not different between GH-treated and control animals; LPS
increased the phosphorylation of AKT/PKB with GH treatment stimulating a
four-fold further increase of AKT/PKB phosphorylation. Effects similar to those
on AKT/PKB were also observed on signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b (STAT5b). The family of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) showed
different pattern of response. ERK1/2 phosphorylation increased 3h after LPS
challenge but only in GH-treated group (P<0.01). Compared to 0 h, SAPK/JUN
phosphorylation increased in both experimental groups 3, 6h (P<0.01), and 24h
(P<0.05) after LPS. However, at 3h the increase was greater (P<0.01) in
GH-treated than in control animals. No effect of LPS challenge or GH treatment on
p38(MAPK) was observed. These results suggest that GH treatment has a significant
impact on the differential activation of STPEs in the clinical response to LPS.

PMID: 16466901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Apr;91(4):1526-34. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

A mutant signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b, associated with
growth hormone insensitivity and insulin-like growth factor-I deficiency, cannot 
function as a signal transducer or transcription factor.

Fang P(1), Kofoed EM, Little BM, Wang X, Ross RJ, Frank SJ, Hwa V, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, NRC5, Oregon Health and Science University, 3181
Southwest Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA.

CONTEXT: A natural missense mutation in the signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 5b gene was recently identified in association with a female
patient presenting with severe growth failure and immune dysfunction. The
mutation results in an alanine to proline substitution at residue 630 (A630P) in 
the src-homology-2 domain, a region essential for docking of STATs to
phospho-tyrosines on activated receptors, STAT dimerization, and stabilization of
phospho-STAT-DNA interactions.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to explore the molecular mechanisms
underlying the GH insensitivity and IGF-I deficiency caused by the A630P-mutated 
STAT5b.
RESULTS: In reconstitution experiments using HEK293 cells, both GH and
interferon-gamma were unable to activate mutant STAT5b (A630P), as demonstrated
by lack of immunodetectable phospho-tyrosyl-STAT5b (A630P) and inability to drive
luciferase reporter activity. However, the Src family of nonreceptor kinases
[constitutively active v-src and epithelial growth factor-induced c-src]
tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5b(A630P). The v-src-induced phospho-STAT5b(A630P)
translocated to the nucleus but, unlike wild-type Stat5b, was unable to bind DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The A630P mutation disrupts the src-homology-2 architecture such
that: 1) mutant STAT5b most likely cannot dock to phospho-tyrosines on
ligand-activated receptors; and 2) stable interactions with DNA are prevented.
Because STAT5b (A630P) is an inefficient signal transducer and transcription
factor, the detrimental impact on signaling pathways important for normal growth 
and immunity explains, in part, the complex clinical phenotype of GH
insensitivity and immune dysfunction.

PMID: 16464942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Jan;4(1):39-45.

A constitutively active Lck kinase promotes cell proliferation and resistance to 
apoptosis through signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b activation.

Shi M(1), Cooper JC, Yu CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0615, USA.

Lck is a Src family protein tyrosine kinase and is expressed predominantly in T
cells. Aberrant expression or activation of Lck kinase has been reported in both 
lymphoid and nonlymphoid malignancies. However, the mechanisms underlying
Lck-mediated oncogenesis remain largely unclear. In this report, we establish a
tetracycline-inducible system to study the biochemical and biological effects of 
a constitutively active Lck mutant with a point mutation at the negative
regulatory tyrosine. Expression of the active Lck kinase induces both tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b (STAT5b), a STAT family member activated in a variety of tumor
cells. The active Lck kinase interacts with STAT5b in cells, suggesting that Lck 
may directly phosphorylate STAT5b. Expression of the constitutively active Lck
mutant in interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent BaF3 cells promotes cell proliferation. 
In addition, the active Lck kinase protects BaF3 cells from IL-3
withdrawal-induced apoptotic death and leads to IL-3-independent growth. These
transforming properties of the oncogenic Lck kinase can be further augmented by
expression of exogenous wild-type STAT5b but attenuated by a dominant-negative
form of STAT5b. All together, our results suggest the potential involvement of
STAT5b in Lck-mediated cellular transformation.

PMID: 16446405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 24;103(4):1000-5. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Stat5a/b are essential for normal lymphoid development and differentiation.

Yao Z(1), Cui Y, Watford WT, Bream JH, Yamaoka K, Hissong BD, Li D, Durum SK,
Jiang Q, Bhandoola A, Hennighausen L, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

Cytokines that use the common gamma chain gammac are critical for lymphoid
development and function. Mutations of the IL-7 receptor, gammac, or its
associated kinase, Jak3, are the major cause of human severe combined
immunodeficiency. Although activated by IL-7, Stat5a/b (Stat, signal transducer
and activator of transcription) have been thought to play limited roles in
lymphoid development. However, we now show that mice completely deficient in
Stat5a/b have severely impaired lymphoid development and differentiation. Absence
of Stat5 also abrogates T cell receptor gamma rearrangement and survival of
peripheral CD8(+) T cells. Thus, deficiency of Stat5 results in severe combined
immunodeficiency, similar in many respects to deficiency of IL-7R, gammac, and
Jak3.

PMCID: PMC1327727
PMID: 16418296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 10;281(6):3190-7. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Characterization of distinct Stat5b binding sites that mediate growth
hormone-stimulated IGF-I gene transcription.

Chia DJ(1), Ono M, Woelfle J, Schlesinger-Massart M, Jiang H, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

A key agent in the anabolic actions of growth hormone (GH) is insulin-like growth
factor-I (IGF-I), a 70-amino acid secreted protein with direct effects on somatic
growth and tissue maintenance and repair. GH rapidly and potently stimulates
IGF-I gene transcription by mechanisms independent of new protein synthesis, and 
recent studies have linked the transcription factor Stat5b to a regulatory
network connecting the activated GH receptor on the cell membrane to the IGF-I
gene in the nucleus. Here we analyze two distinct conserved GH response elements 
in the rat IGF-I locus that contain paired Stat5b sites. Each response element
binds Stat5b in vivo in a GH-dependent way, as assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, and consists of one high affinity and one lower
affinity Stat5b site, as determined by both qualitative and quantitative
protein-DNA binding studies. In biochemical reconstitution experiments, both
response elements are able to mediate GH-stimulated and Stat5b-dependent
transcription when fused to a reporter gene containing either the major IGF-I
promoter or a minimal neutral promoter, although the paired Stat5b sites located 
in the second IGF-I intron were more than twice as effective as the response
element that mapped approximately 73 kb 5' to the IGF-I exon 1. Taken together,
our results define the initial molecular architecture of a complicated
GH-regulated transcriptional pathway, and suggest that apparently redundant
hormone response elements provide a mechanism for amplifying GH action at a
physiologically important target gene.

PMID: 16339156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 23;25(13):1974-9.

Leukemia with distinct phenotypes in transgenic mice expressing PML/RAR alpha,
PLZF/RAR alpha or NPM/RAR alpha.

Rego EM(1), Ruggero D, Tribioli C, Cattoretti G, Kogan S, Redner RL, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Department of Pathology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

Recurrent chromosomal translocations involving the RAR alpha locus on chromosome 
17 are the hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The RAR alpha gene
fuses to variable partners (PML, PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5B: X genes) leading to 
the expression of APL-specific fusion proteins with identical RAR alpha moieties.
To analyse whether the variable X moiety could affect the activity of the fusion 
protein in vivo, we generated and characterized, on a comparative basis, NPM/RAR 
alpha transgenic mice (TM) in which the fusion gene is expressed under the
control of a human Cathepsin G (hCG) minigene. We compared the features of the
leukemia observed in these TM with those in hCG-PML/RAR alpha and hCG-PLZF/RAR
alpha TM. In all three transgenic models, leukemia developed after a variably
long latency, with variable penetrance. However, the three leukemias displayed
distinct cytomorphological features. hCG-NPM/RAR alpha leukemic cells resembled
monoblasts. This phenotype contrasts with what was observed in the hCG-PML/RAR
alpha TM model in which the leukemic phase was characterized by the proliferation
of promyelocytic blasts. Similarly, hCG-PLZF/RAR alpha TM displayed a different
phenotype where terminally differentiated myeloid cells predominated.
Importantly, the NPM/RAR alpha oncoprotein was found to localize in the
nucleolus, unlike PML/RAR alpha and PLZF/RAR alpha, thus possibly interfering
with the normal function of NPM. Similarly to what was observed in human APL
patients, we found that NPM/RAR alpha and PML/RAR alpha, but not PLZF/RAR alpha
leukemia, was responsive to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or As2O3 treatments.
Taken together, our results underscore the critical relevance of the X moiety in 
dictating the biology of the disease and the activity of the APL fusion
oncoprotein.

PMID: 16331271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Diabetes. 2005 Dec;54(12):3410-7.

Inhibition of preproinsulin gene expression by leptin induction of suppressor of 
cytokine signaling 3 in pancreatic beta-cells.

Laubner K(1), Kieffer TJ, Lam NT, Niu X, Jakob F, Seufert J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology, and Molecular Medicine, Medizinische
Klinik und Poliklinik II, University of Würzburg, Klinikstrasse 6-8, 97070
Würzburg, Germany.

Leptin inhibits insulin secretion and preproinsulin gene expression in pancreatic
beta-cells, but signal transduction pathways and molecular mechanisms underlying 
this effect are poorly characterized. In this study, we analyzed leptin-mediated 
signal transduction and preproinsulin gene regulation at the molecular level in
pancreatic beta-cells. Leptin stimulation led to janus kinase (JAK)2-dependent
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the transcription factors signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3 and STAT5b in INS-1 beta-cells.
Leptin also induced mRNA expression of the JAK-STAT inhibitor suppressor of
cytokine signaling (SOCS)3 in INS-1 beta-cells and human pancreatic islets in
vitro and in pancreatic islets of ob/ob mice in vivo. Transcriptional activation 
of the rat SOCS3 promoter by leptin was observed with concomitant leptin-induced 
STAT3 and STAT5b DNA binding to specific promoter regions. Unexpectedly, SOCS3
inhibited both basal and STAT3/5b-dependent rat preproinsulin 1 gene promoter
activity in INS-1 cells. These results suggest that SOCS3 represents a
transcriptional inhibitor of preproinsulin gene expression, which is induced by
leptin through JAK-STAT3/5b signaling in pancreatic beta-cells. In conclusion,
although SOCS3 is believed to be a negative feedback regulator of JAK-STAT
signaling, our findings suggest involvement of SOCS3 in a direct gene regulatory 
pathway downstream of leptin-activated JAK-STAT signaling in pancreatic
beta-cells.

PMID: 16306356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6552-8. Epub 2005 Nov 22.

Aberrant folding of a mutant Stat5b causes growth hormone insensitivity and
proteasomal dysfunction.

Chia DJ(1), Subbian E, Buck TM, Hwa V, Rosenfeld RG, Skach WR, Shinde U, Rotwein 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15592.

A predicted alanine to proline substitution in Stat5b that results in profound
short stature, growth hormone insensitivity, and immunodeficiency represents the 
first natural mutation of this transcription factor in a human. To understand the
mechanisms responsible for these pathophysiological abnormalities, we have
studied the biochemical and biophysical properties of the mutant Stat5b molecule.
In a cellular reconstitution model growth hormone robustly stimulated tyrosine
phosphorylation and transcriptional activity of wild-type Stat5b while
Stat5bA630P was minimally modified and did not promote reporter gene expression. 
Steady state levels of Stat5bWT were approximately 3-fold higher than Stat5bA630P
in cell extracts prepared with nonionic detergents. Although initial rates of
biosynthesis of both proteins were similar, pulse-chase experiments established
that the apparent half-life of newly synthesized soluble Stat5bA630P was <15% of 
Stat5bWT (3.5 h versus >24 h). Stat5bA630P accumulated in cells primarily in
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. Structural analysis of the isolated SH2 domain
containing the A630P mutation showed that it resembled the wild-type SH2 segment 
but that it exhibited reduced thermodynamic stability and slower folding
kinetics, displayed an increased hydrophobic surface, and was prone to
aggregation in solution. Our results are compatible with a model in which
Stat5bA630P is an inactive transcription factor by virtue of its aberrant folding
and diminished solubility triggered by a misfolded SH2 domain. The potential for 
aggregation and formation of cytoplasmic inclusions raises the possibility that
Stat5bA630P could produce additional defects through inhibition of proteasome
function.

PMID: 16303763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Mar;20(3):647-60. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Codependence of growth hormone-responsive, sexually dimorphic hepatic gene
expression on signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b and hepatic
nuclear factor 4alpha.

Holloway MG(1), Laz EV, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Targeted disruption of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b
gene (STAT5b) leads to decreased expression in male mouse liver of a
male-predominant cytochrome (Cyp) 2d protein, whereas female-predominant Cyp2b
proteins are increased. Presently, we characterize the effects of STAT5b
deficiency on 15 specific, individual Cyp RNAs and other sexually dimorphic liver
gene products. All seven male-specific RNAs investigated were decreased to normal
female levels in STAT5b-deficient male liver, whereas five of eight
female-specific RNAs, designated class I female genes, were increased in
expression up to 200-fold or more. STAT5b deficiency had a much more modest
effect on the expression of these genes in females. Hypophysectomy and GH
replacement studies demonstrated positive GH pulse regulation of all seven male
RNAs and negative GH pulse regulation of class I, but not class II, female RNAs
in wild-type, but not in STAT5b-deficient, male mice. A majority of the
sex-specific genes responded in parallel to the loss of STAT5b and the loss of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, indicating that both transcription factors are 
essential and suggesting they may coregulate sexually dimorphic liver gene
expression. Continuous GH treatment of intact male mice, which overrides the
endogenous male, pulsatile plasma GH pattern, down-regulated all seven male RNAs 
and induced expression of the five class I female RNAs within 4-7 d; however,
induction of class II female RNAs was delayed until d 7-14. Given the slow
responses of all 15 genes to changes in plasma GH status, GH regulation of
sex-specific Cyp expression is proposed to be indirect and mediated by STAT5b-
and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha-dependent factors that may include
repressors of female-specific Cyps and other targets of GH action.

PMID: 16239260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int Immunol. 2005 Dec;17(12):1543-52. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Physical and functional interactions between STAT3 and ZIP kinase.

Sato N(1), Kawai T, Sugiyama K, Muromoto R, Imoto S, Sekine Y, Ishida M, Akira S,
Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences Hokkaido 
University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a latent
cytoplasmic transcription factor that can be activated by cytokines and growth
factors. It plays important roles in cell growth, apoptosis and cell
transformation, and is constitutively active in a variety of tumor cells. In this
study, we provide evidence that zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIPK)
interacts physically with STAT3. ZIPK specifically interacted with STAT3, and did
not bind to STAT1, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b or STAT6. ZIPK phosphorylated STAT3 on
serine 727 (Ser727) and enhanced STAT3 transcriptional activity. Small
interfering RNA-mediated reduction of ZIPK expression decreased leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF)- and IL-6-induced STAT3-dependent transcription.
Furthermore, LIF- and IL-6-mediated STAT3 activation stimulated ZIPK activity.
Taken together, our data suggest that ZIPK interacts with STAT3 within the
nucleus to regulate the transcriptional activity of STAT3 via phosphorylation of 
Ser727.

PMID: 16219639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4561-5.

Nonobese diabetic mouse congenic analysis reveals chromosome 11 locus
contributing to diabetes susceptibility, macrophage STAT5 dysfunction, and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor overproduction.

Litherland SA(1), Grebe KM, Belkin NS, Paek E, Elf J, Atkinson M, Morel L,
Clare-Salzler MJ, McDuffie M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
litherla@pathology.ufl.edu

Unstimulated monocytes of at-risk/type 1 diabetic humans and macrophages of the
NOD mouse have markedly elevated autocrine GM-CSF production and persistent STAT5
phosphorylation. We analyzed the relationship between GM-CSF production and
persistent STAT5 phosphorylation in NOD macrophages using reciprocal congenic
mouse strains containing either diabetes-susceptible NOD (B6.NODC11), or
diabetes-resistant C57L (NOD.LC11) loci on chromosome 11. These intervals contain
the gene for GM-CSF (Csf2; 53.8 Mb) and those for STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B
(Stat3, Stat5a, and Stat5b; 100.4-100.6 Mb). High GM-CSF production and
persistent STAT5 phosphorylation in unactivated NOD macrophages can be linked to 
a region (44.9-55.7 Mb) containing the Csf2 gene, but not the Stat3/5a/5b genes. 
This locus, provisionally called Idd4.3, is upstream of the previously described 
Idd4.1 and Idd4.2 loci. Idd4.3 encodes an abundance of cytokine genes that use
STAT5 in their macrophage activation signaling and contributes approximately 50% 
of the NOD.LC11 resistance to diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2605964
PMID: 16177100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Dec;44(4):262-73.

Transactivating agonists of the EGF receptor require Tyr 845 phosphorylation for 
induction of DNA synthesis.

Boerner JL(1), Biscardi JS, Silva CM, Parsons SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Cancer Center, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Signaling networks play important roles in cancer progression. For example,
overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a poor
prognostic indicator in multiple tumor types. Recent studies have postulated that
the EGFR functions as a central conduit for signaling by different classes of
cell surface receptors. In this study, we demonstrated that c-Src-dependent
phosphorylation of tyrosine 845 (Tyr 845) on EGFR was required for DNA synthesis 
induced by the G protein-coupled agonists, endothelin (ET) and lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA), and the cytokine, growth hormone (GH), in murine fibroblast and
breast cancer model systems. In addition, we showed that a dominant interfering
form of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5b (a downstream
effector of phospho-Tyr 845 [pY845] in fibroblasts) abrogates DNA synthesis
induced by all agonists in the breast cancer model. To further characterize the
role of Tyr 845, a pY845-containing peptide was microinjected into SKBr3 breast
cancer cells and murine fibroblasts, and was found to ablate EGF-stimulated
S-phase entry in both cell systems. Taken together, these findings suggested that
pY845 is critical for DNA synthesis induced by a variety of mitogens and that its
signaling effectors may include but are not limited to STAT5b.

PMID: 16167350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Prostate. 2006 Feb 1;66(2):135-45.

Erythropoietin stimulates growth and STAT5 phosphorylation in human prostate
epithelial and prostate cancer cells.

Feldman L(1), Wang Y, Rhim JS, Bhattacharya N, Loda M, Sytkowski AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell and Molecular Biology, Division of Hematology and
Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
lfeldman@bidmc.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Erythropoietin (Epo), the principal regulator of erythroid progenitor
survival, growth, and differentiation, initiates its action by binding to its
cognate cell surface receptor (EpoR). EpoR have been identified on a variety of
non-hematopoietic cells, both normal and malignant, however, little is known
about the function of EpoR on malignant cells.
METHODS: RT-PCR, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry were used to
demonstrate that prostate cancer cells express EpoR at both the gene and protein 
level. Cell proliferation assays and STAT5 phosphorylation were used to
demonstrate Epo's mitogenic action and intracellular signaling, respectively.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that transformed prostate epithelial and prostate
cancer cell lines, as well as primary prostate tissue, express the EpoR.
Importantly, the EpoR on prostate cells are functional, as demonstrated by the
observation that each of the cell lines exhibited a dose-dependent proliferative 
response to Epo, and that Epo triggered STAT5b phosphorylation in the cells.
CONCLUSION: Human prostatic epithelial cells and prostate cancer cells express
functional EpoR, and Epo serves as a growth factor for these cells. These results
have implications for our understanding of normal prostatic growth and
development and of the pathobiology of human prostate cancer.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16161153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Exp Mol Med. 2005 Aug 31;37(4):353-64.

Hypoxia activates the cyclin D1 promoter via the Jak2/STAT5b pathway in breast
cancer cells.

Joung YH(1), Lim EJ, Lee MY, Park JH, Ye SK, Park EU, Kim SY, Zhang Z, Lee KJ,
Park DK, Park T, Moon WK, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Bio-Food and Drug Research
Center, College of Biomedical and Health Science, Konkuk University, Chungju
380-701, Korea.

Hypoxia, a common consequence of solid tumor growth in breast cancer or other
cancers, serves to propagate a cascade of molecular pathways which include
angiogenesis, glycolysis, and various cell-cycle control proteins. As we have
shown previously, hypoxia activates STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5) and increases its binding activity to the GAS element in mammary
epithelial cells. In this study we attempted to elucidate the mechanism by which 
cyclin D1 is regulated by the STAT5 protein under hypoxic conditions. Our data
demonstrate that hypoxia (2% O(2)) or desferrioxamine (DFO) induces tyrosine and 
serine phosphorylation of STAT5 in human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) and mammary 
epithelial cells (HC11). Imunoprecipitation and subsequent Western analysis
showed that Jak2 leads to the tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STAT5a
or STAT5b under hypoxic conditions. Using a transfected COS-7 cell model system, 
we demonstrate that the activity of a cyclin D1 promoter-luciferase construct
increased under hypoxic conditions or DFO treatment. The activity of the
STAT5b/cyclin D1 promoter increased significantly by 12 h of hypoxia, whereas the
activity of the STAT5a/cyclin D1 promoter was unaffected under hypoxic
conditions. These increases in promoter activity are predominantly mediated by
the Jak2/STAT5b signaling pathway. We have shown by EMSA that hypoxia induces
STAT5 to bind to the cyclin D1 promoter (GAS-1) in MCF-7 and HC11 cells. These
data suggest that STAT5b may mediate the transcriptional activation of cyclin D1 
after hypoxic stimulation.

PMID: 16155412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37471-80. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

Role of the cytokine-induced SH2 domain-containing protein CIS in growth hormone 
receptor internalization.

Landsman T(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, MA 02215, USA.

The cytokine-inducible SH2 domain-containing protein CIS inhibits signaling from 
the growth hormone (GH) receptor (GHR) to STAT5b by a proteasome-dependent
mechanism. Here, we used the GH-responsive rat liver cell line CWSV-1 to
investigate the role of CIS and the proteasome in GH-induced GHR internalization.
Cell-surface GHR localization and internalization were monitored in GH-stimulated
cells by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy using an antibody directed
against the GHR extracellular domain. In GH naïve cells, GHR was detected in
small, randomly distributed granules on the cell surface and in the cytoplasm,
with accumulation in the perinuclear area. GH treatment induced a rapid (within 5
min) internalization of GH.GHR complexes, which coincided with the onset of GHR
tyrosine phosphorylation and the appearance in the cytosol of distinct granular
structures containing internalized GH. GHR signaling to STAT5b continued for
approximately 30-40 min, however, indicating that GHR signaling and deactivation 
of the GH.GHR complex both proceed from an intracellular compartment. The
internalization of GH and GHR was inhibited by CIS-R107K, a dominant-negative SH2
domain mutant of CIS, and by the proteasome inhibitors MG132 and epoxomicin,
which prolong GHR signaling to STAT5b. GH pulse-chase studies established that
the internalized GH.GHR complexes did not recycle back to the cell surface in
significant amounts under these conditions. Given the established specificity of 
CIS-R107K for blocking the GHR signaling inhibitory actions of CIS, but not those
of other SOCS/CIS family members, these findings implicate CIS and the proteasome
in the control of GHR internalization following receptor activation and suggest
that CIS-dependent receptor internalization is a prerequisite for efficient
termination of GHR signaling.

PMID: 16154995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Signal. 2006 Jun;18(6):851-60. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Characterization of STAT5B phosphorylation correlating with expression of
cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS).

Cooper JC(1), Boustead JN, Yu CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Room 813B Light Hall,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0615, USA.

Cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) is the first identified member of
genes encoding for the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS). CIS is also a
well-known target gene of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(STAT5) pathways, providing normal negative feedback control of signaling by
cytokines and growth factors. Three other SOCS genes, SOCS1, SOCS2, and SOCS3,
can be silenced by DNA hypermethylation in human cancers, suggesting a potential 
mechanism for constitutive STAT activation. However, it is not known whether CIS 
expression is similarly perturbed in tumor cells. We report here the absence of
CIS expression in T lymphoma LSTRA that overexpresses the Lck protein tyrosine
kinase and exhibits elevated STAT5 activity. Pervanadate-induced CIS expression
and STAT5 binding to the CIS promoter in vivo over a short time course implies
that mechanisms other than DNA hypermethylation may contribute to defective CIS
expression in LSTRA cells. Comparison with cytokine-dependent BaF3 cells
stimulated with interleukin-3 (IL-3) further reveals that CIS induction
correlates with specific STAT5b post-translational modifications. It exhibits as 
the slowest migrating form through SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) analysis. This distinctly modified STAT5b is the predominant form that
binds to the consensus STAT5 sites in the CIS promoter and accumulates in the
nucleus. In vitro phosphatase assays and phosphoamino acid analysis suggest the
involvement of phosphorylation on residues other than the highly conserved
tyrosine and serine sites in this distinct STAT5b mobility shift. All together,
our results provide a novel link between incomplete STAT5b phosphorylation and
defective SOCS gene expression in cancer cells.

PMID: 16125365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Endocrinology. 2005 Dec;146(12):5112-9. Epub 2005 Aug 25.

Prolactin specifically activates signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b in neuroendocrine dopaminergic neurons.

Ma FY(1), Anderson GM, Gunn TD, Goffin V, Grattan DR, Bunn SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroendocrinology and Department of Anatomy and Structural
Biology, University of Otago School of Medical Sciences, Dunedin, New Zealand.

The hypothalamic neuroendocrine dopaminergic (NEDA) neurons are crucial in
regulating prolactin secretion from the anterior pituitary. Rising prolactin
concentrations stimulate these neurons to secrete dopamine, which acts via the
pituitary portal vasculature to inhibit additional prolactin release. Prolactin
is known to activate Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) signaling pathways in other cell types, including neurons.
The possible role of JAK-STAT signaling in NEDA neurons has therefore been
examined in this study using fetal rat mediobasal hypothalamic cell cultures and 
an adult rat in vivo preparation. Cultured cells expressing the dopamine
synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) responded to prolactin with a
time-dependent increase in phospho-STAT5, but not phospho-STAT1 or phospho-STAT3,
nuclear labeling. This response was inhibited by the prolactin receptor
antagonist Delta1-9-G129R-human prolactin and the JAK inhibitor AG490, but was
unaffected by selected serine/threonine kinase inhibitors (H89, KN-93,
bisindolymaleimide, or PD98059). Antibodies selective for STAT5a or STAT5b
indicated that the response was restricted to STAT5b, with the number of TH cells
displaying STAT5b nuclear immunoreactivity rising from less than 10% under basal 
conditions to approximately 70% after prolactin stimulation. STAT5a nuclear
labeling remained unchanged at 6-10% of TH-positive cells. STAT5b selectivity was
confirmed in vivo, where the injection of prolactin into bromocriptine-treated
rats stimulated a time-dependent increase in STAT5b, but not STAT5a, nuclear
staining in the TH-expressing neurons in the arcuate nucleus. These results
extend our previous findings with STAT5b-deficient mice and strongly suggest that
in NEDA neurons, prolactin signaling via the JAK/STAT pathway is mediated
exclusively by STAT5b.

PMID: 16123156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Endocrinol Invest. 2005;28(5 Suppl):38-42.

The IGF system in childhood: physiology and clinical implications.

Pozo J(1), Martos-Moreno GA, Barrios V, Argente J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Universitad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain.

Our understanding of the IGF-I system has increased dramatically in recent yr due
in part to the advances in molecular and cellular biology. Not only can we now
measure circulating levels of the members of this axis in order to address the
possibly pathophysiological changes, but genetic alterations can now be
identified as the underlying cause of specific clinical situations. In normal
children, circulating levels of IGF-I and the IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs)
change throughout development and in some cases are gender dependent. Children
and adolescents with a variety of illnesses and metabolic disorders have altered 
circulating IGF-I and IGFBP levels. Hence, in children or adolescents with
exogenous obesity, anorexia nervosa, coeliac disease, leukaemia and other types
of cancer, as well as in cases of GH deficiency, this axis can be altered. These 
data may help us to understand the physiology and pathophysiology of this system,
but the clinical or diagnostic utility of these measurements is still largely
debated. Indeed, in most of the above mentioned illnesses, circulating IGF and
IGFBP levels overlap with normal values. Furthermore, these measurements do not
provide data concerning levels of these factors at target tissues or of local
synthesis and autocrine-paracrine effects. However, measurements of IGF-I and its
binding proteins, as well as GH and its binding proteins, can help us to focus
our analysis of patients suspected to have genetic abnormalities on the GH
receptor, IGF-I, its receptor, IGFALS, or intracellular signalling proteins such 
as STAT5b or ERK. Possibly, the most clear clinical utility of circulating IGF-I 
measurements in children is in cases of GH deficiency or insensitivity or under
GH treatment. However, the fact there are cases of children with non-detectable
levels of circulating IGF-I that yet normal height and growth velocity, or with
non-detectable levels of GH yet normal growth and IGF-I levels, raises many
questions. Furthermore, circulating IGF-I levels may be within the normal control
levels and the child may have a pathological growth pattern. Hence, just how
useful are these measurements? Another clinically important question pertains to 
GH treatment in patients, such as in the Turner Syndrome, where
supraphysiological levels of serum IGF-I are reached in order to induce growth.
The interpretation and clinical utility of measurements of circulating IGF-I and 
its BPs are currently being widely discussed. As our knowledge of this system
increases, with the identification of new members of this family and its
intracellular mechanisms of action, as well as new genetic alterations in
patients, the interpretation of laboratory results will also improve and help to 
better our diagnostic capability.

PMID: 16114274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Nov;19(11):2660-70. Epub 2005 Jun 23.

Estrogen negatively regulates epidermal growth factor (EGF)-mediated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 signaling in human EGF family
receptor-overexpressing breast cancer cells.

Boerner JL(1), Gibson MA, Fox EM, Posner ED, Parsons SJ, Silva CM, Shupnik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22908, USA.

Breast cancer cell growth may be stimulated by 17beta-estradiol (E2) or growth
factors like epidermal growth factor (EGF). However, tumors typically depend on
only one of these pathways and may overexpress either estrogen receptor (ER) or
EGF receptor (EGFR) and related family members. Tumors overexpressing EGFR are
more aggressive than those expressing ER. Intracellular mediators of these
growth-stimulatory pathways are not completely defined, but one potential common 
mediator of EGF and E2 signaling is the transcription factor signal transducer
and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5). To investigate the role of STAT5 in
potential crosstalk between E2 and EGF, MDA-MB231 and SKBr3 breast cancer cells, 
which are ER-negative and overexpress human EGF family receptors, were used.
Introduction of ERalpha and treatment with E2 decreased EGF-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5b, basal and EGF-induced STAT5-mediated transcription,
and EGF-stimulated DNA synthesis in these cells. Suppressive effects of
E2-EpsilonRalpha were specific for STAT5, as EGF stimulation of MAPK was
unaffected. Deletion/mutation analysis of ERalpha demonstrated that the
DNA-binding domain was insufficient, and that the ligand-binding domain was
required for these responses. ERalpha transcriptional activity was not necessary 
for suppression of STAT5 activity. Overexpression of c-Src did not prevent
suppression of STAT5 activity by E2 and ERalpha. However, ERalpha did prevent
basal increases in STAT5 activity with overexpressed c-Src. In the context of
human EGF receptor family overexpression, E2-ER opposes EGF signaling by
regulating STAT5 activity. STAT5 may be a crucial point of signaling for both E2 
and growth factors in breast cancer cells, allowing targeted therapy for many
types of breast tumors.

PMID: 15976008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 15;174(12):7753-63.

Restricted STAT5 activation dictates appropriate thymic B versus T cell lineage
commitment.

Goetz CA(1), Harmon IR, O'Neil JJ, Burchill MA, Johanns TM, Farrar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, Cancer Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The molecular mechanisms regulating lymphocyte lineage commitment remain poorly
characterized. To explore the role of the IL7R in this process, we generated
transgenic mice that express a constitutively active form of STAT5 (STAT5b-CA), a
key downstream IL7R effector, throughout lymphocyte development. STAT5b-CA mice
exhibit a 40-fold increase in pro-B cells in the thymus. As documented by BrdU
labeling studies, this increase is not due to enhanced B cell proliferation.
Thymic pro-B cells in STAT5b-CA mice show a modest increase in cell survival (
approximately 4-fold), which correlates with bcl-x(L) expression. However,
bcl-x(L) transgenic mice do not show increases in thymic B cell numbers. Thus,
STAT5-dependent bcl-x(L) up-regulation and enhanced B cell survival are not
sufficient to drive the thymic B cell development observed in STAT5b-CA mice.
Importantly, thymic pro-B cells in STAT5b-CA mice are derived from early T cell
progenitors (ETPs), suggesting that STAT5 acts by altering ETP lineage
commitment. Supporting this hypothesis, STAT5 binds to the pax5 promoter in ETPs 
from STAT5b-CA mice and induces pax5, a master regulator of B cell development.
Conversely, STAT5b-CA mice exhibit a decrease in the DN1b subset of ETPs,
demonstrating that STAT5 activation inhibits early T cell differentiation or
lineage commitment. On the basis of these findings, we propose that the observed 
expression of the IL-7R on common lymphoid progenitors, but not ETPs, results in 
differential STAT5 signaling within these distinct progenitor populations and
thus helps ensure appropriate development of B cells and T cells in the bone
marrow and thymic environments, respectively.

PMID: 15944278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Lipid Res. 2005 Sep;46(9):1904-13. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Docosahexaenoic acid changes lipid composition and interleukin-2 receptor
signaling in membrane rafts.

Li Q(1), Wang M, Tan L, Wang C, Ma J, Li N, Li Y, Xu G, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing 210002, China.
liqiurong@yahoo.com

Polyunsaturated fatty acids, including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3),
modulate immune responses and exert beneficial immunosuppressive effects, but the
molecular mechanisms inhibiting T-cell activation are not yet elucidated. Lipid
rafts have been shown to play an important role in the compartmentalization and
modulation of cell signaling. We investigated the role of DHA in modulating the
lipid composition in lipid rafts and membrane subdomain distribution of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor signaling molecules. We found that DHA altered
lipid components of rafts and modified the IL-2-induced Janus kinase-signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway by partially
displacing IL-2 receptors from lipid rafts. We fractionated plasma membrane
subcellular compartments and discovered that certain amounts of STAT5a and STAT5b
existed in detergent-resistant plasma membrane fractions of T-cells. After DHA
treatment, STAT5a and STAT5b were not detected in lipid raft fractions and were
located in detergent-soluble fractions. These data demonstrate for the first time
that DHA alters the lipid composition of membrane microdomains and suppresses
IL-2 receptor signaling in T-cells. Thus, our data provide evidence for a
functional modification in lipid rafts by DHA treatment and explain PUFA-mediated
immunosuppressive effects.

PMID: 15930520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Oct;289(4):E600-7. Epub 2005 May 17.

Desensitization of the JAK2/STAT5 GH signaling pathway associated with increased 
CIS protein content in liver of pregnant mice.

Miquet JG(1), Sotelo AI, Bartke A, Turyn D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas, University of Buenos
Aires-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientificar y Techicas (CONICET),
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Chronic exposure to growth hormone (GH) was related to the desensitization of the
JAK2/STAT5 signaling pathway in liver, as demonstrated in cells, female rats, and
transgenic mice overexpressing GH. The cytokine-induced suppressor (CIS) is
considered a major mediator of this desensitization. Pregnancy is accompanied by 
an increment in GH circulating levels, which were reported to be associated with 
hepatic GH resistance, although the molecular mechanisms involved in this
resistance are not clearly elucidated. We thus evaluated the JAK2/STAT5b
signaling pathway and its regulation by the suppressors of cytokine signaling
(SOCS)/CIS family and the JAK2-interacting protein SH2-Bbeta in pregnant mouse
liver, a model with physiological prolonged exposure to high GH levels. Basal
tyrosyl phosphorylation levels of JAK2 and STAT5b in pregnant mice were similar
to values obtained for virgin animals, in spite of the important increment of GH 
they exhibit. Moreover, these signaling mediators were not phosphorylated upon GH
stimulation in pregnant mice. A 3.3-fold increase of CIS protein content was
found for pregnant mice, whereas the abundance of the other SOCS proteins
analyzed and SH2-Bbeta did not significantly change compared with virgin animals.
The desensitization of the JAK2/STAT5b GH signaling pathway observed in pregnant 
mice would then be mainly related to increased CIS levels rather than to the
other regulatory proteins examined.

PMID: 15899943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1278-91.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha blockade restores growth hormone signaling in murine 
colitis.

DiFedele LM(1), He J, Bonkowski EL, Han X, Held MA, Bohan A, Menon RK, Denson LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cytokines including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) may
create a state of growth hormone (GH) resistance in Crohn's disease. Anabolic
effects of GH are mediated via phosphorylation of the signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)5b transcription factor. Although GH resistance 
in other settings has been linked to a defect in janus kinase-STAT signaling, the
molecular basis for GH resistance in colitis was not known. We hypothesized that 
the GH-induced phosphorylation of STAT5b would be impaired in colitis, and that
TNFalpha blockade would restore GH signaling.
METHODS: Growth, body composition, and molecular regulators of GH signaling were 
determined in interleukin-10 null mice with chronic colitis and wild-type
controls, +/- treatment with an anti-TNFalpha antibody.
RESULTS: Interleukin-10 null mice exhibited significant alterations in growth,
body composition, and feed efficiency. Liver insulin-like growth factor 1
expression was reduced in colitic mice. This was associated with down-regulation 
of GH receptor (GHR) expression and impaired GH-dependent STAT5b activation.
Down-regulation of GHR expression was associated with reduced nuclear abundance
and DNA binding of the GHR gene-promoter transactivator, Sp3. TNFalpha
down-regulated GHR abundance and prevented GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT5 in rat hepatocytes in culture. TNFalpha neutralization up-regulated liver
GHR abundance and restored GH activation of STAT5 and serum insulin-like growth
factor 1 levels in colitic mice; this preceded improvements in weight gain and
disease activity.
CONCLUSIONS: GH resistance in experimental colitis is caused by down-regulation
of GHR expression, thereby reducing GH-dependent STAT5 activation. TNFalpha
blockade restores liver GH signaling and improves anabolic metabolism in this
setting.

PMID: 15887111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 4;24(33):5252-7.

Haploinsufficiency identifies STAT5 as a modifier of IL-7-induced lymphomas.

Abraham N(1), Ma MC, Snow JW, Miners MJ, Herndier BG, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British Columbia,
#300-6174, University Boulevard, BC, Canada. ninan@interchange.ubc.ca

The requirement for receptor components and the signalling effector, signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5A/5B, was assessed genetically 
in a lymphoma development model induced by interleukin-7 (IL-7). This growth
factor for T- and B-cell progenitors and mature lymphocytes activates survival
and proliferative pathways including Bcl-2, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and
STAT5. Overexpression of IL-7 in vivo causes early mortality from lymphoma
development. Mice overexpressing IL-7 that were heterozygous for the IL-7Ralpha
subunit showed improved survival compared to wild-type mice. In addition,
STAT5A/5B+/- compound heterozygous mice with one targeted allele each of STAT5A
and STAT5B showed striking amelioration of IL-7-induced mortality and disease
development. STAT5A/5B+/- compound heterozygous mice were otherwise normal in
stem cell and lymphocyte development and cellularity. Lower STAT5 protein levels 
accompanied the reduction in STAT5A/5B copy number, which suggests that STAT5
haploinsufficiency is a modifier of IL-7 signal strength.

PMID: 15870688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochem J. 2005 Aug 15;390(Pt 1):359-66.

Activated STAT5 proteins induce activation of the PI 3-kinase/Akt and Ras/MAPK
pathways via the Gab2 scaffolding adapter.

Nyga R(1), Pecquet C, Harir N, Gu H, Dhennin-Duthille I, Régnier A,
Gouilleux-Gruart V, Lassoued K, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0351, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de
Picardie Jule Verne, 3 rue des Louvels, 80036 Amiens, France.

The active forms of STAT5A (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A) 
and STAT5B are able to relieve the cytokine dependence of haematopoietic cells
and to induce leukaemia in mice. We have demonstrated previously that activation 
of the PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) signalling cascade plays a major role in 
cell growth and survival induced by these proteins. Interaction between STAT5 and
p85, the regulatory subunit of the PI3K, has been suggested to be required for
this activation. We show in the present study that the scaffolding protein Gab2
[Grb2 (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2)-associated binder-2] is an
essential component of this interaction. Gab2 is persistently
tyrosine-phosphorylated in Ba/F3 cells expressing caSTAT5 (constitutively
activated STAT5), independent of JAK2 (Janus kinase 2) activation where it
interacts with STAT5, p85 and Grb2, but not with Shp2 [SH2 (Src homology
2)-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase] proteins. Interaction of STAT5 with
Gab2 was also observed in Ba/F3 cells stimulated with interleukin-3 or expressing
the oncogenic fusion protein Tel-JAK2. The MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein
kinases) ERK1 (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1) and ERK2 were
constitutively activated in the caSTAT5-expressing cells and were found to be
required for caSTAT5-induced cell proliferation. Overexpression of Gab2-3YF, a
mutant of Gab2 incapable of binding PI3K, inhibited the proliferation and
survival of caSTAT5-expressing cells as well as ERK1/2 and Akt/protein kinase B
phosphorylation. Taken together, our results indicate that Gab2 is required for
caSTAT5-induced cell proliferation by regulating both the PI3K/Akt and the
Ras/MAPK pathways.

PMCID: PMC1188271
PMID: 15833084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Aug;289(2):G227-39. Epub 2005 Apr
14.

Interleukin-1 inhibits the induction of insulin-like growth factor-I by growth
hormone in CWSV-1 hepatocytes.

Shumate ML(1), Yumet G, Ahmed TA, Cooney RN.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, College of Medicine, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey,
PA 17033, USA.

Sepsis results in hepatic "growth hormone (GH) resistance" with reductions in
plasma IGF-I despite a two- to fourfold increase in circulating GH. In this
study, we examine the effects of IL-1 on GH receptor (GHR) expression, GH
signaling (via the JAK/STAT and MAPK pathways), and the induction of gene
expression [IGF-I mRNA and serine protease inhibitor (Spi) 2.1] by GH in CWSV-1
hepatocytes. Incubation of cells with IL-1beta (10 ng/ml, 24 h) had no effect on 
the relative abundance of GHR or signaling proteins JAK2, STAT5b, and ERK1/2 in
cell lysates. Baseline phosphorylation of GHR, JAK2, STAT5b, and ERK1/2 was
minimal. After GH stimulation, tyrosine phosphorylation of GHR, JAK2, STAT5b, and
ERK1/2 increased 2- to 10-fold. However, neither the time course nor the
magnitude of GHR, JAK2, and ERK1/2 phosphorylation by GH were significantly
altered by IL-1. The GH-induced translocation of STAT5b to the nucleus was not
prevented by IL-1. Although phosphorylated STAT5 in nuclear extracts from GH +
IL-1 cells was decreased by 24% (vs. controls) 15 min after GH stimulation, this 
did not result in reduced STAT5-DNA binding activity. Pretreatment with IL-1 did 
not significantly decrease IGF-I mRNA stability. We conclude that IL-1 only
minimally affects the time course of JAK2/STAT5 and MAPK signaling by GH.
Therefore, an inhibitory effect of IL-1 on IGF-I and Spi 2.1 mRNA synthesis by GH
represents the most likely mechanism for IL-1-mediated GH resistance.

PMID: 15831712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jul;90(7):4260-6. Epub 2005 Apr 12.

Severe growth hormone insensitivity resulting from total absence of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5b.

Hwa V(1), Little B, Adiyaman P, Kofoed EM, Pratt KL, Ocal G, Berberoglu M,
Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, NRC5, Oregon Health & Sciences University, 3181 S.W.
Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA. hwav@ohsu.edu

CONTEXT: The central clinical feature of GH insensitivity (GHI) is severe growth 
failure associated with elevated serum concentrations of GH and abnormally low
serum levels of IGF-I. GHI can be the result of an abnormality in the GH receptor
or aberrancies downstream of the GH receptor.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the GH-IGF-I axis in a young female GHI subject who
presented with a height of 114 cm (-7.8 sd score) at age 16.4 yr.
PATIENT: The subject, from a consanguineous pedigree, had circulating levels of
GH and GH-binding protein that were normal to elevated, whereas IGF-I (7.2 ng/ml;
normal, 242-600), IGF-binding protein-3 (543 ng/ml; normal, 2500-4800), and
acid-labile subunit (1.22 microg/ml; normal, 5.6-16) levels were abnormally low
and failed to increase during an IGF-I generation test.
DESIGN: Dermal fibroblast cultures were established with the consent of the
patient and family. Immunoblot analysis of cell lysates and DNA sequencing of her
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b), a critical
intermediate of the GH-IGF-I axis, were performed.
RESULTS: Sequencing of the STAT5b gene revealed a novel homozygous insertion of a
single nucleotide in exon 10. The insertion resulted in a frame shift, leading to
early protein termination and consequent lack of immunodetectable STAT5b protein.
CONCLUSION: The identification of a second case of severe growth failure
associated with STAT5b mutation implicates a unique and critical role for STAT5b 
in GH stimulation of IGF-I gene expression and statural growth.

PMID: 15827093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neuroendocrinol. 2005 Mar;17(3):186-94.

Hypothalamic STAT proteins: regulation of somatostatin neurones by growth hormone
via STAT5b.

Bennett E(1), McGuinness L, Gevers EF, Thomas GB, Robinson IC, Davey HW, Luckman 
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are a family of
transcription factors linked to class I cytokine receptors. In the present study,
we investigated whether their distribution in the hypothalamus reflects the
feedback regulation by growth hormone and what role they might play in the
functioning of target neurones. We demonstrate that each of the seven known STATs
has a distinct distribution in the hypothalamus. Notably, the STAT5 proteins,
that are important in growth hormone (GH) and prolactin signalling in peripheral 
tissues, were expressed in somatostatin neurones of the periventricular nucleus
and dopamine neurones of the arcuate nucleus. Because somatostatin neurones are
regulated by feedback from circulating GH, we investigated the importance of
STAT5 in these neurones. We demonstrate that STAT5b protein expression, similar
to somatostatin mRNA, is sexually dimorphic in the periventricular nucleus of
rats and mice. Furthermore, chronic infusion of male dwarf rats with GH increased
the expression of STAT5b, while a single injection of GH into similar rats
induced the phosphorylation of STAT5 proteins. The cellular abundance of
somatostatin mRNA in STAT5b-deficient mice was significantly reduced in the
periventricular nucleus, effectively reducing the sexually dimorphic expression. 
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that STAT5 proteins are involved
in the feedback regulation of somatostatin neurones by GH, and that these
neurones may respond to patterned GH secretion to reinforce sexual dimorphism in 
the GH axis.

PMID: 15796771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Cell Biol. 2005 Mar 28;168(7):1099-108.

{beta}1 Integrin and IL-3R coordinately regulate STAT5 activation and
anchorage-dependent proliferation.

Defilippi P(1), Rosso A, Dentelli P, Calvi C, Garbarino G, Tarone G, Pegoraro L, 
Brizzi MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino, 10126,
Torino, Italy. paola.defilippi@unito.it

We previously demonstrated that integrin-dependent adhesion activates STAT5A, a
well known target of IL-3-mediated signaling. Here, we show that in endothelial
cells the active beta1 integrin constitutively associates with the
unphosphorylated IL-3 receptor (IL-3R) beta common subunit. This association is
not sufficient for activating downstream signals. Indeed, only upon fibronectin
adhesion is Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2) recruited to the beta1 integrin-IL-3R complex
and triggers IL-3R beta common phosphorylation, leading to the formation of
docking sites for activated STAT5A. These events are IL-3 independent but require
the integrity of the IL-3R beta common. IL-3 treatment increases JAK2 activation 
and STAT5A and STAT5B tyrosine and serine phosphorylation and leads to cell cycle
progression in adherent cells. Expression of an inactive STAT5A inhibits cell
cycle progression upon IL-3 treatment, identifying integrin-dependent STAT5A
activation as a priming event for IL-3-mediated S phase entry. Consistently,
overexpression of a constitutive active STAT5A leads to anchorage-independent
cell cycle progression. Therefore, these data provide strong evidence that
integrin-dependent STAT5A activation controls IL-3-mediated proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2171831
PMID: 15795318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Anim Sci. 2005 Apr;83(4):825-32.

Exogenous prolactin stimulates mammary development and alters expression of
prolactin-related genes in prepubertal gilts.

Farmer C(1), Palin MF.

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Dairy and Swine Research and Development
Centre, Lennoxville, Quebec J1M 1Z3, Canada. farmerc@agr.gc.ca
<farmerc@agr.gc.ca>

The goal of this project was to determine whether recombinant porcine (rp)
prolactin (PRL) can enhance mammary development when given to pre-pubertal gilts 
and/or modify the expression of PRL-related genes. Crossbred gilts were injected 
s.c. twice daily with saline (CTRL; n = 13), 2 mg of rpPRL (4PRL; n = 13), or 4
mg of rpPRL (8PRL; n = 13) in a 2.0-mL volume for a period of 29 d, starting at
75.1 +/- 0.5 kg BW. Jugular blood samples were collected before the first
injection, as well as 14 and 28 d later, and were assayed for PRL, IGF-I, and
leptin. Gilts were slaughtered on d 29 of treatment, and mammary glands were
collected for dissection of parenchymal and extraparenchymal tissues, and for
determination of parenchymal DNA, DM, protein, and fat contents. Levels of mRNA
for PRL, PRL receptor (PRL-R), and signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT5A and STAT5B) were determined via real-time PCR in the
mammary parenchyma, as well as levels for PRL and PRL-R in the pituitaries.
Treatments did not alter plasma (P = 0.48) IGF-I. Serum concentrations of PRL at 
slaughter were greater (P < 0.01) in both 4PRL and 8PRL compared with CTRL,
whereas at mid-treatment, they were greater (P < 0.05) only in 8PRL gilts.
Parenchymal tissue weight and parenchymal DNA concentrations increased with
exogenous rpPRL (P < 0.001). The percentage of protein in parenchyma increased (P
< 0.001), whereas that of DM (P < 0.001), fat (P < 0.001), and the protein:DNA
ratio (P < 0.05) decreased with exogenous rpPRL. Treatment differences were
always observed between the 4 mg dose and CTRL, and no further differences were
noted when the dose was increased to 8 mg daily. Expression levels of PRL, but
not PRL-R, were decreased (P < 0.05) in anterior pituitary glands and mammary
glands of treated gilts. The mRNA levels of STAT5A and STAT5B increased (P <
0.05) with exogenous rpPRL. It is evident from these data that rpPRL can
stimulate mammogenesis in prepubertal gilts through hyperplasia and increased
expression of PRL-related genes.

PMID: 15753337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Endocrinol. 2005 Mar;184(3):481-92.

Prolonged insulin treatment inhibits GH signaling via STAT3 and STAT1.

Xu J(1), Ji S, Venable DY, Franklin JL, Messina JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0019, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) and insulin are important regulators of cellular and whole
body metabolism as well as somatic growth and body composition. Studies have
indicated complex feedback effects of GH on insulin action and of insulin on GH
signaling pathways. Previous studies in our laboratory have shown that GH
induction of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)5B tyrosine
phosphorylation is inhibited by prolonged insulin treatment, probably via
downregulation of GHR. Here, we find that in rat H4IIE hepatoma cells GH-induced 
tyrosine phosphorylation of two other STATs (STAT3 and STAT1) was also greatly
reduced following prolonged insulin pretreatment compared with that induced by GH
alone. In the present work, total STAT5B and STAT1 protein levels were not
altered by prolonged insulin treatment. However, prolonged insulin treatment (16 
h; 10 or 100 nM) resulted in a 30-40% reduction of total STAT3 protein, with
little change at 0.1 and 1.0 nM insulin. Thus, there is a selective reduction of 
total STAT3 protein levels by insulin, but only at high concentration of insulin.
Basal tyrosine phosphorylated (PY)-STAT3 was also significantly reduced by
prolonged insulin treatment, and to a greater extent than total STAT3 protein
levels. The inhibitory effect of insulin on total STAT3 protein and basal
PY-STAT3 levels was dependent on activation of the MEK-ERK pathway, rather than
the PI3K pathway. In contrast, the MEK-ERK pathway did not play a major role in
insulin's inhibition of GH-induced PY-STAT3 and PY-STAT1. The present studies
indicate that prolonged hyperinsulinemia, such as that found in some obese
patients or patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus, may have profound effects on 
GH signaling via STAT3 and STAT1.

PMID: 15749807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17449-57. Epub 2005 Feb 21.

Dynamic assembly of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator signaling receptor
complex determines the mitogenic activity of urokinase-type plasminogen
activator.

Jo M(1), Thomas KS, Marozkina N, Amin TJ, Silva CM, Parsons SJ, Gonias SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) receptor (uPAR) functions in
concert with co-receptors, including integrins, FPR-like receptor-1/lipoxin A4
receptor, and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), to initiate cell
signaling. uPAR co-receptors may be dynamically organized into a multiprotein
signaling receptor complex. In Chinese hamster ovary-K1 (CHO-K1) cells,
uPA-binding to uPAR activates ERK/MAP kinase, even though these cells do not
express the EGFR; however, when CHO-K1 cells are transfected to express the EGFR,
ERK activation becomes EGFR-dependent. In this study, we demonstrate that ERK
activation in response to uPA follows equivalent biphasic kinetics in
EGFR-expressing and -deficient CHO-K1 cells. In both cell types, the response is 
pertussis toxin-sensitive; however, uPA promotes cell proliferation exclusively
in the EGFR-expressing cells. uPA-induced mitogenic activity requires activation 
of both STAT5b and ERK. STAT5b was tyrosine-phosphorylated, in response to uPA,
only in EGFR-expressing cells. uPA-induced cell proliferation was blocked by
dominant-negative MEK1, dominant-negative STAT5b, and by expression of an EGFR
that is mutated at Tyr-845, which is essential for STAT5b activation. In two cell
culture models of uPA-stimulated breast cancer growth, MDA-MB 468 cells treated
with uPA and MCF-7 cells treated with uPA-plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
complex, proliferation was completely inhibited when EGFR expression or activity 
was blocked. We conclude that expression and assembly of uPAR co-receptors in a
specific cell type determines the response to uPA. The EGFR selectively
cooperates with uPAR to mediate mitogenesis.

PMID: 15728176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Immunol. 2005 Mar;6(3):303-13. Epub 2005 Feb 13.

STAT5 regulates the self-renewal capacity and differentiation of human memory B
cells and controls Bcl-6 expression.

Scheeren FA(1), Naspetti M, Diehl S, Schotte R, Nagasawa M, Wijnands E, Gimeno R,
Vyth-Dreese FA, Blom B, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology of the Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlands.

It is unknown how B cells that mature during a germinal center reaction 'decide' 
between plasma or memory cell fate. Here we describe a previously unknown
subpopulation of B cells in the human germinal center that is characterized by
tyrosine phosphorylated transcriptional activator STAT5. These cells had an
activated centrocyte phenotype and had abundant expression of BCL6 but low
expression of PRDM1, both encoding transcriptional repression proteins. Using RNA
interference and ectopic expression of constitutively activated forms of STAT5,
we demonstrate here a function for STAT5 in the self-renewal of B cells in vitro.
STAT5b isoform seemed to directly upregulate Bcl-6, and ectopic expression of
Bcl-6 in B cells resulted in self-renewal and inhibition of plasma cell
differentiation. These data indicate that activation of STAT5 is involved in
regulation of memory B cell differentiation.

PMID: 15711548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Kidney Int. 2005 Mar;67(3):858-66.

Cardiac resistance to growth hormone in uremia.

Zheng Z(1), Sun DF, Tummala P, Rabkin R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System and Department
of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease is a major cause of death in end-stage renal
disease (ESRD). Since growth hormone is required for maintaining normal cardiac
structure and function and as growth hormone has a salutary effect on cardiac
remodeling in disease, we postulated that if cardiac resistance to growth hormone
develops in chronic renal failure (CRF) this may predispose to the cardiomyopathy
of uremia. We set out to test whether in CRF there is resistance to the cardiac
action of growth hormone and whether this defect might be caused by altered
growth hormone signaling.
METHODS: Growth hormone-deficient (dw/dw) rats and growth hormone-intact
Sprague-Dawley rats underwent a subtotal nephrectomy or sham operation and pair
feeding.
RESULTS: In dw/dw rats treated with growth hormone for 8 days there was a
significant increase in insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) mRNA levels in
controls but this response was attenuated in CRF. Next, growth hormone-stimulated
Janus kinase-signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK2-STAT5)
signaling was studied 15 minutes after intravenous growth hormone in dw/dw and
Sprague-Dawley rats. Growth hormone receptor, JAK2, STAT5a, and STAT5b protein
levels were unaltered in CRF. Growth hormone-induced JAK2, growth hormone
receptor (GHR), and STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation was significantly depressed in
CRF as was nuclear translocation of phosphorylated STAT5. When rats were treated 
with pharmacologic dose growth hormone, STAT5 phosphorylation increased similarly
in CRF and control rats.
CONCLUSION: Uremic rats develop cardiac resistance to growth hormone caused at
least, in part, by a postreceptor defect in growth hormone-induced signaling that
is characterized by impaired phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT5. 
These findings raise the question whether growth hormone resistance contributes
to the cardiac changes of uremia.

PMID: 15698425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Pediatr Nephrol. 2005 Mar;20(3):303-5. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

Identification of the first patient with a confirmed mutation of the JAK-STAT
system.

Rosenfeld RG(1), Kofoed E, Buckway C, Little B, Woods KA, Tsubaki J, Pratt KA,
Bezrodnik L, Jasper H, Tepper A, Heinrich JJ, Hwa V.

Author information: 
(1)Lucile Packard Foundation for Children's Health, 770 Welch Road, Suite 350,
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. ron.rosenfeld@lpfch.org

Growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) has been attributable, classically, to
mutations in the gene for the GH receptor. After binding to the GH receptor, GH
initiates signal transduction through a number of pathways, including the
JAK-STAT pathway. We describe the first patient reported with a mutation in the
gene for STAT5b, a protein critical for the transcriptional regulation of
insulin-like growth factor-I.

PMID: 15688233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13364-73. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Differential STAT5 signaling by ligand-dependent and constitutively active
cytokine receptors.

Moucadel V(1), Constantinescu SN.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels B-1200, Belgium.

Many leukemia and cancer cells exhibit constitutive activation of STAT5, which
was suggested to provide an anti-apoptotic advantage. Transformation of
cytokine-dependent hematopoietic cells, such as Ba/F3 cells to autonomous growth 
and tumorigenicity equally results in selection for constitutive activation of
STAT5. We compared STAT5 signaling between erythropoietin(Epo)-dependent cells
and cells that were transformed by oncogenic activation of the erythropoietin
receptor (EpoR) by coexpression of the gp55-P envelope protein of the spleen
focus forming virus or by expression of the R129C constitutively active EpoR
mutant. In transformed cells it was mainly STAT5B that was constitutively
activated. In contrast, Epo stimulation activated both STAT5A and STAT5B. In
transformed cells, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) showed STAT5 to be
physically bound to promoters of STAT5 target genes, such as Bcl(XL), and to be
able to promote transactivation of the Bcl(XL) promoter in a constitutive
fashion. Sequencing of native sequences after ChIP with anti-STAT5 antibodies in 
Epo-dependent and -transformed cells indicated that in gp55-transformed cells,
STAT5B bound in the chromatin not only to N3 high affinity, but also to low
affinity N4 GAS sites. Transactivation for N3 GAS sites in luciferase reporters
was specific to gp55 transformation. Because we also found preferential
constitutive STAT5B activation after transformation of cells by a truncated form 
of the G-CSF-R that produces severe neutropenia (Kostmann syndrome) and favors
leukemia in humans, we discuss the potential role of STAT5B in oncogenic
transformation of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15677477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):10955-63. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Identification of a distal STAT5-binding DNA region that may mediate growth
hormone regulation of insulin-like growth factor-I gene expression.

Wang Y(1), Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) regulates insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) gene
expression through signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b)
and STAT5a. The objective of this study was to identify the cis-regulatory DNA
region involved in this process. By cotransfection analyses of shotgun DNA
fragments of a bacterial artificial chromosome sequence containing the entire
human IGF-I gene and a large 5'-flanking region, a approximately 700-bp DNA
region approximately 75 kb 5' to the IGF-I gene was found to have the ability to 
enhance gene expression from both heterologous and homologous promoters in the
presence of constitutively active STAT5a or STAT5b. This 700-bp DNA region
contains two closely located consensus STAT5-binding sites, and its sequence
appears to be evolutionarily conserved. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
verified the ability of the two putative STAT5-binding sites to bind to STAT5a
and STAT5b. Cotransfection analyses confirmed that both STAT5-binding sites were 
necessary for the 700-bp DNA region to mediate STAT5a or STAT5b activation of
gene transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that the
chromosomal region containing these two STAT5-binding sites was bound by
constitutively active STAT5b protein in HepG2 cells and that the binding was
accompanied by increased expression of IGF-I mRNA. In reconstituted GH-responsive
cells, this 700-bp DNA region was able to mediate GH-induced STAT5a or STAT5b
activation of gene expression. These results together suggest that this
STAT5-binding site-containing distal 5'-flanking region of IGF-I gene may be an
enhancer mediating GH-induced STAT5 activation of IGF-I gene transcription.

PMID: 15677453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Basic Res Cardiol. 2005 May;100(3):187-97. Epub 2004 Dec 22.

Erythropoietin protects the infant heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury by
triggering multiple signaling pathways.

Rafiee P(1), Shi Y, Su J, Pritchard KA Jr, Tweddell JS, Baker JE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, Division of Pediatric Surgery, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

The immediate protective effect of erythropoietin (EPO) against ischemia in heart
suggests a role beyond hematopoiesis and the treatment of anemia. We determined
the role of JAK/STAT and Ras/Rac/MAPK in the protective effect of EPO against
ischemia-reperfusion injury in infant rabbit heart. EPO (1.0 U/ml) administered
15 minutes prior to 30-minutes global ischemia and 35 minutes reperfusion
resulted in increased recovery of postischemic ventricular developed pressure in 
rabbit hearts. EPO exerted its immediate cardioprotective effect via activation
of multiple signaling pathways by: 1) phosphorylation and activation of JAK1/2,
STAT3 and STAT5A but not of STAT1alpha and STAT5B, 2) phosphorylation and
activation of PI(3) kinase and its downstream kinases Akt and Rac, 3) activation 
of PKCepsilon, Raf, MEK1/2, p42/44 MAPK and p38 MAPK. Pretreatment with
Wortmannin abolished EPO-induced Akt activation and phosphorylation. Pretreatment
with Chelerythrine followed by EPO treatment resulted in partial inhibition of
Raf activation, and abolished PKCepsilon and p38 MAPK activation without any
effect on Akt, MEK1/2 and p42/44 MAPK. PD98059 abolished MEK1/2 and p42/44 MAPK
activation with no effect on Akt, Raf and p38 MAPK activation. SB203580 inhibited
only p38 MAPK activation by EPO. We can conclude EPO increases immediate
cardioprotection through the activation of multiple signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 15611843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Dec;271(23-24):4613-20.

Regulation of STAT signalling by proteolytic processing.

Hendry L(1), John S.

Author information: 
(1)Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, Programme in Infection and Immunity, 
King's College, London, UK.

Interaction of cytokines with their cognate receptors leads to the activation of 
latent transcription factors, the signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) proteins. Numerous studies have identified the critical
roles played by STAT proteins in regulating cell proliferation, differentiation
and survival. Consequently, the activity of STAT proteins is negatively regulated
by a variety of different mechanisms, which include alternative splicing,
covalent modifications, protein-protein interactions with negative regulatory
proteins and proteolytic processing by proteases. Cleavage of STAT proteins by
proteases results in the generation of C-terminally truncated proteins, called
STATgamma, which lack the transactivation domain and behave as functional
dominant-negative proteins. Currently, STATgamma isoforms have been identified
for Stat3, Stat5a, Stat5b and Stat6 in different cellular contexts and biological
processes. Evidence is mounting for the role of as yet unidentified serine
proteases in the proteolytic processing of STAT proteins, although at least one
cysteine protease, calpain is also known to cleave these STATs in platelets and
mast cells. Recently, studies of acute myeloid leukaemia and cutaneous T cell
lymphoma patients have revealed important roles for the aberrant expression of
Stat3gamma and Stat5gamma proteins in the pathology of these diseases. Together, 
these findings indicate that proteolytic processing is an important mechanism in 
the regulation of STAT protein biological activity and provides a fertile area
for future studies.

PMID: 15606748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Mar;67(3):891-901. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Inadequacy of the Janus kinase 2/signal transducer and activator of transcription
signal transduction pathway to mediate episodic growth hormone-dependent
regulation of hepatic CYP2C11.

Verma AS(1), Dhir RN, Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce St., Philadelphia, PA 19104-6048, USA.

CYP2C11, the most commonly expressed hepatic cytochrome P450 isoform in male
rats, is induced by the masculine "episodic" secretory growth hormone profile. A 
considerable number of reports have indicated that episodic growth hormone
effects are mediated by the activation of the Janus kinase 2 (Jak2)/signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5B signal transduction pathway.
We observed that restoration of the normal masculine plasma growth hormone pulse 
in hypophysectomized male rats did indeed rapidly activate (phosphorylate) Jak2, 
shortly followed by activation and nuclear translocation of Stat5B. Infusion of a
growth hormone pulse with an amplitude that was 10% of the normal height induced 
a dramatic overexpression of CYP2C11, had little effect activating Jak2, but
induced a more rapid and greater accumulation of activated nuclear Stat5B.
Restoration of a growth hormone pulse with an amplitude of only 1% of normal had 
little effect phosphorylating Jak2, activated and translocated to the hepatic
nucleus approximately 70% of the normally induced levels of Stat5B, but had no
inductive effect on CYP2C11. Last, the hypophysectomized male rat receiving no
growth hormone replacement expressed 25 to 35% of normal concentrations of
CYP2C11 despite no measurable activation of either Jak2 or Stat5B. These results 
raise concerns regarding the requisite role of the Jak2/Stat5B pathway in
mediating episodic growth hormone regulation of CYP2C11. However, accumulation of
activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1 and ERK2 were the only
transducers measured in the study not affected by the 1% replacement pulse of
growth hormone and were elevated 2- to 3-fold above normal when the pulse was
renaturalized to 10% of physiological amplitude, suggesting the possible
involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase in episodic growth hormone
regulation of CYP2C11.

PMID: 15591245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 4;280(5):3259-68. Epub 2004 Nov 10.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factors in transcriptional regulation of male-specific
CYP2A2.

Wiwi CA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Cytochrome P450 2A2 (CYP2A2) is an adult male-specific rat liver steroid
hydroxylase whose sex-dependent expression is regulated at the transcriptional
level by sexually dimorphic pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretory patterns. In 
contrast to CYP2C11 and other male-specific, plasma GH pulse-inducible liver
genes, CYP2A2 is highly expressed in hypophysectomized rat liver, despite the
absence of GH stimulation. CYP2A2 promoter fragments 0.9-6.2 kb long exhibited
unusually high basal promoter activity when transfected into the liver cell line 
HepG2. A further approximately 2.5-fold increase in activity was obtained by
cotransfection of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 3gamma or HNF4alpha. CYP2A2
promoter activity was inhibited approximately 85% by transfection of HNF3beta or 
HNF6, both of which are more highly expressed in female than male liver and can
strongly trans-activate the female-specific CYP2C12 promoter. The male GH
pulse-activated transcription factor STAT5b had no effect on CYP2A2 promoter
activity, either alone or in combination with HNF3gamma and HNF4alpha, consistent
with the GH pulse-independence of CYP2A2 expression. By contrast, STAT5b
synergistically enhanced the transcriptional activity of HNF4alpha toward two
other male-specific liver target genes, Cyp2d9 and CYP8B1. Furthermore, STAT5b in
combination with the HNF4alpha coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha strongly enhanced the transcriptional activity 
of HNF4alpha toward CYP8B1 but not toward CYP2A2. These findings support the
hypothesis that sex-dependent HNFs contribute to the sexually dimorphic
expression of CYP2A2 and other liver CYPs and highlight the ability of STAT5b to 
act in concert with HNF4alpha to regulate select male-specific liver CYP genes.

PMID: 15539409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):6409-17.

IL-5 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor activate STAT3 and
STAT5 and promote Pim-1 and cyclin D3 protein expression in human eosinophils.

Stout BA(1), Bates ME, Liu LY, Farrington NN, Bertics PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, 1300 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Allergic inflammation is characterized by elevated eosinophil numbers and by the 
increased production of the cytokines IL-5 and GM-CSF, which control several
eosinophil functions, including the suppression of apoptosis. The JAK/STAT
pathway is important for several functions in hemopoietic cells, including the
suppression of apoptosis. We report in this study that STAT3, STAT5a, and STAT5b 
are expressed in human eosinophils and that their signaling pathways are active
following IL-5 or GM-CSF treatment. However, in airway eosinophils, the
phosphorylation of STAT5 by IL-5 is reduced, an event that may be related to the 
reduced expression of the IL-5Ralpha on airway eosinophils. Furthermore, IL-5 and
GM-CSF induced the protein expression of cyclin D3 and the kinase Pim-1, both of 
which are regulated by STAT-dependent processes in some cell systems. Pim-1 is
more abundantly expressed in airway eosinophils than in blood eosinophils.
Because Pim-1 reportedly has a role in the modulation of apoptosis, these results
suggest that Pim-1 action is linked to the suppression of eosinophil apoptosis by
these cytokines. Although cyclin D3 is known to be critical for cell cycle
progression, eosinophils are terminally differentiated cells that do not proceed 
through the cell cycle. Thus, this apparent cytokine regulation of cyclin D3
suggests that there is an alternative role(s) for cyclin D3 in eosinophil
biology.

PMID: 15528381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):6241-7.

Enhancer role of STAT5 in CD2 activation of IFN-gamma gene expression.

Gonsky R(1), Deem RL, Bream J, Young HA, Targan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 
Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

IFN-gamma is an important immunoregulatory protein with tightly controlled
expression in activated T and NK cells. Three potential STAT binding regions have
been recognized within the IFN-gamma promoter: 1) an IL-12-mediated STAT4 binding
site at -236 bp; 2) a newly identified IL-2-induced STAT5 binding element at -3.6
kb; and 3) CD2-mediated STAT1 and STAT4 binding to an intronic element in mucosal
T cells. However, functional activation of these sites remains unclear. In this
study we demonstrate CD2-mediated activation of the newly characterized -3.6-kb
IFN-gamma STAT5 binding region. CD2 signaling of human PBMC results in activation
of the -3.6-kb IFN-gamma promoter, whereas mutation of the -3.6-kb STAT5 site
attenuates promoter activity. Functional activation is accompanied by STAT5A but 
little STAT5B nucleoprotein binding to the IFN-gamma STAT5 site, as determined by
competition and supershift assays. STAT5 activation via CD2 occurs independent of
IL-2. Western and FACS analysis shows increased phospho-STAT5 following CD2
signaling. AG490, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor affecting Jak proteins, inhibits
CD2-mediated IFN-gamma mRNA expression, secretion, and nucleoprotein binding to
the IFN-gamma STAT5 site in a dose-dependent fashion. This report is the first to
describe CD2-mediated activation of STAT5 and supports STAT5 involvement in
regulation of IFN-gamma expression.

PMID: 15528362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1123-31. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

STAT5B-mediated growth hormone signaling is organized by highly dynamic
microtubules in hepatic cells.

Phung-Koskas T(1), Pilon A, Poüs C, Betzina C, Sturm M, Bourguet-Kondracki ML,
Durand G, Drechou A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Cellulaire, EA 1595, Faculté de
Pharmacie, 5, rue JB. Clément, 92296 Chatenay-Malabry, France.

In the last decade, the notion that microtubules are critical to the spatial
organization of signal transduction and contribute to the transmission of signals
to downstream targets has been proposed. Because the STAT5B transduction and
transcription factor is the major STAT protein activated by growth hormone
stimulation in hepatocytes and is a crossroads between many signaling pathways,
we studied the involvement of microtubules in STAT5B-mediated growth hormone
signaling pathway in the highly differentiated and polarized WIF-B hepatic cell
line. We showed that depolymerization of the microtubule network impaired STAT5B 
translocation to the nucleus upon growth hormone treatment. A significant amount 
of STAT5B binds to microtubules, while STAT5A and STAT3 are exclusively
compartmentalized in the cytosol. Moreover, taxol-induced stabilization of
microtubules released STAT5B from its binding, and we show that STAT5B binds
specifically to the highly dynamic microtubules and is absent of the stable
microtubule subpopulation. The specific involvement of dynamic microtubule
subpopulation in growth hormone signaling pathway was confirmed by the inhibition
of growth hormone-induced STAT5B nuclear translocation after stabilization of
microtubules or specific disruption of highly dynamic microtubules. Upon growth
hormone treatment, MT-bound STAT5B was rapidly released from microtubules by a
dynein-dependent transport to the nucleus. Altogether, our findings indicate that
the labile microtubule subpopulation specifically and dynamically organizes
STAT5B-mediated growth hormone signaling in hepatic cells.

PMID: 15528207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Sep;17 Suppl 4:1267-71.

Gender differences in height: an evolutionary perspective.

Rosenfeld RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lucile Packard Foundation for Children's Health Palo Alto, CA 94022, USA.
ron.rosenfeld@lpfch.org

Homo sapiens (H. sapiens) exhibits growth characteristics not observed in other
mammals, including other primates. Both male and female H. sapiens experience
pubertal growth spurts and are not sexually dimorphic in adult stature. These
unique growth characteristics must have evolved to benefit the reproductive
success and survival of the species. The H. sapiens childhood is relatively
protracted, and the pubertal growth spurt may be a compensatory measure to attain
adult size in a relatively short time. Because reproductive patterns of H.
sapiens have evolved away from a male-dominated social structure, large male size
no longer confers a reproductive advantage. The relatively large female size of
H. sapiens might have evolved to support the birth of offspring with
ever-increasing cranial characteristics. Growth in H. sapiens depends largely on 
GH-dependent STAT5b regulation of IGF-I expression. STAT5b in other mammals
contributes to growth in males only. Although speculative, the loss of sexual
dimorphism in H. sapiens may reflect a progressive dependence on STAT5b to
control growth.

PMID: 15506072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Blood. 2005 Feb 15;105(4):1476-83. Epub 2004 Oct 21.

A STAT5 modifier locus on murine chromosome 7 modulates engraftment of
hematopoietic stem cells during steady-state hematopoiesis.

Couldrey C(1), Bradley HL, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical
Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD, USA.

Homologous disruption of expression of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b (STAT5ab(-/-)) in mice results in
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that can engraft irradiated hosts alone but are
noncompetitive against wild-type HSCs. To explore mechanisms for this phenotype, 
we crossed the STAT5 mutations onto an HW80 background congenic to the original
C57BL/6 that differs in a small chromosome 7 genomic locus. We previously
demonstrated that C57BL/6 or HW80 background STAT5ab(-/-) bone marrow (BM) cells 
showed equal repopulating function either competitively or noncompetitively in
irradiated hosts. However, one intraperitoneal injection of wild-type green
fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic BM cells into unconditioned newborn
STAT5ab(-/-) recipients of either background was sufficient for high-level donor 
engraftment. Furthermore, haploinsufficiency of STAT5 (STAT5ab(+/-)) allowed
improved engraftment over wild-type recipients, indicating a dose-dependent
requirement for STAT5 activation. In reciprocal experiments, STAT5ab(-/-) BM was 
transplanted into nonirradiated W/W(v) hosts. In these mice, C57BL/6 STAT5ab(-/-)
BM cells were 10-fold more defective in long-term engraftment than control
wild-type BM cells and HW80 STAT5ab(-/-) BM cells were 5- to 10-fold more
defective than C57BL/6 STAT5ab(-/-) BM cells. Therefore, we conclude that STAT5
plays a critical role during steady-state HSC engraftment and a chromosome 7
modifier locus regulates this activity.

PMID: 15498858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54724-30. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Isolation of unique STAT5 targets by chromatin immunoprecipitation-based gene
identification.

Nelson EA(1), Walker SR, Alvarez JV, Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

STAT5a and STAT5b are two highly related transcription factors that control
essential cellular functions. Several STAT5 targets are known, although it is
likely that most remain uncharacterized. To identify a more complete set of
STAT5-regulated genes, we used a modification of the chromatin
immunoprecipitation procedure, which does not presuppose any information
regarding these targets. Employing Ba/f3 cells in which STAT5 is activated by
interleukin-3, we have identified novel STAT5 binding sites that may be
regulatory regions for nearby genes. These sites are typically found far from
transcription start sites, and most do not contain CpG islands, indicating that
they are not in traditional promoter regions. Nonetheless, when the expression of
genes near these STAT5 binding sites was examined, all were expressed in Ba/f3
cells, and most were modulated by interleukin-3. Furthermore, genes identified by
this strategy show unique expression patterns in acute leukemias, tumors
characterized by activated STAT5. Whereas both STAT5 isoforms bound to all
promoters tested, STAT5a and STAT5b bound with different kinetics, suggesting
that at least some of the differences between the functions of these two proteins
are mediated by their DNA binding activity. Therefore, this method of
transcription factor target identification represents an effective strategy to
isolate transcription factor targets in an unbiased fashion, and it has revealed 
many novel STAT5-dependent regulatory regions outside of traditional promoters.

PMID: 15498775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;19(2):431-40. Epub 2004 Oct 7.

Regulation of progesterone levels during pregnancy and parturition by signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 and 20alpha-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase.

Piekorz RP(1), Gingras S, Hoffmeyer A, Ihle JN, Weinstein Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The two highly related signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stats), Stat5a and Stat5b, are major mediators of prolactin signaling in both
the mammary gland and in the ovary. Deficiencies in Stat5b, or in both Stat5a and
Stat5b, result in loss of pregnancy during midgestation and are correlated with
an increase in ovarian 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20alpha-HSD) and a
decrease in serum progesterone, which normally declines only immediately before
parturition. To determine the relative contribution of 20alpha-HSD to
progesterone metabolism and Stat5 function during pregnancy and parturition, we
created a 20alpha-HSD-deficient strain of mice by gene disruption. Mice deficient
for 20alpha-HSD sustain high progesterone levels and display a delay in
parturition of several days demonstrating that 20alpha-HSD regulates parturition 
downstream of the prostaglandin F2alpha receptor in an essential and nonredundant
manner. Moreover, 20alpha-HSD deficiency partially corrected the abortion of
pregnancies associated with Stat5b deficiency, supporting the concept that
prolactin activation of Stat5b is important in suppressing 20alpha-HSD gene
expression and thereby allowing the maintenance of progesterone levels that are
required to sustain pregnancy.

PMID: 15471942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Genetika. 2004 Jul;40(7):961-7.

[The structure of a conserved region of porcine genome, represented in human
genome by chromosome 17].

[Article in Russian]

Larkin DM, Astakhova IM, Kozhin AIu, Karamysheva TV, Rubtsov NB, Kuznetsov SB,
Zhdanova NS.

Radiation mapping of nine genes (H3F3B, HLR1, MYL4, STAT5B, THRA1, TOP2A, MCP1,
NF1, and MPO) to porcine chromosome 12 was carried out. Also, subchromosomal
location of the NF1 gene along with the two loci containing the DNA sequences
homologous to the DNA of the two human BAC clones was determined. The NF1
position was ascertained via microdissection of chromosome 12 with subsequent PCR
amplification of the gene fragment with specific primers. BAC clones were mapped 
using FISH. Comparative analysis of the gene order in porcine chromosome 12 and
in the homologous human chromosome 17 was performed. It was demonstrated that the
gene orders in these chromosomes differed relative to the position of the MPO
gene.

PMID: 15458207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Sep 15;199(3):275-84.

Simultaneous, bidirectional inhibitory crosstalk between PPAR and STAT5b.

Shipley JM(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, MA 02215, USA.

The transcription factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activate genes
involved in fatty acid metabolism (PPARalpha) and adipogenesis (PPARgamma) and
mediate hormonal responses important for body growth, liver gene expression, and 
mammary gland development (STAT5a and STAT5b). These seemingly disparate pathways
are subject to mutually inhibitory crosstalk, with growth hormone (GH)-activated 
STAT5 able to inhibit PPAR-regulated gene transcription by approximately 80%, and
conversely, ligand-activated PPAR able to inhibit STAT5-regulated transcription
to a similar degree. Given the co-expression of PPAR and STAT5 in multiple
tissues, we investigated whether one of the factors dominates the inhibitory
crosstalk. A PPAR-responsive Renilla luciferase reporter was constructed and used
to monitor PPAR transcriptional activity in COS-1 cells co-transfected with a
STAT5 firefly luciferase reporter. In cells co-stimulated with GH and a PPAR
agonist, STAT5b inhibited expression of the PPAR-regulated Renilla luciferase
reporter, whereas PPARalpha and PPARgamma inhibited transcription of the
STAT5b-regulated firefly luciferase reporter. The extent of the inhibitory
crosstalk was dependent on the relative levels of expression of each
transcription factor and on the relative concentrations of GH and PPAR agonist.
Dose-response studies revealed that STAT5b was inhibited at an approximately
7-fold lower concentration of the PPARgamma ligand troglitazone than was required
for activation of PPARgamma, indicating that only a portion of cellular PPARgamma
is needed for STAT5b inhibition. Similarly, mono-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (MEHP), 
a reproductive toxicant and primary metabolite of the environmental chemical
di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP), inhibited STAT5b transcriptional activity with
an EC50 value of 1.1 microM, corresponding to an approximately 10-fold lower
concentration than required for activation of PPARgamma-dependent transcription. 
We conclude that the cross-inhibition between PPAR and STAT5 proceeds in a
simultaneous, bidirectional manner. Exposure to phthalates and other
environmental chemical activators of PPARs may thus lead to alteration of
hormone-induced, STAT5-regulated gene expression in tissues such as liver, fat
and breast, where both transcription factors are expressed. Conversely,
STAT5-activating hormones and cytokines may modulate the responsiveness of PPARs 
to their foreign chemical ligands.

PMID: 15364543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;12(4):450-4.

[Identification of acute leukemia-specific genes from leukemia recipient/sibling 
donor pairs by distinguishing study with oligonucleotide microarrays].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun Y(1), Dong LJ, Tian F, Wang SQ, Jia ZL, Huang J, Chen ZJ, Li WJ, Chen XL, Zhu
P.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Center, Hospital 307, Academy of
Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 100039, China.

To explore differentially expressed genes in leukemia gene expression profile and
identify main related genes in acute leukemia, gene expression profiles were
analyzed in bone marrow/leucopheresis peripheral blood stem cells samples from 9 
acute leukemia patients and their sibling donors with the use of oligonucleotide 
microarrays. 163 reported leukemia-related genes were involved in the study. The 
oligonucleotide primers were designed, synthesized and spotted on the
chemical-material-coated-glass plates in array. The total RNAs were isolated from
nine patients' bone marrow or leucopheresis peripheral blood cells and from nine 
their sibling donors peripheral blood stem cells treated by G-CSF, then collected
by CS-3000 cell selection machine, and were reversely transcribed to cDNAs with
the incorporations of fluorescent dUTP. The mixed probes were then hybridized to 
the oligonucleotide microarray. The results showed that in four patient/donor
pairs with B-ALL, 5 up-regulated (RIZ, STK-1, T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1A,
Cbp/p300, Op18) and 1 down-regulated genes (hematopoietic proteoglycan core
protein) were identified; In five patient/donor pairs with AML-M(4) and AML-M(5),
6 up-regulated (STAT5B, ligand p62 for the Lck SH2, CST3, LTC4S, myeloid leukemia
factor 2 and epb72) and 1 down-regulated genes (CCR5) were identified. In
conclusion, on the basis of distinguishing study of specific genetic related
recipient/sibling donor pairs, screening leukemia-related genes with
oligonucleotide microarrays, a set of 13 up-regulated or down-regulated genes
among 163 leukemia-related genes has been identified. The result has further
confirmed that above genes play critical role in the molecular mechanism of acute
leukemia.

PMID: 15363129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Gene. 2004 Aug 18;338(1):65-74.

Conservation, duplication and divergence of the zebrafish stat5 genes.

Lewis RS(1), Ward AC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Biological and Chemical
Sciences, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, Victoria 3125,
Australia.

There are seven mammalian signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)
proteins that act downstream of cytokine and growth factor receptors to mediate
rapid changes in gene expression. The mammalian Stat5a and Stat5b genes show high
sequence identity and lie adjacent in a head-to-head configuration next to the
Stat3 gene, apparently the result of a relatively recent mammal-specific gene
duplication event. We have identified and characterized two stat5 homologues that
are expressed in zebrafish, named stat5.1 and stat5.2. The stat5.1 gene shows a
high level of conservation with the single stat5 gene found in other teleosts and
lies next to the stat3 gene, in the same relative orientation as the mammalian
Stat5b gene. In contrast, the stat5.2 gene lies on a different chromosome to
stat5.1 and stat3, and has diverged from the stat5 genes of other teleosts, with 
no apparent orthologue. Together, these data suggest that the ancestral Stat5
gene has undergone two independent gene duplication events to generate a stat5.2 
paralogue in zebrafish and a Stat5a paralogue in mammals.

PMID: 15302407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer Sci. 2004 Aug;95(8):662-5.

Dominant-negative Stat5 inhibits growth and induces apoptosis in T47D-derived
tumors in nude mice.

Yamashita H(1), Nishio M, Fujii Y, Iwase H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
hirokoy@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) regulates growth,
differentiation, and survival of mammary and hematopoietic cells. The role of
Stat5 in breast cancer has not been established, although Stat5 is critical for
some hematopoietic malignancies. In this study, we have analyzed the role of
Stat5 in progression of the estrogen receptor-positive T47D human breast cancer
cell line, in which Stat5b is constitutively activated. Expression of
Stat5-regulated genes, such as cyclin D1 and bcl-xL, was strongly suppressed in
T47D cells infected with the dominant-negative Stat5 adenovirus,
AdStat5aDelta740. We also determined the phenotypic effects of introduction of
dominant-negative Stat5 on T47D-derived tumors in nude mice. Tumors injected with
AdStat5aDelta740 showed a 60% reduction in size, which was associated with the
induction of apoptosis. Our results indicate the possibility of using
dominant-negative Stat5 to induce apoptosis in certain Stat5-activated breast
cancers.

PMID: 15298729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Clin Invest. 2004 Aug;114(3):349-56.

Central and peripheral actions of somatostatin on the growth hormone-IGF-I axis.

Murray RD(1), Kim K, Ren SG, Chelly M, Umehara Y, Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Research Institute, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Somatostatin (SRIF) analogs provide safe and effective therapy for acromegaly. In
a proportion of patients, however, SRIF analogs may lead to discordant growth
hormone (GH) and IGF-I suppression, which suggests a more complex mechanism than 
attributable to inhibition of GH release alone. To elucidate whether SRIF acts
peripherally on the GH-IGF-I axis, we showed that rat hepatocytes express
somatostatin receptor subtypes-2 and -3 and that IGF-I mRNA and protein levels
were suppressed in a dose-dependent manner by administration of octreotide. The
inhibitory effect of SRIF was not apparent without added GH and in the presence
of GH was specific for IGF-I induction and did not inhibit GH-induced c-myc or
extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation. Pertussis toxin
treatment of hepatocytes incubated with GH and SRIF, or with GH and octreotide,
abrogated the inhibitory effect on GH-induced IGF-I, which confirms the
requirement for the inhibitory G-protein. Treatment with SRIF and GH increased
protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) activity and inhibited signal transducer and
activator of transcription-5b (STAT5b) phosphorylation and nuclear localization. 
Octreotide also inhibited GH-stimulated IGF-I protein content of ex vivo-perfused
rat livers. The results demonstrate that SRIF acts both centrally and
peripherally to control the GH-IGF-I axis, providing a mechanistic explanation
for SRIF analog action in treating patients with GH-secreting pituitary adenomas.

PMCID: PMC484973
PMID: 15286801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):7059-71.

Phosphorylation of Y845 on the epidermal growth factor receptor mediates binding 
to the mitochondrial protein cytochrome c oxidase subunit II.

Boerner JL(1), Demory ML, Silva C, Parsons SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cancer Center, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

When co-overexpressed, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and c-Src
cooperate to cause synergistic increases in EGF-induced DNA synthesis, soft agar 
colony growth, and tumor formation in nude mice. This synergy is dependent upon
c-Src-mediated phosphorylation of a unique tyrosine on the EGFR, namely, tyrosine
845 (Y845). Phenylalanine substitution of Y845 (Y845F) was found to inhibit
EGF-induced DNA synthesis without affecting the catalytic activity of the
receptor or its ability to phosphorylate Shc or activate mitogen-activated
protein kinase. These results suggest that synergism may occur through alternate 
signaling pathways mediated by phosphorylated Y845 (pY845). One such pathway
involves the transcription factor Stat5b. Here we describe another pathway that
involves cytochrome c oxidase subunit II (CoxII). CoxII was identified as a
specific binding partner of a pY845-containing peptide in a phage display screen.
EGF-dependent binding of CoxII to the wild type but not to the mutant Y845F-EGFR 
was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. This association also
required the kinase activity of c-Src. Confocal microscopy, as well as
biochemical fractionation, indicated that the EGFR translocates to the
mitochondria after EGF stimulation, where it colocalizes with CoxII. Such
translocation required the catalytic activity of the receptor but not
phosphorylation of Y845. However, ectopic expression of the Y845F-EGFR prevented 
the EGF from protecting MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells from adriamycin-induced
apoptosis, whereas two mutants of Stat5b, a dominant-interfering mutant
(DNstat5b) and a tyrosine mutation at 699 (Y699F-Stat5b) did not. Taken together,
these data suggest that, through the ability of EGFR to translocate to the
mitochondria, the binding of proteins such as CoxII to pY845 on the EGFR may
positively regulate survival pathways that contribute to oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC479738
PMID: 15282306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):41249-57. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

A distal region in the interferon-gamma gene is a site of epigenetic remodeling
and transcriptional regulation by interleukin-2.

Bream JH(1), Hodge DL, Gonsky R, Spolski R, Leonard WJ, Krebs S, Targan S,
Morinobu A, O'Shea JJ, Young HA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte and Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation
Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1820, USA.
jbream@jhsph.edu

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is a multifunctional cytokine that defines the
development of Th1 cells and is critical for host defense against intracellular
pathogens. IL-2 is another key immunoregulatory cytokine that is involved in T
helper differentiation and is known to induce IFN-gamma expression in natural
killer (NK) and T cells. Despite concerted efforts to identify the one or more
transcriptional control mechanisms by which IL-2 induces IFN-gamma mRNA
expression, no such genomic regulatory regions have been described. We have
identified a DNase I hypersensitivity site approximately 3.5-4.0 kb upstream of
the transcriptional start site. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we
found constitutive histone H3 acetylation in this distal region in primary human 
NK cells, which is enhanced by IL-2 treatment. This distal region is also
preferentially acetylated on histones H3 and H4 in primary Th1 cells as compared 
with Th2 cells. Within this distal region we found a Stat5-like motif, and in
vitro DNA binding assays as well as in vivo chromosomal immunoprecipitation
assays showed IL-2-induced binding of both Stat5a and Stat5b to this distal
element in the IFNG gene. We examined the function of this Stat5-binding motif by
transfecting human peripheral blood mononuclear cells with -3.6 kb of
IFNG-luciferase constructs and found that phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate/ionomycin-induced transcription was augmented by IL-2 treatment. The
effect of IL-2 was lost when the Stat5 motif was disrupted. These data led us to 
conclude that this distal region serves as both a target of chromatin remodeling 
in the IFNG locus as well as an IL-2-induced transcriptional enhancer that binds 
Stat5 proteins.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15271977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Growth Factors. 2004 Jun;22(2):79-88.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factors in growth hormone-regulated, sexually
dimorphic expression of liver cytochromes P450.

Wiwi CA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The liver is a sexually dimorphic organ in many species, including humans. In
rodent models, dramatic sex differences characterize the expression of numerous
plasma proteins, receptors and other signaling molecules, and enzymes of steroid 
and foreign compound metabolism, including members of the cytochrome P450 (CYP)
superfamily. The sexual dimorphism of liver gene expression is dictated by the
temporal pattern of plasma growth hormone (GH) stimulation, which is intermittent
and highly pulsatile in males and more frequent in females. Many liver-specific
genes, including CYP genes, are regulated by the coordinated action of multiple
hepatic nuclear factors (HNFs) through a complex transcriptional hierarchy. These
HNFs are proposed to collaborate with the GH pulse-activated latent cytoplasmic
transcription factor STAT5b to regulate the sex-dependent expression of liver
CYPs. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that certain HNFs are regulated
by GH and exhibit a differential responsiveness to the sex-specific pattern of GH
secretion. In particular, recent studies of an HNF4alpha-deficient mouse model
demonstrate an essential role for this nuclear receptor in regulating several
liver-enriched transcription factors and sexually dimorphic CYPs in liver in
vivo. Further studies on the mechanisms by which HNF4alpha and other liver
factors respond to GH may expand our understanding of the mechanisms by which GH,
via the coordinated action of HNFs and STAT5b, regulate sexually dimorphic liver 
gene expression.

PMID: 15253383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;23(6):355-65.

High-throughput gateway bicistronic retroviral vectors for stable expression in
mammalian cells: exploring the biologic effects of STAT5 overexpression.

Royer Y(1), Menu C, Liu X, Constantinescu SN.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels, Belgium.

Stable expression of cloned genes in mammalian cells has been achieved in the
past by retroviral transduction using bicistronic retroviral vectors. In these
vectors, the use of an Internal Ribosome Entry Site (IRES) allows simultaneous
expression of a protein of interest and a fluorescence marker. However,
traditional cDNA cloning in these vectors is often difficult. Here we report the 
construction of a high-throughput retroviral vector using the Invitrogen
"Gateway" Cloning system. The Gateway recombination sequences (attR) flanking the
ccdB and chloramphenicol resistance genes were incorporated at the 5' of the IRES
of pMX-IRES-GFP, -CD2, or -CD4 vectors. Through recombination, these vectors can 
acquire cDNAs coding for genes of interest, which will result in simultaneous
expression of the recombined gene and the marker protein. We constructed Gateway 
bicistronic vectors coding for the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) and GFP, CD4,
or CD2. Epo-dependent proliferation assays and analysis of Jak2-dependent EpoR
cell-surface expression showed that these vectors were able to function
indistinguishable from the original pMX-EpoR-IRES-GFP. The expression levels of
the genes cloned upstream the IRES were proportional to the levels of expression 
of GFP, which was cloned downstream of the IRES. We used the same approach and
generated Ba/F3 cells that overexpress STAT5a, STAT5b, or a constitutively active
form of STAT5. Overexpression of STAT5 lead to a significant effect on the
intrinsic adherence to plastic of these cells, but did not change their
proliferative responses to cytokines. We discuss possible applications of the new
vectors for cell signaling and expression cloning.

PMID: 15231069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5510-20.

Impaired alveologenesis and maintenance of secretory mammary epithelial cells in 
Jak2 conditional knockout mice.

Wagner KU(1), Krempler A, Triplett AA, Qi Y, George NM, Zhu J, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases and Department of 
Pathology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, 68198-6805, USA.
kuwagner@unmc.edu

Jak2 is a hormone-receptor-coupled kinase that mediates the tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of signal transducers and activators of
transcription (Stat). The biological relevance of Jak2-Stat signaling in
hormone-responsive adult tissues is difficult to investigate since Jak2
deficiency leads to embryonic lethality. We generated Jak2 conditional knockout
mice to study essential functions of Jak2 during mammary gland development. The
mouse mammary tumor virus-Cre-mediated excision of the first coding exon resulted
in a Jak2 null mutation that uncouples signaling from the prolactin receptor
(PRL-R) to its downstream mediator Stat5 in the presence of normal and
supraphysiological levels of PRL. Jak2-deficient females were unable to lactate
as a result of impaired alveologenesis. Unlike Stat5a knockouts, multiple
gestation cycles could not reverse the Jak2-deficient phenotype, suggesting that 
neither other components of the PRL-R signaling cascade nor other growth factors 
and their signal transducers were able to compensate for the loss of Jak2
function to activate Stat5 in vivo. A comparative analysis of Jak2-deficient
mammary glands with transplants from Stat5a/b knockouts revealed that Jak2
deficiency also impairs the pregnancy-induced branching morphogenesis. Jak2
conditional mutants therefore resemble PRL-R knockouts more closely, which
suggested that Jak2 deficiency might affect additional PRL-R downstream mediators
other than Stat5a and Stat5b. To address whether Jak2 is required for the
maintenance of PRL-responsive, differentiating alveolar cells, we utilized a
transgenic strain that expresses Cre recombinase under regulatory elements of the
whey acidic protein gene (Wap). The Wap-Cre-mediated excision of Jak2 resulted in
a negative selection of differentiated alveolar cells, suggesting that Jak2 is
required not only for the proliferation and differentiation of alveolar cells but
also for their maintenance during lactation.

PMCID: PMC419899
PMID: 15169911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Prolif. 2004 Jun;37(3):231-45.

The influence of antisense oligonucleotides against STAT5 on the regulation of
normal haematopoiesis in a bone marrow model.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Paczkowski M, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szcecin,
Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

Cytokines and growth factors that take part in the regulation of haematopoietic
cell development activate many signalling pathways in target cells. The STAT5
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are members of a
family of signal transducers and activators of transcription that can be
activated after cytokine stimulation. Their binding to promoters of different
genes influences cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. It is
suggested that they play an important role in haematopoiesis, however, the
question of the real function of STAT5 proteins requires further examination. The
aim of our study was to investigate the role of STAT5 in the proliferation and
apoptosis of normal haematopoietic bone marrow cells derived from heparinized
cadaveric organ donors (HCOD). We applied antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) 
to block STAT5A and STAT5B at the mRNA level and the reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction method to study STAT5 mRNA expression in the cells
after incubation with ODNs. Moreover, we performed Western blot analysis of the
STAT5A protein after exposure to antisense STAT5A. We analysed the clonogenicity 
of the colony-forming unit of granulocytes-macrophages and the burst-forming unit
of erythrocytes in methylcellulose cultures according to the type and the dose of
ODNs. We also examined apoptosis induced in bone marrow mononuclear and CD34(+)
cells by employing annexin V staining and the TUNEL method using flow cytometry
(FACScan). We found that the perturbation of STAT5 expression decreased the
clonogenicity of bone marrow haematopoietic cells. However, we did not observe
any significant increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells after incubation
with antisense ODNs. It was concluded that the STAT5 proteins play a significant 
role in the proliferation of human bone marrow cells harvested from HCOD. These
proteins might be critical in the regulation of haematopoiesis, especially under 
stress conditions.

PMID: 15144500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Endocrinology. 2004 Sep;145(9):4162-75. Epub 2004 May 13.

Distinctive roles for prolactin and growth hormone in the activation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 in pancreatic islets of langerhans.

Brelje TC(1), Stout LE, Bhagroo NV, Sorenson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, 6-160 Jackson Hall, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 
55455, USA.

Although the beta-cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans express both
prolactin (PRL) and GH receptors, we have observed that PRL is considerably more 
effective than GH in the up-regulation of islet function in vitro. This study
examined whether differences in the activation of the Janus kinase 2/signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5 signaling pathway by these
closely related receptors may be involved in this disparity. The activation of
STAT5B by PRL was biphasic, with an initial peak within 30 min, a nadir between 1
and 3 h, and prolonged activation after 4 h. In contrast, the response to GH was 
transient for 1 h. The importance of the long-term activation of STAT5B by PRL
was supported by the similar dose response curves for STAT5B activation and the
PRL-induced increases in insulin secretion and islet cell proliferation. Because 
the pulsatile secretion of GH affects its actions in other target tissues, the
ability of pretreatment with either hormone to affect subsequent stimulation was 
also examined. Surprisingly, the response to PRL was inhibited by prior exposure 
for less than 3 h to either PRL or GH and disappeared with a longer pretreatment 
with either hormone. Similar to other tissues, the response to GH was inhibited
by any length of prior exposure to GH. However, pretreatment with PRL had no
effect. These experiments are the first demonstration of the transient
desensitization of the PRL receptor by either PRL or GH pretreatment in any
tissue and the desensitization of GH stimulation in islet cells. These
observations provide insight into the mechanisms that regulate the
desensitization of these receptors and, more importantly, allow the long-term
activation of STAT5B by the PRL receptor. These results may apply to other
members of the cytokine superfamily of receptors. We also demonstrate that the
increase in islet cell proliferation required continuous stimulation with PRL,
whereas the smaller effect with GH occurred with either continuous or pulsatile
stimulation. In summary, this study demonstrates that islets are sensitive to the
temporal pattern of stimulation by these hormones and provides a new basis for
understanding their physiological roles in the regulation of islet function.

PMID: 15142985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Haematol. 2004 Jun;72(6):420-9.

The role of the STAT5 proteins in the proliferation and apoptosis of the CML and 
AML cells.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin,
Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

OBJECTIVES: The STAT5 proteins are activated by many haematological cytokines and
growth factors. They regulate cell cycle, apoptosis and proliferation of
different cells via the influence on gene transcription. Because STAT5s are
constitutively activated in certain haematooncologic diseases, they are suggested
to play an important role in leukaemogenesis. However, the real function of these
proteins in haematopoietic cell transformation and proliferation is not clear
enough. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of suppression of
STAT5A and STAT5B expression on the clonogenicity and apoptosis of the chronic
myeloid leukaemia (CML) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Blast cells from 34 newly diagnosed patients with CML and
AML were used in our experiments. Antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) were
applied to block STAT5A and STAT5B at the mRNA level and the RT-PCR method was
used to study STAT5 mRNA expression in the cells after incubation with ODNs.
Moreover, Western blot analysis of the STAT5 proteins was performed. The effect
of ODN pretreatment on cell clonogenicity in methylocellulose cultures was
examined according to the type of oligodeoxynucleotide and the time of exposure. 
The induction of apoptosis in cells was also estimated by the Annexin V/PI
staining and the TUNEL method using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Perturbation of STAT5 expression decreased proliferative potential of
the CML and the AML blasts as well as enhanced their apoptosis (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies showed that the STAT5 proteins may be critical in the
regulation of growth and apoptosis of the CML and AML leukaemic cells.

PMID: 15128421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(10):4557-70.

Tyrosine 813 is a site of JAK2 autophosphorylation critical for activation of
JAK2 by SH2-B beta.

Kurzer JH(1), Argetsinger LS, Zhou YJ, Kouadio JL, O'Shea JJ, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0662, USA.

The tyrosine kinase Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) binds to the majority of the known
members of the cytokine family of receptors. Ligand-receptor binding leads to
activation of the associated JAK2 molecules, resulting in rapid
autophosphorylation of multiple tyrosines within JAK2. Phosphotyrosines can then 
serve as docking sites for downstream JAK2 signaling molecules. Despite the
importance of these phosphotyrosines in JAK2 function, only a few sites and
binding partners have been identified. Using two-dimensional phosphopeptide
mapping and a phosphospecific antibody, we identified tyrosine 813 as a site of
JAK2 autophosphorylation of overexpressed JAK2 and endogenous JAK2 activated by
growth hormone. Tyrosine 813 is contained within a YXXL sequence motif associated
with several other identified JAK2 phosphorylation sites. We show that
phosphorylation of tyrosine 813 is required for the SH2 domain-containing adapter
protein SH2-B beta to bind JAK2 and to enhance the activity of JAK2 and STAT5B.
The homologous tyrosine in JAK3, tyrosine 785, is autophosphorylated in response 
to interleukin-2 stimulation and is required for SH2-B beta to bind JAK3. Taken
together these data strongly suggest that tyrosine 813 is a site of
autophosphorylation in JAK2 and is the SH2-B beta-binding site within JAK2 that
is required for SH2-B beta to enhance activation of JAK2.

PMCID: PMC400461
PMID: 15121872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28450-7. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

The cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase Pyk2 as a novel effector of fibroblast growth
factor receptor 3 activation.

Meyer AN(1), Gastwirt RF, Schlaepfer DD, Donoghue DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Molecular Genetics,
University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0367, USA.

Activating mutations within fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), a
receptor tyrosine kinase, are responsible for human skeletal dysplasias including
achondroplasia and the neonatal lethal syndromes thanatophoric dysplasia types I 
and II. Several of these same FGFR3 mutations have also been identified
somatically in human cancers, including multiple myeloma, bladder carcinoma, and 
cervical cancer. The molecular pathways exploited by FGFR3 to stimulate abnormal 
proliferation during neoplasia are unclear. The nonreceptor protein-tyrosine
kinase Pyk2 (proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2) has been shown previously to
regulate apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells. Here we describe a novel
interaction between FGFR3 and Pyk2, mediated by the juxtamembrane domain of FGFR3
and the kinase domain of Pyk2. Within the FGFR family, Pyk2 also interacted
significantly with FGFR2. Overexpression of Pyk2 alone led to its spontaneous
activation and tyrosine phosphorylation, resulting in activation of Stat5B,
indicated by the reporter GFP-Stat5B. These effects were completely dependent
upon Tyr(402), the autophosphorylation site of Pyk2, which allows recruitment of 
Src family members for further activating phosphorylations at other sites on
Pyk2. In the presence of activated FGFR3, the activation of Pyk2 itself became
independent of Tyr(402), indicating that FGFR3 activation circumvents the
requirement for c-Src recruitment at Tyr(402) of Pyk2. We also examined the role 
of the tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in antagonizing Pyk2 activation. Taken together,
these results suggest that signaling pathways regulated by FGFR3 may converge
with Pyk2-dependent pathways to provide maximal activation of Stat5B.

PMID: 15105428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Jun;40(2):158-63.

Regions syntenic to human 17q are gained in mouse and rat neuroblastoma.

Lastowska M(1), Chung YJ, Cheng Ching N, Haber M, Norris MD, Kees UR, Pearson AD,
Jackson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. m.a.lastowska@ncl.ac.uk

Gain of chromosome arm 17q is the most frequent chromosomal change in human
neuroblastoma and is a powerful predictor of adverse outcome of disease. This
suggests that the region of gain includes a gene or genes critical for tumor
pathogenesis. Analyses of breakpoint positions have revealed that the shortest
region of gain (SRG) extends from MPO (17q23.1) to 17qter. Because this
encompasses >300 genes, it precludes the identification of candidate genes from
human breakpoint data alone. However, mouse chromosome 11, which is syntenic to
human chromosome 17, is gained in up to 30% of neuroblastoma tumors developed in 
a murine MYCN transgenic model of this disease. To confirm that this key genetic 
change indicates the involvement of a molecular pathway conserved between mouse
and man and is not occurring coincidentally in the transgenic model, we used
fluorescence in situ hybridization to analyze sporadic cases of both mouse and
rat neuroblastoma. Our results confirmed the presence of chromosome 11 gain in
all three of the mouse cell lines we analyzed, with the SRG extending from Stat5b
(101.6 Mb) to tel. In addition, the rat neuroblastoma cell line harbors an extra 
copy of distal chromosome 10, extending from 92.8 to 109.3 Mb, which is also
syntenic to human 17q. Comparison of the regions gained in all three species has 
excluded 4.2 Mb from the previously defined region of 17q gain in humans as a
likely location of the candidate gene or genes, and strongly suggests that the
molecular etiology of neuroblastoma is similar in all three species.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15101050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. AIDS. 2004 Feb 20;18(3):421-6.

Defective interleukin-2-dependent STAT5 signalling in CD8 T lymphocytes from
HIV-positive patients: restoration by antiretroviral therapy.

Kryworuchko M(1), Pasquier V, Keller H, David D, Goujard C, Gilquin J, Viard JP, 
Joussemet M, Delfraissy JF, Thèze J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cellular Immunogenetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris.

BACKGROUND: CD8 T lymphocytes are critical in the control of HIV replication and 
disease progression. Our previous studies demonstrated that CD8 T cells from
chronically infected patients with high virus load proliferated poorly in
response to interleukin-2 (IL-2), a cytokine critical in CD8 T cell growth and
differentiation, even though relatively high levels of IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) were
expressed. This suggested that signal transduction defects in response to IL-2
might be involved. The STAT5 transcription factor is important in IL-2-dependent 
biological responses and it is known that there are defects in unstimulated CD3
and CD4 cells in HIV-infected patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the induction of STAT5 by IL-2 is altered in
the CD8 T cells from HIV-positive individuals and the impact of highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) on its status.
METHODS: CD8 T lymphocytes were purified from the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of HIV-positive patients before and after HAART. Ex vivo IL-2-induced STAT5
activation was evaluated by immunoblotting and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays.
RESULTS: CD8 T cells from a subset of untreated HIV-positive patients were unable
to activate STAT5a and STAT5b proteins functionally in response to IL-2. This
defect was not a result of alterations in IL-2R expression but correlated with an
impaired activation of the upstream kinase Jak-3, known to mediate STAT5
activation. Overall, HAART restored Jak/STAT signalling in such patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results further uncover a potential mechanism by which CD8 T
cell function is impaired in HIV-infected patients.

PMID: 15090793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Blood. 2004 Apr 15;103(8):2965-72. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Hematopoietic-repopulating defects from STAT5-deficient bone marrow are not fully
accounted for by loss of thrombopoietin responsiveness.

Bradley HL(1), Couldrey C, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical
Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 (STAT5) plays an important
role in repopulating activity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, the
relationship of STAT5 activation with early acting cytokine receptors is not well
established. We have directly compared bone marrow (BM) from mice mutant for
STAT5a and STAT5b (STAT5ab(-/-)) with that from mice lacking c-Mpl (c-Mpl(-/-)), 
the thrombopoietin receptor. Both STAT5 and c-Mpl deficiency only mildly affected
committed myeloid progenitors assayed in vitro, but STAT5ab(-/-) BM showed lower 
Gr-1+ (4.4-fold), B220+ (23-fold), CD4+ (20-fold), and Ter119+ (17-fold)
peripheral blood repopulating activity than c-Mpl(-/-) BM against wild-type
competitor in long-term repopulating assays in vivo. Direct head-to-head
competitions of STAT5ab(-/-) BM and c-Mpl(-/-) BM showed up to a 25-fold
reduction in STAT5ab(-/-) contribution. Differences affecting reconstitution of
primitive c-Kit+Lin-Sca-1+ multipotent progenitor (MPP)/HSC (1.8-fold) and
c-Kit+Lin-Sca-1- oligopotent progenitor BM fractions (3.3-fold) were more modest.
In serial transplantation experiments, STAT5ab(-/-) and c-Mpl(-/-) BM both failed
to provide consistent engraftment in tertiary hosts and could not radioprotect
lethally irradiated quaternary recipients. These results indicate substantial
overlap in c-Mpl-STAT5 signaling defects at the MPP/HSC level but indicate that
STAT5 is activated independent of c-Mpl to promote multilineage hematopoietic
differentiation.

PMID: 15070672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Immunol. 2004 Apr 15;172(8):4770-8.

STAT5 activation underlies IL7 receptor-dependent B cell development.

Goetz CA(1), Harmon IR, O'Neil JJ, Burchill MA, Farrar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology, Cancer
Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Signals initiated by the IL7R are required for B cell development. However, the
roles that distinct IL7R-induced signaling pathways play in this process remains 
unclear. To identify the function of the Raf and STAT5 pathways in IL7R-dependent
B cell development, we used transgenic mice that express constitutively active
forms of Raf (Raf-CAAX) or STAT5 (STAT5b-CA) throughout lymphocyte development.
Both Raf-CAAX and STAT5b-CA mice exhibit large increases in pro-B cells. However,
crossing the Raf-CAAX transgene onto the IL7R(-/-) background fails to rescue B
cell development. In contrast, STAT5 activation selectively restores B cell
expansion in IL7R(-/-) mice. Notably, the expansion of pro-B cells in STAT5b-CA
mice correlated with an increase in cyclin D2, pim-1, and bcl-x(L) expression,
suggesting that STAT5 directly affects pro-B cell proliferation and survival. In 
addition, STAT5 activation also restored B cell differentiation in IL7R(-/-) mice
as determined by 1) the restoration of V(H) Ig gene rearrangement and 2) the
appearance of immature and mature B cell subsets. These findings establish STAT5 
as the key player entraining B cell development downstream of the IL7R.

PMID: 15067053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Jan 15;213(2):193-8.

Effect of erythropoietin on Leydig cell is associated with the activation of
Stat5 pathway.

Yamazaki T(1), Kanzaki M, Kamidono S, Fujisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

In order to elucidate whether erythropoietin (EPO) influences male reproduction, 
EPO activation via erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) of Stat5 was studied in Leydig 
cell cultures. RT-PCR analysis of mRNA that had been prepared from primary rat
Leydig cell culture and the mouse Leydig tumor cell line (I-10 cells) each
demonstrated amplification of the appropriate fragment for the respective genes. 
Both I-10 cells and primary rat Leydig cell cultures were treated with 1U/ml
recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO) for various time periods upto 60 min,
and cytoplasmic proteins, total cellular proteins, and nuclear extracts were
isolated. Expression of Stat5b protein and phosphorylated Stat5b protein were
investigated by Western blotting using anti-Stat5b pAb and anti-phospho-Stat5a/b 
pAb. Stat5b protein exists at the cytoplasmic level irrespective of exposure to
rHuEPO, while phosphorylated Stat5b protein increases upon rHuEPO stimulation.
DNA binding of nuclear protein to synthetic double-stranded oligonucleotides
containing a DNA response element derived from PRL-inducible element (PIE) was
examined using a gel mobility shift assay. The oligonucleotide representing the
PIE of the rat beta-casein promoter was demonstrated to bind to the nuclear
extract of rHuEPO-treated cells, time dependently forming a single mobility shift
complex X. These data suggest that EPO binds to a receptor expressed on the
surface of Leydig cells. This EPOR regulates expression of specific gene, through
a Jak-Stat pathway to influence male reproductive function.

PMID: 15062567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Feb;17(2):211-8.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 (STAT1), but not STAT5b,
regulates IGF-I receptor gene expression in an osteosarcoma cell line.

Shalita-Chesner M(1), Glaser T, Werner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

The IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) exhibits potent mitogenic, antiapoptotic, and
transforming activities. Previous studies have suggested that the expression of
the IGF-IR gene is negatively regulated by certain cytokines, including
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). The potential involvement of STAT proteins in
transcriptional regulation of the IGF-IR gene by IFN-gamma was addressed by
transient coexpression of vectors encoding STAT1 and STAT5b, together with an
IGF-IR promoter luciferase reporter, in the osteosarcoma-derived cell line
Saos-2. Physical interactions between IFN-gamma-induced transcription factors and
the IGF-IR promoter region were examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA). The results obtained indicate that the mechanism of action of IFN-gamma
involves stimulation of STAT1 which, in turn, binds IFN-gamma activation sites
(GAS) in the IGF-IR regulatory region, thus suppressing promoter activity. Taken 
together, our results suggest that the IGF-IR gene is a novel target for STAT1
action and that at least part of the inhibitory effects of STAT1 may involve
repression of the strongly antiapoptotic IGF-IR gene.

PMID: 15055356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 15;23(17):3040-7.

Interleukin-7 induces apoptosis of 697 pre-B cells expressing dominant-negative
forms of STAT5: evidence for caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Lanvin O(1), Gouilleux F, Mullié C, Mazière C, Fuentes V, Bissac E, Dantin F,
Mazière JC, Régnier A, Lassoued K, Gouilleux-Gruart V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, INSERM, EMI 0351, 3 rue des Louvels, 80036 Amiens, 
France.

The transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B (STAT: signal transducer and
activator of transcription) play a major role in the signaling events elicited by
a number of growth factor and cytokine receptors. In this work, we aimed to
investigate the role of STAT5 in human precursor B cell survival by introducing
dominant-negative (DN) forms of STAT5A or STAT5B in the 697 pre-B cell line. All 
clones expressing DN forms of either transcription factor exhibited a higher
spontaneous apoptotic rate that was massively enhanced upon interleukin-7 (IL-7) 
stimulation. This was associated with caspase 8 cleavage, mitochondrial
transmembrane potential disruption and caspase 3 activation. However, the DN
forms of STAT5 did not alter the expression of Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-x, Bim, A1 and
Mcl1 proteins in IL-7-stimulated cells. The pancaspase inhibitor
Z-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromylmethyl ketone partially suppressed IL-7-mediated
mitochondrial transmembrane potential disruption and cell death, suggesting that 
IL-7 induced the death of DN STAT5 expressing 697 cells through caspase-dependent
and -independent mechanisms that both require mitochondrial activation.

PMID: 15048088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. FEBS Lett. 2004 Mar 26;562(1-3):27-34.

Characterization of the human STAT5A and STAT5B promoters: evidence of a positive
and negative mechanism of transcriptional regulation.

Crispi S(1), Sanzari E, Monfregola J, De Felice N, Fimiani G, Ambrosio R, D'Urso 
M, Ursini MV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Via P.
Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy.

We recently published the genomic characterization of the STAT5A and STAT5B
paralogous genes that are located head to head in the 17q21 chromosome and share 
large regions of sequence identity. We here demonstrate by transient in vitro
transfection that STAT5A and STAT5B promoters are able to direct comparable
levels of transcription. The expression of basal promoters is enhanced after Sp1 
up-regulation in HeLa and SL2 cells while DNA methylation associated to the
recruitment of MeCP2 methyl CpG binding protein down-regulates STAT5A and B
promoters by interfering with Sp1-induced transcription. In addition,
cross-species sequence comparison identified a bi-directional negative cis-acting
regulatory element located in the STAT5 intergenic region.

PMID: 15043997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2004 Jan-Apr;17(1):5-14.

Novel shift of Jak/Stat signalling characterizes the protective effect of
aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA) from tumor necrosis factor-alpha toxicity in human 
B lymphocytes.

Marchisio M(1), Grimley PM, Di Baldassarre A, Santavenere E, Miscia S.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Unit, Department of Biomorphology, University of Chieti,
Chieti, Italy.

Previous results demonstrated that the occurrence of death in human peripheral B 
lymphocytes by TNF-alpha was paralleled by the activation of the cytoplasmic Jak1
and Tyk2 protein kinases, along with the recruitment of transcription factors
Stat3 and Stat5b. In this study we demonstrate that the balance of survival
signals in the presence of TNF-alpha was altered by the addition of a salicylate 
compound, the endonuclease inhibitor aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA). Apoptosis
effected by TNF-alpha alone was suppressed by ATA and this event was paralleled
by phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Jak2, Stat2, Stat4 and NF-kB,
along with inhibition of caspase activation. These results confirm that among the
different cellular responses evoked by TNF-alpha in human B cells, recruitment of
Jak/Stat proteins and possible related gene modulation represent contributing
factors and address the issue of the development of potential therapeutic
strategies aimed at the control of systemic or local effects produced by
TNF-alpha.

PMID: 15000861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16349-55. Epub 2004 Feb 4.

SOCS2 induces neurite outgrowth by regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor
activation.

Goldshmit Y(1), Walters CE, Scott HJ, Greenhalgh CJ, Turnley AM.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Regeneration Laboratory, Centre for Neuroscience, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) 2 is a negative regulator of growth
hormone (GH) signaling that regulates body growth postnatally and neuronal
differentiation during development. SOCS2 binds to the GH receptor and inhibits
GH signaling, including attenuation of STAT5 activation. Here we describe a new
function and mechanism of action for SOCS2. Overexpression of SOCS2 in central
nervous system neurons promoted neurite outgrowth, and in PC12 cells, neurite
outgrowth was induced under nondifferentiating conditions, leading to inhibition 
of the neurite-inhibitory GTPase Rho and activation of the neurite-promoting
GTPase Rac1. Addition of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors
PP3 or AG490 or the Src kinase inhibitor PP2 blocked the SOCS2-induced neurite
outgrowth. The overexpressed SOCS2 bound to the EGFR, which was constitutively
phosphorylated at Tyr845, the Src binding site. Overexpression of the phosphatase
SHP-2 reduced the constitutive EGFR phosphorylation and subsequent neurite
outgrowth. SOCS2 expression also resulted in a modest 30% decrease in
phosphorylation of STAT5b at Tyr699, which is the primary site on STAT5
phosphorylated by GH; however, total tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 was
decreased by 75-80% under basal and epidermal growth factor-stimulated
conditions. Our findings suggest that SOCS2 regulates EGFR phosphorylation,
leading to regulation of neurite outgrowth through a novel pathway that is
distinct from GH.

PMID: 14764607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2004 Jun 1;103(11):4198-200. Epub 2004 Feb 5.

Familial essential thrombocythemia associated with a dominant-positive activating
mutation of the c-MPL gene, which encodes for the receptor for thrombopoietin.

Ding J(1), Komatsu H, Wakita A, Kato-Uranishi M, Ito M, Satoh A, Tsuboi K, Nitta 
M, Miyazaki H, Iida S, Ueda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, 1-Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-Ku, Nagoya
467-8601, Japan.

One Japanese pedigree of familial essential thrombocythemia (FET) inherited in an
autosomal-dominant manner is presented. A unique point mutation, serine 505 to
asparagine 505 (Ser505Asn), was identified in the transmembrane domain of the
c-MPL gene in all of the 8 members with thrombocythemia, but in none of the other
8 unaffected members in this FET family. The Ba/F3 cells expressing the mutant
Asn505 acquired interleukin 3 (IL-3)-independent survival capacity, whereas those
expressing wild-type Ser505 did not. The autonomous phosphorylation of Mek1/2 and
Stat5b was observed in the mutant Ba/F3 cells in the absence of IL-3. The former 
was also found in platelets derived from the affected individual in the absence
of thrombopoietin. These results show that the Asn505 is an activating mutation
with respect to the intracellular signaling and survival of the cells. This is
the first report of FET deriving from a dominant-positive activating mutation of 
the c-MPL gene.

PMID: 14764528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Mar;286(3):E393-401.

In vivo regulation of growth hormone-stimulated gene transcription by STAT5b.

Woelfle J(1), Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

The long-term effects of growth hormone (GH) are mediated through coordinated
changes in gene expression that are the outcome of interactions between
hormone-activated signal transduction pathways and specific feedback loops.
Recent studies in mice have implicated the transcription factor STAT5b as part of
the GH-regulated somatic growth pathway, because mice lacking this protein showed
diminished growth rates. To assess the role of Stat5b in GH-stimulated gene
expression, we have delivered modified versions of the protein to the liver of
pituitary-deficient male rats by quantitative adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. 
In pilot studies in cell culture, both constitutive-active and dominant-negative 
STAT5b showed appropriate binding properties toward a specific DNA response
element. After in vivo expression, neither protein prevented nuclear accumulation
of STATs 1 and 3 in the liver. Dominant-negative STAT5b completely inhibited
GH-stimulated transcription of genes encoding the growth-promoting proteins
IGF-I, IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), and acid-labile subunit (ALS), which
comprise the major circulating IGF-I complex, and blocked expression of the GH
inhibitors SOCS-1, SOCS-2, and CIS, but had little effect on induction of SOCS-3.
Constitutive-active STAT5b stimulated robust transcription of IGF-I, ALS, and
IGFBP-3 in the absence of hormone but did little to modify GH-mediated activation
of SOCS family genes. An adenovirus encoding EGFP was without effect. These
results, in addition to establishing STAT5b as one of the key agents of
GH-stimulated gene transcription, demonstrate the feasibility of using in vivo
gene transfer to target and dissect the functions of distinct components of
complex hormone-activated signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 14761873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Genes Immun. 2004 Jan;5(1):46-57.

Evidence for a cluster of genes on chromosome 17q11-q21 controlling
susceptibility to tuberculosis and leprosy in Brazilians.

Jamieson SE(1), Miller EN, Black GF, Peacock CS, Cordell HJ, Howson JM, Shaw MA, 
Burgner D, Xu W, Lins-Lainson Z, Shaw JJ, Ramos F, Silveira F, Blackwell JM.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

The region of conserved synteny on mouse chromosome 11/human 17q11-q21 is known
to carry a susceptibility gene(s) for intramacrophage pathogens. The region is
rich in candidates including NOS2A, CCL2/MCP-1, CCL3/MIP-1alpha, CCL4/MIP-1beta, 
CCL5/RANTES, CCR7, STAT3 and STAT5A/5B. To examine the region in man, we studied 
92 multicase tuberculosis (627 individuals) and 72 multicase leprosy (372
individuals) families from Brazil. Multipoint nonparametric analysis (ALLEGRO)
using 16 microsatellites shows two peaks of linkage for leprosy at D17S250 (Z(lr)
score 2.34; P=0.01) and D17S1795 (Z(lr) 2.67; P=0.004) and a single peak for
tuberculosis at D17S250 (Z(lr) 2.04; P=0.02). Combined analysis shows significant
linkage (peak Z(lr) 3.38) at D17S250, equivalent to an allele sharing LOD score
2.48 (P=0.0004). To determine whether one or multiple genes contribute, 49
informative single nucleotide polymorphisms were typed in candidate genes.
Family-based allelic association testing that was robust to family clustering
demonstrated significant associations with tuberculosis susceptibility at four
loci separated by intervals (NOS2A-8.4 Mb-CCL18-32.3 kb-CCL4-6.04 Mb-STAT5B) up
to several Mb. Stepwise conditional logistic regression analysis using a
case/pseudo-control data set showed that the four genes contributed separate main
effects, consistent with a cluster of susceptibility genes across 17q11.2.

PMID: 14735149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Glia. 2004 Jan 15;45(2):188-96.

Signaling through JAK2-STAT5 pathway is essential for IL-3-induced activation of 
microglia.

Natarajan C(1), Sriram S, Muthian G, Bright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, 1222F VSRH, 2201 Capers Avenue, Nashville, TN 37212, USA.
john.bright@vanderbilt.edu

Erratum in
    Glia. 2004 Sep;47(4):387.

Microglia, the resident macrophage of the brain, mediates immune and inflammatory
responses in the central nervous system (CNS). Activation of microglia and
secretion of inflammatory cytokines associate with the pathogenesis of CNS
diseases, including multiple sclerosis (MS), Alzheimer's disease (AD),
Parkinson's disease, prion disease, and AIDS dementia. Microbial pathogens,
cytokines, chemokines, and costimulatory molecules are potent inducers of
microglial activation in the CNS. Signaling through its receptor, IL-3 induces
the activation of JAK-STAT and MAP kinase pathways in microglial cells. In this
study, we found that in vitro treatment of EOC-20 microglial cells with
tyrphostin AG490 blocked IL-3-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, STAT5A,
and STAT5B signaling proteins. Stable transfection of EOC-20 cells with a
dominant negative JAK2 mutant also blocked IL-3-induced tyrosine phosphorylation 
of JAK2, STAT5A, and STAT5B in microglia. The blockade of JAK2-STAT5 pathway
resulted in a decrease in IL-3-induced proliferation and expression of CD40 and
major histocompatibility complex class II molecules in microglia. These findings 
highlight the fact that JAK2-STAT5 signaling pathway plays a critical role in
mediating IL-3-induced activation of microglia.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14730712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11553-61. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

A mutant Stat5b with weaker DNA binding affinity defines a key defective pathway 
in nonobese diabetic mice.

Davoodi-Semiromi A(1), Laloraya M, Kumar GP, Purohit S, Jha RK, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

A number of cytokines that finely regulate immune response have been implicated
in the pathogenesis or protection of type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune
diseases. It is, therefore, of pivotal importance to examine a family of proteins
that serve as signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs), which
regulate the transcription of a variety of cytokines. We report here a defective 
gene (Stat5b) located on chromosome 11 within a previously mapped T1D
susceptibility interval (Idd4) in the nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice. Our
sequencing analysis revealed a unique mutation C1462A that results in a leucine
to methionine (L327M) in Stat5b of NOD mice. Leu(327), the first residue in the
DNA binding domain of STAT proteins, is conserved in all identified mammalian
STAT proteins. Homology modeling predicted that the mutant Stat5b has a weaker
DNA binding, which was confirmed by DNA-protein binding assays. The inapt
transcriptional regulation ability of the mutated Stat5b is proved by decreased
levels of RNA of Stat5b-regulated genes (IL-2Rbeta and Pim1). Consequently,
IL-2Rbeta and Pim1 proteins were shown by Western blotting to have lower levels
in NOD compared with normal B6 mice. These proteins have been implicated in
immune regulation, apoptosis, activation-induced cell death, and control of
autoimmunity. Therefore, the Stat5b pathway is a key molecular defect in NOD
mice.

PMID: 14701862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Cancer. 2004 Feb 20;108(5):665-71.

Stat5a is tyrosine phosphorylated and nuclear localized in a high proportion of
human breast cancers.

Cotarla I(1), Ren S, Zhang Y, Gehan E, Singh B, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are latent cytoplasmic
transcription factors that are activated and translocated into the nucleus after 
phosphorylation at a conserved tyrosine residue. Mouse model studies have
demonstrated that activated Stat5a acts as a critical survival factor for normal,
preneoplastic and malignant mammary epithelial cells. Very limited information is
available, however, on the expression, tyrosine phosphorylation status and
nuclear localization of Stat5a in human breast cancers. In our study, the pattern
of Stat5a cellular localization was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in a series 
of 83 randomly selected primary human breast adenocarcinomas.
Immunoprecipitation/Western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays employing
different phospho-specific antibodies verified Stat5a tyrosine phosphorylation
status. Stat5a was nuclear localized and tyrosine phosphorylated in 59 of 78
(76%) breast cancers examined; 38 of 78 (49%) demonstrated Stat5a nuclear
localization in more than 25% of the breast cancer cells within the
adenocarcinomas. Nuclear localized Stat5a was associated positively with
increased levels of histologic differentiation (p = 0.03). A statistically
significant positive association with p27 nuclear localization also was
identified (p = 0.05). No relationship was found between nuclear localized Stat5a
and menopausal status, tumor size, ploidy, percentage of cells in S-phase, lymph 
node metastases, ER, ErbB2, nuclear localized p21 or nuclear localized
Stat5b/Stat3. As its role in human breast cancer progression and response to
therapy is defined, Stat5a could become a new molecular target for breast cancer 
therapy.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14696092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):9048-54.

Dysregulated expression of COOH-terminally truncated Stat5 and loss of
IL2-inducible Stat5-dependent gene expression in Sezary Syndrome.

Mitchell TJ(1), Whittaker SJ, John S.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Cancer Unit, St. Johns Institute of Dermatology, Division of Skin
Sciences, Kings College London, St. Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Sezary Syndrome (SzS) is a leukemic variant of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
characterized by the accumulation of clonal neoplastic CD4+ T cells. The signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family members, Stat5a and
Stat5b, play an important role in regulating T-cell activation. Recent studies
have shown that inappropriate activation of STATs occurs frequently in a wide
variety of human cancers. Here we examine the functional status of Stat5 proteins
in SzS as compared with healthy donors. Western blotting demonstrates that in
cytoplasmic extracts of unstimulated T cells from healthy controls two isoforms
of Stat5, full-length and a COOH-terminal truncated isoform, termed Stat5(t), are
present. However, bandshift assays demonstrate that only Stat5(t) translocates to
the nucleus and binds DNA on IL-2 stimulation. In contrast, preactivated T cells 
express only full-length Stat5, which is functionally activated on IL-2
stimulation. Analysis of Stat5 protein isoforms from five of five SzS patients
revealed predominant aberrant expression of Stat5(t) in preactivated peripheral
blood mononuclear cell. Furthermore, patients showed preferential IL-2-induced
DNA binding of Stat5(t). Consistent with the inappropriate activation of Stat5(t)
in SzS patients, real-time PCR revealed that IL-2-induced mRNA expression of the 
Stat5 target genes, Bcl-2, PIM-1, and CISH were markedly reduced. These data
indicate that functional Stat5 isoform expression is regulated by T-cell
activation status and that dysregulated expression of Stat5(t) in malignant T
cells in SzS can suppress Stat5-dependent gene expression. Thus, aberrant
expression of Stat5(t) may be one mechanism that contributes to the cellular
transformation of T cells in this disease.

PMID: 14695224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):8757-62.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 is required for 
progression of autochthonous prostate cancer: evidence from the transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate system.

Kazansky AV(1), Spencer DM, Greenberg NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

The constitutive activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) proteins has been demonstrated in many diverse human cancer cell lines and
clinical tumors including prostate cancer. The STAT family has at least seven
members, and the two forms of the STAT5 protein, STAT5A and STAT5B, exhibit a
high degree of sequence similarity. We have reported previously that expression
of STAT5B, but not STAT5A, could enhance the transforming potential of v-src and 
induces cell cycle progression and motility in fibroblasts. In the current study 
we demonstrate specific activation of STAT5B in epithelial cells representing
invasive and metastatic prostate cancer. We also demonstrate that the naturally
occurring dominant-negative isoform STAT5DeltaB can block cell cycle progression 
through G(1) and inhibit the growth, invasive potential, and clonogenic ability
of these prostate cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we report that the
dominant-negative isoform STAT5DeltaB can inhibit the growth of prostate cancer
cells in grafting studies. These results support our hypothesis that specific
activation of STAT5, in particular STAT5B, facilitates the progression of
prostate cancer.

PMID: 14695191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Exp Hematol. 2003 Dec;31(12):1198-205.

Differential role of Stat5 isoforms in effecting hematopoietic recovery induced
by Mpl-ligand in lethally myelosuppressed mice.

Pestina TI(1), Jackson CW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Department of Hematology-Oncology, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N. Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105-2794,
USA. tamara.pestina@stjude.org

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of the c-terminal half of c-Mpl in Mpl-L-induced
myeloprotection and the importance of Stat5 isoforms in the survival signaling
pathways induced by Mpl ligand.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Delta60-Mpl knockin mice, Stat5a(-/-)/b(-/-), Stat5a(-/-),
and Stat5b(-/-) mice and wild-type (WT) controls were given a lethal
myelosuppressive regimen: 80 mg/kg carboplatin intravenously followed by 7.5 or
6.5 Gy 137Cs total-body irradiation. A single dose of PEG-rmMGDF (65 microg/kg)
was intravenously injected immediately after myelosuppression. Mice survival and 
blood counts were monitored for 22 days posttreatment.
RESULTS: Knockin Delta60-Mpl mice lacking the c-terminal half of the
intracellular domain of c-Mpl show reduced ability of Mpl-L to prevent lethal
myelosuppression and an impaired thrombopoietic response to exogenous c-Mpl
ligand. The survival of Mpl-L-treated Stat5a(-/-)/b(-/-) mice exposed to the
lethal myelosuppressive regimen was substantially compromised compared to that of
WT mice. Reduced survival of Stat5a(-/-)/b(-/-) mice was due to more severe
hematopoietic suppression. Deletion of Stat5a did not result in a defect in
hematopoietic recovery. In contrast, Mpl-L-treated Stat5b-deficient mice
demonstrated significantly delayed hematopoietic recovery compared to WT
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Myeloprotective signaling transduced by the terminal 60 amino acids 
of the intracellular domain of c-Mpl is essential for complete protection from
lethal myelosuppression provided by Mpl-L. Our studies differentiate the
functions of Stat5 isoforms in hematopoietic stress and reveal a pivotal role of 
Stat5b in Mpl-L-induced hematopoietic recovery in this lethal myelosuppression
model.

PMID: 14662325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Immunol. 2003 Dec 1;171(11):5853-64.

Distinct effects of STAT5 activation on CD4+ and CD8+ T cell homeostasis:
development of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells versus CD8+ memory T cells.

Burchill MA(1), Goetz CA, Prlic M, O'Neil JJ, Harmon IR, Bensinger SJ, Turka LA, 
Brennan P, Jameson SC, Farrar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, Cancer Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Using transgenic mice that express a constitutively active version of STAT5b, we 
demonstrate that STAT5 plays a key role in governing B cell development and T
cell homeostasis. STAT5 activation leads to a 10-fold increase in pro-B, but not 
pro-T, cells. Conversely, STAT5 signaling promotes the expansion of mature
alphabeta T cells (6-fold increase) and gammadelta and NK T cells (3- to 4-fold
increase), but not of mature B cells. In addition, STAT5 activation has
dramatically divergent effects on CD8(+) vs CD4(+) T cells, leading to the
selective expansion of CD8(+) memory-like T cells and CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T 
cells. These results establish that activation of STAT5 is the primary mechanism 
underlying both IL-7/IL-15-dependent homeostatic proliferation of naive and
memory CD8(+) T cells and IL-2-dependent development of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory 
T cells.

PMID: 14634095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Immunol. 2003 Nov 15;171(10):5042-50.

Loss of tolerance and autoimmunity affecting multiple organs in
STAT5A/5B-deficient mice.

Snow JW(1), Abraham N, Ma MC, Herndier BG, Pastuszak AW, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, and Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.

STAT5 has previously been reported to be dispensable for the maintenance of
tolerance in vivo. However, in examining hemopoiesis in mice lacking both
isoforms of STAT5, STAT5A, and STAT5B, we noted that a subset of these mice
demonstrated dramatic alterations in several bone marrow progenitor populations
concomitant with lymphocytic infiltration of the bone marrow. In addition,
cellular infiltration affecting the colon, liver, and kidney was observed in
these mice. Survival analysis revealed that STAT5A/5B(-/-) mice exhibited early
death. The increased mortality and the pathology affecting multiple organs
observed in these mice were abrogated on the recombination-activating gene 1(-/-)
background. In light of the similarities between STAT5A/5B-deficient mice and
mice unable to signal through the IL-2R, we hypothesized that the tolerizing role
of STAT5A/5B was triggered via activation of the IL-2R. In agreement with this,
we found that IL-2Rbeta chain-deficient mice exhibited similar hemopoietic
abnormalities. Because IL-2 signaling is thought to contribute to tolerance
through maintenance of a CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cell population, we examined 
these cells and observed a numerical reduction in STAT5A/5B(-/-) mice along with 
a higher rate of apoptosis. These data provide strong evidence for a requirement 
for STAT5 in the maintenance of tolerance in vivo.

PMID: 14607901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 15;63(20):6763-71.

Constitutive activation of Stat5b contributes to carcinogenesis in vivo.

Xi S(1), Zhang Q, Gooding WE, Smithgall TE, Grandis JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

The development of more effective prevention and treatment strategies for solid
tumors is limited by an incomplete understanding of the critical growth pathways 
that are activated in carcinogenesis. Signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) proteins have been linked to transformation and tumor
progression. Studies to date have not elucidated clear and distinct roles for
Stat5genes (Stat5a and Stat5b) in human epithelial cancers. We analyzed the role 
of Stat5a/b isoforms in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck using
expression and activation studies in human tissues and in a xenograft model after
selective targeting. In a xenograft model, blockade of Stat5b, but not Stat5a,
using antisense oligonucleotides resulted in tumor growth inhibition and
abrogation of Stat5 target genes in vivo. Blockade of the epidermal growth factor
receptor resulted in partial abrogation of Stat5 activation, thus linking
epidermal growth factor receptor to Stat5 in vivo. In tissues from 33 individuals
with head and neck cancer, Stat5 activation levels were correlated with
progression to a malignant phenotype, where increased expression and
phosphorylation of Stat5b were detected consistently in tumors compared with
their epithelial counterparts. Thus, constitutive activation of Stat5b
contributes to squamous cell tumorigenesis and may serve as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 14583472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochem Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;81(4):285-95.

Translocation of transcription regulators into the nucleus during granulocyte
commitment of HL-60 cells.

Navakauskiene R(1), Kulyte A, Treigyte G, Gineitis A, Magnusson KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, LT-2600
Vilnius, Lithuania. ruta.navakauskiene@bchi.lt

Expression of transcription factors required for lineage commitment of
differentiating cells (C/EBPbeta and c-Myb) and for survival of differentiated
cells (STATs and NFkappaB) was examined in the HL-60 cell line. Differentiation
was induced by treating the cells with retinoic acid. c-Myb expression in the
nucleus restored at the precommitment stage (18 h) what concurred with the
highest nuclear level of C/EBPbeta, which suggests a combinatorial interaction of
these transcription factors in the granulocytic signalling pathway. Expression of
STAT5a and STAT5b varied during differentiation, whereas no significant changes
were seen in STAT3 levels. Increased cytosolic level of NFkappaB p65 during
precommitment and commitment stages of granulocytic differentiation coincided
with augmentation of the STAT5a protein level, which could be evidence of their
possible cooperation during granulocytic-lineage commitment of HL-60 cells. Our
results suggest that the studied transcription factors cooperatively promote
signalling in the differentiating promyelocytic HL-60 cell line in response to
retinoic acid.

PMID: 14569301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Sci. 2003 Oct;94(10):847-50.

Pre-B lymphomas in SL/Kh mice: a multifactorial disease model.

Hiai H(1), Tsuruyama T, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-5801, Japan. hiai@path1.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The pre-B lymphoma in the inbred mouse strain SL/Kh is an excellent
multifactorial disease model. The endogenous murine leukemia virus provirus
Emv11, genetically acquired from an AKR progenitor, is the pathogenetic agent
that reintegrates to dysregulate several host genes, i.e., Stat5a, Evi3, c-Myc,
N-Myc, Stat5b, and others. Constitutive activation of Stat5a either by provirus
integration or by transfection of the active mutant Stat5a cDNA transforms pre-B 
cells in bone marrow. Genetically determined expansion of early B cells and a
dominant SL/Kh MHC allele predispose the animals to succumb to pre-B lymphomas. A
number of other host genetic and epigenetic factors that determine the types of
lymphomas, susceptibility to lymphomas, and length of the latent period are
discussed.

PMID: 14556656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51261-6. Epub 2003 Oct 7.

Mechanisms of growth hormone (GH) action. Identification of conserved Stat5
binding sites that mediate GH-induced insulin-like growth factor-I gene
activation.

Woelfle J(1), Chia DJ, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

Many of the actions of growth hormone (GH) on somatic growth and tissue
maintenance are mediated by insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), a secreted
protein whose gene expression is rapidly and potently induced by GH by unknown
mechanisms. Recent studies implicating Stat5a and Stat5b in the growth response
to GH in mice and observations linking Stat5b to control of IGF-I gene
transcription in rats have prompted the current investigations into the molecular
determinants of a putative regulatory network extending from GH through Stat5b to
IGF-I. Here we characterize as critical components of this hormone-activated
transcriptional pathway two adjacent Stat5 binding sites in the second intron of 
the rat IGF-I gene located within a conserved region previously found to undergo 
acute and reversible changes in chromatin structure after in vivo GH treatment.
As assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, GH rapidly induced binding
of Stat5 to this DNA segment in the liver of GH-deficient rats, just prior to the
onset of transcription from both major and minor IGF-I gene promoters.
Biochemical reconstitution experiments showed that the two intronic Stat5 DNA
elements were able to bind Stat5b in vitro after GH treatment could transmit GH- 
and Stat5b-dependent transcriptional responsiveness to the major IGF-I promoter
and to a minimal neutral gene promoter and were required for full stimulation of 
reporter gene activity by GH. Taken together, these results identify an intronic 
enhancer as a key mediator of GH-induced IGF-I gene transcription working through
Stat5b and provide new insight into the molecular architecture of this
transcriptional pathway.

PMID: 14532269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 15;171(8):3919-27.

Specific inhibition of Stat5a/b promotes apoptosis of IL-2-responsive primary and
tumor-derived lymphoid cells.

Behbod F(1), Nagy ZS, Stepkowski SM, Karras J, Johnson CR, Jarvis WD, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Stat5a/b exhibits 96% homology and are required for normal immune function. The
present studies examined Stat5a/b function in lymphoid cells by specific and
simultaneous disruption of both proteins using novel
phosphorothioate-2'-O-methoxyethyl antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (asODN).
Efficient delivery was confirmed by the presence of fluorescent TAMRA-labeled ODN
in >or=55 and 95% in human primary and tumor cell lines, respectively. Acute
asODN administration reduced levels of Stat5a (90%) in 6 h, whereas Stat5b
required nearly 48 h to attain the same inhibition, suggesting that the apparent 
turnover rate for Stat5a was 8-fold higher than that for Stat5b. Expression of
the closely related Stat3 protein was unchanged after asODN treatment, however.
Molecular ablation of Stat5a/b promoted apoptotic cell death in a significant
population of primary PHA-activated T cells (72%) and lymphoid tumor cell line
(e.g., YT; 74%) within 24 h, as assessed by 1) visualization of karyolytic
nuclear degeneration and other generalized cytoarchitectural alterations, 2)
enzymatic detection of TdT-positive DNA degradation, and 3) automated cytometric 
detection of annexin V translocation. Contrary to findings from Stat5a/b-null
mice, cell cycle progression did not appear to be significantly affected.
Interestingly, IL-2-insensitive and unprimed T cells and Jurkat cells remained
mostly unaffected. Finally, evidence is provided that the cytotoxicity associated
with Stat5a/b ablation may derive from activation of caspase-8, an initiator
protease that contributes to apoptotic cell commitment. We propose that in
lymphoid cells competent to activate Stat5a and Stat5b, both proteins
preferentially mediate an antiapoptotic survival influence.

PMID: 14530308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Prolif. 2003 Oct;36(5):265-78.

The influence of STAT5 antisense oligonucleotides on the proliferation and
apoptosis of selected human leukaemic cell lines.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Masiuk M, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin,
Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

The signal transducers and activators of transcription--STAT5A and STAT5B--take
part in the regulation of many essential physiopathological processes. They
influence the cell cycle, apoptosis and the proliferation of different types of
cell lines. The STAT5 proteins are induced in response to multiple haematopoietic
cytokines. Because they are constitutively active in certain haemato-oncologic
diseases, it is also suggested that they play an important role in
leukaemogenesis. However, function of these proteins in haematopoietic cell
transformation and proliferation is not clear. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the impact of perturbation of STAT5 expression [using
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) against STAT5 mRNA], on the clonogenicity and survival
of selected human leukaemic cell lines, HEL, HL-60, K562, TF-1. We analysed the
effect of ODN pre-treatment on the cell clonogenicity in methylcellulose cultures
according to the time and the temperature of exposure. Moreover, we attempted to 
estimate apoptosis induced in examined cells, by flow cytometry using combined
Annexin V-PI staining and the TUNEL method. We also applied the RT-PCR method to 
analyse Bax and Bcl-xL gene expression. We found that the perturbation of STAT5
expression with antisense oligonucleotides caused a decrease in the proliferative
potential of human K562 and TF-1 cell lines. Also, we observed higher induction
of apoptotic cell death in the K562 and TF-1 cells incubated with the antisense
STAT5A ODNs. We did not notice any impact of ODNs on the HL-60 and HEL cells. Our
studies using STAT5 antisense oligonucleotides showed that these proteins may be 
critical in the regulation of growth and apoptosis of some types of leukaemic
blasts.

PMID: 14521520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. N Engl J Med. 2003 Sep 18;349(12):1139-47.

Growth hormone insensitivity associated with a STAT5b mutation.

Kofoed EM(1), Hwa V, Little B, Woods KA, Buckway CK, Tsubaki J, Pratt KL,
Bezrodnik L, Jasper H, Tepper A, Heinrich JJ, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2003 Sep 18;349(12):1110-2.

PMID: 13679528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45340-51. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

NCoA-1/SRC-1 is an essential coactivator of STAT5 that binds to the FDL motif in 
the alpha-helical region of the STAT5 transactivation domain.

Litterst CM(1), Kliem S, Marilley D, Pfitzner E.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse
42-44, 60596 Frankfurt, Germany.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is a transcription
factor that activates prolactin (PRL)-dependent gene expression in the mammary
gland. For the activation of its target genes, STAT5 recruits coactivators like
p300 and the CREB-binding protein (CBP). In this study we analyzed the function
of p300/CBP-associated members of the p160/SRC/NCoA-family in STAT5-mediated
transactivation of beta-casein expression. We found that only one of them,
NCoA-1, acts as a coactivator for both STAT5a and STAT5b. The two coactivators
p300/CBP and NCoA-1 cooperatively enhance STAT5a-mediated transactivation. For
NCoA-1-dependent coactivation of STAT5, both the activation domain 1 and the
amino-terminal bHLH/PAS domain are required. The amino-terminal region mediates
the interaction with STAT5a in cells. A motif of three amino acids in an
alpha-helical region of the STAT5a-transactivation domain is essential for the
binding of NCoA-1 and for the transcriptional activity of STAT5a. Moreover we
observed that NCoA-1 is involved in the synergistic action of the glucocorticoid 
receptor and STAT5a on the beta-casein promoter. These findings support a model
in which STAT5, in concert with the glucocorticoid receptor, recruits a
multifunctional coactivator complex to initiate the PRL-dependent transcription.

PMID: 12954634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):3969-76.

Effects of chronic ethanol on hepatic and renal CYP2C11 in the male rat:
interactions with the Janus-kinase 2-signal transducer and activators of
transcription proteins 5b pathway.

Badger TM(1), Ronis MJ, Frank SJ, Chen Y, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center and Department of Physiology/Biophysics, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA.
badgerthomasm@uams.edu

Chronic alcohol intake in male rats results in: 1) demasculinization of the GH
pulse pattern; 2) reduced serum testosterone concentrations; and 3) decreased
expression hepatic CYP2C11. Hepatic CYP2C11 expression is regulated by the male
pattern of GH through the Janus-kinase/signal transducer and activators of
transcription proteins (JAK/STAT) signal transduction pathway in the male rat.
Renal CYP2C11 is regulated by testosterone, not GH. The involvement of the
JAK/STAT5b signal transduction pathway in renal CYP2C11 signaling has not been
studied. We tested the hypothesis that ethanol reduces CYP2C11 levels by
interfering with the JAK/STAT5b pathway. Using a total enteral nutrition (TEN)
model to feed rats a well-balanced diet, we have studied the effects of chronic
ethanol intake (21 d) on hepatic and renal JAK/STAT pathway of adult male rats
(8-10/group). We found decreased hepatic and renal expression of CYP2C11 in
ethanol-fed rats with concomitant decreases in STAT5b and phospho-STAT5b,
decreased in vitro hepatic STAT5b binding to a CYP2C11 promoter element and no
effects on hepatic GHR levels. Ethanol caused tissue specific effects in
phospho-JAK2 and JAK2, with increased levels in the liver, but decreased JAK2
expression in the kidney. We conclude that ethanol suppression of CYP2C11
expression is clearly associated with reductions in STAT5b levels, but not
necessarily in reductions of JAK2 levels. The mechanisms underlying
ethanol-induced suppression of STAT5b is yet to be determined, as is the question
of whether this is secondary to hormonal effects or a direct ethanol effect.

PMID: 12933671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 22;308(2):325-30.

Role of Stat5 in type I interferon-signaling and transcriptional regulation.

Uddin S(1), Lekmine F, Sassano A, Rui H, Fish EN, Platanias LC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology-Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Type I interferons are pleiotropic cytokines that transduce signals via
activation of multiple downstream signaling cascades, including the Jak-Stat
pathway. Although the roles of Stat1 and Stat2 in Type I interferon signaling are
well established, the roles that other Stat-family members play in the induction 
of IFN-responses remain to be defined. In previous studies, we have shown that
Stat5 associates with the CrkL adapter and forms a signaling complex that binds
DNA. In the present study, we provide evidence that Stat5 is phosphorylated on
serines 725/730 in an IFNalpha- and IFNbeta-dependent manner, providing direct
evidence that serine phosphorylation of the protein is a component of an
interferon signaling cascade. Such serine phosphorylation of Stat5 is Map kinase-
and PI 3(')-kinase independent, while the activation of the serine kinase that
phosphorylates Stat5 is regulated by upstream tyrosine kinase activity. Using
mouse embryonic fibroblasts with targeted disruption of the Stat5a and Stat5b
genes, we demonstrate that full activation of Stat5 is required for Type I
interferon-dependent gene transcription via GAS elements. Altogether, our data
provide evidence that Stat5 plays an important role in IFN-signaling and
participates in the induction of Type I IFN-dependent responses. Furthermore, our
results strongly suggest that, in addition to phosphorylation on tyrosine
residues, phosphorylation on serine residues exhibits regulatory effects on the
transcriptional capacity of Stat5.

PMID: 12901872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Aug;64(2):355-64.

Down-regulation of STAT5b transcriptional activity by ligand-activated peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) alpha and PPARgamma.

Shipley JM(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington St., Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.

The nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) is
activated by a diverse group of acidic ligands, including many peroxisome
proliferator chemicals present in the environment. Janus tyrosine kinase-signal
transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) signaling is activated by
multiple cytokines and hormones and leads to the translocation of dimerized STAT 
proteins to the nucleus where they activate transcription of target genes.
Previous studies have shown that growth hormone (GH)-activated STAT5b can inhibit
PPAR-regulated transcription. Here, we show that this inhibitory cross-talk is
mutual, and that GH-induced, STAT5b-dependent beta-casein promoter-luciferase
reporter gene transcription can be inhibited up to approximately 80% by
ligand-activated PPARalpha or PPARgamma. Dose-response experiments showed a
direct relationship between the extent of PPAR activation and the degree of
inhibition of STAT5-regulated transcription. PPAR did not block STAT5b tyrosine
phosphorylation or inhibit DNA-binding activity. Both PPARs inhibited the
transcriptional activity of a constitutively active STAT5b mutant, indicating
that inhibition occurs downstream of the GH-stimulated STAT5 activation step.
Transcriptionally inactive, dominant-negative PPAR mutants did not block STAT5b
inhibition by wild-type PPAR, indicating that PPAR target gene transcription is
not required. PPARalpha retained its STAT5b inhibitory activity in the presence
of the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin, indicating that enhanced
histone deacetylase recruitment does not contribute to STAT5b inhibition.
PPARalpha lacking the ligand-independent AF-1 trans-activation domain failed to
inhibit STAT5b, highlighting the importance of the AF-1 region in STAT5-PPAR
inhibitory cross-talk. These findings demonstrate the bidirectionality of
cross-talk between the PPAR and STAT pathways and provide a mechanism whereby
exposure to environmental chemical activators of PPAR can suppress expression of 
GH target genes.

PMID: 12869640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Jul;112(1):93-101.

Regulation of eosinophil apoptosis by nitric oxide: Role of c-Jun-N-terminal
kinase and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5.

Zhang X(1), Msc, Moilanen E, Lahti A, Hämäläinen M, Giembycz MA, Barnes PJ,
Lindsay MA, Kankaanranta H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopharmacological Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere,
Finland.

BACKGROUND: Reduced eosinophil apoptosis is considered to be a key mechanism for 
eosinophilia in allergic diseases such as asthma, rhinitis, and eczema.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to investigate the possible modulatory effect
of nitric oxide (NO) in human eosinophils.
METHODS: Apoptosis in isolated eosinophils was assessed by relative DNA
fragmentation assay, annexin-V binding, and morphologic analysis. The activation 
of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) was assessed by immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: The NO donor S-nitroso-N -acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) reversed the
survival-prolonging effect of IL-5 by inducing apoptosis. This effect was blocked
by the NO scavenger (2-(4-Carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3 
oxide.potassium salt), indicating that reversal of IL-5-mediated eosinophil
survival was due to NO. The effect of NO on IL-5-afforded cell survival was not
mediated by cyclic guanosine 3': 5'-monophosphate (cGMP), because neither an
inhibitor of guanylyl cyclase nor inhibitors of phosphodiesterases had any effect
on SNAP-induced eosinophil apoptosis in IL-5-treated cells. SNAP induced a
time-dependent increase in the activity of JNK, and an inhibitor peptide specific
for JNK, L-JNKI1, completely reversed SNAP-induced apoptosis in IL-5-treated
eosinophils. In contrast, SNAP did not inhibit IL-5-induced STAT5 activation.
Inhibition of the activity of caspases by Z-Asp-CH(2)-DCB reversed the effect of 
SNAP, suggesting that NO promotes apoptosis in IL-5-treated human eosinophils in 
a caspase-dependent manner. However, this effect of NO was not mediated by means 
of activation of caspases 3, 8, or 9.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that exogenous NO reverses IL-5-mediated
eosinophil survival by inducing apoptosis, and this is mediated by means of
activation of JNK in a cGMP-independent manner.

PMID: 12847485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Exp Hematol. 2003 Jul;31(7):622-30.

Spontaneous STAT5 activation induces growth factor independence in idiopathic
myelofibrosis: possible relationship with FKBP51 overexpression.

Komura E(1), Chagraoui H, Mansat de Mas V, Blanchet B, de Sepulveda P, Larbret F,
Larghero J, Tulliez M, Debili N, Vainchenker W, Giraudier S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U362, Pavillon de recherche 1, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif
Cedex, France.

Spontaneous growth of megakaryocyte progenitors is one of the biologic hallmarks 
of idiopathic myelofibrosis (IMF). The molecular mechanisms underlying this
hypersensitivity to cytokines are poorly understood. Using a differential display
approach, we previously observed FK506 binding protein 51 (FKBP51) overexpression
in pathologic megakaryocytes from IMF. Using an FKBP51-overexpressing cell line, 
we found sustained STAT5 activation associated with JAK2 phosphorylation. We
subsequently tested whether this transcription factor was activated in patient
samples. We detected a STAT5 nuclear translocation and activation in
spontaneously grown megakaryocytes and in circulating CD34(+) cells from the
majority of patients studied. The biologic role of this JAK/STAT pathway
activation was demonstrated by inhibiting both the anti-apoptotic phenotype
mediated by FKBP51 overexpression in UT7 cells and the spontaneous megakaryocytic
growth by addition in culture of the JAK2 inhibitor AG490 or overexpression of a 
STAT5b dominant negative or SOCS-1. These results demonstrate that a constitutive
STAT5 activation in IMF is indispensable for spontaneous growth of
megakaryocytes. They also suggest that FKBP51 overexpression could be involved in
STAT5 activation in IMF cells and in subsequent abnormal growth.

PMID: 12842707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Exp Med. 2003 Jul 7;198(1):79-89. Epub 2003 Jun 30.

Stat5 synergizes with T cell receptor/antigen stimulation in the development of
lymphoblastic lymphoma.

Kelly JA(1), Spolski R, Kovanen PE, Suzuki T, Bollenbacher J, Pise-Masison CA,
Radonovich MF, Lee S, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Morse HC 3rd, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart and Blood Institute,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent
transcription factors that mediate a wide range of actions induced by cytokines, 
interferons, and growth factors. We now report the development of thymic T cell
lymphoblastic lymphomas in transgenic mice in which Stat5a or Stat5b is
overexpressed within the lymphoid compartment. The rate of lymphoma induction was
markedly enhanced by immunization or by the introduction of TCR transgenes.
Remarkably, the Stat5 transgene potently induced development of CD8+ T cells,
even in mice expressing a class II-restricted TCR transgene, with resulting CD8+ 
T cell lymphomas. These data demonstrate the oncogenic potential of dysregulated 
expression of a STAT protein that is not constitutively activated, and that TCR
stimulation can contribute to this process.

PMCID: PMC2196089
PMID: 12835478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2003;8(2):317-31.

The role of STAT5 proteins in the regulation of normal hematopoiesis in a cord
blood model.

Baskiewicz-Masiuk M(1), Masiuk M, Czajka R, Machalinski B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Al. Powstanców
Wlkp.72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. poziomka@med.pam.szczecin.pl

The signal transducers and activators of transcription - STAT5A and STAT5B - are 
responsible for the control of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, via 
their effect on gene expression. They are activated by the binding of many
cytokines, growth factors and hormones to their receptors on the cell surface.
Many of these cytokines regulate hematopoietic cell development; therefore, STAT5
proteins are suggested to play an important role in hematopoiesis. There are
numerous contradictory reports available in the literature on the role of STAT5
in normal hematopoietic cell development; hence, the question of the real
function of STAT5 proteins clearly requires further studies. The aim of our study
was to evaluate the role of STAT5 in normal hematopoiesis using
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) strategy against STAT5 mRNA. We employed the RT-PCR
method to study STAT5 mRNA expression in cells after their incubation with ODNs. 
We analyzed the effect of blocking STAT5 proteins on the viability and
clonogenecity of the CFU-GM (Colony Forming Unit of Granulocyte-Macrophages) and 
the BFU-E (Burst Forming Unit of Erythrocytes) obtained from human cord blood
(CB). The clonogenic growth of the cells was assessed in methylcellulose cultures
according to the type of oligodeoxynucleotides. We also attempted to estimate the
level of apoptosis induced in cord blood mononuclear and CD34+ cells by employing
different assays: i) Annexin V staining using flow cytometry (FACSCalibur); ii)
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL); iii)
analysis of Bax and Bcl-X(L) gene expression by RT-PCR. Perturbation of STAT5
expression with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides had no impact on the viability,
clonogenecity and apoptosis of CB hematopoietic cells. Our results showed that
STAT5 proteins do not play a significant role in the regulation of proliferation 
of normal hematopoietic cells derived from cord blood.

PMID: 12813566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Cell Physiol. 2003 Jul;196(1):113-23.

EGF receptor-mediated, c-Src-dependent, activation of Stat5b is downregulated in 
mitogenically responsive hepatocytes.

Guren TK(1), Ødegård J, Abrahamsen H, Thoresen GH, Susa M, Andersson Y, Østby E, 
Christoffersen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway. t.k.guren@labmed.uio.no

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins may be activated
by epidermal growth factor (EGF), but their role in EGF receptor-mediated
mitogenic signaling is not clear. We previously showed that Stat5b was activated 
by EGF in rat hepatocytes in primary monolayer culture. In the present study, we 
found that EGF induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5b both on Tyr-699, which 
correlated with specific DNA binding activity, and also on other tyrosine
residues. The Src tyrosine kinase inhibitor CGP77675 blocked the EGF-induced
activation of Stat5b, but did not affect the Stat5b activation by growth hormone 
(GH) or prolactin (PRL). The Stat5b response to EGF was most pronounced soon (3
h) after plating (early G(1)) and at high cell density (50,000 hepatocytes per
cm(2)). However, at this cell density EGF did not stimulate DNA synthesis. In
hepatocytes at 24 h of culturing (mid/late G(1)) with 20,000 cells per cm(2), EGF
induced strong phosphorylation of the EGF receptor, as well as Shc and ERK, and
stimulated DNA synthesis, but did not activate Stat5b, although the Stat5b
response to GH or PRL was retained. A strong GH-induced Stat5b activation neither
influenced the DNA synthesis alone nor enhanced the mitogenic effect of EGF. The 
results show that EGF induces tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity
of Stat5b in a manner different from GH and PRL, apparently by a Src-dependent
mechanism. The data also provide further evidence that Stat5b is not required for
mitogenic signaling from the EGF receptor.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12767047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood. 2003 Aug 15;102(4):1290-7. Epub 2003 Apr 24.

Stat5 expression is critical for mast cell development and survival.

Shelburne CP(1), McCoy ME, Piekorz R, Sexl V, Roh KH, Jacobs-Helber SM, Gillespie
SR, Bailey DP, Mirmonsef P, Mann MN, Kashyap M, Wright HV, Chong HJ, Bouton LA,
Barnstein B, Ramirez CD, Bunting KD, Sawyer S, Lantz CS, Ryan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23284-2012, USA.

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) and stem cell factor (SCF) are important mast cell growth
and differentiation factors. Since both cytokines activate the transcription
factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5), a known
regulator of proliferation and survival, we investigated the effects of Stat5
deficiency on mast cell development and survival. Bone marrow-derived mast cell
(BMMC) populations cultured from Stat5A/B-deficient mice survived in IL-3 + SCF, 
but not in either cytokine alone. These cells demonstrated reduced expression of 
Bcl-2, Bcl-x(L), cyclin A2, and cyclin B1, with increased apoptosis and delayed
cell cycle progression during IL-3 or SCF culture. Finally, the absence of Stat5 
resulted in loss of in vivo mast cell development, as judged by assessments of
Stat5-deficient mice and transplantation of Stat5-deficient bone marrow cells to 
mast cell-deficient recipient mice. These results indicate that Stat5A and Stat5B
are critical regulators of in vitro and in vivo mast cell development and
survival.

PMID: 12714518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 20;278(25):22696-702. Epub 2003 Apr 7.

Acute control of insulin-like growth factor-I gene transcription by growth
hormone through Stat5b.

Woelfle J(1), Billiard J, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

Many of the effects of growth hormone (GH) are mediated by insulin-like growth
factor-I (IGF-I), a secreted peptide whose gene transcription is induced by GH by
unknown mechanisms. Recent studies in mice have implicated Stat5b as part of a
GH-regulated somatic growth pathway, because mice lacking this transcription
factor show diminished growth rates and a decline in serum IGF-I levels. To test 
the role of Stat5b in GH-stimulated IGF-I gene expression, we have delivered
modified versions of the protein to pituitary-deficient male rats by quantitative
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. In pilot studies in cell culture, both
constitutively active and dominant-negative Stat5b appropriately regulated
transcription from a GH-responsive Stat5-dependent reporter gene. After in vivo
expression, neither protein impaired GH-induced activation of cytoplasmic
signaling pathways or blocked nuclear accumulation of Stats 1 and 3 in the liver,
the major site of IGF-I production. Dominant-negative Stat5b completely prevented
GH-stimulated IGF-I gene transcription, whereas constitutively active Stat5b led 
to robust IGF-I gene expression in the absence of hormone. An adenovirus encoding
enhanced green fluorescent protein was without effect. Similar results were seen 
with the GH-responsive Stat5b-dependent Spi 2.1 gene, whereas GH-stimulated c-fos
transcription was minimally altered. These results establish Stat5b as a key
component of GH-stimulated IGF-I gene transcription, and they demonstrate the
feasibility of using in vivo gene transfer to target distinct components of
hormone-activated signaling pathways.

PMID: 12682066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Endocrinology. 2003 May;144(5):1847-53.

Epidermal growth factor increases cortisol production and type II 3
beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Delta(5)-Delta(4)-isomerase expression in human
adrenocortical carcinoma cells: evidence for a Stat5-dependent mechanism.

Feltus FA(1), Kovacs WJ, Nicholson W, Silva CM, Nagdas SK, Ducharme NA, Melner
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

We tested the ability of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to regulate a key enzyme
in the adrenal synthesis of glucocorticoids: human type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/Delta(5)-Delta(4)-isomerase (3 beta HSD). EGF treatment (25 ng/ml) 
of human adrenocortical carcinoma cells (H295R) resulted in a 5-fold increase in 
cortisol production and a corresponding 2-fold increase in 3 beta HSD mRNA.
Experiments were performed to determine whether EGF is acting through a
previously identified signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(Stat5)-responsive element located from -110 to -118 in the human type II 3 beta 
HSD promoter. A Stat5 expression construct was cotransfected with a 3 beta
HSD-chloramphenol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter construct comprised of
nucleotides -301-->+45 of the human type II 3 beta HSD promoter linked to the CAT
reporter gene sequence. The addition of EGF at doses as low as 10 ng/ml resulted 
in an 11- to 15-fold increase in CAT activity. The introduction of 3-bp point
mutations into critical nucleotides in the Stat5 response element obviated the
EGF response. Either Stat5a or Stat5b isoforms induced CAT reporter expression
upon treatment with EGF. These results demonstrate the ability of EGF to regulate
the expression of a critical enzyme (3 beta HSD) in the production of cortisol
and suggest a molecular mechanism by which this regulation occurs.

PMID: 12697691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Apr;30(2):139-50.

The role of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 in the inhibitory 
effects of GH on adipocyte differentiation.

Richter HE(1), Albrektsen T, Billestrup N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Signal Transduction, Novo Nordisk A/S, Novo Allé, DK-2880
Bagsvaerd, Denmark.

GH inhibits primary rat preadipocyte differentiation and expression of late genes
required for terminal differentiation. Here we show that GH-mediated inhibition
of fatty acid-binding protein aP2 gene expression correlates with the activation 
of the Janus kinase-2/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5
signalling pathway. Within minutes of treatment, GH induced the tyrosine
phosphorylation, nuclear localization and DNA binding of STAT5. Importantly,
there was no evidence that STAT5 acted via an interaction with peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma. To further understand the mechanism of
STAT5 action, we reconstituted the inhibition of aP2 in a non-adipogenic cell
line. Using this system, we showed that the ability of GH to inhibit a 520 bp aP2
reporter was largely dependent upon the presence of either STAT5A or STAT5B.
Mutant analysis confirmed that the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 was
essential for this signalling. However, STAT5's C-terminal transactivation domain
was fully dispensable for this inhibition. Taken together, these data confirm a
key regulatory role of STAT5 in adipose tIssue and point to STAT5 as the
repressing modulator of GH-mediated inhibition in primary preadipocytes.

PMID: 12683938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biol Chem. 2003 Jan;384(1):151-9.

Interaction between leptin and insulin signaling pathways differentially affects 
JAK-STAT and PI 3-kinase-mediated signaling in rat liver.

Carvalheira JB(1), Ribeiro EB, Folli F, Velloso LA, Saad MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Clínica Médica, FCM, Universidade Estadual de Campinas,
13081-970 Campinas, SP, Brasil.

Chronic leptin treatment markedly enhances the effect of insulin on hepatic
glucose production unproportionally with respect to body weight loss and
increased insulin sensitivity. In the present study the cross-talk between
insulin and leptin was evaluated in rat liver. Upon stimulation of JAK2 tyrosine 
phosphorylation, leptin induced JAK2 co-immunoprecipitation with STAT3, STAT5b,
IRS-1 and IRS-2. This phenomenon parallels the leptin-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT3, STAT5b, IRS-1 and IRS-2. Acutely injected insulin
stimulated a mild increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, STAT3 and STAT5b.
Leptin was less effective than insulin in stimulating IRS phosphorylation and
their association with PI 3-kinase. Simultaneous treatment with both hormones
yielded no change in maximal phosphorylation of STAT3, IRS-1, IRS-2 and Akt, but 
led to a marked increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and STAT5b when
compared with isolated administration of insulin or leptin. This indicates that
there is a positive cross-talk between insulin and leptin signaling pathways at
the level of JAK2 and STAT5b in rat liver.

PMID: 12674509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Apr;14(3):118-23.

Prolactin regulation of estrogen receptor expression.

Frasor J(1), Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612,
USA.

The ability of the rat corpus luteum to respond to estrogen requires prolactin
(PRL), which can stimulate the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER). This
review will focus on the signaling mechanisms by which this occurs. Transcription
of the genes encoding both ERalpha (Esr1) and ERbeta (Esr2) is stimulated by PRL 
through the Jak2-Stat5 pathway and Stat5-response elements that are located in
each of the Esr promoters. A single nucleotide difference between these two
response elements is responsible for the observation that either Stat5a or Stat5b
can stimulate Esr1 transcription, whereas only Stat5b can activate transcription 
of Esr2. The tyrosine kinase Jak2 is required for PRL activation of Esr1 promoter
activity; however, additional pathways are involved in PRL-induced Stat5b
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation and DNA binding. In addition to the corpus
luteum, PRL-induced ER expression might provide a mechanism for fine-tuning the
responsiveness of other target tissues, such as the decidua and mammary gland, to
these two hormones.

PMID: 12670737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogene. 2003 Mar 20;22(11):1638-52.

Naturally occurring dominant-negative Stat5 suppresses transcriptional activity
of estrogen receptors and induces apoptosis in T47D breast cancer cells.

Yamashita H(1), Iwase H, Toyama T, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. hiroko@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5 regulates growth,
differentiation, and survival of mammary and hematopoietic cells. The role of
Stat5 in breast cancer has not been established, although Stat5 is critical for
some hematopoietic malignancies. We detected for the first time that Stat5b is
constitutively activated in human breast cancer cell lines, and analysed the role
of Stat5 in estrogen receptor(ER)-positive breast cancer cell lines using
dominant-negative variants of Stat5. Two distinct carboxyl-truncated Stat5a
derivatives were generated. Stat5aDelta740 corresponded to a naturally occurring 
alternative splice variant, and Stat5aDelta713 was analogous to an 80 kDa Stat5a 
product of a nuclear protease. Stat5aDelta740 and Stat5aDelta713 displayed
comparable dominant-negative properties and suppressed transcriptional activity
of wild-type Stat5a and Stat5b equally well. Cotransfection experiments revealed 
that Stat5aDelta740 completely blocked transcriptional activity of endogenous
estrogen receptor in T47D and MCF7 cells, and of both ER alpha and ER beta in
COS-7 cells. Stat5aDelta740 was selected for adenoviral delivery, and
high-efficiency expression of tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5aDelta740 was achieved
in infected cells. Adenoviral-mediated Stat5aDelta740 induced apoptosis in T47D
cells but not in caspase-3-negative MCF7 cells. The present study indicates that 
overexpression of a dominant-negative variant of Stat5 suppresses ER
transcriptional activity and induces apoptosis in estrogen-responsive breast
cancer tissue culture cells.

PMID: 12642867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17218-27. Epub 2003 Mar 5.

Signal transduction pathways regulated by prolactin and Src result in different
conformations of activated Stat5b.

Kabotyanski EB(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030-3498, USA.

Stat5 is activated by a broad spectrum of cytokines, as well as non-receptor
tyrosine kinases, such as Src. In this study, the DNA binding properties of the
two closely related Stat5 proteins, Stat5a and Stat5b, induced either by
prolactin (Prl) or by Src were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
using several different Stat5 binding sites. Src-induced Stat5b-DNA binding
complexes consistently displayed a slightly faster mobility than those induced by
Prl, as well as differences in their ability to be supershifted by anti-Stat5
antibodies. IP-Westerns performed using specific antibodies directed at the N and
C termini of Stat5b suggested that depending on the activating stimulus, Stat5b
exhibited different conformations, which influenced antibody accessibility at its
C terminus. These conformational differences may in part be due to differential
effects of Prl and Src on Stat5b tyrosine phosphorylation, since Src induced
several additional sites of tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5b at residues other 
than Tyr-699, including Tyr-724 and Tyr-679. The latter Tyr-679 is conserved in
all mammalian Stat5bs, but is not present in Stat5a. A Stat 5bY679F mutant
induced by Src kinase exhibited an altered pattern of nuclear localization as
compared with wild-type Stat5b. Furthermore, this mutation inhibited
v-Src-induced cyclin D1-luciferase reporter activity in transient transfection
assays performed in Stat5a/b-deficient MEFs, suggesting that Tyr-679
phosphorylation may play a role in v-Src induced proliferation. Thus, depending
on the signal transduction pathway responsible for activation, different
conformations of activated Stat5 may result in selective biological responses.

PMID: 12621061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Exp Immunol. 2003 Mar;131(3):422-7.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 envelope glycoproteins and anti-CD4 antibodies
inhibit interleukin-2-induced Jak/STAT signalling in human CD4 T lymphocytes.

Kryworuchko M(1), Pasquier V, Thèze J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunogénétique Cellulaire, Département de Medecine Moleculaire,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection leads to a profound T cell
dysfunction well before the clinical onset of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS). We have been accumulating evidence that one of the mechanisms responsible
for this T cell deficiency may be the dysregulation of signal transduction via
the interleukin (IL)-2/IL-2 receptor (R) complex. In CD4 T cells, we have
observed previously that viral envelope (env) glycoproteins induce IL-2
unresponsiveness and the down-regulation of the three chains making up the IL-2R 
(alpha, beta, gamma) in vitro. We have now established further that this
disruption of the IL-2/IL-2R system manifests itself in defective signal
propagation via the Janus kinase (Jak)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) pathway in response to IL-2. The treatment of CD4 T cells
with HIV env or surface ligation of CD4 with anti-CD4 monoclonal antibodies
inhibited the IL-2-induced activation of Jak-1 and Jak-3, as well as their
targets, STAT5a and STAT5b. This Jak/STAT deficiency may contribute to the
crippling of CD4 T cell responses to a cytokine central to the immune response by
HIV.

PMCID: PMC1808643
PMID: 12605694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur J Biochem. 2003 Jan;270(2):239-52.

Genomic structure, expression and characterization of a STAT5 homologue from
pufferfish (Tetraodon fluviatilis).

Sung SC(1), Fan TJ, Chou CM, Leu JH, Hsu YL, Chen ST, Hsieh YC, Huang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan.

The STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5) gene was isolated 
and characterized from a round-spotted pufferfish genomic library. This gene is
composed of 19 exons spanning 11 kb. The full-length cDNA of Tetraodon
fluviatilis STAT5 (TfSTAT5) contains 2461 bp and encodes a protein of 785 amino
acid residues. From the amino acid sequence comparison, TfSTAT5 is most similar
to mouse STAT5a and STAT5b with an overall identity of 76% and 78%, respectively,
and has < 35% identity with other mammalian STATs. The exon/intron junctions of
the TfSTAT5 gene were almost identical to those of mouse STAT5a and STAT5b genes,
indicating that these genes are highly conserved at the levels of amino acid
sequence and genomic structure. To understand better the biochemical properties
of TfSTAT5, a chimeric STAT5 was generated by fusion of the kinase-catalytic
domain of carp Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) to the C-terminal end of TfSTAT5. The fusion
protein was expressed and tyrosine-phosphorylated by its kinase domain. The
fusion protein exhibits specific DNA-binding and transactivation potential toward
an artificial fish promoter as well as authentic mammalian promoters such as the 
beta-casein promoter and cytokine inducible SH2 containing protein (CIS) promoter
when expressed in both fish and mammalian cells. However, TfSTAT5 could not
induce the transcription of beta-casein promoter via rat prolactin and Nb2
prolactin receptor. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing
detailed biochemical characterization of a STAT protein from fish.

PMID: 12605675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003 Feb 1;23(2):289-94.

A functional polymorphism in a STAT5B site of the human PPAR gamma 3 gene
promoter affects height and lipid metabolism in a French population.

Meirhaeghe A(1), Fajas L, Gouilleux F, Cottel D, Helbecque N, Auwerx J, Amouyel
P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, INSERM U.508, Institut Pasteur
de Lille, France.

OBJECTIVE: The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) plays
a role in adipocyte differentiation and insulin sensitization. It has been shown 
that genetic variation in the PPARgamma gene alters body weight control, lipid
and insulin homeostasis, and the susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. Four
PPARgamma isoforms are generated by alternative splicing and promoter usage.
PPARgamma3 is only expressed in adipose tissue, colon, and macrophages and
therefore seems to be a good candidate gene for metabolic and
cardiovascular-associated diseases. In the present study, we looked for genetic
variation in the PPARgamma3 promoter.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The proximal PPARgamma3 promoter was sequenced in 20
individuals. We detected a C/G polymorphism at position -681 from exon A2.
Interestingly, it was located in a signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5B (STAT5B) binding consensus site. In a French population (n=836),
the -681G allele was associated with increased height and plasma low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations. In vitro, we showed that the -681G allele
completely abolished the binding of STAT5B to the cognate promoter element as
well as the transactivation of the PPARgamma3 promoter by the growth
hormone/STAT5B pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that PPARgamma3 may regulate the control of
height and lipid homeostasis via the STAT5B pathway.

PMID: 12588773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 May;17(5):945-58. Epub 2003 Feb 13.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation is sufficient to
drive transcriptional induction of cyclin D2 gene and proliferation of rat
pancreatic beta-cells.

Friedrichsen BN(1), Richter HE, Hansen JA, Rhodes CJ, Nielsen JH, Billestrup N,
Møldrup A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Islet Discovery Research, Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsvaerd, Denmark. 
bttm@novonordisk.com

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activation plays a
central role in GH- and prolactin-mediated signal transduction in the pancreatic 
beta-cells. In previous experiments we demonstrated that STAT5 activation is
necessary for human (h)GH-stimulated proliferation of INS-1 cells and hGH-induced
increase of mRNA-levels of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D2. In this study we
have further characterized the role of STAT5 in the regulation of cyclin D
expression and beta-cell proliferation by hGH. Cyclin D2 mRNA and protein levels 
(but not cyclin D1 and D3) were induced in a time-dependent manner by hGH in
INS-1 cells. Inhibition of protein synthesis by coincubation with cycloheximide
did not affect the hGH-induced increase of cyclin D2 mRNA levels at 4 h.
Expression of a dominant negative STAT5 mutant, STAT5aDelta749, partially
inhibited cyclin D2 protein levels. INS-1 cells transiently transfected with a
cyclin D2 promoter-reporter construct revealed a 3- to 5-fold increase of
transcriptional activity in response to hGH stimulation. Furthermore,
coexpression of a constitutive active STAT5 mutant (either CA-STAT5a or
CA-STAT5b) was sufficient to drive transactivation of the promoter. CA-STAT5b was
stably expressed in INS-1 cells under the control of a doxycycline-inducible
promoter. Gel retardation experiments using a probe representing a putative STAT5
binding site in the cyclin D2 promoter revealed binding of the
doxycycline-induced CA-STAT5b. Furthermore, induction of CA-STAT5b stimulated
transcriptional activation of the cyclin D2 promoter and induced hGH-independent 
proliferation in these cells. In primary beta-cells, adenovirus-mediated
expression of CA-STAT5b profoundly stimulated DNA-synthesis (5.3-fold over
control) in the absence of hGH. Our studies indicate that STAT5 activation is
sufficient to drive proliferation of the beta-cells and that cyclin D2 may be a
critical target gene for STAT5 in this process.

PMID: 12586844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Diabetes. 2003 Feb;52(2):308-14.

STAT5A promotes adipogenesis in nonprecursor cells and associates with the
glucocorticoid receptor during adipocyte differentiation.

Floyd ZE(1), Stephens JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
70803, USA.

The differentiation of adipocytes is regulated by the activity of a variety of
transcription factors, including peroxidase proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)-gamma and C/EBPalpha. Our current study demonstrates that ectopic
expression of STAT5A, such as that of PPAR-gamma and C/EBPalpha, promotes
adipogenesis in two nonprecursor fibroblast cell lines. Using morphologic and
biochemical criteria, we have demonstrated that STAT5A and the combination of
STAT5A and STAT5B are sufficient to induce the expression of early and late
adipogenic markers in BALB/c and NIH-3T3 cells. Yet, the ectopic expression of
STAT5B alone does not induce the expression of adipocyte genes, but enhances the 
induction of these genes in cells also expressing STAT5A. This finding suggests
that STAT5A and STAT5B do not function identically in adipocytes. In addition,
these studies demonstrate that the phosphorylation of STAT5 proteins may play a
role in adipogenesis. Moreover, we have shown that STAT5A is associated with the 
glucocorticoid receptor during adipogenesis in a highly regulated manner.

PMID: 12540601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Endocrinology. 2003 Feb;144(2):638-47.

Novel signal transduction pathway for luteinizing hormone and its interaction
with insulin: activation of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription and phosphoinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathways.

Carvalho CR(1), Carvalheira JB, Lima MH, Zimmerman SF, Caperuto LC, Amanso A,
Gasparetti AL, Meneghetti V, Zimmerman LF, Velloso LA, Saad MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, 13081-970 Campinas, Brazil.

The actions of LH are mediated through a single class of cell surface LH/human
chorionic gonadotropin receptor, which is a member of the G protein-coupled
receptor family. In the present study we showed that LH induced rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) in rat ovary. Upon
JAK2 activation, tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription-1 (STAT-1), STAT-5b, insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), and Src 
homology and collagen homology (Shc) were detected. In addition, LH induced
IRS-1/phosphoinositol 3-kinase and Shc /growth factor receptor-binding protein 2 
(Grb2) associations and downstream AKT (protein kinase B, homologous to v-AKT)
serine phosphorylation and ERK tyrosine phosphorylation, respectively. The
simultaneous infusion of insulin and LH induced higher phosphorylation levels of 
JAK2, STAT5b, IRS-1, and AKT compared with each hormone alone in the whole ovary 
of normal rats. By immunohistochemistry we demonstrated that these late events
take place in follicular cells and both external and internal theca. These
results indicate a new signal transduction pathway for LH and show that there is 
positive cross-talk between the insulin and LH signaling pathways at the level of
phosphoinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathway in this tissue.

PMID: 12538627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):210-7.

A role for Stat5 in CD8+ T cell homeostasis.

Kelly J(1), Spolski R, Imada K, Bollenbacher J, Lee S, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cytokine signals are known to contribute to CD8+ memory T cell homeostasis, but
an exact understanding of the mechanism(s) has remained elusive. We have now
investigated the role of Stat5 proteins in this process. Whereas Stat5a and
Stat5b KO mice have decreased numbers of CD8+ T cells, Stat5-transgenic mice have
an increased number of these cells. Stat5b-transgenic mice exhibit increased
Ag-induced cell death of CD4+ T cells and augmented proliferation and Bcl-2
expression in CD8+ T cells, providing a basis for this finding. Moreover, CD8+
memory T cells are substantially affected by Stat5 levels. These findings
identify Stat5 proteins as critical signaling mediators used by cytokines to
regulate CD8+ T cell homeostasis.

PMID: 12496402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Breast Cancer. 2002;9(4):312-8.

The role of Stat5 in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Yamashita H(1), Iwase H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kawasumi 1, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
hirokoy@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Estrogen receptor (ER) has been a successful target for effective prevention and 
treatment strategies in breast cancer, whereas growth factors and their signaling
molecules are proving to be effective treatment targets as well. Understanding
the interaction between ER and growth factor signaling pathways should provide
clues to optimal treatment approaches and new strategies to overcome and prevent 
endocrine resistance. Cross-talk between ER and signal transducer and activator
of transcription 5 (Stat5) has also been reported. Stat5 regulates growth,
differentiation, and survival of mammary and hematopoietic cells. The role of
Stat5 in breast cancer has not been established, although Stat5 is critical for
some hematopoietic malignancies. We have analyzed the role of Stat5 in the
progression of ER-positive breast cancer cells such as T47D and MCF7 in which
Stat5b is constitutively activated. Adenoviral-mediated dominant-negative Stat5
induced apoptosis in T47D cells but not in caspase-3 negative MCF7 cells. Our
study indicates that targeting Stat5 may represent a new strategy to suppress
estrogen receptor activity and induce apoptosis in Stat5-activated, ER-positive
breast cancer.

PMID: 12459712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Dec;16(12):2764-79.

Dual mechanism of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 activation
by the insulin receptor.

Le MN(1), Kohanski RA, Wang LH, Sadowski HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

Insulin stimulates signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5)
activation in insulin receptor (IR)-overexpressing cell lines and in insulin
target tissues of mice. Stat5b and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) interact 
with the same autophosphorylation site in the IR [phosphotyrosine (pY) 972] in
yeast two-hybrid assays, and the IR phosphorylates Stat5b in vitro. These data
suggest that Stat5 proteins might be recruited to, and phosphorylated by, the
activated IR in vivo. Nevertheless, insulin activates Janus kinases (JAKs) in
IR-overexpressing cell lines and in insulin target tissues. To determine whether 
Stat5 proteins must be recruited to the pY972LSA motif in the IR for
insulin-stimulated activation in mammalian cells, we generated and tested a
series of IR mutants. The L973R/A975D mutation abolishes the ability of the IR to
induce Stat5 activation, whereas IRS-1 phosphorylation is unaffected. In
contrast, the N969A/P970A mutation in the IR has no effect on Stat5 activation
but significantly reduces IRS-1 phosphorylation. In coimmunoprecipitation assays,
insulin-stimulated Stat5 activation correlates with Stat5 recruitment to the IR. 
We also find that insulin stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of JAKs that are
constitutively associated with the IR. Expression of dominant-negative (DN) JAKs,
the JAK inhibitor suppressor of cytokine signaling 1, or pretreatment with the
JAK inhibitor, AG490, reduces, but does not eliminate, insulin-induced Stat5
activation. Expression of the appropriate pair of DN JAKs in each of the singly
JAK-deficient cell lines further establishes a component of insulin-stimulated
Stat5 activation that is JAK independent. This likely represents phosphorylation 
of Stat5 proteins by the IR, as we find that IR kinase domain phosphorylates
Stat5b in vitro on Y699 as efficiently as JAK2. Increasing the concentration of
Stat5 proteins in cells favors the direct phosphorylation of Stat5 by the IR
kinase where the DN-JAK inhibition of insulin-stimulated Stat5 activation becomes
insignificant. At physiological levels of Stat5 however, we propose that JAKs and
the IR both contribute to the insulin-induced phosphorylation of Stat5.

PMID: 12456798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):4353-7. Epub 2002 Nov 25.

Endotoxin enhances liver alcohol dehydrogenase by action through upstream
stimulatory factor but not by nuclear factor-kappa B.

Potter JJ(1), Rennie-Tankersley L, Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Liver alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is increased by physiological stress and by
chronic administration of growth hormone (GH). Endotoxin plays a role in the
pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease. The effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
the endotoxin component of Gram-negative bacteria, was determined on liver ADH.
LPS given daily to rats for 3 days increased ADH mRNA, ADH protein, and ADH
activity. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) in the liver nuclear extracts bound
to an oligonucleotide specifying region -226 to -194 of the ADH promoter, whereas
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) was shown previously to bind to a more proximal
site. LPS increased NF-kappaB and USF binding to the ADH promoter. The NF-kappaB 
(p65) and NF-kappaB (p50) expression vectors inhibited the transfected ADH
promoter activity, which contrasts with the previously demonstrated stimulation
by an USF expression vector. The binding activities of STAT5b and of C/EBPbeta,
which mediate the effect of GH on ADH, were not changed or decreased,
respectively, by LPS, indicating that GH plays no intermediary role in the effect
of LPS. This study shows that LPS increases ADH and that this effect is mediated 
by increased binding of USF to the ADH promoter and not by NF-kappaB, which has
an inhibitory action.

PMID: 12454009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Nov 29;197(1-2):153-65.

Morphogenic and tumorigenic potentials of the mammary growth hormone/growth
hormone receptor system.

van Garderen E(1), Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
e.van.garderen@crucell.com

Due to the characteristics of the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle in the dog,
which spans a prolonged time period, this species is a suitable model to study
the role of progestins in both normal morphogenic and abnormal tumorigenic
processes in the mammary gland. It has been convincingly shown that progestins,
including endogenous progesterone, induce the synthesis of growth hormone (GH) in
the normal and the tumorous canine mammary gland. The growth hormone receptor
(GHR) is also expressed in normal and tumorous canine mammary tissues and in this
concise overview we highlight recent advances in our understanding of the
significance of the GH/GHR system for mammary gland (patho)biology. In an attempt
to unravel the cellular and molecular mechanisms associated with the GH/GHR
system, we were able to show that both GH and GHR are differentially expressed in
normal canine mammary tissues. Maximum expression of both GH and GHR occurs
during the proliferation phase of the tissue, which links the progestin-induced
mammary GH synthesis to the progestin-associated proliferation of epithelial
cells in the mammary gland. Expression of the GH/GHR system is also present in
most canine mammary tumors, albeit that GHR expression may be downregulated in
undifferentiated mammary carcinomas. Upon GH stimulation of the GHR-positive
CMT-U335 canine mammary tumor cell line, the transcription factors STAT5A and
STAT5B become phosphorylated on their tyrosine residues, which is likely to
reflect the significance of mammary GH in vivo. Molecular analysis of the canine 
mammary GHR transcripts by RT-PCR provided evidence for normal and alternative
processing of the GHR primary transcript encoding the full-length plasma membrane
GHR and at least four putative GH binding proteins (GHBPs), respectively. The
translation products from the alternatively spliced GHR transcripts indicate an
intact N-terminal ligand binding domain and an unique C-terminal portion, lacking
the transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail. Thus, these proteins are
considered to be able to bind GH, but have lost their signaling potential. The
exact biological role of these GHBPs remains to be established, but GHBPs may
have a transport function in the endocrine route, regulate the level of
biologically available GH locally, or dominant-negatively influence the
full-length plasma membrane GHR. In dog mammary cancer specimens strongly reduced
levels of alternatively spliced GHR transcripts were found compared to the
non-malignant mammary tissue. Notably, expression of both GH and GHR in mammary
cancer cells is not restricted to dogs. Recent experiments generated evidence for
GH and GHR expression in human breast cancer cells, and also in human prostate
cancer cells, which represents another highly prevalent hormone-sensitive human
malignancy. In agreement with our findings in the dog, the expression of the
hGH-N gene in human mammary cancer cells seemed to correlate positively with
their progesterone receptor status, which warrants, in our opinion, a
reconsideration of the role of progestins in breast cancer of women. In human
prostate cancer cells four different hGH-N transcripts were detected, which
encode classical 22 kDa GH and GH-related proteins. Consistent with the findings 
on the canine GHR, different GHR transcripts in human mammary cancer cells and
prostate cancer cells were detected encoding the full-length plasma membrane GHR 
and putative GHBPs.

PMID: 12431808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 17;278(3):1671-9. Epub 2002 Nov 11.

STAT5b, a Mediator of Synergism between c-Src and the Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor.

Kloth MT(1), Laughlin KK, Biscardi JS, Boerner JL, Parsons SJ, Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Microbiology and the Cancer Center,
University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908.

Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and its association
with the tyrosine kinase, c-Src, is correlated with increased cellular
proliferation and tumorigenesis. Previous studies have shown that EGFR and c-Src 
co-overexpression and association leads to the c-Src-mediated phosphorylation of 
tyrosine 845 of the EGFR and that mutation of Tyr(845) ablates epidermal growth
factor (EGF)-induced DNA synthesis. Here, we investigate the contribution of the 
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT5b) in the signaling
pathways regulated by EGFR and c-Src overexpression in human breast tumor cell
lines as well as in a mouse fibroblast model (C3H10T1/2). We demonstrate that 1) 
activation of STAT5b by EGF requires overexpression of the EGFR, 2)
co-overexpression of c-Src alone does not result in EGF-induced activation of
STAT5b but enhances that seen in EGFR-overexpressing cells, and 3) EGF-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b requires Tyr(845) of the EGFR. Furthermore,
the stable overexpression of a kinase-defective c-Src in the context of EGFR
overexpression results in a decrease in the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b in
response to EGF and a more dramatic decrease in EGF-induced transcriptional
activation of STAT5b, suggesting an integral role for c-Src in the physiological 
actions of STAT5b. Using a dominant negative STAT5b, we provide evidence that one
such physiological action is to mediate EGF-induced DNA-synthesis. Finally, the
use of site-specific tyrosine mutants demonstrates that EGF-induced
phosphorylation of STAT5b involves not only tyrosine 699 of STAT5b, which is
required for its transcriptional activation, but also three previously identified
tyrosines in the C terminus of STAT5b (Tyr(725)/Tyr(740)/Tyr(743)).

PMID: 12429742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. EMBO J. 2002 Nov 1;21(21):5766-74.

The Src family kinase Hck couples BCR/ABL to STAT5 activation in myeloid leukemia
cells.

Klejman A(1), Schreiner SJ, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Slupianek A, Wilson M,
Smithgall TE, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is constitutively
activated by BCR/ABL, the oncogenic tyrosine kinase responsible for chronic
myelogenous leukemia. The mechanism of BCR/ABL-mediated STAT5 activation is
unknown. We show here that the BCR/ABL SH3 and SH2 domains interact with
hematopoietic cell kinase (Hck), leading to the stimulation of Hck catalytic
activity. Active Hck phosphorylated STAT5B on Tyr699, which represents an
essential step in STAT5B stimulation. Moreover, a kinase-dead Hck mutant and Hck 
inhibitor PP2 abrogated BCR/ABL-dependent activation of STAT5 and elevation of
expression of STAT5 downstream effectors A1 and pim-1. These data identify a
novel BCR/ABL-Hck-STAT5 signaling pathway, which plays an important role in
BCR/ABL-mediated transformation of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC131059
PMID: 12411494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48479-83. Epub 2002 Oct 30.

Mutations in the estrogen receptor DNA-binding domain discriminate between the
classical mechanism of action and cross-talk with Stat5b and activating protein 1
(AP-1).

Björnström L(1), Sjöberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Estrogen receptors (ERs) efficiently potentiate the transcriptional activity of
prolactin-activated Stat5b through a mechanism that involves the ER DNA-binding
domain (DBD) and the hinge domain. We have identified residues within the DBD of 
ER that are critical for the functional interaction of ER with Stat5b. We show
that disruption of the second zinc finger structure abrogated cross-talk between 
ER and Stat5b, while the structure of the first zinc finger was not important.
Furthermore, we confirm that intact DNA binding activity was not required for
potentiation of Stat5b activity and that the dimerization of ER did not seem to
be involved. Ligand-bound ERs also modulated activating protein 1-dependent
transcription, and our data demonstrate that both zinc finger structures of the
ER DBD are important for an intact response. We show that introduction of various
point mutations within the DBD altered the response of the receptor to
17beta-estradiol and to the estrogen antagonists 4-hydroxytamoxifen and ICI
182,870 on the collagenase promoter. These findings provide new insights into the
mechanisms by which ERs act in cross-talk with non-related transcription factors.

PMID: 12411447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Int Immunol. 2002 Nov;14(11):1263-71.

Serine phosphorylation of Stat5 proteins in lymphocytes stimulated with IL-2.

Xue HH(1), Fink DW Jr, Zhang X, Qin J, Turck CW, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.

Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates cytokine-induced dimerization of STAT
proteins. Serine phosphorylation has also been found to occur in a number of STAT
proteins, including Stat1, Sat3, Stat4, Stat5a, Stat5b and Stat6, and was shown
to be important for maximal transcriptional activation mediated by Stat1, Stat3
and Stat4, but not for Stat5a or Stat5b. As these latter proteins were studied in
transiently transfected COS-7 cells stimulated with prolactin, we sought to
further investigate the significance of their serine phosphorylation in a more
physiologically based system in response to IL-2. Both Stat5a and Stat5b were
rapidly phosphorylated on serine in response to IL-2 and the phosphorylation site
in Stat5a was mapped to Ser780, which is not conserved in Stat5b. In vitro
studies with reporter constructs, and experiments in which wild-type and mutant
Stat5a retroviruses were used to transduce Stat5a-deficient splenocytes revealed 
that the serine mutant constructs were not diminished in their ability to mediate
IL-2 signaling and if anything exhibited augmented proliferative capability.
Thus, in contrast to the apparent importance of serine phosphorylation for
transcriptional activation by Stat1, Stat3 and Stat4 in response to IFN, IL-6 and
IL-12 respectively, serine phosphorylation of Stat5a does not enhance
Stat5a-mediated signaling in response to IL-2.

PMID: 12407017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Blood. 2003 Jan 1;101(1):134-42. Epub 2002 Aug 15.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) is required for
eosinophil differentiation of human cord blood-derived CD34+ cells.

Buitenhuis M(1), Baltus B, Lammers JW, Coffer PJ, Koenderman L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) have been reported to 
play a critical role in the differentiation of several myeloid cell lines,
although the importance of STATs in the differentiation of primary human
hematopoietic cells remains to be established. Terminal eosinophil
differentiation is induced by interleukin-5 (IL-5), which has also been
demonstrated to activate STAT5. We have investigated whether STAT5 plays a
critical role during eosinophil differentiation using umbilical cord
blood-derived CD34(+) cells. In this ex vivo system, STAT5 expression and
activation are high early during differentiation, and STAT5 protein expression is
down-regulated during the final stages of eosinophil differentiation. Retroviral 
transductions were performed to ectopically express wild-type and
dominant-negative STAT5a (STAT5aDelta750) in CD34(+) cells. Transduction of cells
with STAT5a resulted in enhanced proliferation compared with cells transduced
with empty vector alone. Interestingly, ectopic expression of STAT5a also
resulted in accelerated differentiation. In contrast, ectopic expression of
STAT5aDelta750 resulted in a block in differentiation, whereas proliferation was 
also severely inhibited. Similar results were obtained with dominant-negative
STAT5b. Forced expression of STAT5a enhanced expression of the STAT5 target genes
Bcl-2 and p21(WAF/Cip1), suggesting they may be important in STAT5a-mediated
eosinophil differentiation. These results demonstrate that STAT5 plays a critical
role in eosinophil differentiation of primary human hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 12393707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Blood. 2002 Dec 1;100(12):3983-9. Epub 2002 Jul 25.

Cell intrinsic defects in cytokine responsiveness of STAT5-deficient
hematopoietic stem cells.

Bradley HL(1), Hawley TS, Bunting KD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department and the Flow Cytometry Facility, American Red Cross
Holland Laboratory, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

Secreted growth factors are integral components of the bone marrow (BM) niche and
can regulate survival, proliferation, and differentiation of committed
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, downstream genes activated in HSCs by
early-acting cytokines are not well characterized. To better define intracellular
cytokine signaling in HSC function, we have analyzed mice lacking expression of
both signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b
(STAT5ab(-/-)). These studies specifically avoided possible autoimmune and/or
splenomegaly disease-mediated indirect effects on HSC function by using 2
independent approaches: (1) by crossing onto the C57Bl/6 RAG2(-/-) background,
and (2) by generation of wild-type chimeric mice reconstituted with transplanted 
STAT5ab(-/-) BM cells. These experiments demonstrated that STAT5-deficient HSCs
have cell autonomous defects in competitive long-term repopulating activity.
Furthermore, in the chimeric mice, injected wild-type BM cells showed a
progressive multilineage competitive repopulating advantage in vivo,
demonstrating that steady-state hematopoiesis was also highly STAT5-dependent.
Consistent with the in vivo repopulating deficiency, when Sca-1(+)c-kit(+)lin(-) 
(KLS) cells were isolated and stimulated with growth factors in vitro, up to a
13-fold reduced expansion of total nucleated cells was observed in response to
cocktails containing interleukin 3 (IL-3), IL-6, stem cell factor (SCF), Flt3
ligand, and thrombopoietin. Notably, a 10-fold reduction in expansion was
observed with IL-3 and SCF. However, STAT5 activation was not required for
regeneration of the KLS pool in vivo following transplant or for secondary
repopulating ability. These studies support a major role for STAT5 activation as 
a cellular determinant of cytokine-mediated HSC repopulating potential but not
self-renewal capacity.

PMID: 12393407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Oct;72(4):819-28.

Interleukin-2 family cytokines stimulate phosphorylation of the Pro-Ser-Pro motif
of Stat5 transcription factors in human T cells: resistance to suppression of
multiple serine kinase pathways.

Nagy ZS(1), Wang Y, Erwin-Cohen RA, Aradi J, Monia B, Wang LH, Stepkowski SM, Rui
H, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, 77030, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a and Stat5b are critical
for normal immune function. Progression of T cells through G(1)-S phase of cell
cycle requires T cell receptor (TCR)- and/or cytokine-inducible tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5a/b. Stat5a/b may also, in a cell-dependent manner, be
constitutively or cytokine-inducibly phosphorylated on a Pro-Ser-Pro (PSP) motif 
located within the transcriptional activation domain. Phosphorylation of the PSP 
motif is needed for maximal transcriptional activation by Stat5, at least in
certain promoter contexts. The basal and cytokine-inducible serine
phosphorylation state of Stat5a/b has not been determined in T cells. Using
primary human T cells and T lymphocytic cell lines coupled with novel
phospho-specific antibodies to this conserved phosphoserine motif in Stat5a or
Stat5b, we report that: Stat5a and Stat5b were unphosphorylated on the PSP motif 
under basal conditions and became markedly phosphorylated in response to several 
T cell growth factor stimuli, including interleukin (IL)-2, -7, -9, and -15 and
phorbol ester 12-myristate 13-acetate but not TCR engagement; inducible Stat5a/b 
serine phosphorylation differed quantitatively and temporally; and Stat5a/b
serine phosphorylation was, in contrast to inducible Stat3 serine
phosphorylation, insensitive to inhibitors of mitogen-activated protein kinase,
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, and mammalian target of rapamycin or deletion of
Raf-A, -B, or -C by antisense oligonucleotides. We conclude that IL-2 family
cytokines tightly control Stat5 serine phosphorylation through a kinase distinct 
from the Stat3 serine kinase.

PMID: 12377952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 4;297(4):811-7.

The nuclear isoform of protein-tyrosine phosphatase TC-PTP regulates
interleukin-6-mediated signaling pathway through STAT3 dephosphorylation.

Yamamoto T(1), Sekine Y, Kashima K, Kubota A, Sato N, Aoki N, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

In the previous study, we demonstrated that the nuclear isoform of T-cell
protein-tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) dephosphorylated and deactivated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b, thereby
negatively regulating prolactin (PRL)-mediated signaling pathway. In this study, 
we examined the involvement of the nuclear isoform of TC-PTP in interleukin-6
(IL-6)-mediated signaling pathway. IL-6 is a multifunctional cytokine that plays 
important roles in the immune system, hematopoiesis, and acute phase reactions,
and has also implicated in IL-6-related diseases. Here, we demonstrate that
IL-6-induced tyrosine-phosphorylation and activation of STAT3 were suppressed by 
overexpression of the nuclear isoform of TC-PTP in 293T cells.
Tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT3 directly interacted with a substrate-trapping
mutant of TC-PTP. Furthermore, retrovirus-mediated overexpression of the nuclear 
isoform of TC-PTP suppressed the IL-6-induced growth arrest of myeloid leukemia
M1 cells. Endogenous TC-PTP complexed with STAT3 in the nucleus of M1 cells.
These results strongly suggest that the nuclear isoform of TC-PTP may serve as a 
negative regulator of IL-6-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 12359225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Leukemia. 2002 Oct;16(10):1959-73.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia: a model for the role of molecular diagnosis and
residual disease monitoring in directing treatment approach in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Grimwade D(1), Lo Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Guy's, King's and St Thomas'
School of Medicine, London, UK.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a number of features that 
underpin the need for rapid and accurate diagnosis and demand a highly specific
treatment approach. These include the potentially devastating coagulopathy,
sensitivity to anthracycline-based chemotherapy regimens, as well as unique
responses to all-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide that have
revolutionized therapy over the last decade. The chromosomal translocation
t(15;17) which generates the PML-RARalpha fusion gene has long been considered
the diagnostic hallmark of APL; however, this abnormality is not detected in
approximately 10% cases with successful karyotype analysis. In the majority of
these cases, the PML-RARalpha fusion gene is still formed, resulting from
insertion events or more complex rearrangements. These cases share the beneficial
response to retinoids and favorable prognosis of those with documented t(15;17), 
underscoring the clinical relevance of molecular analyses in diagnostic
refinement. In other cases of t(15;17) negative APL, various chromosomal
rearrangements involving 17q21 have been documented leading to fusion of RARalpha
to alternative partners, namely PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b. The nature of the
fusion partner has a significant bearing upon disease characteristics, including 
sensitivity to retinoids and arsenic trioxide. APL has provided an exciting
treatment model for other forms of AML whereby therapeutic approach is directed
towards cytogenetically and molecularly defined subgroups and further modified
according to response as determined by minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring.
Recent studies suggest that rigorous MRD monitoring, coupled with pre-emptive
therapy at the point of molecular relapse improves survival in the relatively
small subgroup of PML-RARalpha positive patients with 'poor risk' disease. Advent
of 'real-time' quantitative RT-PCR technology seems set to yield further
improvements in the predictive value of MRD assessment, achieve more rapid sample
throughput and facilitate inter- and intra-laboratory standardization, thereby
enabling more reliable comparison of data between international trial groups.

PMID: 12357347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Leukemia. 2002 Oct;16(10):1927-32.

Variations on a theme: the alternate translocations in APL.

Redner RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The t(15;17)(q22;q21) translocation is tightly linked to the APL phenotype, and
the resultant PML-RAR fusion can be demonstrated in 98% of APL cases. Rare
variant translocations have been reported, the majority of which on detailed
analysis represent cryptic PML-RAR fusions. However, a handful of APL cases have 
been described with different genotypes. These include the t(11;17)(q23;q21) that
produces the PLZF-RAR fusion, t(5;17)(q35;q21) that forms NPM-RAR,
t(11;17)(q13;q21) that generates NUMA-RAR, and der(17) that creates STAT5b-RAR.
In this review we will discuss these variant translocations, and discuss the
insights that we have gained from their study.

PMID: 12357344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2002 Oct;12(5):374-80.

Intracellular signaling by growth hormone variant (GH-V).

Silva CM(1), Kloth MT, Lyons CE, Dunn CR, Kirk SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Virginia
Health System, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Placental growth hormone, or growth hormone variant (GH-V), is a member of the
growth hormone gene family. Its physiologic role during pregnancy remains
undefined. Although extensive work has been done characterizing the signaling
pathways activated by hGH, the signaling pathways which are activated by GH-V
have not been characterized. We investigated cellular signaling by GH-V in model 
systems in which signaling by hGH has been well characterized. GH-V activates the
STAT5b transcription factor in the IM-9 human lymphocyte and 3T3-F442A
preadipocyte cell lines, and in primary porcine smooth muscle cells, which all
homologously express GH receptors. In contrast, hCS does not activate signaling
in these GH receptor-expressing cells. Like hGH, signaling by GH-V is inhibited
by the GH antagonist (G120K). These results provide preliminary evidence that
GH-V plays a major role in affecting target cells expressing the GH receptor,
thus potentially exerting significant GH-like effects on maternal physiology
during pregnancy.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12213191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Sep;16(9):2019-33.

CPAP is a novel stat5-interacting cofactor that augments stat5-mediated
transcriptional activity.

Peng B(1), Sutherland KD, Sum EY, Olayioye M, Wittlin S, Tang TK, Lindeman GJ,
Visvader JE.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research & Rotary Bone Marrow
Research Laboratories, Post Office Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria 3050,
Australia.

Stat5, a member of the signal transducer and activators of transcription (Stat)
protein family, is a primary mediator of prolactin (PRL) signaling in the mammary
gland. There are two distinct Stat5 genes, Stat5a and Stat5b. The Stat5a isoform 
has been demonstrated to have an essential role in mammary epithelial
differentiation, whereas Stat5b is required for dimorphic sexual growth. To
search for proteins that interact with the C terminus of Stat5a, a highly
divergent region amongst Stat family members, we performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen of HBL100 and primary breast adenocarcinoma libraries. This led to the
identification of a protein that had previously been isolated as a centrosomal
P4.1-associated protein (CPAP). CPAP was shown to specifically interact with
Stat5a and Stat5b but not with Stat1 or Stat3. Both the tyrosine phosphorylated
and unphosphorylated forms of Stat5, as well as Stat5a/Stat5b heterodimers, could
associate with CPAP. CPAP was expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and the
developing mammary gland as well as in other tissues. Indirect immunofluorescence
and cellular fractionation studies revealed that CPAP was predominantly
cytoplasmic, with low levels in the nucleus. Nuclear levels of CPAP increased
substantially upon activation of the PRL pathway, most likely reflecting
cotranslocation of this protein with activated Stat5. Furthermore, CPAP was found
to augment Stat5-mediated transcription. Thus, we have identified CPAP as a novel
coactivator of Stat5 proteins in the PRL (and probably other) pathways.

PMID: 12198240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Endocrinology. 2002 Sep;143(9):3284-94.

Stimulation of hepatic signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b by GH 
is not altered by 3-methylcholanthrene.

Timsit YE(1), Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical Sciences Building, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8.

We are investigating the mechanisms by which aromatic hydrocarbons, such as
3-methylcholanthrene (MC), suppress hepatic cytochrome P450 2C11 (CYP2C11) gene
expression. CYP2C11 is an enzyme expressed in the liver of male rats and is
regulated by a pulsatile pattern of GH secretion. We have previously shown that
MC attenuates the stimulatory effect of GH on CYP2C11 expression in
hypophysectomized male rats. In follow-up studies we evaluated the effect of MC
on GH-stimulated signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b)
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and DNA-binding activity. GH-stimulated
increases in hepatic nuclear STAT5b and phospho-STAT5b levels were not different 
between groups of hypophysectomized rats receiving MC or vehicle. This
observation was corroborated at the DNA-binding level by EMSA. We also measured
GH-induced STAT5b activation in the H4IIE rat hepatoma cell line. STAT5b
DNA-binding activity detected in GH-treated cells was not affected by MC.
Immunocytochemistry experiments revealed no effect of MC on GH-stimulated STAT5b 
nuclear translocation in H4IIE cells. These in vivo and in vitro data suggest
that interference with GH-stimulated STAT5b activation does not constitute a
mechanism by which MC attenuates the stimulatory effect of GH on CYP2C11 gene
expression.

PMID: 12193540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 May-Jun;21(5-6):475-81.

The roles of inflammation, STAT transcription factors, and nerve growth factor in
viral reactivation and herpes keratitis.

Kriesel JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah School of Medicine, Departments of Internal Medicine and
Ophthalmology, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA. jkriesel@med.utah.edu

Nerve growth factor (NGF) has an inhibitory effect while inflammatory cytokines
may stimulate herpes simplex virus (HSV) reactivation. NGF binds to its receptor 
trkA on terminal axons and signals the neuron cell body in the ganglion. Many
cytokines may also signal neurons through their specific receptors, affecting
STAT transcription factors within the cell bodies. We studied the effects of
trigeminal ganglion (TG) explantation, a powerful HSV reactivation stimulus, on
the NGF/trkA and the JAK/STAT signaling pathways. Immunohistochemistry and gel
shifting experiments were performed using anti-STAT, anti-trkA, or negative
control antibodies on mouse TGs. The expression of neuronal trkA was greatly
reduced or eliminated by 3 days postexplantation. In contrast, the expression of 
STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5b, as well as phosphotyrosine-STAT3 were relatively
preserved in these explanted TGs. Gel-shifting experiments indicated that TG
nuclear extracts bind specifically to the HSV-1 LAT promoter, an important viral 
gene that regulates reactivation. STAT1, but not STAT3 or STAT5b, was detected as
a component of this LAT binding complex. These studies suggest that the
inhibitory effects of NGF/trkA signaling are lost after TG explantation while
STAT expression is maintained, allowing HSV-1 reactivation to proceed.

PMID: 12167251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Biol Rep. 2001;28(4):217-22.

Opposite nuclear level and binding activity of STAT5B and STAT3 proteins with rat
haptoglobin gene under normal and turpentine induced acute phase conditions.

Grigorov I(1), Lazic T, Cvetkovic I, Milosavljevic T, Petrovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Research, Department for Molecular Biology, Belgrade,
Yugoslavia. iligri&ibiss.bg.ac.yu

Transcription of the rat gene encoding haptoglobin (Hp) is highly induced during 
acute phase (AP) response which has been previously shown to be mediated by
inducible STAT3 member of the Signal Transducer and Activators of Transcription
(STATs) family proteins. In this study, we observed that under normal but not in 
the turpentine induced AP conditions, another member of the STAT family proteins,
STAT5b is expressed and binds to the hormone regulatory element (HRE) of the rat 
Hp gene. We found that the nuclear amounts of constitutively active STAT5b in rat
liver decreased significantly with time of turpentine treatment as opposed to
that of cytosol STAT5b, suggesting possible export of constitutive STAT5b from
the nucleus. Nuclear accumulation and binding of inducible STAT3 proteins to the 
rat Hp gene HRE following turpentine treatment implicated that STAT5b negatively 
regulates Hp gene expression during normal conditions.

PMID: 12153141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Leukemia. 2002 Aug;16(8):1568-9.

Infrequent rearrangement of the STAT5b locus in primary human hematologic
malignancies.

Touche N, Philippe C, Gregoire MJ, Arnould C, Dastugue N, Mugneret F,
Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Franck M, Jonveaux P.

PMID: 12145702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002 Jul 1;182(1):1-10.

Elevated basal expression of liver peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes and CYP4A
microsomal fatty acid omega-hydroxylase in STAT5b(-/-) mice: cross-talk in vivo
between peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor and signal transducer and
activator of transcription signaling pathways.

Zhou YC(1), Davey HW, McLachlan MJ, Xie T, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Long-term treatment of rodents with peroxisome proliferator chemicals, a group of
structurally diverse nongenotoxic carcinogens, leads to liver cancer in a process
dependent on the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-alpha (PPARalpha). Previous in vitro studies have shown that growth
hormone (GH) can inhibit PPARalpha-dependent gene expression by down-regulation
of PPARalpha expression and by a novel inhibitory cross-talk involving the
GH-activated transcription factor STAT5b. Presently, we evaluate the role of
STAT5b in mediating these inhibitory actions of GH on PPAR function using a
STATb-deficient mouse model. Protein levels of three PPARalpha-responsive
peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway enzymes (fatty acyl-CoA oxidase,
3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase, and L-bifunctional enzyme) were increased up to two- to 
threefold in STAT5b(-/-) relative to wild-type control mouse liver, as was the
basal expression of two PPARalpha-regulated cytochrome P450 4A proteins. In
contrast, protein levels of two PPARalpha-unresponsive peroxisomal enzymes,
catalase and urate oxidase, were not affected by the loss of STAT5b. A
corresponding increase in expression of fatty acyl-CoA oxidase and L-bifunctional
enzyme mRNA, as well as PPARalpha mRNA, was observed in the STAT5b-deficient
mice, suggesting a transcriptional mechanism for the observed increases. Although
basal liver expression of PPARalpha and its target genes was thus elevated in
STAT5b(-/-) mice, the clofibrate-induced level of enzyme expression was
unaffected, suggesting that the inhibitory effects of STAT5b are overcome at high
concentrations of PPARalpha activators. These findings support the hypothesis
that GH and potentially other endogenous activators of STAT5b help to maintain
liver PPARalpha function at a low basal level and may thereby moderate
PPARalpha-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis and other responses stimulated by
exposure to low levels of environmental chemicals of the peroxisome proliferator 
class.

PMID: 12127257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Blood. 2002 Jul 15;100(2):467-73.

Prostaglandin-E2 enhances EPO-mediated STAT5 transcriptional activity by serine
phosphorylation of CREB.

Boer AK(1), Drayer AL, Rui H, Vellenga E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University Hospital Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.

Erythroid colony formation in response to erythropoietin (EPO) stimulation is
enhanced by costimulating the cells with prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2). The present
study further analyzed the underlying mechanisms and demonstrated that
EPO-mediated STAT5 transactivation in the erythroid AS-E2 cell line was enhanced 
6-fold by PGE2 (10 microM), without affecting the STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation 
or STAT5-DNA binding. Moreover, the PGE2-enhancing effect was independent of
STAT5 serine phosphorylation. In AS-E2 cells STAT5 is constitutively
phosphorylated on Ser780 (STAT5A) and EPO-dependently phosphorylated on
Ser726/731 (STAT5A/STAT5B), but overexpression of STAT5 serine mutants did not
affect STAT5 transactivation. In addition, PGE2 did not affect STAT5 serine
phosphorylation. Instead, the stimulatory effect of PGE2 on STAT5 signaling could
be mimicked by dibutyryl-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and the
phosphodiesterase inhibitor IBMX, suggesting that the effect was mediated by
cAMP. Activation of the cAMP pathway resulted in cAMP-response element binding
protein (CREB) phosphorylation, which was sustained in the presence of EPO plus
PGE2 and transient on EPO stimulation alone. The costimulatory effect of PGE2 on 
EPO-mediated STAT5 transactivation was inhibited by overexpression of serine-dead
CREB or protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor (PKI), in contrast to EPO-mediated
transactivation, which was PKA independent. Furthermore, CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 was shown to be involved in EPO-mediated STAT5 transactivation, and a 
CBP mutant with increased affinity for CREB resulted in an additional enhancement
of the PGE2 effect. Finally, we demonstrated that the STAT5 target genes Bcl-X,
SOCS2, and SOCS3 were up-regulated by costimulation with PGE2. In summary, these 
studies demonstrate that PGE2 enhancement of EPO-induced STAT5 transactivation is
mediated by the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway.

PMID: 12091337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1696-710.

Synergistic action of prolactin (PRL) and androgen on PRL-inducible protein gene 
expression in human breast cancer cells: a unique model for functional
cooperation between signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 and
androgen receptor.

Carsol JL(1), Gingras S, Simard J.

Author information: 
(1)Canada Research Chair in Oncogenetics, Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology
Research Center, Laval University Medical Center and Laval University, Québec,
Canada G1V 4G2.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) has been shown to 
cooperate with some nuclear receptors. However, an interaction has never been
demonstrated with the androgen receptor (AR). Given that the PRL-inducible
protein/gross cystic disease fluid-15 (PIP/GCDFP-15) is both a PRL-controlled and
an androgen-controlled protein, we used its promoter region to investigate the
potential interaction between Stat5 and androgen receptor. Dihydrotestosterone or
PRL alone slightly modulated or did not modulate the luciferase activity of all
reporter gene constructs. In contrast, a maximal increase was observed using the 
-1477+42 reporter gene construct after exposure to both dihydrotestosterone and
PRL. The requirement of half-site androgen-responsive elements and two consensus 
Stat5-binding elements, Stat5#1 and Stat5#2, was determined by site-directed
mutagenesis. Activated Stat5B binds with a higher affinity to Stat5#2 than to
Stat5#1. Stat5ADelta749 and Stat5BDelta754 mutants demonstrated that the Stat5
trans-activation domain is involved in the hormonal cooperation. The cooperation 
depends on the PRL-induced phosphorylation on Tyr(694) in Stat5A and Tyr(699) in 
Stat5B, as demonstrated using the Stat5AY694F and Stat5BY699F proteins. The use
of AR Q798E, C619Y, and C784Y mutants showed that trans-activation, DNA-binding, 
and ligand-binding domains of AR are essential. Our study thus suggests a
functional cooperation between AR and Stat5.

PMID: 12089361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1598-611.

Possible involvement of truncated signal transducer and activator of
transcription-5 in the GH pattern-dependent regulation of CYP2C12 gene expression
in rat liver.

Helander H(1), Gustafsson JA, Mode A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, NOVUM, S-141 86
Huddinge, Sweden. Hanna.Helander@mednut.ki.se

The transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Stat)5a and Stat5b have been implicated in the GH regulation of CYP2C genes in
rodent liver. In addition to full-length Stat5 isoforms, truncated Stat5 proteins
(Stat5beta), lacking the transactivating domain, have been demonstrated. In this 
study we found that Stat5beta can be formed by proteolytic cleavage in rat liver 
nuclei and that the activity of the protease is independent of GH. The GH
regulation of the female-specific CYP2C12 gene has recently been shown to be
conveyed by two adjacent Stat5-binding elements in the 5'-upstream region. We
found that binding of Stat5 in liver nuclear extracts to this site involved
simultaneous binding of two Stat5 dimers, most likely both Stat5b homodimers and 
Stat5a/Stat5b heterodimers. We also investigated Stat5 binding to a potential
composite Stat5 element in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of CYP2C12. Several
Stat5 complexes were formed on this element including Stat5beta-containing
complexes. In transient transfection experiments we could demonstrate that the
3'-UTR element reduced GH activation of a CYP2C12-luciferase reporter construct
harboring the 5'-Stat5 elements. We speculate that binding of Stat5beta to the
3'-UTR element could be of relevance for the GH-dependent and sex-specific
expression of CYP2C12.

PMID: 12089354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1565-76.

Stimulation of 3T3-L1 adipogenesis by signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5.

Nanbu-Wakao R(1), Morikawa Y, Matsumura I, Masuho Y, Muramatsu MA, Senba E, Wakao
H.

Author information: 
(1)Helix Research Institute, 1532-3 Yana Kisarazu-shi Chiba, 292-0812 Japan.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) mediates signaling of 
many cytokines and growth factors. Here we show that Stat5 functions as an
initial mediator of adipogenesis. The preadipocyte cell line 3T3-L1 undergoes
adipocyte differentiation upon appropriate hormonal induction. We found that
Stat5A and Stat5B were strongly activated at an early stage of 3T3-L1
differentiation. To investigate physiological roles of Stat5 in adipogenesis, we 
have constructed 3T3-L1 cell lines in which either an exogenous wild type (wt) or
dominant negative (dn) form of Stat5A expression was controlled under the
doxycycline-regulatable promoter. Precocious induction of wt-Stat5A in adipocyte 
differentiation promoted accumulation of triglycerides within the cells. In
contrast, induction of dn-Stat5A attenuated lipid accumulation. Northern blot
analyses revealed that the expression of proadipogenic transcription factors was 
influenced in a complementary fashion by ectopic expression of either wt- or
dn-Stat5A. Notably, Stat5 regulated expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, which plays crucial roles in adipogenesis.
We have also generated transgenic mice in which dn-Stat5A is expressed in an
adipose tissue-specific fashion and found attenuation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma and of many adipocyte-related genes. These 
results highlight a novel role of Stat5 in adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 12089351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Endocrinology. 2002 Jul;143(7):2610-7.

GH and epidermal growth factor signaling in normal and Laron syndrome
fibroblasts.

Silva CM(1), Kloth MT, Whatmore AJ, Freeth JS, Anderson N, Laughlin KK, Huynh T, 
Woodall AJ, Clayton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville 22908, USA. cms3e@virginia.edu

We have investigated and compared GH and epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling 
in primary human skin fibroblasts from normal subjects and subjects with
GH-binding protein-positive Laron syndrome (LS). In normal human fibroblasts, GH 
and EGF activate the tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT)1 and STAT5b; in LS fibroblasts, EGF does, but GH does
not. GH also activates the tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinase (JAK)2 in
normal, but not LS, fibroblasts. Similarly, both GH and EGF activate MAPK in
normal fibroblasts, but only EGF does in the LS fibroblasts. As in the 3T3-F442A 
mouse preadipocyte cell line, GH signaling to mitogen-activated protein kinase is
partially inhibited by wortmannin treatment, indicating a role for
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) in this signaling pathway. The exogenous
expression of the GH receptor in one family of LS fibroblasts (H1) but not the
other (M) restores signaling to a STAT5 reporter element. Together, these results
indicate that the mechanism of defective GH signaling in two families of LS
fibroblasts are different but that both occur at a level close to, and specific
for, the GH receptor.

PMID: 12072393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 May;22(5):555-63.

Association of the chaperone glucose-regulated protein 58 (GRP58/ER-60/ERp57)
with Stat3 in cytosol and plasma membrane complexes.

Guo GG(1), Patel K, Kumar V, Shah M, Fried VA, Etlinger JD, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

Glucose-regulated protein 58 (GRP58/ER-60/ERp57), best known as a chaperone in
the endoplasmic reticulum lumen, was previously identified by us as one of
several accessory proteins in the S100 cytosol fraction of human hepatoma Hep3B
cells that was differentially coshifted by anti-Stat3 antibody in an
antibody-subtracted differential protein display assay. In the present study, the
association between GRP58 and Stat3 in different cytoplasmic compartments was
evaluated using cross-immunoprecipitation and cell-fractionation techniques. In
the S100 cytosol fraction, three different anti-GRP58 polyclonal antibodies (pAb)
cross-immunoprecipitated Stat3 (but not Stat1), and, conversely, anti-Stat3 pAb
cross-immunoprecipitated GRP58. Both cytosolic Stat3 and GRP58 eluted during
Superose-6 gel-filtration chromatography in complexes of size 200-400 kDa
(statosome I), and anti-Stat3 pAb cross-immunoprecipitated GRp58 from these FPLC 
elution fractions. Using differential sedimentation and density equilibrium
flotation methods, Stat3 and GRP58 were observed to be coassociated with
cytoplasmic membranes enriched for the plasma membrane marker 5' nucleotidase but
not with those containing the endoplasmic reticulum marker BiP/GRP78. The Stat3
and GRP58-containing plasma membrane fraction also contained Stat1, Stat5b, and
gp130. Stat activation by orthovanadate caused the accumulation of PY-Stat3 in
the GRP58-containing plasma membrane fraction. However, this PY-Stat3 was
DNA-binding deficient. Likewise, excess exogenous recombinant human GRP58
prepared using a baculovirus expression system preferentially inhibited Stat3
DNA-binding activity in the S100 cytosol, suggesting that GRP58 may sequester
activated Stat3. The new data confirm the association between GRP58 and Stat3 in 
cytosolic 200-400-kDa statosome I complexes and show that both GRP58 and Stat
family members coassociate in the plasma membrane compartment. We suggest that
the chaperone GRP58 may regulate signaling by sequestering inactive and activated
Stat3.

PMID: 12060494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2581-8.

Regulated expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription, Stat5, 
and its enhancement of PRL expression in human endometrial stromal cells in
vitro.

Mak IY(1), Brosens JJ, Christian M, Hills FA, Chamley L, Regan L, White JO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Wolfson and Weston
Research Centre for Family Health, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College of
Science Technology and Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 ONN, United
Kingdom.

Differentiation of human endometrium during the secretory phase of the menstrual 
cycle is characterized by expression of a variety of genes implicated in the
establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. An increased abundance of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stats) in the secretory phase
suggests Stat5 as a component of the differentiation of endometrium in response
to ovarian hormone stimulation in vivo. Decidualization is initiated in a subset 
of endometrial stromal cells (ESC) in vivo during the secretory phase, but it is 
unclear whether regulated expression of Stat5 is a feature of these cells. Here, 
therefore, the abundance and subcellular distribution of Stat5 in ESC after a
decidualization stimulus of cAMP plus medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) has been 
investigated in vitro. Western blotting revealed an increase in the apparent
abundance of Stat5a and Stat5b, in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions, at 2, 3, 
and 4 d after stimulation. The potential functional relevance of this increase in
Stat5 is suggested by the ability of transiently transfected Stat5a or Stat5b to 
significantly enhance the response of the decidual PRL promoter to cAMP/MPA and
attenuation of the response to cAMP/MPA by dominant negative Stat5. Recent
evidence suggests endometrial differentiation, including PRL production, as a
possible target of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) prevalent in recurrent
miscarriage. Monoclonal antibody, ID2, which has similar reactivity as human aPL,
significantly decreased the apparent abundance of nuclear Stat5b in response to
cAMP/MPA and was associated with decreased decidual PRL promoter activation and
PRL secretion. Regulated expression of Stat5 is therefore a component of decidual
differentiation of human ESC and contributes significantly to activation of the
decidual PRL promoter. Alteration of this process by an aPL component suggests
decidual differentiation as a potential clinical target in recurrent early
miscarriages.

PMID: 12050218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jun;16(6):1394-406.

Growth enhancement in suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS-2)-deficient mice 
is dependent on signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b).

Greenhalgh CJ(1), Bertolino P, Asa SL, Metcalf D, Corbin JE, Adams TE, Davey HW, 
Nicola NA, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)The Cooperative Research Centre for Cellular Growth Factors and the Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria,
Australia. greenhalgh@wehi.edu.au

Mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signaling-2 (SOCS-2) exhibit accelerated
postnatal growth resulting in adult mice that are 1.3 to 1.5 times the size of
normal mice. In this study we examined the somatotrophic pathway to determine
whether the production or actions of GH or IGF-I are altered in these mice. We
demonstrated that SOCS-2(-/-) mice do not have elevated GH levels and suffer no
major pituitary dysmorphogenesis, and that SOCS-2-deficient embryonic fibroblasts
do not have altered IGF-I signaling. Primary hepatocytes from SOCS-2(-/-) mice,
however, did have moderately prolonged signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 signaling in response to GH stimulation. Furthermore, the
deletion of SOCS-2 from mice also lacking signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5b had little effect on growth, suggesting that the action of
SOCS-2 may be the regulation of the GH signaling pathway.

PMID: 12040024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gene. 2002 Feb 20;285(1-2):311-8.

The structure of human STAT5A and B genes reveals two regions of nearly identical
sequence and an alternative tissue specific STAT5B promoter.

Ambrosio R(1), Fimiani G, Monfregola J, Sanzari E, De Felice N, Salerno MC,
Pignata C, D'Urso M, Ursini MV.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics (IIGB-CNR), Via G. Marconi,
10, 80125, Naples, Italy.

STAT5A and STAT5B genes belong to the signal transducer and activators of
transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors. They show a high degree of 
sequence homology at levels of mRNA, however, in spite of their supposed
redundancy, each STAT5 has distinct biological functions mainly related to the
immune system, hematopoiesis, growth and mammary development. We isolated and
sequenced both STAT5A and STAT5B encoding human genes finding that they are
segmented in 20 and 19 exons, respectively, of comparable size except for the
extreme 5' exons and the 3' exons. Two CpG islands, 23.2% CpG for STAT5A and
30.2% for STAT5B, are present at the 5' of both STAT5 genes covering the 5'
untranslated regions. More surprisingly, the two genes share two major regions of
almost identical sequence which diverge between the different species indicating 
an intra-species specific mechanism of preservation. Furthermore, we identified
two alternative 5' exons in STAT5B genes and thus two alternative promoters. The 
second putative promoter is not embedded in a CpG island and it shows a tissue
specific pattern of expression. Finally, the STAT5B gene was assessed as a
candidate gene in a human disorder related to growth failure.

PMID: 12039059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 May;16(5):1108-24.

Basal activation of transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat5) in nonpregnant mouse and human breast epithelium.

Nevalainen MT(1), Xie J, Bubendorf L, Wagner KU, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)United States Military Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20852, USA.

Transcription factor Stat5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription) is 
essential for PRL-induced terminal differentiation of mouse mammary epithelial
cells during pregnancy and lactation and has been implicated in mammary
tumorigenesis. A new and sensitive immunological method to detect active,
tyrosine phosphorylated Stat5 in situ revealed that Stat5 is continuously
activated in luminal epithelial cells of mouse and human breast, not only during 
pregnancy and lactation, but also outside of pregnancy. Examination of virgin
Stat5a or Stat5b null mice suggested that Stat5a was the primary isoform
activated in mammary epithelial cells. Basal activation of Stat5 in mammary
epithelium of virgin wild-type mice was continuous throughout estrous cycle and
was also detected in 17 of 17 normal human breast tissue specimens analyzed. PRL 
was identified as the principal factor maintaining basal activation of Stat5 in
mammary epithelium of nonpregnant mice based on several lines of evidence. First,
administration of PRL, but not GH or epidermal growth factor, uniformly enhanced 
basal activation of Stat5 in luminal mammary epithelial cells. Second,
hypophysectomy disrupted basal activation of Stat5, an effect that was completely
reversed by administration of PRL, but only partially by GH. Third, knock-out of 
the PRL receptor gene markedly reduced basal activation of Stat5, an effect that 
was maintained in a normalized endocrine environment after transplanting PRL
receptor null mammary epithelium into wild-type mice. Continuous activation of
Stat5 indicates a role of this transcription factor in normal, nonpregnant breast
epithelial cells, and may shed new light on Stat5 involvement in breast tumor
promotion.

PMID: 11981045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2846-53.

Differential function of STAT5 isoforms in head and neck cancer growth control.

Leong PL(1), Xi S, Drenning SD, Dyer KF, Wentzel AL, Lerner EC, Smithgall TE,
Grandis JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
and The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Up-regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is critical for the 
loss of growth control in a variety of human cancers, including squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). Stimulation of EGFR results in activation
of mitogenic signaling pathways including Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription (STATs). Stat5 activation has been primarily demonstrated in
hematopoietic malignancies. Gene disruption studies suggest potentially distinct 
functions of the Stat5 isoforms, Stat5a and Stat5b, which are encoded by two
genes closely linked on human chromosome 17. To determine the function of Stat5
in SCCHN growth control, we studied the expression and constitutive activation of
Stat5a and Stat5b in normal and transformed human squamous epithelial cells.
Increased constitutive activation of Stat5 was detected in transformed compared
with normal squamous cells. Blockade of TGF-alpha or EGFR, abrogated Stat5
activation. Targeting of Stat5b using antisense oligonucleotides inhibited SCCHN 
growth. In addition, SCCHN cells stably transfected with dominant negative mutant
Stat5b failed to proliferate in vitro. In contrast, targeting of Stat5a using
either antisense or dominant negative strategies had no effect on cell growth.
These results suggest that TGF-alpha/EGFR-mediated autocrine growth of
transformed epithelial cells is dependent on activation of Stat5b but not Stat5a.

PMID: 11973644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Immunol. 2002 May 1;168(9):4567-75.

Stat5B shuttles between cytoplasm and nucleus in a cytokine-dependent and
-independent manner.

Zeng R(1), Aoki Y, Yoshida M, Arai K, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In response to cytokine stimuli, Stats are phosphorylated and translocated to the
nucleus to activate target genes. Then, most are dephosphorylated and returned to
the cytoplasm. Using Ba/F3 cells, we found that the nuclear export of Stat5B by
cytokine depletion was inhibited by leptomycin B (LMB), a specific inhibitor of
nuclear export receptor chromosome region maintenance 1. Interestingly, LMB
treatment in the absence of cytokine led to the accumulation of Stat5B in the
nucleus, suggesting that Stat5B shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm as
a monomer without cytokine stimulation. This notion is supported by the
observation that LMB-induced accumulation of Stat5B in the nucleus was also
observed with Stat5B having a mutated tyrosine 699, which is essential for dimer 
formation. Using a series of mutant Stat5Bs, we identified a part of the coiled
coil domain to be a critical region for monomer nuclear import and a more
N-terminal region to be critical for the cytokine stimulation dependent import of
Stat5B. Taken together, we propose a model in which Stat5B shuttles between the
nucleus and cytoplasm by two different mechanisms, one being a factor-independent
constitutive shuttling by monomeric form, and the other, a factor
stimulation-dependent one regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation and subsequent
dimerization.

PMID: 11971004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Blood. 2002 Apr 15;99(8):2647-52.

The Stat5-RARalpha fusion protein represses transcription and differentiation
through interaction with a corepressor complex.

Maurer AB(1), Wichmann C, Gross A, Kunkel H, Heinzel T, Ruthardt M, Groner B,
Grez M.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. a.maurer@em.uni-frankfurt.de

The transcription factor Stat5 mediates the cellular response to activation of
multiple cytokine receptors involved in the regulation of proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Recently, the human Stat5 gene was found 
to be translocated to the RARalpha gene in a patient with acute promyelocytic
leukemia indicating that Stat5 might also play a role in cellular transformation.
We investigated the mechanism by which Stat5 might exert this function and
studied the biochemical and cellular functions of fusion proteins comprising
Stat5 and RARalpha. The expression of Stat5-RARalpha causes the transcriptional
repression of gene transcription, a process that requires the coiled-coil domain 
of Stat5 (amino acid positions 133-333). Oligomerization of this domain in the
Stat5-RARalpha fusion protein leads to stable binding of the corepressor SMRT
independent of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) stimulation and is accompanied by
an impaired response to differentiation signals in hematopoietic cells. This
inhibitory effect on myeloid differentiation cannot be overcome by simultaneous
coexpression of RARalpha. We conclude that Stat5 is capable of interacting with a
corepressor complex that alters the pattern of corepressor binding to RARalpha
and its dissociation in response to ATRA stimulation, leading to enhanced
repressor activity and a block of hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 11929749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Blood. 2002 Apr 15;99(8):2637-46.

Interactions of STAT5b-RARalpha, a novel acute promyelocytic leukemia fusion
protein, with retinoic acid receptor and STAT3 signaling pathways.

Dong S(1), Tweardy DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b-retinoic acid receptor
(RAR) alpha is the fifth fusion protein identified in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). Initially described in a patient with all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA)-unresponsive disease, STAT5b-RARalpha resulted from an interstitial
deletion on chromosome 17. To determine the molecular mechanisms of myeloid
leukemogenesis and maturation arrest in STAT5b-RARalpha(+) APL and its
unresponsiveness to ATRA, we examined the effect of STAT5b-RARalpha on the
activity of myeloid transcription factors including RARalpha/retinoid X receptor 
(RXR) alpha, STAT3, and STAT5 as well as its molecular interactions with the
nuclear receptor corepressor, SMRT, and nuclear receptor coactivator, TRAM-1.
STAT5b-RARalpha bound to retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) both as a
homodimer and as a heterodimer with RXRalpha and inhibited wild-type
RARalpha/RXRalpha transactivation. Although STAT5b-RARalpha had no effect on
ligand-induced STAT5b activation, it enhanced interleukin 6-induced
STAT3-dependent reporter activity, an effect shared by other APL fusion proteins 
including promyelocytic leukemia-RARalpha and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger 
(PLZF)-RARalpha. SMRT was released from STAT5b-RARalpha/SMRT complexes by ATRA at
10(-6) M, whereas TRAM-1 became associated with STAT5b-RARalpha at 10(-7) M. The 
coiled-coil domain of STAT5b was required for formation of STAT5b-RARalpha
homodimers, for the inhibition of RARalpha/RXRalpha transcriptional activity, and
for stability of the STAT5b-RARalpha/SMRT complex. Thus, STAT5b-RARalpha
contributes to myeloid maturation arrest by binding to RARE as either a homodimer
or as a heterodimer with RXRalpha resulting in the recruitment of SMRT and
inhibition of RARalpha/RXRalpha transcriptional activity. In addition,
STAT5b-RARalpha and other APL fusion proteins may contribute to leukemogenesis by
interaction with the STAT3 oncogene pathway.

PMID: 11929748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):17359-66. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

Regulation of erythropoietin-induced STAT serine phosphorylation by distinct
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Haq R(1), Halupa A, Beattie BK, Mason JM, Zanke BW, Barber DL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of 
Toronto, Canada.

The STAT proteins are a family of latent transcription factors that are activated
by a wide variety of cytokines. Upon receptor engagement, STATs become tyrosine
phosphorylated, translocate to the nucleus, and induce expression of target
genes. In addition to tyrosine phosphorylation, maximal activation of some STAT
proteins requires serine phosphorylation within the transactivation domain. Here 
we focus on STAT phosphorylation after engagement of the erythropoietin receptor 
(EPO-R). In Ba/F3-EPO-R cells, EPO induces tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of
STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B. Identical regions of the EPO-R couple to both
tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of each cognate STAT protein. A proximal
region of the EPO-R lacking cytoplasmic tyrosines couples to STAT1 and STAT3
phosphorylation as well as ERK and p38(HOG) activation, but not JNK/SAPK. STAT1
serine phosphorylation was perturbed by inhibition of ERK and p38 pathways,
whereas only inhibition of ERK activation blocked STAT3 serine phosphorylation in
response to EPO. STAT5A/B phosphorylation is downstream of EPO-R Tyr(343),
however, STAT5A/B serine phosphorylation is unaffected by either ERK or p38
inhibition. Physiological responses induced by EPO may depend on regulation of
serine phosphorylation of the STAT molecules by p38(HOG) and the ERK family of
kinases as well as additional serine/threonine kinases.

PMID: 11875080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Mar;71(3):511-9.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced STAT5
activation and target-gene expression during human monocyte/macrophage
differentiation.

Lehtonen A(1), Matikainen S, Miettinen M, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology,
National Public Health Institute, Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-0300 Helsinki,
Finland. Anne.Lehtonen@ktl.fi

GM-CSF signals through JAK2 and STAT5 and stimulates the expression of STAT5
target genes, such as pim-1 and CIS. Analyzed by EMSA, GM-CSF stimulation led to 
much stronger STAT5 DNA-binding to pim-1 or CIS GAS elements in primary human
monocytes compared with mature macrophages. Similarly, GM-CSF-induced expression 
of pim-1 and CIS mRNAs was much stronger in monocytes. These differencies were
not a result of downregulation of the GM-CSF receptor system or STAT5 expression,
because monocytes and macrophages readily expressed GM-CSF receptor, JAK2,
STAT5A, and STAT5B mRNAs and proteins. Monocytes expressed significant amounts of
truncated STAT5 forms that took part in STAT5-DNA complex formation in
GM-CSF-stimulated monocytes. This resulted in faster moving STAT5 complexes
compared with macrophages in EMSA. Our results demonstrate that STAT5 isoform
expression, GM-CSF-induced STAT5 activation, and STAT5 target-gene expression are
altered significantly during monocyte/macrophage differentiation.

PMID: 11867689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Histochem Cytochem. 2002 Mar;50(3):365-83.

An immunohistochemical approach to monitor the prolactin-induced activation of
the JAK2/STAT5 pathway in pancreatic islets of Langerhans.

Brelje TC(1), Svensson AM, Stout LE, Bhagroo NV, Sorenson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

This study examined whether an immunohistochemical method examining the
subcellular localization of STAT5 could be used to characterize the activation of
the JAK2/STAT5 pathway by prolactin (PRL) in intact cells or tissues. In the
Ins-1 beta-cell line, STAT5A and STAT5B were distributed almost equally in the
cytoplasm and the nucleus in unstimulated cells. STAT5A was also detected along
the border of cells and in the perinuclear region. After exposure to PRL, the
redistribution from the cytoplasm to the nucleus was much higher for STAT5B
compared to STAT5A. This translocation represented 12% of the STAT5A and 22% of
the STAT5B originally located in the cytoplasm before stimulation. In isolated
rat islets of Langerhans, PRL stimulated the nuclear translocation of both STAT5A
and STAT5B only in beta-cells. The expression of the PRL receptor only by
beta-cells was confirmed with a rabbit polyclonal antiserum raised against the
rat PRL receptor. It was estimated that 4% of STAT5A and 9% of STAT5B originally 
located in the cytoplasm was translocated to the nucleus after stimulation. The
presence of a functional JAK2/STAT5 signaling pathway in all islet cells was
demonstrated by the nuclear translocation of STAT5B in all islet cells (i.e.,
alpha-, beta-, and delta-cells) after stimulation with fetal calf serum. The
nuclear translocation and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5B was biphasic, with
an initial peak within 30 min, a nadir between 1 and 3 hr, and prolonged
activation after 4 hr. In contrast, the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A was
also biphasic but its nuclear translocation peaked within 30 min and was then
reduced to a level slightly above that observed before PRL stimulation. This
method is able to detect changes in STAT5 activation as small as 2% of the total 
cell content. These observations demonstrate the utility of this approach for
studying the activation of STAT5 in a mixed population of cells within tissues or
organs. In addition, the dose response for the nuclear translocation of STAT5B in
normal beta-cells was similar to those for changes in proliferation and insulin
secretion in isolated rat islets. Therefore, the subcellular localization can be 
used to monitor the activation of STAT5 and it may be a key event in the
upregulation of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans during pregnancy.

PMID: 11850439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cell Growth Differ. 2002 Jan;13(1):13-8.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) activates Jak1/Stat3-Stat5B signaling
through TNFR-1 in human B cells.

Miscia S(1), Marchisio M, Grilli A, Di Valerio V, Centurione L, Sabatino G,
Garaci F, Zauli G, Bonvini E, Di Baldassarre A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Unit, Department of Biomorphology, School of Medicine,
University of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy. s.miscia@morpho.unich.it

The biological actions of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) are mediated by
two cell surface receptors, TNFR-1 and TNFR-2. These receptors do not display
protein tyrosine kinase activity. Nevertheless, an early TNF-induced activation
of specific tyrosine kinases has been reported as an important cue to the
cellular response to this cytokine. Here we present evidence that TNF-alpha
induces the activation of the cytoplasmic Janus tyrosine kinases Jak1 and Tyk2 in
both human healthy peripheral and lymphoma B cells. This event was accompanied by
the recruitment of a specific set of latent cytosolic transcription factors,
Stat3 and Stat5b. Furthermore, Jak1 coprecipitated with TNFR-1 after TNF-alpha
treatment. These data suggest that at least in human B cells this cytokine can
exert its biological effects through the Jak-Stat signaling pathway and that such
signals are initiated through an interaction between TNFR-1 and Jak 1.

PMID: 11801527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Endocrinology. 2002 Feb;143(2):386-94.

Cytokine-inducible SH2 protein up-regulation is associated with desensitization
of GH signaling in GHRH-transgenic mice.

González L(1), Miquet JG, Sotelo AI, Bartke A, Turyn D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas, Facultad de Farmacia y
Bioquímica, Junín 956, 1113 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The effects of continuous high GH levels on GH signal transduction through the GH
receptor (GHR)/Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) pathway as well as the desensitization of this pathway by
suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) were studied in transgenic mice
overexpressing GHRH. In transgenic mice, hepatic GHR levels were 4.5-fold higher 
than in normal animals, whereas the protein contents of JAK2, STAT5a, and STAT5b 
did not vary. This same pattern was found for basal tyrosine phosphorylation
(PY-): PY-GHR was 4.5-fold increased in transgenic mice, whereas there were no
differences in PY-JAK2 and PY-STATs between normal and transgenic animals. After 
GH administration, tyrosine phosphorylation of GHR, JAK2, and STAT5s increased 3-
to 7-fold in normal mice, but no significant changes were found in transgenic
mice, indicating a decreased GH sensitivity in these animals. The content of
cytokine-inducible SH2 protein, a member of the SOCS family, was 18-fold higher
in GHRH-transgenic than in normal mice. Conversely, SOCS-3, present in normal
mice, was hardly seen in transgenic animals, whereas SOCS-2 levels did not vary. 
These findings suggest that cytokine-inducible SH2 protein, significantly induced
by continuously elevated GH levels, may be the SOCS protein responsible for the
GH signaling desensitization in transgenic animals.

PMID: 11796490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Clin Invest. 2002 Jan;109(1):111-9.

Diabetic LDL inhibits cell-cycle progression via STAT5B and p21(waf).

Brizzi MF(1), Dentelli P, Pavan M, Rosso A, Gambino R, Grazia De Cesaris M,
Garbarino G, Camussi G, Pagano G, Pegoraro L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna Università di Torino, Torino, Italy.

Modified LDL is a major cause of injury to the endothelium in diabetes. In the
present study, we analyzed the effects on endothelial cells of LDL recovered from
type 2 diabetic patients (dm-LDL) or from nondiabetic subjects (n-LDL). Treatment
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells with dm-LDL, but not n-LDL, led to the 
accumulation of cells in G1. To dissect the molecular mechanisms of this effect, 
we analyzed the expression and function of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
p21(waf), a cell cycle regulator known to be a target of the signal transducers
and activators of transcription (STATs). dm-LDL led to transient STAT5
phosphorylation and the formation of a STAT5-containing complex and activated
p21(waf) expression at the transcriptional level. Expression of the
dominant-negative form of STAT5B, but not of STAT5A, significantly decreased both
p21(waf) expression and the fraction of cells in G1. Finally, immunofluorescence 
analysis demonstrated that activated STAT5 is expressed in newly formed
intraplaque vessels and in endothelial cells lining the luminal side of the
plaque. Similarly, p21(waf) immunoreactivity was found in the neointimal
vasculature. Our results suggest a role of STAT5B as a regulator of gene
expression in diabetes-associated vascular disease.

PMCID: PMC150820
PMID: 11781356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Blood. 2002 Jan 15;99(2):680-9.

Selective inhibitor of Janus tyrosine kinase 3, PNU156804, prolongs allograft
survival and acts synergistically with cyclosporine but additively with
rapamycin.

Stepkowski SM(1), Erwin-Cohen RA, Behbod F, Wang ME, Qu X, Tejpal N, Nagy ZS,
Kahan BD, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery/Division of Immunology and Organ Transplantation and
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA.

Janus kinase 3 (Jak3) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine (Tyr) kinase associated with the 
interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor common gamma chain (gamma(c)) that is activated by 
multiple T-cell growth factors (TCGFs) such as IL-2, -4, and -7. Using human T
cells, it was found that a recently discovered variant of the undecylprodigiosin 
family of antibiotics, PNU156804, previously shown to inhibit IL-2-induced cell
proliferation, also blocks IL-2-mediated Jak3 auto-tyrosine phosphorylation,
activation of Jak3 substrates signal transducers and activators of transcription 
(Stat) 5a and Stat5b, and extracellular regulated kinase 1 (Erk1) and Erk2
(p44/p42). Although PNU156804 displayed similar efficacy in blocking
Jak3-dependent T-cell proliferation by IL-2, -4, -7, or -15, it was more than
2-fold less effective in blocking Jak2-mediated cell growth, its most homologous 
Jak family member. A 14-day alternate-day oral gavage with 40 to 120 mg/kg
PNU156804 extended the survival of heart allografts in a dose-dependent fashion. 
In vivo, PNU156804 acted synergistically with the signal 1 inhibitor cyclosporine
A (CsA) and additively with the signal 3 inhibitor rapamycin to block allograft
rejection. It is concluded that inhibition of signal 3 alone by targeting Jak3 in
combination with a signal 1 inhibitor provides a unique strategy to achieve
potent immunosuppression.

PMID: 11781254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Blood. 2002 Jan 15;99(2):479-87.

Reduced lymphomyeloid repopulating activity from adult bone marrow and fetal
liver of mice lacking expression of STAT5.

Bunting KD(1), Bradley HL, Hawley TS, Moriggl R, Sorrentino BP, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Department, American Red Cross Holland Laboratory, Rockville,
MD, USA. buntingk@usa.redcross.org

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are intracellular
mediators of cytokine receptor signals. Because many early-acting growth factors 
have been implicated in STAT5 activation, this study sought to investigate
whether STAT5 may be a transcriptional regulator of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
long-term repopulating activity. To test this possibility, bone marrow (BM) and
fetal liver (FL) cells from mice containing homozygous deletions of both STAT5a
and STAT5b genes (STAT5ab(-/-)) were characterized for hematopoietic repopulating
activities. BM and FL grafts were capable of repopulating lymphoid and myeloid
lineages of lethally irradiated primary and secondary hosts, with defects
observed primarily in T-lymphocyte engraftment. Because only a fraction of normal
HSC function is required to reconstitute hematopoiesis, competitive repopulation 
assays of adult BM or FL cells were used against wild type adult BM or FL cells
to quantitate stem cell function. In these analyses, average 25-, 28-, 45-, and
68-fold decreases in normal repopulating activity were evident in granulocyte
(Gr-1(+)), macrophage (Mac-1(+)), erythroid progenitor (Ter119(+)), and
B-lymphocyte (B220(+)) populations, respectively, with T lymphocytes (CD4(+))
always undetectable from the STAT5ab(-/-) graft. Consistent with previous reports
of divergence between stem cell phenotype and function in cases of perturbed
hematopoiesis, the absolute number of cells within Sca-1(+)c-kit(+)lin(-) or
lin(-) Hoechst 33342 side population fractions was not significantly different
between wild type and STAT5ab(-/-) BM or FL cells. These results demonstrate that
a significant proportion of the growth factor signals required for multilineage
reconstitution potential of HSCs is STAT5 dependent.

PMID: 11781228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):58-69.

A nuclear protein tyrosine phosphatase TC-PTP is a potential negative regulator
of the PRL-mediated signaling pathway: dephosphorylation and deactivation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5a and 5b by TC-PTP in nucleus.

Aoki N(1), Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan. naoki@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Retraction in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Nov;27(11):1982.

In the present study we examined involvement of nuclear protein tyrosine
phosphatase TC-PTP in PRL-mediated signaling. TC-PTP could dephosphorylate signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b, but the
apparent dephosphorylation activity of TC-PTP was weaker than that of cytosolic
PTP1B 30 min after PRL stimulation in transfected COS-7 cells, whereas both
STAT5a and STAT5b were dephosphorylated to the same extent by recombinant TC-PTP 
and PTP1B in vitro. Tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5 was coimmunoprecipitated with
substrate trapping mutants of TC-PTP, suggesting that STAT5 is a specific
substrate of TC-PTP. These observations were further extended in mammary
epithelial COMMA-1D cells stably expressing TC-PTP. A time-course study revealed 
that dephosphorylation of STAT5 by TC-PTP was delayed compared with that by
cytosolic PTP1B due to nuclear localization of TC-PTP throughout PRL stimulation 
in mammary epithelial cells. Endogenous beta-casein gene expression and
beta-casein gene promoter activation in COS-7 cells were largely suppressed by
TC-PTP wild type as well as catalytically inactive mutants, suggesting that
stable complexes formed between STAT5 and TC-PTP in the nucleus. Taken together, 
we conclude that TC-PTP is catalytically competent with respect to
dephosphorylation and deactivation of PRL-activated STAT5 in the nucleus.

PMID: 11773439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 2002 Jan 1;99(1):95-101.

STAT5 promotes multilineage hematolymphoid development in vivo through effects on
early hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Snow JW(1), Abraham N, Ma MC, Abbey NW, Herndier B, Goldsmith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

The transcription factor signal transducers and activators of transcription 5
(STAT5) is activated by numerous cytokines that orchestrate blood cell
development. Multilineage peripheral blood cytopenias were observed in adult mice
lacking both isoforms of STAT5 (STAT5A and STAT5B) as well as accelerated rates
of apoptosis in the bone marrow. Although the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
population was preserved in a number of these mice, the post-HSC progenitor
populations were diminished and a marked reduction in functional progenitors
(spleen colony-forming units) was detected. Competitive bone marrow
transplantation studies in vivo revealed a profound impairment of repopulation
potential of STAT5-null HSCs, leading to complete lack of contribution to the
myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid lineages. These abnormalities were associated
with heightened proliferation activity in the HSC fraction, suggesting the action
of homeostatic mechanisms to maintain sufficient levels of diverse blood cell
types for viability. Thus, STAT5 normally sustains the robust hematopoietic
reserve that contributes to host viability through crucial survival effects on
early progenitor cells.

PMID: 11756158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8693-701. Epub 2001 Dec 20.

Novel activation of STAT5b in response to epidermal growth factor.

Kloth MT(1), Catling AD, Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Of the seven signal transducers and activators of transcription that have been
identified, STATs 1, 3, and 5a/5b can be activated not only by a multitude of
cytokines but also by some growth factors. The data presented here demonstrate
that, in contrast to activation by the cytokine, growth hormone (GH), the
activation of STAT5b by the growth factor, epidermal growth factor (EGF),
requires overexpression of the EGF receptor (EGFR). We have shown that EGF
activates STAT5b not only in a HEK293 cell model in which the EGFR is stably
overexpressed but also in the MDA-MB468 breast cancer cell line. Furthermore, EGF
(but not GH) is able to activate tyrosine phosphorylation of a Tyr-699 mutant of 
STAT5b. Using metabolic labeling studies as well as site-directed mutagenesis, we
have identified three novel EGF-induced tyrosine phosphorylation sites, Tyr-725, 
Tyr-740, and Tyr-743. Luciferase assays using a STAT5-specific DNA sequence
demonstrate that, although Tyr-699 is absolutely required for transcriptional
activation, tyrosines 725, 740, and 743 may be involved in a negative regulation 
of transcription. Because overexpression of the EGFR is common in many cancers,
including advanced breast cancer, characterization of EGF-induced STAT5b may have
direct implications in therapeutic applications.

PMID: 11751923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8673-81. Epub 2001 Dec 18.

SH2-B family members differentially regulate JAK family tyrosine kinases.

O'Brien KB(1), O'Shea JJ, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

Activation of JAK tyrosine kinases is an essential step in cell signaling by
multiple hormones, cytokines, and growth factors, including growth hormone (GH)
and interferon-gamma. Previously, we identified SH2-B beta as a potent activator 
of JAK2 (Rui, L., and Carter-Su, C. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96,
7172-7177). Here, we investigated whether the activation of JAK2 by SH2-B beta is
specific to JAK2 and SH2-B beta or extends to other JAKs or other members of the 
SH2-B beta family. When SH2-B beta was overexpressed with JAK1 or JAK3, SH2-B
beta failed to increase their activity. However, SH2-B beta bound to both and was
tyrosyl-phosphorylated by JAK1. In contrast to SH2-B beta, APS decreased tyrosyl 
phosphorylation of GH-stimulated JAK2 as well as Stat5B, a substrate of JAK2. APS
also decreased tyrosyl phosphorylation of JAK1, but did not affect the activity
or tyrosyl phosphorylation of JAK3. Overexpressed APS bound to and was
tyrosyl-phosphorylated by all three JAKs. Consistent with these data, in
3T3-F442A adipocytes, endogenous APS was tyrosyl-phosphorylated in response to GH
and interferon-gamma. These results suggest that 1) SH2-B beta specifically
activates JAK2, 2) APS negatively regulates both JAK2 and JAK1, and 3) both SH2-B
beta and APS may serve as adapter proteins for all three JAKs independent of any 
role they have in JAK activity.

PMID: 11751854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Endocrinology. 2002 Jan;143(1):228-38.

PRL signal transduction in the epithelial compartment of rat prostate maintained 
as long-term organ cultures in vitro.

Ahonen TJ(1), Härkönen PL, Rui H, Nevalainen MT.

Author information: 
(1)United States Military Cancer Institute, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Using long-term organ cultures of rat prostate tissue explants, we previously
demonstrated that PRL both stimulates proliferation and acts as an
androgen-independent suppressor of apoptosis in prostate epithelial cells,
leading to epithelial hyperplasia. In this work we delineate intracellular
signaling molecules activated by PRL in prostate tissue to identify candidate
signaling proteins that are responsible for maintaining survival and
proliferation of prostate epithelium in androgen-deprived growth environment. We 
now show that signal transducer and activator of transcription-5a (Stat5a) and
Stat5b become tyrosine phosphorylated in response to PRL stimulation in rat
prostate using prostate organ culture as an experimental model. Stat5 was
translocated to the nuclei of epithelial cells of prostate tissue as demonstrated
by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, EMSA showed PRL-inducible binding of Stat5a
homodimers and Stat5a/5b heterodimers to the PRL response element of the
beta-casein gene promoter. Signaling molecules Stat3, Stat1, MAPK, or protein
kinase B, which can be activated by PRL in other target cells, were not activated
by PRL in prostate tissue. Furthermore, we show that Stat5a and Stat5b are
continuously phosphorylated in rat prostate in vivo, although they are expressed 
to varying degree in separate lobes of rat prostate. Collectively, our results
suggest that PRL signaling in rat prostate tissue is primarily transduced via
Stat5a and Stat5b. The Stat5 pathway represents one candidate signaling
mechanism, used by PRL and possibly other growth factors and cytokines, that
supports the viability of prostate epithelial cells during long-term androgen
deprivation.

PMID: 11751614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Genomics. 2001 Dec;78(3):129-34.

The Stat3/5 locus encodes novel endoplasmic reticulum and helicase-like proteins 
that are preferentially expressed in normal and neoplastic mammary tissue.

Cui Y(1), Li M, Walton KD, Sun K, Hanover JA, Furth PA, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA. Yongzhic@intra.niddk.nih.gov

The signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 5 and 3 are
critical for mammary alveolar development during pregnancy and remodeling during 
involution. In the mouse, STAT3, STAT5a, and STAT5b are encoded by adjacent genes
on chromosome 11 (60.5 cM). To identify additional genes in the Stat3/5 locus
that may participate in normal and neoplastic development of the mammary gland,
we have cloned and sequenced 500 kb and searched for genes preferentially
expressed in mammary tissue. We identified six known genes and cloned two new
genes, termed D11Lgp1 and D11Lgp2. Both genes are most highly expressed in normal
mammary tissue and mammary tumors from several transgenic mouse models. LGP1
consists of 532 and 530 amino acids in mouse and human, respectively (88%
similarity). A region in the carboxy-terminal half of LGP1 has limited homology
with Arabidopsis thaliana GH3-like proteins. Immunofluorescence studies
demonstrated that LGP1 is located in the nuclear envelope and the endoplasmic
reticulum. LGP2 is a cytoplasmic protein of 678 amino acids.

PMID: 11735219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Dec;15(12):2172-81.

Differential roles for signal transducers and activators of transcription 5a and 
5b in PRL stimulation of ERalpha and ERbeta transcription.

Frasor J(1), Park K, Byers M, Telleria C, Kitamura T, Yu-Lee LY, Djiane J,
Park-Sarge OK, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

PRL has been shown to stimulate mRNA expression of both ERalpha and ERbeta in the
rat corpus luteum and decidua of pregnancy. To investigate whether PRL may
stimulate ER expression at the level of transcription and which transcription
factors may mediate this stimulation, we have cloned the 5'-flanking regions of
both rat ER genes. A constitutively active PRL receptor (PRL-R(CA)) stimulated
both ERalpha and ERbeta promoter activity, indicating that PRL is acting to
stimulate ER transcription. Putative signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)5 response elements were identified at -189 in the ERalpha
promoter and at -330 in the ERbeta promoter. Mutation of these response elements 
or overexpression of dominant negative Stat5 prevented stimulation of ERalpha and
ERbeta promoter activity, indicating that PRL regulation of ER expression
requires both intact Stat5 binding sites as well as functional Stat5.
Interestingly, either Stat5a or Stat5b could stimulate ERalpha transcription
while stimulation of ERbeta occurred only in the presence of Stat5b. Through
mutational analysis, a single nucleotide difference between the ERalpha and
ERbeta Stat5 response elements was shown to be responsible for the lack of
Stat5a-mediated stimulation of ERbeta. These findings indicate that PRL
stimulation of ER expression occurs at the level of transcription and that PRL
regulation of ERalpha can be mediated by either Stat5a or Stat5b, while
regulation of ERbeta appears to be mediated only by Stat5b.

PMID: 11731618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Dec;15(12):2157-71.

Serine phosphorylation of GH-activated signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (STAT5a) and STAT5b: impact on STAT5 transcriptional activity.

Park SH(1), Yamashita H, Rui H, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b), the major
liver-expressed STAT5 form, is phosphorylated on both tyrosine and serine in
GH-stimulated cells. Although tyrosine phosphorylation is known to be critical
for the dimerization, nuclear translocation, and activation of STAT5b DNA-binding
and transcriptional activities, the effect of STAT5b serine phosphorylation is
uncertain. Presently, we identify Ser730 as the site of STAT5b serine
phosphorylation in GH-stimulated liver cells. We additionally show that the
serine kinase inhibitor H7 partially blocks the GH-stimulated formation of
(Ser,Tyr)-diphosphorylated STAT5b without inhibiting STAT5b nuclear
translocation. Evaluation of the functional consequences of STAT5b serine
phosphorylation by mutational analysis revealed an approximately 50% decrease in 
GH-stimulated luciferase reporter gene activity regulated by an isolated
STAT5-binding site when STAT5b Ser730 was mutated to alanine and under conditions
where STAT5 DNA-binding activity was not diminished. No decrease in GH-stimulated
reporter activity was seen with the corresponding STAT5a-Ser725Ala mutant;
however, a decrease in reporter activity occurred when the second established
STAT5a serine phosphorylation site, serine 779, was additionally mutated to
alanine. Unexpectedly, STAT5a-Ser725,779Ala and STAT5b-Ser730Ala displayed
approximately 2-fold higher GH- or PRL-stimulated transcriptional activity
compared with wild-type STAT5b when assayed using an intact beta-casein
promoter-luciferase reporter. Finally, STAT5b-stimulated gene transcription was
abolished in cells treated with H7, but in a manner unrelated to the inhibitory
effects of H7 on STAT5b Ser730 phosphorylation. These findings suggest that the
effects of STAT5b and STAT5a serine phosphorylation on STAT-stimulated gene
transcription can be modulated by promoter context. Moreover, in the case of
STAT5a, phosphorylation of serine 779, but not serine 725, may serve to regulate 
target gene transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11731617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. EMBO J. 2001 Dec 3;20(23):6836-44.

Functional interaction of STAT5 and nuclear receptor co-repressor SMRT:
implications in negative regulation of STAT5-dependent transcription.

Nakajima H(1), Brindle PK, Handa M, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA. hnakajim@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) play a central role in
cytokine signaling. Activating and repressing gene transcription is a dynamic
process involving chromatin remodeling by histone acetylases and deacetylases,
yet the role of this process in STAT-dependent transcription remains largely
unknown. In a search for STAT5-interacting proteins by yeast two-hybrid
screening, we identified the nuclear receptor co-repressor SMRT (silencing
mediator for retinoic acid receptor and thyroid hormone receptor) as a potential 
STAT5-binding partner. SMRT binds to both STAT5A and 5B, and strongly repressed
STAT5-dependent transcription in vitro. SMRT binds to the N-terminal coiled-coil 
domain of STAT5 and a mutation within this region previously found to render
STAT5 hyperactive in response to cytokines abolished the interaction with SMRT.
Overexpression of SMRT suppressed the induction of STAT5 target genes by
interleukin-3, whereas the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
effectively enhanced and prolonged their expression. Together, these findings
illuminate the potential role of SMRT in down-regulating STAT5 activity, with a
consequent reduction of STAT5 target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC125765
PMID: 11726519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Lupus. 2001;10(10):691-9.

Stimulation of interferon regulatory factor-1 by prolactin.

Yu-Lee L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. yulee@bcm.tmc.edu

Prolactin (PRL), a pituitary peptide hormone, is known to regulate diverse
cellular functions including proliferation, differentiation, angiogenesis and
protection against apoptosis and inflammation. To understand the mechanism of PRL
signaling in T cells, we have cloned both PRL and its receptor (PRL-R), one
potent mediator of PRL signaling, Stat5b, and a panel of PRL-inducible immediate 
early genes from T cells. We are employing these genes as tools with which to
understand how PRL regulates the expression of one target gene, the transcription
factor interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), which is a multifunctional immune 
regulator gene. In investigating regulatory events along the PRL-R/JAK/Stat/IRF-1
signaling pathway, we show that Stat factors can activate as well as inhibit
IRF-1 promoter activity and that cross-talk between Stat and NFkappaB signaling
pathways also regulates IRF-1 promoter activity. These findings have much broader
implications not only for T lymphocytes but also for other PRL responsive target 
cells and tissues.

PMID: 11721695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 29;20(49):7216-22.

The theory of APL.

Piazza F(1), Gurrieri C, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, Sloan-Kettering Division, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Cornell University, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with reciprocal and balanced
chromosomal translocations always involving the Retinoic Acid Receptor alpha
(RARalpha) gene on chromosome 17 and variable partner genes (X genes) on distinct
chromosomes. RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the vast majority of APL cases,
and in a few cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b genes. As a consequence,
X-RARalpha and RARalpha-X fusion genes are generated encoding aberrant fusion
proteins that can interfere with X and/or RARalpha function. Here we will review 
the relevant conclusions and the open questions that stem from a decade of in
vivo analysis of APL pathogenesis in the mouse in transgenic and knock-out
models.

PMID: 11704849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):1941-52.

PRL-induced ERalpha gene expression is mediated by Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) while
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) phosphorylation
involves Jak2 and a second tyrosine kinase.

Frasor J(1), Barkai U, Zhong L, Fazleabas AT, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

In the rat corpus luteum of pregnancy, PRL stimulation of ER expression is a
prerequisite for E2 to have any luteotropic effect. Previous work from our
laboratory has established that PRL stimulates ERalpha expression at the level of
transcription and that the transcription factor Stat5 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5) mediates this stimulation. Since it is well
established that PRL activates Stat5 through the tyrosine kinase, Janus kinase 2 
(Jak2), the role of Jak2 in PRL regulation of ERalpha expression was
investigated. In primary luteinized granulosa cells, the general tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors, genistein and AG18, and the Jak2 inhibitor, AG490, prevented PRL
stimulation of ERalpha mRNA levels, suggesting that PRL signaling to the ERalpha 
gene requires Jak2 activity. However, using an antibody that recognizes the
tyrosine-phosphorylated forms of both Stat5a and Stat5b (Y694/Y699), it was found
that AG490 could inhibit PRL-induced Stat5a phosphorylation only and had little
or no effect on Stat5b phosphorylation. These effects of AG490 were confirmed in 
COS cells overexpressing Stat5b. Also in COS cells, a kinase-negative Jak2
prevented PRL stimulation of ERalpha promoter activity and Stat5b phosphorylation
while a constitutively active Jak2 could stimulate both in the absence of PRL.
Furthermore, kinase-negative-Jak2, but not AG490, could inhibit Stat5b nuclear
translocation and DNA binding. Therefore, it seems that in the presence of AG490,
Stat5b remains phosphorylated, is located in the nucleus and capable of binding
DNA, but is apparently transcriptionally inactive. These findings suggest that
PRL may activate a second tyrosine kinase, other than Jak2, that is capable of
phosphorylating Stat5b without inducing transcriptional activity. To investigate 
whether another signaling pathway is involved, the src kinase inhibitor PP2 and
the phosphoinositol-3 kinase inhibitor (PI3K), LY294002, were used. Neither
inhibitor alone had any major effect on PRL regulation of ERalpha promoter
activity or on PRL-induced Stat5b phosphorylation. However, the combination of
AG490 and LY294002 largely prevented PRL-induced Stat5b phosphorylation. These
findings indicate that PRL stimulation of ERalpha expression requires Jak2 and
also that PRL can induce Stat5b phosphorylation through two tyrosine kinases,
Jak2 and one downstream of PI3K. Furthermore, these results suggest that the role
of Jak2 in activating Stat5b may be through a mechanism other than simply
inducing Stat5b phosphorylation.

PMID: 11682625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 1;167(9):5018-26.

Essential role of Stat5 for IL-5-dependent IgH switch recombination in mouse B
cells.

Horikawa K(1), Kaku H, Nakajima H, Davey HW, Hennighausen L, Iwamoto I, Yasue T, 
Kariyone A, Takatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

IL-5 stimulation of CD38-activated murine splenic B cells induces mu-gamma1 CSR
at the DNA level leading to a high level of IgG1 production. Further addition of 
IL-4 in the system enhances IL-5-dependent mu-gamma1 CSR. Although some of the
postreceptor signaling events initiated by IL-5 in activated B cells have been
characterized, the involvement of Stat in IL-5 signaling has not been thoroughly 
evaluated. In this study, we examined the activation of Stat5 and
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) in CD38-activated murine splenic B
cells by IL-5. The role of Stat5a and Stat5b in IL-5-induced mu-gamma1 CSR and
also IgG1 and IgM production was documented, as IL-5 does not act on
CD38-stimulated splenic B cells from Stat5a(-/-) and Stat5b(-/-) mice. Expression
levels of CD38-induced germline gamma1 transcripts and AID in Stat5a(-/-) and
Stat5b(-/-) B cells upon IL-5 stimulation were comparable to those of wild-type B
cells. The impaired mu-gamma1 CSR by Stat5b(-/-) B cells, but not by Stat5a(-/-) 
B cells, was rescued in part by IL-4, as the addition of IL-4 to the culture of
CD38- and IL-5-stimulated B cells induced mu-gamma1 CSR leading to IgG1
production. Analysis of cell division cycle number of wild-type B cells revealed 
that mu-gamma1 CSR was observed after five or six cell divisions. Stat5a(-/-) and
Stat5b(-/-) B cells showed similar cell division cycles, but they did not undergo
mu-gamma1 CSR. Our data support the notion that both Stat5a and Stat5b are
essential for IL-5-dependent mu;-gamma1 CSR and Ig secretion; however, their
major target may not be AID. Stat5a and Stat5b are not redundant, but rather are 
at least partially distinctive in their function.

PMID: 11673510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 10;20(40):5726-35.

In vivo analysis of the molecular genetics of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Pandolfi PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, Sloan-Kettering Division, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Cornell University, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.
p-pandolfi@ski.mskcc.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a distinct and paradigmatic subtype of
myeloid leukemia associated with reciprocal chromosomal translocations always
involving the Retinoic Acid Receptor(alpha) (RARalpha) gene on chromosome 17 and 
variable partner genes (X genes) on different chromosomes. As a consequence of
these translocations X-RARalpha and RARalpha-X fusion genes are generated.
RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the vast majority of APL cases, and in a few
cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b genes respectively. In the last few
years, the functions of these aberrant fusion proteins and of the normal gene
products involved in these translocations have been extensively characterized in 
vivo in transgenic and KO animal models. Here we will review the important
conclusions, the novel questions and paradoxes that stem from this analysis.

PMID: 11607822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Oct 25;183(1-2):101-12.

Specific DNA binding and transactivation potential of recombinant, purified
Stat5.

Beisenherz-Huss C(1), Mundt M, Herrala A, Vihko P, Schubert A, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy, University of Freiburg, Albertstr. 23, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany.

The signal transducers and activators of transcriptions (Stats) are central
mediators of cytokine responses especially in hematopoietic cells. The detailed
molecular mechanisms of Stat activation, particularly the role of
post-translational modifications and co-operation with cellular transcription
factors are subject to intense investigation. The phosphorylation of a tyrosine
residue in the carboxyl terminal domain is a common characteristic for the
biologically active state of all known Stats. We studied the biological potential
of purified recombinant murine Stat5a and Stat5b. These proteins were expressed
in Sf9 insect cells upon infection with Stat5 encoding baculoviruses. We also
obtained the tyrosine phosphorylated, activated forms of the Stat5 proteins by
expressing the tyrosine kinase Janus kinase2 (Jak) in the same cells through
co-infection with a kinase encoding virus. After purification, only the tyrosine 
phosphorylated form was able to bind specifically in vitro to the Stat5 DNA
response element. This activated form of Stat5 is also able to support specific
cell free in vitro transcription of a gene with a Stat5 response element in its
promoter region. The recombinant purified Stat5 proteins were treated with the
tyrosine specific protein phosphatase or with potato acidic phosphatase, which
removes phosphate groups from serine and tyrosine residues. Phosphatase treatment
resulted in the loss of specific DNA binding ability. This property could be
restored by an in vitro reaction with recombinant, purified EGF or PDGF receptor 
kinases. Tyrosine rephosphorylation in vitro also restored the transactivation
potential of Stat5. This modification is, therefore, a sufficient prerequisite
for transcriptional induction by Stat5.

PMID: 11604230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Oct 25;183(1-2):49-54.

Differential phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2, Stat5A and Stat5B in response to 
growth hormone in primary rat adipocytes.

Ridderstråle M(1), Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Lund University, Wallenberglaboratory, University
Hospital Malmö, S-205 02 Malmo, Sweden. martin.ridderstrale@endo.mas.lu.se

In vitro growth hormone (GH) stimulation of Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation has been detected in rat adipocytes where GH
exerts both chronic diabetogenic and acute insulin-like effects but not in
adipocytes where only chronic diabetogenic effects are exerted. The 95 kDa
transcription factor Stat5, which is tyrosine phosphorylated in response to GH in
both cases, is here identified as the 5A-isoform. Stat5B was not tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to GH in adipocytes but subject to a gel supershift
indicating regulation by serine and/or threonine phosphorylation. The
differential tyrosine phosphorylation of these proteins suggests involvement of a
kinase other than Jak2 in Stat5A activation. However, in adipocytes where GH
exerts both diabetogenic and insulin-like effects, and both Jak2 and Stat5A were 
activated, their phosphorylation kinetics and downregulation of tyrosine
phosphorylation were almost identical. We conclude that Stat5A is important for
the diabetogenic actions of GH and that Jak2 still is the most probable candidate
kinase for Stat5A in primary adipocytes.

PMID: 11604224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Exp Hematol. 2001 Oct;29(10):1177-84.

Promegapoietin, a family of chimeric growth factors, supports megakaryocyte
development through activation of IL-3 and c-Mpl ligand signaling pathways.

Doshi PD(1), Giri JG, Abegg AL, Favara JP, Huynh MS, Kahn LE, Minnerly JC, Pegg
LE, Villani-Price D, Siegel NR, Staten NR, Thomas JW, McKearn JP, Smith WG.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacia Discovery Research, Chesterfield, Mo. 63198, USA.
parul.doshi@pharmacia.com

OBJECTIVE: The signaling pathways induced by promegapoietin (PMP), a family of
chimeric growth factors that activate the human IL-3 and c-Mpl receptors, were
investigated.
METHODS: The biological activity of PMP was examined by receptor binding, cell
proliferation, ex vivo expansion of hematopoietic progenitor cells, and in vivo
production of platelets. The activation of signaling pathways was examined by
Western blot and Northern blot analyses.
RESULTS: Two PMP molecules, PMP-1 and PMP-1a, induced proliferation of cells
expressing the IL-3 receptor, c-Mpl, or both receptors and bound to the IL-3
receptor and c-Mpl with high affinity. Ex vivo expansion assays using human bone 
marrow CD34(+) cells suggested that PMP-1 induced greater total cellular
expansion as well as expansion of CD41(+) megakaryocytic precursor cells than
IL-3 or c-Mpl ligand alone. Subcutaneous administration of 50 microg/kg of PMP-1 
for 10 days to rhesus monkeys resulted in increased platelet production in vivo
from a baseline of 357 +/- 45 x 10(3) cells/mL to 1376 +/- 151 x 10(3) cell/mL.
PMP-1 induced phosphorylation of the beta(c) subunit of IL-3 receptor and c-Mpl, 
JAK2, and STAT5b, but not STAT3. PMP-1 induced greater expression of Pim-1,
c-Myc, and cyclin D2 than did either an IL-3 receptor agonist or c-Mpl receptor
agonist alone. The magnitude of induction of early response genes was similar for
PMP and the coaddition of IL-3 receptor agonist and c-Mpl receptor agonist.
CONCLUSION: PMP combines the biological activities of IL-3 and c-Mpl ligand in a 
single molecule that can simultaneously activate signaling pathways induced by
both these ligands.

PMID: 11602319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;48 Suppl 1:S17-9.

Histone deacetylases and transcriptional therapy with their inhibitors.

Pandolfi PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.
p-pandolfi@ski.mskcc.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the expansion of malignant
myeloid cells blocked at the promyelocytic stage of hemopoietic development and
is invariably associated with reciprocal chromosomal translocations involving the
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) gene on chromosome 17. RARalpha variably 
fuses to PML, PLZF, NPM, NuMA, and Stat5B genes (X genes/proteins). These
translocations are balanced and reciprocal, thus leading to the generation of
X-RARalpha and RARalpha-X fusion genes of which the products coexist in the APL
blast. The invariable involvement in these translocations of RARalpha, a
prototypical transcription factor, makes APL a compelling example of aberrant
transcriptional mechanisms in the etiopathogenesis of cancer. This paper focuses 
on the recent progress in defining the molecular mechanisms underlying APL
pathogenesis and addresses how this new understanding has allowed the proposal
and development of novel therapeutic strategies with compounds such as histone
deacetylase inhibitors and inorganic arsenicals such as As2O3 which are currently
being tested in murine leukemia models as well as in human APL patients. In
particular, the crucial role played by the aberrant transcriptional activities of
X-RARalpha and RARalpha-X fusion proteins in APL pathogenesis is discussed by
reviewing the relevant therapeutic implications resulting from this analysis.

PMID: 11587360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):45722-8. Epub 2001 Sep 27.

The Stat1 binding motif of the interferon-gamma receptor is sufficient to mediate
Stat5 activation and its repression by SOCS3.

Woldman I(1), Varinou L, Ramsauer K, Rapp B, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9,
A1030 Vienna, Austria.

Signal transduction via the interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) receptor requires the
tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stats). Whereas tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1 occurs in all cells,
activation of Stat5 by IFN-gamma is cell type-restricted. Here we investigated
the mechanism of Stat5 activation by the IFN-gamma receptor. In transfection
assays both Stat5 isoforms, Stat5a and Stat5b, were phosphorylated on tyrosine in
response to IFN-gamma. Stat5 activation required the presence of tyrosine 420
(Tyr-420) in the murine IFNGR1 receptor chain, which also serves as the Stat1
binding site. Moreover, a peptide including Tyr-440, the Stat1 binding site of
the human IFNGR1 chain, conferred the ability upon a synthetic receptor to
activate Stat5. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) inhibited the
activation of Stat5 by the IFN-gamma receptor, and the Tyr-440-containing peptide
stretch was sufficient for repression. SOCS3 expression had little effect on the 
activity of Jak kinases not associated with cytokine receptors. In
IFN-gamma-treated, Stat1-deficient fibroblasts Stat5 was inefficient in inducing 
transcription of a Stat-dependent reporter gene, suggesting it does not per se
make a major contribution to the expression of IFN-gamma-responsive genes.

PMID: 11577084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43031-9. Epub 2001 Sep 18.

Inhibitory cross-talk between STAT5b and liver nuclear factor HNF3beta: impact on
the regulation of growth hormone pulse-stimulated, male-specific liver cytochrome
P-450 gene expression.

Park SH(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

STAT5b is repeatedly activated in rodent liver by the male pattern of
intermittent plasma growth hormone (GH) stimulation and is required to maintain
the GH pulse-regulated, male-specific pattern of liver gene expression. We
presently investigate the interactions between STAT5b and hepatocyte-enriched
nuclear factors (HNFs) that contribute to regulation of GH pulse-inducible,
male-specific liver cytochrome P-450 (CYP) genes. STAT5 binding sites were
identified in the 5'-flank of the adult male-expressed genes CYP2A2 (nucleotides 
-2255 to -2247), CYP4A2 (nucleotides -1872 to -1864), and CYP2C11 (nucleotides
-1150 to -1142). STAT5-DNA complexes were formed by each CYP sequence with
nuclear extract from GH pulse-activated male, but not female, rat liver. The
CYP2C11 STAT5 site, which is flanked by HNF3 consensus sequences, conferred
STAT5b-inducible reporter gene activity in GH-treated HepG2 cells.
trans-Activation of the intact CYP2C11 promoter (1.8-kilobase 5'-flank) was
strongly induced by the liver nuclear factors HNF1alpha and HNF3beta but,
unexpectedly, was inhibited by GH-activated STAT5b. This STAT5b inhibitory effect
could be reversed by HNF1alpha and reflects a functional antagonism between
STAT5b and HNF3beta, as evidenced by the inhibition of HNF3beta DNA binding and
transcriptional activity by STAT5b. HNF3beta, in turn, inhibited STAT5b by a
novel mechanism that leads to suppression of GH-inducible STAT5b tyrosine
phosphorylation, DNA binding activity, and transcriptional activity. The
potential for GH-activated STAT5b to stimulate male-specific liver CYP expression
can thus be modulated by HNF3beta, highlighting the complex interrelationship
between STAT5b and liver transcription factors controlling expression of
GH-regulated CYP genes.

PMID: 11562369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 1;61(17):6517-23.

Role of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 in nucleophosmin/
anaplastic lymphoma kinase-mediated malignant transformation of lymphoid cells.

Nieborowska-Skorska M(1), Slupianek A, Xue L, Zhang Q, Raghunath PN, Hoser G,
Wasik MA, Morris SW, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The NPM/ALK fusion gene, formed by the t(2;5) translocation in anaplastic
large-cell lymphoma, encodes a M(r) 75,000 hybrid protein that containsthe
amino-terminal portion of the nucleolar phosphoprotein nucleophosmin(NPM) joined 
to the entire cytoplasmic portion of the receptor tyrosine kinase anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK). NPM/ALK encodes a constitutively activated tyrosine kinase
that belongs to the family of tyrosine kinases activated by chromosomal
translocation. Our studies show that NPM/ALK, similar to other members of this
family, activates signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) and 
that this activation is essential for lymphomagenesis. NPM/ALK-mediated
activation of STAT5 was demonstrated by detection of: (a) constitutive tyrosine
phosphorylation and enhanced DNA binding ability of STAT5 in NPM/ALK-transformed 
cells; and (b) NPM/ALK-dependent stimulation of STAT5-mediated transactivation of
the beta-casein promoter. Retroviral infection of NPM/ALK+ cells with a
dominant-negative STAT5B mutant (STAT5-DNM) inhibited the antiapoptotic activity 
of NPM/ALK in growth factor and serum-free medium. In addition, STAT5-DNM
inhibited proliferation and diminished the clonogenic properties of
NPM/ALK-positive cells. Finally, SCID mice injected with NPM/ALK+ cells infected 
with a virus carrying STAT5-DNM survived significantly longer than mice
inoculated with NPM/ALK+ cells infected with the empty virus. Necropsy identified
a widespread ALK+ lymphoma in lymph nodes and liver of the affected animals.
Together, our data indicate that NPM/ALK-induced activation of STAT5 may play an 
important role in NPM/ALK-mediated lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 11522649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Endocrinology. 2001 Sep;142(9):3836-41.

STAT5b is required for GH-induced liver IGF-I gene expression.

Davey HW(1), Xie T, McLachlan MJ, Wilkins RJ, Waxman DJ, Grattan DR.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton 2001, New Zealand.
helen.davey@agresearch.co.nz

Although the increased expression of Igf-I in liver in response to GH is well
characterized, the intracellular signaling pathways that mediate this effect have
not been identified. Intracellular signaling molecules belonging to the Janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (JAK2-STAT5b) pathway 
are activated by GH and have previously been shown to be required for sexually
dimorphic body growth and the expression of liver cytochrome P450 proteins known 
to be regulated by the gender-specific temporal patterns of pituitary GH
secretion. Here, we evaluate the role of STAT5b in GH activation of Igf-I by
monitoring the induction of Igf-I mRNA in livers of wild-type and Stat5b(-/-)mice
stimulated with exogenous pulses of GH. GH induced the expression of liver Igf-I 
mRNA in hypophysectomized male wild-type, but not in hypophysectomized male
Stat5b(-/-) mice, although the Stat5b(-/-) mice exhibit both normal liver GH
receptor expression and strong GH induction of Cytokine-inducible SH2 protein
(Cis), which is believed to contribute to the down-regulation of GH-induced liver
STAT5b signaling. Thus, STAT5b plays an important and specific role in liver
Igf-I gene expression.

PMID: 11517160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Cell Biochem. 2001;82(3):371-86.

Extracellular matrix regulates alpha s1-casein gene expression in rabbit primary 
mammary cells and CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) binding activity.

Jolivet G(1), Meusnier C, Chaumaz G, Houdebine LM.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement et Biotechnologies, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, 78352 Jouy en Josas, France. gjolivet@biotec.jouy.inra.fr

Previous studies have shown that both the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (STAT5) and the CCAAT enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are
involved in the regulation of casein gene expression by mammary epithelial cells.
Prolactin (Prl) activation of STAT5 is necessary for casein gene expression. The 
extracellular matrix (ECM) regulates also casein gene expression. Here, we have
investigated whether ECM regulates C/EBPs activity in primary rabbit mammary
epithelial cells. Isolated primary mammary cells were cultured on plastic or on
floating collagen I gel. Prolactin induced alphas 1-casein gene expression when
cells were cultured on collagen but not on plastic. It is noteworthy that
activated STAT5 was detected in both culture conditions. Several STAT5 isoforms
(STAT5a, STAT5b, and other STAT5 related isoforms, some with lower molecular
weight than the full-length STAT5a and STAT5b) were detected under the different 
culture conditions. However, their presence was not related to the expression of 
alphas 1-casein gene. The binding of nuclear factors to a C/EBP specific binding 
site and the protein level of C/EBPbeta differed in cells cultured on plastic or 
on collagen but these parameters were not modified by Prl. This suggests that
C/EBP binding activity was regulated by ECM and not by Prl. Interestingly, these 
modifications were correlated to the expression of the alphas 1-casein gene.
Hence, the activation of the alphas 1-casein gene expression depends on two
independent signals, one delivered by Prl via the activation of STAT5, the other 
delivered by ECM via C/EBP.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11500914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Immunity. 2001 Jul;15(1):159-72.

The basis for IL-2-induced IL-2 receptor alpha chain gene regulation: importance 
of two widely separated IL-2 response elements.

Kim HP(1), Kelly J, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) chain is an essential component of 
high-affinity IL-2 receptors. Accordingly, IL-2Ralpha expression helps to
regulate T cell growth and other lymphoid functions. Lineage-restricted and
activation-dependent IL-2Ralpha transcription is controlled by three upstream
positive regulatory regions (PRRs). We now describe an additional IL-2 response
element, PRRIV, within intron 1, in humans and mice. PRRIV activity requires GAS 
motifs that bind Stat5 proteins and additional upstream HMG-I(Y) binding sites.
Moreover, IL-2 induces the binding of HMG-I(Y), Stat5a, and Stat5b in vivo to
PRRIV and PRRIII, which also functions as an IL-2 response element. Thus, the
IL-2 inducibility of the IL-2Ralpha gene is unexpectedly mediated by two widely
separated regulatory Stat5-dependent elements, located both upstream and
downstream of the transcription initiation sites.

PMID: 11485747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 31;98(16):9050-5.

An essential role of the JAK-STAT pathway in ischemic preconditioning.

Xuan YT(1), Guo Y, Han H, Zhu Y, Bolli R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Laboratory, Division of Cardiology, University of
Louisville and the Jewish Hospital Heart and Lung Institute, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

The goal of this study was to determine the role of the Janus tyrosine kinase
(JAK)-signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway in the
late phase of ischemic preconditioning (PC). A total of 230 mice were used. At 5 
min after ischemic PC (induced with six cycles of 4-min coronary occlusion/4-min 
reperfusion), immunoprecipitation with anti-phosphotyrosine (anti-pTyr)
antibodies followed by immunoblotting with anti-JAK antibodies revealed increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1 (+257 +/- 53%) and JAK2 (+238 +/- 35%),
indicating rapid activation of these two kinases. Similar results were obtained
by immunoblotting with anti-pTyr-JAK1 and anti-pTyr-JAK2 antibodies. Western
analysis with anti-pTyr-STAT antibodies demonstrated a marked increase in nuclear
pTyr-STAT1 (+301 +/- 61%) and pTyr-STAT3 (+253 +/- 60%) 30 min after ischemic PC,
which was associated with redistribution of STAT1 and STAT3 from the cytosolic to
the nuclear fraction and with an increase in STAT1 and STAT3 gamma-IFN activation
site DNA-binding activity (+606 +/- 64%), indicating activation of STAT1 and
STAT3. No nuclear translocation or tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT2, STAT4,
STAT5A, STAT5B, or STAT6 was observed. Pretreatment with the JAK inhibitor AG-490
20 min before the six occlusion/reperfusion cycles blocked the enhanced tyrosine 
phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2 and the increased tyrosine phosphorylation,
nuclear translocation, and enhanced DNA-binding activity of STAT1 and STAT3. The 
same dose of AG-490 abrogated the protection against myocardial infarction and
the concomitant up-regulation of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) protein and
activity observed 24 h after ischemic PC. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that ischemic PC induces isoform-selective activation of JAK1, JAK2, 
STAT1, and STAT3, and that ablation of this response impedes the up-regulation of
iNOS and the concurrent acquisition of ischemic tolerance. This study
demonstrates that the JAK-STAT pathway plays an essential role in the development
of late PC. The results reveal a signaling mechanism that underlies the
transcriptional up-regulation of the cardiac iNOS gene and the adaptation of the 
heart to ischemic stress.

PMCID: PMC55371
PMID: 11481471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Diabetes. 2001 Aug;50(8):1891-900.

Growth hormone induces cellular insulin resistance by uncoupling
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and its downstream signals in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Takano A(1), Haruta T, Iwata M, Usui I, Uno T, Kawahara J, Ueno E, Sasaoka T,
Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University,
Toyama, Japan.

Growth hormone (GH) is well known to induce in vivo insulin resistance. However, 
the molecular mechanism of GH-induced cellular insulin resistance is largely
unknown. In this study, we demonstrated that chronic GH treatment of
differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes reduces insulin-stimulated 2-deoxyglucose (DOG) 
uptake and activation of Akt (also known as protein kinase B), both of which are 
downstream effects of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase, despite enhanced
tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1, association of
IRS-1 with the p85 subunit of PI 3-kinase, and IRS-1-associated PI 3-kinase
activity. In contrast, chronic GH treatment did not affect 2-DOG uptake and Akt
activation induced by overexpression of a membrane-targeted form of the p110
subunit of PI 3-kinase (p110(CAAX)) or Akt activation stimulated by
platelet-derived growth factor. Fractionation studies indicated that chronic GH
treatment reduces insulin-stimulated translocation of Akt from the cytosol to the
plasma membrane. Interestingly, chronic GH treatment increased insulin-stimulated
association of IRS-1 with p85 and IRS-1-associated PI 3-kinase activity
preferentially in the cytosol. These results indicate that cellular insulin
resistance induced by chronic GH treatment in 3T3-L1 adipocytes is caused by
uncoupling between activation of PI 3-kinase and its downstream signals, which is
specific to the insulin-stimulated PI 3-kinase pathway. This effect of GH might
result from the altered subcellular distribution of IRS-1-associated PI 3-kinase.

PMID: 11473053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):171-4.

Cloning and developmental expression of STAT5 in Xenopus laevis.

Pascal A(1), Riou JF, Carron C, Boucaut JC, Umbhauer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, Groupe
Biologie Expérimentale, UMR CNRS 7622, Université Paris VI, 9 quai Saint-Bernard,
75005, Paris, France.

Transcription factors of the signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) family are required for cellular responses to multiple signalling
molecules. After ligand binding-induced activation of cognate receptors, STAT
proteins are phosphorylated, hetero- or homodimerize, and enter the nucleus. STAT
dimers bind to specific DNA elements and alter the transcriptional activity of
the signal-responsive genes. We report the cloning and developmental pattern of
expression of XSTAT5, a Xenopus laevis member of the STAT family, closely related
to the mammalian STAT5A and STAT5B. XSTAT5 is expressed maternally and
zygotically. With the onset of neurulation, XSTAT5 RNA are clearly localized in
the anterior neural plate and subsequently in the neural structures of the
developing eye, the pineal gland and the cement gland anlage. At late tailbud
stages, a faint expression is detected in a ventral location that might
correspond to the ventral blood islands.

PMID: 11472851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Aug;27(1):93-106.

Cross-talk between Stat5b and estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta in mammary
epithelial cells.

Björnström L(1), Kilic E, Norman M, Parker MG, Sjöberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Both 17beta-estradiol and prolactin play important roles in the mammary gland,
raising the possibility of functional cross-talk between the two signaling
pathways. Here, we demonstrate that estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and -beta
(ERbeta) are both able to potentiate transcription from a Stat5-responsive
promoter when activated by prolactin. Potentiation was observed not only in the
presence of 17beta-estradiol, but also in the presence of anti-estrogens such as 
tamoxifen and ICI 182,780. The magnitude of the response was dependent on
cell-type: in the HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cell line ERbeta potentiates
transcription efficiently whereas ERalpha showed low activity. Conversely, in
COS-7 cells, both estrogen receptors were active. We show that activation domains
in the N-terminus (AF-1) and the C-terminus (AF-2) of the ERs are dispensable for
potentiation. The effects are dependent on the presence of an intact
DNA-binding/hinge domain, which we show is capable of interacting with Stat5b in 
vitro and in HC11 cell extracts. We conclude that ERalpha and ERbeta act as
coactivators for Stat5b through a mechanism which is independent of AF-1 and
AF-2.

PMID: 11463580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Apr;220(1-2):103-8.

Differential inhibition of recombinant bovine GH (rbGH) activity in vitro by in
vivo enhancing monoclonal antibodies.

Beattie J(1), Phillips K, Borromeo V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Recognition Department, Hannah Research Institute, Ayr, Scotland,
UK.

We have previously described the effects of complexing recombinant bovine growth 
hormone (rbGH) with the in vivo enhancing monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) OA11 and
OA15 and the non-enhancing Mab OA14 on the subsequent activity of GH in different
tissue culture models. We reported that all of these Mabs caused the inhibition
of GH-stimulated Jak-2 tyrosine kinase phosphorylation in the GH responsive
pre-adipocyte cell line 3T3-F442A. However, using the mouse myeloid cell line
FDC-P1 transfected with the full length ovine GH receptor (GHR), we subsequently 
found that OA11 and OA14 remained inhibitory with respect to the end point
measurement of GH stimulated mitogenesis but that OA15 had no inhibitory effect
on GH stimulated mitogenesis in this cell line. In order to correlate longer term
mitogenic effects of Mab-GH complexes with signalling events in this transfected 
cell line model, we now report on the effects of complexing with Mab on the
subsequent GH stimulated phosphorylation of Stat5b (signal transducer and
activator of transcription). In agreement with our data for the mitogenic
activity of GH-Mab complexes, we found that OA11 and OA14 inhibit GH activation
of Stat5b but that OA15 is not inhibitory. Further to this, the dose-response
effect of both OA11 and OA14 on the GH stimulation of Stat5b in the FDC-P1-oGHR
transfected cells correlates with the previously described dose-response effects 
for both Mabs in the context of GH stimulation of mitogenic effects. We conclude 
that in this oGHR transfected cell line model, Mab effects on short and long term
GH signalling events are tightly correlated. The observation that neither of the 
in vivo enhancing Mabs--OA11 or OA15--amplifies the response to GH in our
transfected cell line model, coupled with the differential nature of Mab effects 
on GH activity (OA11--inhibition; OA15--no effect) may argue for an in vivo
mechanism for enhancement of GH activity.

PMID: 11451369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cytokine. 2001 May 21;14(4):225-9.

Leptin receptor long-form signalling in a human liver cell line.

Briscoe CP(1), Hanif S, Arch JR, Tadayyon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, New
Frontiers Science Park, Harlow, Essex, UK. Celia_Briscoe@sbphrd.com

Expression of the long form of the leptin receptor was detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting in the
human liver cell line WRL68. Leptin (50-200 nM) significantly increased tyrosine 
phosphorylation of STAT cytoplasmic transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5b in a
dose-dependent manner and produced a gel-shift with STAT3- and STAT5-specific
oligonucleotides. WRL68 cells therefore provide the first human in vitro
hepatocyte system in which to study leptin receptor-mediated signalling and to
elucidate the role of leptin in liver.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11448122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2001 Jun;21(6):445-50.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) are detectable in mouse
trigeminal ganglion neurons.

Kriesel JD(1), Jones BB, Hwang IP, Dahms KM, Spruance SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The John A. Moran Eye Center, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. jkriesel@med.utah.edu

We studied signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) expression
in mouse trigeminal ganglia (TG) to gain an understanding of herpes simplex virus
(HSV) infection and reactivation. Mouse TG were harvested and were either frozen 
for Western blot analysis or preserved in 4% paraformaldehyde for subsequent
immunohistochemistry study. The thawed specimens were homogenized, and
nuclear/cytoplasmic extractions were performed for Western blots and
immunoprecipitation. Immunohistochemistry showed that Stat1, Stat3, Stat4,
Stat5b, and phosphotyrosine Stat3 localized to TG neurons, not surrounding
satellite cells. Western blot of TG nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts confirmed
the presence of these Stat at the appropriate molecular weights. Stat2 was
undetectable in TG by these methods. Immunoprecipitation of TG nuclear extracts
did not confirm the presence of Stat-Stat dimers in these specimens. These
studies show that several Stat, including phosphotyrosine Stat3, are present in
TG neurons, the site of HSV latency, where they could act upon latent viral DNA
to effect reactivation.

PMID: 11440643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Jul;15(7):1062-76.

Interleukin-2 inhibits glucocorticoid receptor transcriptional activity through a
mechanism involving STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5)
but not AP-1.

Biola A(1), Lefebvre P, Perrin-Wolff M, Sturm M, Bertoglio J, Pallardy M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U461 Faculté de Pharmacie Paris-Sud 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Cytokines and glucocorticoids (GCs) signaling pathways interfere with each other 
in the regulation of apoptosis and gene expression in the immune system.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2), through the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators 
of transcription (Jak/STAT) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways,
activates STAT5 and activated protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factors,
respectively, which are known to repress glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activity,
at least in part, through protein-protein interactions. In this work, we have
analyzed the mechanisms whereby IL-2 down-regulates the GC-induced
transactivation of the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (MMTV-LTR) 
in murine CTLL-2 T lymphocytes. Mutagenesis studies revealed that the MMTV-LTR
STAT5 binding site (-923/-914) was not required for IL-2-mediated inhibition but 
identified both glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) and the -104/+1 region as
critical elements for this negative response. The DNA binding activities of
transcription factors required for GC-mediated activation of the MMTV-LTR
promoter and that bind to the -104/+1 region (nuclear factor-1, Oct-1) were not
affected by IL-2 treatment. Overexpression of wild-type STAT5B enhanced the
effect of IL-2 on MMTV-LTR activity, and a dominant negative form of STAT5B
(Y699F) abolished the IL-2-mediated MMTV-LTR inhibition, whereas AP-1 activation 
had no effect in this system. Direct interaction between liganded GR and STAT5
was observed in CTLL-2 cells in a STAT5 phosphorylation-independent manner.
Overexpression of nuclear coactivators CBP (CREB-binding protein) or SRC-1a
(steroid receptor coactivator 1a) did not blunt IL-2 inhibitory effects. We
suggest that the STAT5-repressive activity on the GC-dependent transcription may 
involve direct interaction of STAT5 with GR, is dependent on the promoter context
and STAT5 activation level, and occurs independently of coactivators levels in T 
cells.

PMID: 11435608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2001 Jul 1;391(1):41-8.

Effect of STAT5b on rat liver alcohol dehydrogenase.

Potter JJ(1), Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2195, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) enhances rat liver alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) due to an
increase in enzyme synthesis, which is mediated at the level of transcription.
Previous studies have shown that the effect of GH in enhancing activation of the 
ADH promoter is mediated by C/EBP beta binding to region -22 to -11 relative to
the start of transcription. In this study, STAT5b and C/EBP beta were found to
bind to adjacent nucleotide sequences on a region between -226 and -194.
Expression vectors for both STAT5b and C/EBP beta independently activated the
promoter. Furthermore, the expression vector for the GH receptor also activated
the ADH promoter, and this effect was abrogated by mutations of the adjacent
STAT5b and C/EBP beta binding sites. These observations indicate that the
enhancing effect of GH is mediated by both STAT5b and C/EBP beta.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11414683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Immunol. 2001 Jun 15;166(12):7486-95.

Cooperative regulation of Mcl-1 by Janus kinase/stat and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase contribute to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-delayed
apoptosis in human neutrophils.

Epling-Burnette PK(1), Zhong B, Bai F, Jiang K, Bailey RD, Garcia R, Jove R, Djeu
JY, Loughran TP Jr, Wei S.

Author information: 
(1)Hematologic Malignancy Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
burnetpk@moffit.usf.edu

Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) are phagocytic cells constitutively
programmed for apoptotic cell death. Exposure to GM-CSF delays apoptosis as
measured by annexin-V staining and cell morphological change. We found that
STAT5B, STAT1, and STAT3 DNA-binding activity was induced by GM-CSF. We also
detected activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) pathway
after GM-CSF treatment which was inhibited by treatment with the PI 3-kinase
inhibitors, wortmannin and LY294002. We investigated whether STAT or PI 3-kinase 
activity was necessary for the pro-survival response of GM-CSF in PMN. Exposure
of PMN to GM-CSF in the presence of either AG-490, antisense STAT3
oligonucleotides, or wortmannin resulted in a partial inhibition of
GM-CSF-mediated pro-survival activity. GM-CSF induced a time-dependent increase
in the mRNA and protein expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2-family protein,
Mcl-1. We examined the hypothesis that Janus kinase/STAT and PI 3-kinase
regulation of Mcl-1 contributed to GM-CSF-delayed apoptosis. Using either AG-490 
or wortmannin alone, we observed a dose-dependent inhibition of GM-CSF-induced
Mcl-1 expression. Using suboptimal doses of AG-490 and wortmannin, we found that 
both drugs together had an additive effect on delayed apoptosis and Mcl-1
expression. These data suggest that cooperative regulation of Mcl-1 by the Janus 
kinase/STAT and PI 3-kinase pathways contribute to GM-CSF-delayed apoptosis.

PMID: 11390502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 May 15;176(1-2):39-48.

Stat5 phosphorylation status and DNA-binding activity in the bovine and murine
mammary glands.

Wheeler TT(1), Broadhurst MK, Sadowski HB, Farr VC, Prosser CG.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science, AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Private Bag 3123,
Hamilton, New Zealand. tom.wheeler@agresearch.co.nz

The transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b are mediators of prolactin signalling
in mammary epithelial cells, and are thought to play a role in lactogenesis. In
cultured cells, activation of Stat5 activity through phosphorylation results in
Stat5 binding to the promoters of at least some of the milk protein genes,
thereby stimulating their transcription. However, the mammary biology of Stat5
differs between species, and the role of Stat5 in the bovine mammary gland is not
fully understood. We have generated an antibody that specifically recognises the 
phosphorylated forms of Stat5a and Stat5b and used it to compare the levels of
phosphorylated Stat5 with Stat5 DNA-binding activity in bovine and murine mammary
tissue. Both Stat5 DNA-binding activity and phosphorylation status in the bovine 
mammary gland were at near-maximal levels at late pregnancy (27-35 days prior to 
calving), when at least three of the major milk proteins are not highly
expressed. In addition, these studies revealed significant animal-to-animal
variation in the level of Stat5 activity in both species. The results are
consistent with a role in terminal differentiation of mammary epithelial cells.
They also suggest that the stimulation of high-level expression of milk protein
genes in the bovine mammary gland is not through activation of the prolactin
receptor-Jak2-Stat5 pathway.

PMID: 11369441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 19;20(17):2080-90.

Constitutively active STAT5 variants induce growth and survival of hematopoietic 
cells through a PI 3-kinase/Akt dependent pathway.

Santos SC(1), Lacronique V, Bouchaert I, Monni R, Bernard O, Gisselbrecht S,
Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire (ICGM), Institut National de la Santé
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM U363), Hôpital Cochin, 27 rue du Fbg St
Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STATs) are important mediators 
of cytokine and growth factor-induced signal transduction. STAT5A and STAT5B have
been shown to play a role in survival and proliferation of hematopoietic cells
both in vitro and in vivo and to contribute to the growth and viability of cells 
transformed by the TEL-JAK2 oncoprotein. In this study, we investigated the
molecular mechanisms by which constitutively active STAT5 proteins induce cell
proliferation and survival of Ba/F3 cell lines expressing either dominant
positive STAT5A or STAT5B variants or TEL-JAK2 or TEL-ABL fusion proteins. Our
results showed that active STAT5 constitutively interacted with p85, the
regulatory subunit of the PI 3-kinase. A constitutive activity of the PI
3-kinase/Akt pathway was observed in these cells and required for their cell
cycle progression. In contrast, while activity of the PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway was
required for survival of Ba/F3 cells expressing the constitutively active forms
of STAT5A or STAT5B, it was dispensable for cells transformed by TEL-JAK2 or
TEL-ABL fusion proteins, suggesting that additional survival pathways take place 
in these transformed cells.

PMID: 11360192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2001 Jan-Feb;27(1):231-48.

Modeling acute promyelocytic leukemia in the mouse: new insights in the
pathogenesis of human leukemias.

Merghoub T(1), Gurrieri C, Piazza F, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the expansion of malignant
myeloid cells blocked at the promyelocytic stage of differentiation and is
associated with reciprocal chromosomal translocations always involving the
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) gene on chromosome 17. As a consequence
of the translocation, RARalpha variably fuses to the PML, PLZF, NPM, NuMA, and
Stat5b genes (X genes), respectively, leading to the generation of RARalpha-X and
X-RARalpha fusion genes. The aberrant chimeric proteins encoded by these genes,
as well as the inactivation of the X and RARalpha functions, may exert a crucial 
role in leukemogenesis. To define the molecular genetics of APL and the
contribution of each molecular event in APL pathogenesis, we have generated
transgenic mice harboring X-RARalpha and/or RARalpha-X genes as well as mice
where the various X genes have been inactivated by homologous recombination. Here
we show that while the X-RARalpha fusion gene is crucial for leukemogenesis, the 
presence of RARalpha-X and the inactivation of X function are critical in
modulating the onset as well as the phenotype of the leukemia.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11358384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Genetika. 2001 Mar;37(3):358-64.

[Use of PCR markers for mapping swine chromosome 12].

[Article in Russian]

Larkin DM(1), Kuznetsov SB, Astakhova NM, Zhdanova NS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 
630090 Russia. lark@bionet.nsc.ru

Using PCR analysis of pig-mink and pig-Chinese hamster hybrid cell lines and
heterologous and homologous primers of various types, chromosomal and
subchromosomal mapping of genes TOP2A, THRA, BRCA1, GAS, HLR1, MYL4, LIS1, MCP1, 
ENO3, CRYB1, P4HB, STAT5B, and H3F3B to pig chromosome 12 was carried out. The
efficiency of using different types of heterologous primers for pig chromosome
mapping was compared.

PMID: 11357369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2001 Feb;20(2):123-35.

Growth hormone induces tyrosyl phosphorylation of the transcription factors
Stat5a and Stat5b in CMT-U335 canine mammary tumor cells.

van Garderen E(1), Swennenhuis JF, Hellmén E, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. e.vangarderen@vet.uu.nl

It has now been well documented that the normal and tumorous canine mammary
glands can be extra-pituitary sites of substantial growth hormone (GH) synthesis.
Until now, attempts to reproduce the GH synthesis in-vitro using canine mammary
explants or mammary tumor cells have not been successful. Therefore, the response
of CMT-U335 canine mammary tumor cells to administered porcine GH (pGH) was
investigated as an in-vitro model to study the possible effects of GH synthesis
on this site. CMT-U335 cells spontaneously express the growth hormone receptor
(GHR) as well as the prolactin receptor (PRLR). Twenty five minutes after
administration, GH induced, in a dose-dependent manner, phosphorylation of the
transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b. Clear phosphorylation was induced by
10(-7) M and 10(-8) M pGH, with virtually no phosphorylation at 10(-9) M pGH. A
similar dose-dependent phosphorylation of Stat5a by ovine prolactin was found in 
these cells. Although at high concentrations binding of pGH to the canine PRLR
can occur (albeit with a low pKa), the similar dose-dependent effect of oPRL on
Stat5a phosphorylation indicated that pGH signaled through the GHR. Remarkably,
pGH induced a moderately decreased proliferation of CMT-U335 tumor cells, which
may indicate that GH induces differentiation in these tumor cells. The GH-induced
activation of Stat5a and Stat5b in these cells, as part of the JAK/Stat signal
transduction pathway, is consistent with mammary GH playing a role in autocrine
and/or paracrine stimulation of (tumorous) mammary cells.

PMID: 11311850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Biol Chem. 2001 Feb;382(2):343-51.

Experimental regulation of STAT gene expression reveals an involvement of STAT5
in interleukin-4-driven cell proliferation.

Friedrich K(1), Wietek S.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biocenter), Department of
Physiological Chemistry II, Würzburg, Germany.

The precise roles of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs)
in cytokine-triggered control of cell physiology are not sufficiently well
understood. We have established cell lines in which the individual functional
contributions of STAT6 and STAT5a/b to interleukin-(IL-) 3 and -4-dependent
processes can be readily studied. Mutants of STAT6, STAT5a and 5b lacking the
transcriptional transactivation domain were fused to the green fluorescent
protein (GFP) and expressed in the murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3 in a regulatable 
fashion. The expression of these truncated STAT variants could be tightly
controlled over a wide range by doxycycline in the medium. They specifically
bound to cognate DNA elements upon cytokine stimulation and acted
dominant-negatively on the transcription of respective reporter genes in response
to IL-3 and -4. The system was applied to the question of STAT contributions to
cytokine-dependent cell proliferation. Expression of dominant-negative STAT6 had 
no significant effect on cell growth in response to both IL-3 and IL-4. In
contrast, truncated STAT5 interfered with cell proliferation in response to IL-3,
and, interestingly, also to IL-4. The results support our earlier findings on a
role of STAT5 in IL-4-induced intracellular signaling and indicate that STAT5b in
particular is involved in IL-4 receptor-triggered control of cell proliferation.

PMID: 11308032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 15;61(6):2453-8.

Maturation of erythroid cells and erythroleukemia development are affected by the
kinase activity of Lyn.

Tilbrook PA(1), Palmer GA, Bittorf T, McCarthy DJ, Wright MJ, Sarna MK, Linnekin 
D, Cull VS, Williams JH, Ingley E, Schneider-Mergener J, Krystal G, Klinken SP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Western Australian Institute for Medical
Research, Royal Perth Hospital, Australia.

This study examined the impact of the tyrosine kinase Lyn on
erythropoietin-induced intracellular signaling in erythroid cells. In J2E
erythroleukemic cells, Lyn coimmunoprecipitated with numerous proteins, including
SHP-1, SHP-2, ras-GTPase-activating protein, signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) 5a, STAT5b, and mitogen-activated protein kinase; however,
introduction of a dominant-negative Lyn (Y397F Lyn) inhibited the interaction of 
Lyn with all of these molecules except SHP-1. Cells containing the
dominant-negative Lyn displayed altered intracellular phosphorylation patterns,
including mitogen-actiated protein kinase, but not erythropoietin receptor,
Janus-activated kinase (JAK) 2, or STAT5. As a consequence,
erythropoietin-initiated differentiation and basal proliferation were severely
impaired. Y397F Lyn reduced the protein levels of erythroid transcription factors
erythroid Kruppel-like factor and GATA-1 up to 90%, which accounts for the
inability of J2E cells expressing Y397F Lyn to synthesize hemoglobin. Although
Lyn was shown to bind several sites on the cytoplasmic domain of the
erythropoietin receptor, it was not activated when a receptor mutated at the JAK2
binding site was ectopically expressed in J2E cells indicating that JAK2 is the
primary kinase in erythropoietin signaling and that Lyn is a secondary kinase. In
normal erythroid progenitors, erythropoietin enhanced phosphorylation of Lyn;
moreover, exogenous Lyn increased colony forming unit-erythroid, but not burst
forming uniterythroid, colonies from normal progenitors, demonstrating a
stage-specific effect of the kinase. Significantly, altering Lyn activity in J2E 
cells had a profound effect on the development of erythroleukemias in vivo: the
mortality rate was markedly reduced and latent period extended when either
wild-type Lyn or Y397F Lyn was introduced into these cells. Taken together, these
data show that Lyn plays an important role in intracellular signaling in
nontransformed and leukemic erythroid cells.

PMID: 11289114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(9):3137-43.

Gadd45gamma is dispensable for normal mouse development and T-cell proliferation.

Hoffmeyer A(1), Piekorz R, Moriggl R, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Gadd45gamma, a family member of the growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene
family 45 (Gadd45), is strongly induced by interleukin-2 (IL-2) in peripheral T
cells. While in most tissues all Gadd45 family members are expressed, Gadd45gamma
is the only member that is induced by IL-2. Here we show that the IL-2-induced
expression of Gadd45gamma is dependent on a signaling pathway mediated by the
tyrosine kinase Jak3 and the transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b (signal
transducer and activator of transcription). Previous studies with ectopically
overexpressed Gadd45gamma in various cell lines implicated its function in
negative growth control. To analyze the physiological role of Gadd45gamma we used
homologous recombination to generate mice lacking Gadd45gamma.
Gadd45gamma-deficient mice develop normally, are indistinguishable from their
littermates, and are fertile. Furthermore, hematopoiesis in mice lacking
Gadd45gamma is not impaired and Gadd45gamma-deficient T lymphocytes show normal
responses to IL-2. These data demonstrate that Gadd45gamma is not essential for
normal mouse development and hematopoiesis, possibly due to functional redundancy
among the Gadd45 family members. Gadd45gamma is also dispensable for IL-2-induced
T-cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC86941
PMID: 11287618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20703-10. Epub 2001 Mar 13.

Insulin Induction of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 mRNA expression in C2C12 Skeletal Muscle
Cells Is Mediated by Stat5*.

Sadowski CL(1), Choi TS, Le M, Wheeler TT, Wang LH, Sadowski HB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York, 10029, USA. henry.sadowski@mssm.edu

Previously, by a yeast 2-hybrid screen, we identified signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) as a substrate of the insulin receptor
(IR). We demonstrated that refeeding of fasted mice leads to rapid activation of 
Stat5 proteins in liver, skeletal muscle, and fat, suggesting that Stat5b is a
physiological target of insulin. Here, we show that injection of glucose or
insulin into fasted mice leads to robust activation of both Stat5a and Stat5b in 
skeletal muscle. In C2C12 myotubes, we find that insulin stimulates tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5b by 3-5-fold. This degree of Stat5 activation
in vitro is significantly lower than what we observe in vivo and inversely
correlates with IRS-1/2 levels. We can recapitulate robust insulin activation of 
Stat5 in C2C12 cells by stable overexpression of the human IR (hIR). To identify 
insulin-activated genes that are Stat5 targets, we also overexpressed an IR
mutant (LA-hIR) that signals normally for mitogen-activated protein kinase- and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent pathways but is deficient in Stat5
signaling in response to insulin. We demonstrate that insulin induces the
expression of SOCS-2 mRNA in the wild type hIR but not in the
LA-hIR-overexpressing cells. The induction of SOCS-3 by insulin is reduced but
not lost in the LA-hIR cells. Therefore, our results suggest that insulin
induction of SOCS-2, and in part SOCS-3 mRNA expression, is mediated by Stat5 and
can be independent of mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-signaling pathways.

PMID: 11279166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr;10(7):769-75.

Oncogenes and tumor suppressors in the molecular pathogenesis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Pandolfi PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.
p-pandolfi@ski.mskcc.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with reciprocal chromosomal
translocations always involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) gene 
on chromosome 17 and variable partner genes (X genes) on distinct chromosomes.
RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the vast majority of APL cases, and in a few
cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and Stat5b genes, respectively, leading to the
generation of RARalpha-X: and X:-RARalpha fusion genes. Both fusion proteins can 
exert oncogenic functions through their ability to interfere with the activities 
of X and RARalpha proteins. Here, it will be discussed in detail how an extensive
biochemical analysis as well as a systematic in vivo genetic approach in the
mouse has allowed the definition of the multiple oncogenic activities of
PML-RARalpha, and how it has become apparent that this oncoprotein is able to
impair RARalpha at the transcription level and the tumor suppressive function of 
the PML protein.

PMID: 11257111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;26(2):145-54.

Fatty acids inhibit leptin signalling in BRIN-BD11 insulinoma cells.

Briscoe CP(1), Hanif S, Arch JR, Tadayyon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, New
Frontiers Science Park, Harlow, Essex, UK.

The effect of treatment with a 0.03% fatty acid (FA) cocktail on
leptin-receptor-mediated STAT (signal transducers and activators of
transcription) activation in the rat insulinoma cell line BRIN-BD11 was
investigated. Leptin (10 nM) stimulated the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 and
STAT5b. Acute treatment with FAs prevented leptin-stimulated STAT3 tyrosine
phosphorylation and significantly raised basal STAT5 phosphorylation. A chronic
treatment (5 days) of BRIN-BD11 cells with FAs similarly attenuated
leptin-stimulated STAT tyrosine phosphorylation. Chronic FA treatment also
attenuated prolactin-stimulated STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation but not
interleukin-6-stimulated STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation, suggesting that the
effect is receptor/ligand specific. TaqMan analysis of gene expression following 
chronic FA treatment showed neither a decrease in the amount of leptin receptor
(Ob-R) mRNA, nor an increase in the negative regulators of STAT signalling, SOCS3
(suppressors of cytokine signalling) or cytokine inducible sequence (CIS). These 
data demonstrate that FAs modulate leptin and prolactin signalling in beta-cells,
implying that high levels of circulating FAs present in obese individuals affect 
the action of selective cytokines in beta-cell function.

PMID: 11241166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):3724-32.

Concomitant inhibition of Janus kinase 3 and calcineurin-dependent signaling
pathways synergistically prolongs the survival of rat heart allografts.

Behbod F(1), Erwin-Cohen RA, Wang ME, Trawick BW, Qu X, Verani R, Kahan BD,
Stepkowski SM, Kirken RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas
Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The cytoplasmic localized Janus tyrosine kinase 3 (Jak3) is activated by multiple
cytokines, including IL-2, IL-4, and IL-7, through engagement of the IL-2R common
gamma-chain. Genetic inactivation of Jak3 is manifested as SCID in humans and
mice. These findings have suggested that Jak3 represents a pharmacological target
to control certain lymphoid-derived diseases. Using the rat T cell line Nb2-11c, 
we document that tyrphostin AG-490 blocked in vitro IL-2-induced cell
proliferation (IC(50) approximately 20 microM), Jak3 autophosphorylation, and
activation of its key substrates, Stat5a and Stat5b, as measured by
tyrosine/serine phosphorylation analysis and DNA-binding experiments. To test the
notion that inhibition of Jak3 provides immunosuppressive potential, a 7-day
course of i.v. therapy with 5-20 mg/kg AG-490 was used to inhibit rejection of
heterotopically transplanted Lewis (RT1(l)) heart allografts in ACI (RT1(a))
recipients. In this study, we report that AG-490 significantly prolonged
allograft survival, but also acted synergistically when used in combination with 
the signal 1 inhibitor cyclosporin A, but not the signal 3 inhibitor, rapamycin. 
Finally, AG-490 treatment reduced graft infiltration of mononuclear cells and
Stat5a/b DNA binding of ex vivo IL-2-stimulated graft infiltrating of mononuclear
cells, but failed to affect IL2R alpha expression, as judged by RNase protection 
assays. Thus, inhibition of Jak3 prolongs allograft survival and also potentiates
the immunosuppressive effects of cyclosporin A, but not rapamycin.

PMID: 11238613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Jan;12(1):1-7.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5B potentiates v-Src-mediated 
transformation of NIH-3T3 cells.

Kazansky AV(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030-3498, USA.

Previously, we reported that whereas both signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) 5A and STAT5B can be activated with respect to tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding potential by Src kinase, only STAT5B was
translocated to the nucleus, where it presumably activates unique downstream
responses. To help elucidate the functional consequences of STAT5B activation by 
v-src, the properties of stably transfected NIH-3T3 cells containing both an
intact and a dominant negative, COOH-terminal-truncated isoform of STAT5B were
investigated. STAT5B enhanced the transforming potential of v-Src as reflected by
both an increase in focus formation and growth in soft agar. STAT5B also enhanced
v-Src-induced cell cycle progression and cell motility in NIH-3T3 cells.
Furthermore, the dominant negative, COOH-terminal-truncated isoform of STAT5B was
able to partially suppress v-Src-mediated cell transformation. These results
support the hypothesis that STAT5B may enhance Src/Abl-induced tumorigenesis.
Accordingly, the equilibrium between STAT5B and STAT5A and their naturally
occurring truncated forms may therefore play a key role in the etiology of
certain cancers.

PMID: 11205741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Br J Haematol. 2001 Feb;112(2):449-58.

The granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor supports erythroid
differentiation in the absence of the erythropoietin receptor or Stat5.

Millot GA(1), Svinarchuk F, Lacout C, Vainchenker W, Dumenil D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U362, Laboratoire Hématopoïèse et Cellules Souches, Institut Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France.

To evaluate the functional conservation of signal transduction mechanisms between
haematopoietic receptors and to characterize the molecules activated in this
phenomenon, we introduced granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR)
cDNA into mouse fetal liver cells using a retroviral vector. In semi-solid medium
assays, G-CSFR-infected cells gave rise to all types of colonies
[granulocyte-macrophage (GM), megakaryocyte (MK) and mixed lineage (GEMM)
colony-forming units (CFU) and erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-E)] in the
presence of G-CSF alone. The direct effect of G-CSF on erythroid differentiation 
of G-CSFR-transduced erythroid progenitors was demonstrated by the development of
erythroid colonies using G-CSFR-expressing Lin- cells cloned at one cell per well
in liquid culture in the presence of G-CSF. Interestingly, while Stat5, but not
Stat3, was activated in erythroid cells in response to erythropoietin (EPO), both
were activated in erythroid and granulocytic cells stimulated by G-CSF.
Furthermore, G-CSF induced the growth of erythroid colonies from
G-CSFR-expressing fetal liver cells from EPO receptor-/- (EPO-R-/-) or Stat5a-/- 
Stat5b-/- mice, demonstrating that erythroid differentiation can occur in the
absence of EPO-R or Stat5. These data show that forced expression of G-CSFR
allows G-CSF-dependent multilineage proliferation and differentiation of
haematopoietic progenitors and rescues EPO-R-/- erythroid cells. While G-CSF
induces Stat5 activation in G-CSFR-expressing erythroid cells, this activation is
not necessary for the terminal erythroid differentiation induced by G-CSF.

PMID: 11167846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Genomics. 2001 Jan 15;71(2):150-5.

Structure of the mouse Stat 3/5 locus: evolution from Drosophila to zebrafish to 
mouse.

Miyoshi K(1), Cui Y, Riedlinger G, Robinson P, Lehoczky J, Zon L, Oka T, Dewar K,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Building 8, Room 101, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) are transcription
factors that can be activated by many cytokines. While Drosophila contains only
one Stat (d-Stat), mammals contain seven, with STATs 3, 5a, and 5b being the
closest functional relatives. To understand the evolutionary relationship between
d-Stat and vertebrate STATs 3 and 5, we isolated, sequenced, and analyzed the
zebrafish Stat3 (z-Stat3) gene and a 500-kb region spanning mouse chromosome 11, 
60.5 cM containing three Stat genes (m-Stats). Within this region we identified
the genes encoding m-Stats 3, 5a, and 5b, Cnp1, Hcrt/Orexin, Ptrf, GCN5, mDj11,
and four new genes. The 5' ends of the m-Stat5a and m-Stat5b genes are juxtaposed
to each other, and the 3' ends of the m-Stat3 and Stat5a genes face each other.
While the m-Stat5a and m-Stat3 genes have one promoter each, which are active in 
many tissues, the m-Stat5b gene acquired two distinct promoters. The distal
promoter is expressed ubiquitously, and transcription from the proximal promoter 
is restricted to liver, muscle, and mammary tissue. Through a comparison of
exon-intron boundaries from the m-Stat3, m-Stat5a, and m-Stat5b, z-Stat3, and
d-Stat genes, we deduced their evolutionary relationship. We propose that the
Stat3 and Stat5 lineages are derived from the duplication of a common primordial 
gene and that d-Stat is a part of the Stat5 lineage.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11161808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Anim Genet. 2000 Oct;31(5):339-40.

The STAT3-encoding gene resides within the 40 kbp gap between the STAT5A- and
STAT5B-encoding genes in cattle.

Molenaar A(1), Wheeler TT, McCracken JY, Seyfert HM.

Author information: 
(1)Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New Zealand.

PMID: 11105222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Bone Miner Res. 2000 Nov;15(11):2284-90.

Growth hormone-regulated intracellular signaling in UMR 106 osteosarcoma cells.

Morales O(1), Lindgren U, Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge Hospital,
Sweden.

Growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) are important growth
factors for postnatal longitudinal bone growth. Although many effects of GH on
bone growth are mediated by IGF-1, GH can directly influence bone cells. Limited 
knowledge exists regarding specific intracellular signaling pathways and genes
activated by GH in bone cells. GH is known to activate several intracellular
signaling pathways, among them the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) pathway. GH mainly activates JAK2 and both
isoforms of STAT5, A and B. STAT5 gene deletion experiments have shown the
importance of these transcription factors for growth. To understand the molecular
mechanism(s) behind this, different experimental models are needed. The UMR 106
cell line is a rat clonal osteosarcoma cell line with osteoblast-like phenotypic 
properties, one is the endogenous expression of GH receptor (GHR). The present
study focused on whether these cells express a functional GH-responsive
JAK2/STAT5 pathway. Analysis of cell extracts by immunoprecipitation and Western 
blot showed that physiological concentrations of GH activated JAK2. Western blot 
analysis of nuclear extracts from GH-stimulated UMR 106 cells showed that
physiological concentrations of GH induced nuclear translocation of both STAT5
isoforms, but with STAT5A being predominant. Both isoforms displayed similar
nuclear turnover after GH stimulation of cells. Gel electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (GEMSA) of nuclear extract revealed that both STAT5A and STAT5B
obtained DNA-binding capacity after GH stimulation. Thus, we have shown, for the 
first time, the expression and GH-induced activation of JAK2 and STAT5A/B in UMR 
106 osteoblast-like cells. This study also shows that this cell line is a
suitable experimental model to study unique GH effects in osteoblasts mediated by
STAT5.

PMID: 11092411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 2;276(9):6675-88. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

DNA binding specificity of different STAT proteins. Comparison of in vitro
specificity with natural target sites.

Ehret GB(1), Reichenbach P, Schindler U, Horvath CM, Fritz S, Nabholz M, Bucher
P.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) 1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland. markus.nabholz@isrec.unil.ch

STAT transcription factors are expressed in many cell types and bind to similar
sequences. However, different STAT gene knock-outs show very distinct phenotypes.
To determine whether differences between the binding specificities of STAT
proteins account for these effects, we compared the sequences bound by STAT1,
STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6. One sequence set was selected from random
oligonucleotides by recombinant STAT1, STAT5A, or STAT6. For another set
including many weak binding sites, we quantified the relative affinities to
STAT1, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6. We compared the results to the binding sites in
natural STAT target genes identified by others. The experiments confirmed the
similar specificity of different STAT proteins. Detailed analysis indicated that 
STAT5A specificity is more similar to that of STAT6 than that of STAT1, as
expected from the evolutionary relationships. The preference of STAT6 for sites
in which the half-palindromes (TTC) are separated by four nucleotides (N(4)) was 
confirmed, but analysis of weak binding sites showed that STAT6 binds fairly well
to N(3) sites. As previously reported, STAT1 and STAT5 prefer N(3) sites;
however, STAT5A, but not STAT1, weakly binds N(4) sites. None of the STATs bound 
to half-palindromes. There were no specificity differences between STAT5A and
STAT5B.

PMID: 11053426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 1;165(9):5097-104.

Functional uncoupling of the Janus kinase 3-Stat5 pathway in malignant growth of 
human T cell leukemia virus type 1-transformed human T cells.

Kirken RA(1), Erwin RA, Wang L, Wang Y, Rui H, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. rkirken@farmr1.med.uth.tmc.edu

Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) transforms cytokine-dependent T
lymphocytes and causes adult T cell leukemia. Janus tyrosine kinase (Jak)3 and
transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b are essential for the proliferation of
normal T cells and are constitutively hyperactivated in both HTLV-1-transformed
human T cell lines and lymphocytes isolated from HTLV-1-infected patients;
therefore, a critical role for the Jak3-Stat5 pathway in the progression of this 
disease has been postulated. We recently reported that tyrphostin AG-490
selectively blocked IL-2 activation of Jak3/Stat5 and growth of murine T cell
lines. Here we demonstrate that disruption of Jak3/Stat5a/b signaling with AG-490
(50 microM) blocked the proliferation of primary human T lymphocytes, but
paradoxically failed to inhibit the proliferation of HTLV-1-transformed human T
cell lines, HuT-102 and MT-2. Structural homologues of AG-490 also inhibited the 
proliferation of primary human T cells, but not HTLV-1-infected cells. Disruption
of constitutive Jak3/Stat5 activation by AG-490 was demonstrated by inhibition of
1) tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak3, Stat5a (Tyr(694)), and Stat5b (Tyr(699)); 2)
serine phosphorylation of Stat5a (Ser(726)) as determined by a novel
phosphospecific Ab; and 3) Stat5a/b DNA binding to the Stat5-responsive
beta-casein promoter. In contrast, AG-490 had no effect on DNA binding by p50/p65
components of NF-kappaB, a transcription factor activated by the HTLV-1-encoded
phosphoprotein, Tax. Collectively, these data suggest that the Jak3-Stat5 pathway
in HTLV-1-transformed T cells has become functionally redundant for
proliferation. Reversal of this functional uncoupling may be required before
Jak3/Stat5 inhibitors will be useful in the treatment of this malignancy.

PMID: 11046040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2000 Aug;26(4):320-30.

Delineation and mapping of Stat5 isoforms activated by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor in myeloid cells.

Chakraborty A(1), Dyer KF, Tweardy DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a cytokine critical for
proliferation and differentiation of granulocytic precursors and neutrophil
functions that has previously been demonstrated to activate Stat3 and Stat5, two 
members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) protein
family. Stat3 has been identified to be critical for G-CSF receptor
(G-CSFR)-mediated signaling for granulocyte differentiation. Stat5 activation has
been mapped to the proximal portion of the cytosolic region of the G-CSFR.
However, delineation and mapping of the specific Stat5 isoforms activated by
G-CSF in myeloid cells have not been reported. In this study, we demonstrated
that G-CSF activated a Stat5 complex in human myeloid cells containing three
isoforms of Stat5: Stat5A, Stat5B, and Stat5 p80. Activation of Stat5A and Stat5B
maps to the proliferation-specific domain of the G-CSFR, whereas Stat5 p80 is
recruited by phosphotyrosine-704 within the region of G-CSFR required for
differentiation. G-CSF-activated Stat5A/B, but not Stat5 p80, formed a
heterodimer with Stat3. The Stat5A/B-Stat3 heterodimer can bind to specific DNA
sequences preferred by both Stat3 and Stat5. These findings are consistent with
the possibility that Stat5 p80 contributes to G-CSF-induced myeloid
differentiation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11042034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2000 Sep 15;80(2):198-206.

Activation of the Jak-Stat- and MAPK-pathways by oncostatin M is not sufficient
to cause growth inhibition of human glioma cells.

Halfter H(1), Postert C, Friedrich M, Ringelstein EB, Stögbauer F.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Neurology, Westf. Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Albert-Schweitzer-Str. 33, D-48129, Münster, Germany. halfter@uni-muenster.de

We have recently described that oncostatin M (OSM), a member of the IL-6 family
of cytokines, induces the differentiation of human glioma cells in culture. In
order to extend this studies, we analyzed the effect of OSM on other human glioma
cell lines including A172, U343-MG and T98G. All of these cell lines express the 
receptor components of OSM and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) gp130, LIFR and
the OSM specific OSMRbeta. Therefore, we expected these cell lines to respond to 
OSM and LIF. Using specific antibodies recognizing proteins of the janus kinase
(Jak-)/signal transducers and activator of transcription (Stat-) signaling
cascade that has been shown to transduce the signals of the IL-6 cytokines to the
nucleus, we could show that Jak1, Jak2 and Tyk2, as well as the Stat proteins
Stat1, Stat3 and Stat5b were phosphorylated in all three cell lines by OSM and,
at least in part, by LIF. Activation of the Stat proteins was also detected by
EMSA which revealed complex formation on the Stat3 DNA-binding element and on a
Stat5 binding site. Consistent with our recent findings, OSM treatment also
induced the activation of the MAPK erk2 and the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 in
cells of the A172, T98G and U343-MG cell lines. Although this activation pattern 
was very close to what we had observed in the GOS3 glioma cells, only T98G showed
a growth inhibition in response to OSM while the A172 and the U343-MG cell lines 
did not respond to OSM treatment in terms of growth inhibition.

PMID: 11038252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Oncogene. 2000 Sep 28;19(41):4695-705.

Human prolactin (hPRL) antagonists inhibit hPRL-activated signaling pathways
involved in breast cancer cell proliferation.

Llovera M(1), Pichard C, Bernichtein S, Jeay S, Touraine P, Kelly PA, Goffin V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 344, Molecular Endocrinology, Faculté de Médecine Necker, Paris,
France.

The involvement of human prolactin (hPRL) in breast cancer has been recently
reconsidered based on its autocrine/paracrine proliferative effect described in
human mammary tumor epithelial cells. Therefore, there is growing interest in the
development of potent hPRL antagonists that may inhibit this effect. We
previously designed hPRL analogs displaying antagonistic properties in a human
transcriptional bioassay. We now report that the most potent of those analogs,
G129R-hPRL, antagonizes all hPRL-induced effects analysed in various breast
cancer cell lines, including cell proliferation. The analog per se lacks
intrinsic agonistic activity on PRL receptor-activated signaling cascades, cell
proliferation and apoptosis, indicating that its mode of action only occurs
through competitive inhibition of hPRL. We provide some molecular basis of this
antagonistic effect by demonstrating that G129R-hPRL competitively inhibits
hPRL-activation of the JAK-STAT and MAPK pathways, two signaling cascades
involved in the mitogenic effect of hPRL in mammary epithelial cells. This
competitive inhibition persists for at least 48 h, as evidenced by long term
analysis of STAT5b activation or of progression through cell cycle. These results
are the first demonstration at the molecular level that hPRL antagonists
interfering with receptor dimerization disrupt signaling events in breast cancer 
cells, which prevents hPRL-induced cell proliferation.

PMID: 11032019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biosci. 2000 Sep;25(3):275-84.

Mechanisms of all-trans retinoic acid-induced differentiation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Zhang JW(1), Wang JY, Chen SJ, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Second Medical University, 197 Ruijin Road II, Shanghai 200 025, People's
Republic of China.

Retinoic acids (RA) play a key role in myeloid differentiation through their
agonistic nuclear receptors (RAR alpha/RXR) to modulate the expression of target 
genes. In acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells with rearrangement of retinoic
acid receptor a (RAR alpha) (including: PML-RAR alpha, PLZF-RAR alpha, NPM-RAR
alpha, NuMA- RAR alpha or STAT5b-RAR alpha) as a result of chromosomal
translocations, the RA signal pathway is disrupted and myeloid differentiation is
arrested at the promyelocytic stage. Pharmacologic dosage of all-trans retinoic
acid (ATRA) directly modulates PML-RAR alpha and its interaction with the nuclear
receptor co-repressor complex, which restores the wild-type RAR alpha/RXR
regulatory pathway and induces the transcriptional expression of downstream
genes. Analysing gene expression profiles in APL cells before and after ATRA
treatment represents a useful approach to identify genes whose functions are
involved in this new cancer treatment. A chronologically well coordinated
modulation of ATRA-regulated genes has thus been revealed which seems to
constitute a balanced functional network underlying decreased cellular
proliferation, initiation and progression of maturation, and maintenance of cell 
survival before terminal differentiation.

PMID: 11022230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Aug 30;166(2):89-99.

Growth hormone (GH) induces the formation of protein complexes involving Stat5,
Erk2, Shc and serine phosphorylated proteins.

Dinerstein-Cali H(1), Ferrag F, Kayser C, Kelly PA, Postel-Vinay M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 344, Endocrinologie Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine
Necker-Enfants Malades, 156 Rue de Vaugirard, 75015, Paris, France.

The aim of this study was to investigate the interaction of Stat5 with key
effector proteins Erk2 and Shc after activation by growth hormone (GH), using
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing the wild type rabbit growth
hormone receptor (GHR). In coimmunoprecipitation experiments, we show GH-induced 
formation of complexes consisting of Stat5a and Erk2, and Stat5a and Stat5b
association with the protein adaptor Shc. In CHO cells treated with GH, a rapid
association of tyrosine and serine phosphorylated Stat5a with activated Erk2 is
observed. In contrast, Shc proteins interact with non-phosphorylated forms of
Stat5. Using truncated and tyrosine mutants of the GHR, we identify a
carboxy-terminal domain of the receptor, which is critical for serine
phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5a/Erk2 complex formation. In addition,
tyrosine residues of this region of the GHR are not required for Stat5a/Erk2
interaction but are essential for Stat5a serine phosphorylation. Moreover, we
detect serine phosphorylated proteins associated with Erk2, Shc and Stat5: both
Stat5 isoforms interact with a serine phosphorylated protein of 63 kDa, which is 
shown to be related to the serine-threonine kinase Akt-1. Our results support the
importance of serine phosphorylation cascades in GH signaling and open another
pathway of GH signal transduction.

PMID: 10996427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39718-26.

A cytosolic protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B specifically dephosphorylates and 
deactivates prolactin-activated STAT5a and STAT5b.

Aoki N(1), Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan. naoki@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10888.

Prolactin (PRL) plays a central and crucial role in the regulation of milk
protein gene expression in mammary epithelial cells. PRL binding to its cognate
receptor leads to receptor dimerization and activation of the tyrosine kinase
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), associated with the membrane-proximal, intracellular
domain of the receptor. In turn, JAK2 phosphorylates and activates STAT5, a
member of the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family.
We have recently reported that 16 different protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTP)
were expressed in lactating mouse mammary gland and mammary epithelial cells
(Aoki, N., Kawamura, M., Yamaguchi-Aoki, Y., Ohira, S., and Matsuda, T. (1999) J.
Biochem. (Tokyo) 125, 669-675). We investigated the involvement of each PTP in
PRL signaling. Among the 12 phosphatases including SHP-2 examined, a cytosolic
phosphatase PTP1B was found to specifically dephosphorylate STAT5a and STAT5b in 
transfected COS7 and in vitro. Nuclear translocation of STAT5a and STAT5b was
largely inhibited upon overexpression of PTP1B. The PRL-dependent transcriptional
activation of the beta-casein gene promoter was also inhibited by PTP1B.
Furthermore, retrovirus-mediated overexpression of PTP1B resulted in
dephosphorylation of endogenous STAT5 and down-regulation of beta-casein gene
expression in mammary epithelial COMMA-1D cells when the cells were treated with 
lactogenic hormones. Endogenous tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5 proteins in mammary
epithelial COMMA-1D cells as well as tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5a and STAT5b
expressed in COS7 cells were co-precipitated by substrate-trapping mutants of
recombinant PTP1B. These results strongly suggest that PTP1B dephosphorylates
PRL-activated STAT5a and STAT5b, thereby negatively regulating PRL-mediated
signaling pathway.

PMID: 10993888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39487-96.

Role of the cytokine-inducible SH2 protein CIS in desensitization of STAT5b
signaling by continuous growth hormone.

Ram PA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Growth hormone (GH)-inducible suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS/CIS
proteins) inhibit GH receptor (GHR) signaling to STAT5b via
phosphotyrosine-dependent binding interactions with the tyrosine kinase JAK2
(SOCS-1) and/or the cytoplasmic tail of GHR (CIS and SOCS-3). Presently, we
investigate the mechanism of CIS inhibition and CIS's role in down-regulating
GHR-JAK2 signaling to STAT5b in cells exposed to GH continuously. CIS is shown to
inhibit GHR-JAK2 signaling by two distinct mechanisms: by a partial inhibition
that is decreased at elevated STAT5b levels and may involve competition between
CIS and STAT5b for common GHR cytoplasmic tail phosphotyrosine-binding sites; and
by a time-dependent inhibition, not seen with SOCS-1 or SOCS-3, that involves
proteasome action. Investigation of the latter mechanism revealed that GH
stimulates degradation of CIS, but not SOCS-3. The proteasome inhibitor MG132
blocked this protein degradation and also blocked the inhibitory action of CIS,
but not that of SOCS-1 or SOCS-3, on STAT5b signaling. Proteasome-dependent
degradation of CIS, most likely in the form of a (GHR-JAK2)-CIS complex, is
therefore proposed to be an important step in the time-dependent CIS inhibition
mechanism. Finally, the down-regulation of GHR-JAK2 signaling to STAT5b seen in
continuous GH-treated cells could be prevented by treatment of cells with the
proteasome inhibitor MG132 or by expression of CIS-R107K, a selective,
dominant-negative inhibitor of CIS activity. These findings lead us to propose
that the cytokine signaling inhibitor CIS is a key mediator of the STAT5b
desensitization response seen in cells and tissues exposed to GH chronically,
such as adult female rat liver.

PMID: 10991939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2000 Apr;10 Suppl B:S1-8.

Pulsatility of growth hormone (GH) signalling in liver cells: role of the
JAK-STAT5b pathway in GH action.

Choi HK(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The intracellular signalling molecule and transcriptional activator STAT5b is a
key mediator of the effects of intermittent plasma growth hormone (GH) pulses on 
the male-specific pattern of liver gene expression and pubertal body growth rates
in rodents. Experiments with Stat5b gene-knockout mice have revealed that these
GH-regulated, male-specific phenotypes are a direct consequence of GH
pulse-dependent STAT5b activation and that loss of function of STAT5b cannot be
compensated for by the closely related signalling molecule STAT5a. Physiological 
plasma GH pulses are required to obtain the high levels of activated STAT5b seen 
in the livers of males, and down-regulation of the GH receptor (GHR)-JAK-STAT5b
pathway in hepatocytes exposed to GH in a near-continuous fashion underlies the
low level of liver STAT5b activity that is characteristic of adult female rats.
Termination of nuclear STAT5b signalling occurs at the conclusion of a plasma GH 
pulse, with STAT5b deactivation catalysed by a tyrosine phosphatase. In males,
termination of the intracellular signalling stimulated by a plasma GH pulse is
proposed to be additionally facilitated by GH-STAT5b-inducible SOCS-CIS proteins,
which block the further activation of STAT5b by binding to and inhibiting the
action of the GHR-JAK2 complex via multiple mechanisms. In this manner, the liver
cell is rendered temporarily unresponsive to further GH-signalling events.
SOCS-CIS proteins synthesized in liver cells stimulated continuously with GH may 
also contribute to the apparent down-regulation of STAT5b signalling that is
observed in the female rat liver.

PMID: 10984246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Blood. 2000 Sep 15;96(6):2277-83.

Stat5a/b contribute to interleukin 7-induced B-cell precursor expansion, but abl-
and bcr/abl-induced transformation are independent of stat5.

Sexl V(1), Piekorz R, Moriggl R, Rohrer J, Brown MP, Bunting KD, Rothammer K,
Roussel MF, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Departments of Biochemistry, Tumor Cell
Biology, Immunology, and Experimental Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The cytokines interleukin 7 (IL-7) and interleukin 4 (IL-4) regulate lymphoid
differentiation and function and activate the transcription factor Stat5. Using
mice deficient for the 2 highly related transcription factors, Stat5a and Stat5b 
(Stat5a/b(-/-)), we investigated the role of Stat5 for B-cell differentiation,
expansion, and function. Peripheral blood B cells of Stat5-deficient mice are
significantly reduced, but no proliferation defects in response to various
mitogenic stimuli are found. Also, IgM and IgG1 antibody production and
immunoglobulin class switching are not affected. Pre- and pro-B cells of
Stat5-deficient animals were found to have reduced responses to IL-7. Pro- and
pre-B cells are the target cells of the abl oncogene and numerous studies have
suggested that Stat5a/b is essential for transformation by derivatives of the
Abelson (abl) gene. To assess the role of Stat5a/b in transformation, we have
evaluated the ability of various abl derivatives to transform cells from
Stat5a/b-deficient mice in vitro or in vivo. We demonstrate that the absence of
Stat5a/b is not essential for the induction of lymphoid or myeloid tumors in vivo
or on the ability to transform bone marrow cells in vitro.

PMID: 10979977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Sep;14(9):1411-24.

Cross-talk between signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat5) and
thyroid hormone receptor-beta 1 (TRbeta1) signaling pathways.

Favre-Young H(1), Dif F, Roussille F, Demeneix BA, Kelly PA, Edery M, de Luze A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 344, Endocrinologie Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine Necker,
Paris, France.

PRL and T3 are involved in antagonistic regulations during various developmental 
processes in vertebrate species. We have studied cross-talk between transcription
factors activated by these signaling pathways, i.e. signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) and thyroid hormone receptor beta1
(TRbeta1). Liganded TRbeta1 in the presence of its heterodimeric partner,
retinoid X receptor gamma (RXRgamma), inhibited the PRL-induced Stat5a- and
Stat5b-dependent reporter gene expression by up to 60%. This T3-inhibitory effect
studied on Stat5 activity was partly reversed by overexpression of a TRbeta1
dominant negative variant mutated within its nuclear localization signal (TR2A). 
We next showed that TRbeta1 and TR2A in the presence of RXRgamma increased and
decreased, respectively, Stat5 localization into the nucleus regardless of
hormonal stimulation. Thus, our data suggest that TRbeta1 can be associated with 
Stat5 in the cytoplasm and may be involved in Stat5 nuclear translocation. In
PRL-treated cells overexpressing TRbeta1/RXRgamma, both Stat5 and TRbeta1 were
coimmunoprecipitated, indicating physical association of the two transcription
factors. In these cells, addition of T3 with ovine (o)PRL decreased the amounts
of total and tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat5 in the cytoplasm compared with
oPRL-treated cells. In the nucleus, no clear difference was observed on Stat5
DNA-binding after treatment with PRL and T3 vs. PRL alone in TRbeta1/RXRgamma
transfected cells. However, antibodies directed against TRbeta1 lowered Stat5-DNA
binding and addition of the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) relieved
T3 inhibition on Stat5 transcriptional activity. Thus, we postulated that the
negative cross-talk between TR and Stat5 on target genes could involve histone
deacetylase recruitment by liganded TRbeta1.

PMID: 10976919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Sep;14(9):1338-50.

Mutation of the SHP-2 binding site in growth hormone (GH) receptor prolongs
GH-promoted tyrosyl phosphorylation of GH receptor, JAK2, and STAT5B.

Stofega MR(1), Herrington J, Billestrup N, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor 48109, USA.

Binding of GH to GH receptor (GHR) rapidly and transiently activates multiple
signal transduction pathways that contribute to the growth-promoting and
metabolic effects of GH. While the events that initiate GH signal transduction,
such as activation of the Janus tyrosine kinase JAK2, are beginning to be
understood, the signaling events that terminate GH signaling, such as
dephosphorylation of tyrosyl-phosphorylated signaling molecules, are poorly
understood. In this report, we examine the role of the SH2 (Src homology-2)
domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 in GH signaling. We
demonstrate that the SH2 domains of SHP-2 bind directly to tyrosyl phosphorylated
GHR from GH-treated cells. Tyrosine-to-phenylalanine mutation of tyrosine 595 of 
rat GHR greatly diminishes association of the SH2 domains of SHP-2 with GHR, and 
tyrosine-to-phenylalanine mutation of tyrosine 487 partially reduces association 
of the SH2 domains of SHP-2 with GHR. Mutation of tyrosine 595 dramatically
prolongs the duration of tyrosyl phosphorylation of the signal transducer and
activator of transcription STAT5B in response to GH, while mutation of tyrosine
487 moderately prolongs the duration of STAT5B tyrosyl phosphorylation.
Consistent with the effects on STAT5B phosphorylation, tyrosine-to-phenylalanine 
mutation of tyrosine 595 prolongs the duration of tyrosyl phosphorylation of GHR 
and JAK2. These data suggest that tyrosine 595 is a major site of interaction of 
GHR with SHP-2, and that GHR-bound SHP-2 negatively regulates GHR/JAK2 and STAT5B
signaling.

PMID: 10976913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Immunol. 2000 Sep 15;165(6):3239-49.

An intron transcriptional enhancer element regulates IL-4 gene locus
accessibility in mast cells.

Hural JA(1), Kwan M, Henkel G, Hock MB, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Immunology and Molecular Pathogenesis, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The cell type-specific expression of a gene is dependent on developmentally
regulated modifications in chromatin structure that allow accessibility of basal 
and inducible transcription factors. In this study, we demonstrate that a
cis-acting element in the second intron of the murine IL-4 gene has a dual
function in regulating transcription in mast cells as well as chromatin
accessibility of the IL-4 gene locus through its influence on the methylation
state of the gene. Previous studies have shown that mast cell-restricted
transcription factors GATA-1/2 and PU.1 associate with the intron element and
regulate its activity. In this study, we use DNase I footprinting and mutational 
analyses to identify two additional sites that contribute to the element's
ability to enhance transcription. One of these sites associates preferentially
with STAT5a and STAT5b. We also demonstrate that deletion of the element or
mutation of the GATA binding site in the context of a stably integrated IL-4
genomic construct prevents maintenance of a demethylated locus in IL-4-producing 
mast cells. These data indicate that, analogous to Ig and TCR intron regulatory
elements, the intron enhancer has an essential role in maintaining
developmentally regulated demethylation at the IL-4 gene locus. In addition, they
indicate that members of the GATA family of transcription factors likely play an 
important role in these processes.

PMID: 10975840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Exp Med. 2000 Sep 4;192(5):719-28.

Essential role of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a but
not Stat5b for Flt3-dependent signaling.

Zhang S(1), Fukuda S, Lee Y, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Spolski R, Leonard WJ, Broxmeyer
HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

The receptor tyrosine kinase Flt3 plays an important role in proliferation and
survival of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Although some post-receptor 
signaling events of Flt3 have been characterized, the involvement of the Janus
kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak/Stat) pathway in
Flt3 signaling has not been thoroughly evaluated. To this aim, we examined
whether Flt3 activates the Jak/Stat pathway in Baf3/Flt3 cells, a line stably
expressing human Flt3 receptor. Stat5a, but not Stats 1-4, 5b, or 6, was potently
activated by Flt3 ligand (FL) stimulation. Interestingly, FL did not activate any
Jaks. Activation of Stat5a required the kinase activity of Flt3. A selective role
for Stat5a in the proliferative response of primary hematopoietic progenitor
cells to FL was documented, as FL did not act on progenitors from marrows of
Stat5a(-/-) mice, but did stimulate/costimulate proliferation of these cells from
Stat5a(+/+), Stat5b(-/-), and Stat5b(+/+) mice. Thus, Stat5a is essential for at 
least certain effects of FL. Moreover, our data confirm that Stat5a and Stat5b
are not redundant, but rather are at least partially distinctive in their
function.

PMCID: PMC2193267
PMID: 10974037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Histochem J. 2000 May;32(5):265-74.

Nuclear localisation of the transcription factor Stat5b is associated with ovine 
milk protein gene expression during lactation but not during late pregnancy or
forced weaning.

Molenaar AJ(1), Wheeler TT, Grigor MR.

Author information: 
(1)Food Science Platform, AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New
Zealand.

Localisation patterns of the transcription factor Stat5b in the udders from
pregnant, lactating and involuting ewes were compared with the expression
patterns of two major milk protein genes alpha-lactalbumin and alphaS1 casein.
Stat5b was detected in the cytoplasm and nuclei of epithelial cells at all stages
of mammary gland development. A consistent positive relationship between the
nuclear localisation of Stat5b in lactating mammary alveolar epithelial cells,
and the presence of milk protein gene mRNA was apparent during lactation and
early involution. Conversely, there was little evidence of nuclear localisation
of Stat5b in non-lactating mammary alveolar epithelial cells during lactation and
early involution. This supports the observation that during lactation, Stat5b may
play a role in milk protein gene expression. However, during pregnancy and later 
involution, while Stat5b was observed to be present in mammary epithelial cell
nuclei and cytoplasm, no relationship between this and the presence of milk
protein gene mRNA was apparent. This suggests that during late pregnancy and in
later involution, Stat5b may be involved in processes other than initiation of
milk protein gene transcription.

PMID: 10939513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34173-82.

Synergistic action of hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 and 6 on CYP2C12 gene
expression and suppression by growth hormone-activated STAT5b. Proposed model for
female specific expression of CYP2C12 in adult rat liver.

Delesque-Touchard N(1), Park SH, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) exerts sexually dimorphic effects on liver gene transcription
through its sex-dependent temporal pattern of pituitary hormone secretion.
CYP2C12 encodes a female-specific rat liver P450 steroid hydroxylase whose
expression is activated by continuous GH stimulation of hepatocytes. Presently,
we investigated the role of liver-enriched and GH-regulated transcription factors
in the activation of CYP2C12 gene expression in GH-stimulated liver cells.
Transcription of a CYP2C12 promoter-luciferase reporter gene in transfected HepG2
cells was activated 15-40-fold by the liver-enriched hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 3 alpha, HNF3 beta, and HNF6. Synergistic interactions leading to an
approximately 300-fold activation of the promoter by HNF3 beta in combination
with HNF6 were observed. 5'-Deletion analysis localized the HNF6 response to a
single 5'-proximal 96-nucleotide segment. By contrast, the stimulatory effects of
HNF3 alpha and HNF3 beta were attributable to five distinct regions within the
1.6-kilobase CYP2C12 proximal promoter. GH activation of the signal transducer
and transcriptional activator STAT5b, which proceeds efficiently in male but not 
female rat liver, inhibited CYP2C12 promoter activation by HNF3 beta and HNF6,
despite the absence of a classical STAT5-binding site. The female-specific
pattern of CYP2C12 expression is thus proposed to reflect the positive
synergistic action in female liver of liver-enriched and GH-regulated
transcription factors, such as HNF3 beta and HNF6, coupled with a dominant
inhibitory effect of GH-activated STAT5b that is manifest in males.

PMID: 10931833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Lab Invest. 2000 Jul;80(7):993-1006.

Epithelial defect in prostates of Stat5a-null mice.

Nevalainen MT(1), Ahonen TJ, Yamashita H, Chandrashekar V, Bartke A, Grimley PM, 
Robinson GW, Hennighausen L, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
and National Institutes of Diabetes and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The transcription factor Stat5a critically mediates prolactin (PRL)-induced
mammary gland development and lactogenesis. PRL also stimulates growth and
differentiation of prostate tissue. Specifically, hyperprolactinemia gives rise
to prostate hyperplasia, and prostate size is reduced in PRL-deficient mice. We
therefore investigated the importance of Stat5a for prostate development and
function by examining Stat5a-null mice. The absence of Stat5a in mice was
associated with a distinct prostate morphology characterized by an increased
prevalence of local disorganization within acinar epithelium of ventral
prostates. Affected acini were typically filled with desquamated, granular
epithelial cells that had become embedded in dense, coagulated secretory
material. These features were reminiscent of acinar cyst formation and
degeneration frequently observed in human benign prostate hyperplasia, however,
cystic changes in prostate acini of Stat5a-deficient mice were not associated
with increased prostate size or morphologic hallmarks of epithelial hyperplasia. 
Instead, immunohistochemistry of the prostate-specific secretory marker,
probasin, suggested that hypersecretory function of the epithelium could underlie
local congestion and cyst formation in prostates of Stat5a-null mice. Serum
testosterone and PRL levels were normal in Stat5a knockout mice, but prostate PRL
receptor expression was reduced as determined by immunohistochemistry. Expression
levels or activation states of other PRL signal transduction proteins, including 
Stat5b, Stat3, Stat1, ERK1, and ERK2 were not altered. The present study offers
the first evidence for a direct role of Stat5a in the maintenance of normal
tissue architecture and function of the mouse prostate.

PMID: 10908145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncogene. 2000 May 15;19(21):2566-76.

The role of Stat5a and Stat5b in signaling by IL-2 family cytokines.

Lin JX(1), Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 10/Rm. 7N252, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda,
Maryland MD 20892-1674, USA.

The activation of Stat5 proteins (Stat5a and Stat5b) is one of the earliest
signaling events mediated by IL-2 family cytokines, allowing the rapid delivery
of signals from the membrane to the nucleus. Among STAT family proteins, Stat5a
and Stat5b are the two most closely related STAT proteins. Together with other
transcription factors and co-factors, they regulate the expression of the target 
genes in a cytokine-specific fashion. In addition to their activation by
cytokines, activities of Stat5a and Stat5b, as well as other STAT proteins, are
negatively controlled by CIS/SOCS/SSI family proteins. The outcome of Stat5
activation in regulating expression of target genes varies, depending upon the
complexity of the promoter region of target genes and the other signaling
pathways that are activated by each cytokine as well. Here, we mainly focus on
the IL2-/IL-2 receptor system, as it is one of the best-studied systems that
depend on Stat5-mediated signals. We will summarize what we have learned about
the molecular mechanisms of how Stat5 is activated by IL-2 family cytokines from 
in vitro biochemical studies as well as the role that is played by Stat5 in each 
of the cytokine signaling pathways from in vivo gene-targeting analyses. Oncogene
(2000).

PMID: 10851055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Shock. 2000 Jun;13(6):435-40.

Interleukin-6 signal transduction in human intestinal epithelial cells.

Pratt SL(1), Ogle CK, Mao JX, Zhao W, Lovell G, Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Ohio 45267-0576, USA.

The gut is an important source of inflammatory cytokines, but there is scant
information on the mechanisms of cytokine action in gut epithelium. We
hypothesized that in human Caco-2 cells, IL-6 acts directly through stimulation
of Stat phosphorylation and that bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) causes Stat
activation indirectly because of its ability to cause the autocrine secretion and
action of interleukin (IL)-6. Stat1, Stat5a, and Stat5b, but not Stat3, were
detected in Caco-2 cells. DNA-binding activity corresponding to activated Stat5
was stimulated in a biphasic manner by IL-6, with a transient early phase,
followed by sustained activation between 8 and 48 h. LPS also stimulated
Stat5-like binding, but there was no early phase of activation. Functional tests 
of Stat5 activation showed that IL-6 stimulated Stat5-dependent reporter gene
transcription but had no effect on Stat1-dependent transcription. LPS did not
stimulate Stat-dependent transcription, nor did it alter the transcriptional
response to IL-6. Tyrosine phosphorylation of both Stat5a and Stat5b was induced 
by IL-6. We infer from these data that IL-6 acts on intestinal epithelia through 
a Stat5-mediated transcriptional mechanism, whereas LPS does not induce gene
expression through autocrine activation of enterocyte Stat signaling. These data 
provide a basis for testing the in vivo regulation of gut signaling and the
interaction of gut reticuloendothelial cells with epithelial signal transduction.

PMID: 10847629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):28222-9.

Negative regulation of growth hormone receptor/JAK2 signaling by signal
regulatory protein alpha.

Stofega MR(1), Argetsinger LS, Wang H, Ullrich A, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Department of Physiology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Signal regulatory proteins (SIRPs) are receptor-like transmembrane proteins, the 
majority of which contain a cytoplasmic proline-rich region and four cytoplasmic 
tyrosines that, when phosphorylated, bind SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine 
phosphatases (SHP). We demonstrated previously that growth hormone (GH) induces
tyrosyl phosphorylation of SIRPalpha and association of SIRPalpha with SHP-2. The
GH-activated tyrosine kinase JAK2 associates with and tyrosyl-phosphorylates
SIRPalpha1. Here we show that JAK2-SIRPalpha1 association does not require
phosphotyrosines in SIRPalpha1 or JAK2 or the proline-rich region of SIRPalpha1. 
However, when the C-terminal 30 amino acids of SIRPalpha1 containing the
proline-rich region and tyrosine 495 are deleted, tyrosyl phosphorylation of
SIRPalpha1 by JAK2 and association of SHP-2 with SIRPalpha1 are reduced.
GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of JAK2 is reduced when wild-type SIRPalpha1
compared with SIRPalpha1 lacking the four cytoplasmic tyrosines (SIRP 4YF) is
expressed in cells, suggesting that SIRPalpha1 negatively regulates GHR/JAK2
signaling. Consistent with reduced JAK2 activity, overexpression of wild-type
SIRPalpha1 but not SIRP 4YF reduces GH-induced phosphorylation of ERKs 1 and 2,
STAT3, and STAT5B. These results suggest that SIRPalpha1 is a negative regulator 
of GH signaling and that the ability of SIRPalpha1 mutants to negatively regulate
GHR-JAK2 signaling correlates with their ability to bind SHP-2.

PMID: 10842184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Mol Evol. 2000 Jun;50(6):550-61.

Molecular characterization of STAT5A- and STAT5B-encoding genes reveals extended 
intragenic sequence homogeneity in cattle and mouse and different degrees of
divergent evolution of various domains.

Seyfert HM(1), Pitra C, Meyer L, Brunner RM, Wheeler TT, Molenaar A, McCracken
JY, Herrmann J, Thiesen HJ, Schwerin M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for the Biology of Farm Animals, Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee-2,
18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

The STAT transcription factors form a family of signal transducers and activators
of transcription. We sequenced the bovine STAT5B cDNA and both STAT5-encoding
genes, STAT5A and STAT5B, representing the first complete description of any
STAT5-encoding gene. DNA fiber FISH hybridization revealed that the genes reside 
only 40 kbp apart on BTA19. Both genes are segmented into 19 exons and all but
two of the homologous exons are of equal size. The genes harbor a central block
of nearly identical DNA sequence (97.5% sequence identity over 3373 bp), spanning
from intron 5 to intron 9. Isolation and sequencing of the homologous segments
from mouse revealed the same unusually high degree of intronic sequence
conservation in these segments of the murine STAT5-encoding genes. However, the
respective sequences are completely divergent between the two species. A
comparison of the inter- and intragenic cDNA sequence preservation at
nonsynonymous sites reveals that the DNA-binding domain is under the strongest
selection pressure for both intergenic and factor-specific intragenic sequence
preservation. The so-called "SH3" segment of the linker domain, in contrast,
shows species-specific sequence identity in all but one amino acid residues in
both factors, in cattle, human, and mouse. This indicates that the same
species-specific selection pressure occurs on the linker domain from both
factors, STAT5A and STAT5B. Thus, the comparison of evolutionary selection
pressures resting on various domains suggests that the DNA-binding domain might
contribute to differential DNA binding of STAT5A and STAT5B factors, while both
might interact equally well with other cellular factors through a segment of the 
linker domain.

PMID: 10835485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 26;275(21):15985-91.

SOCS-3 is an insulin-induced negative regulator of insulin signaling.

Emanuelli B(1), Peraldi P, Filloux C, Sawka-Verhelle D, Hilton D, Van Obberghen
E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U145, IFR-50, Faculté de Médecine, 06107 Nice Cédex 2, France.

The SOCS proteins are induced by several cytokines and are involved in negative
feedback loops. Here we demonstrate that in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, insulin, a hormone
whose receptor does not belong to the cytokine receptor family, induces SOCS-3
expression but not CIS or SOCS-2. Using transfection of COS-7 cells, we show that
insulin induction of SOCS-3 is enhanced upon Stat5B expression. Moreover, Stat5B 
from insulin-stimulated cells binds directly to a Stat element present in the
SOCS-3 promoter. Once induced, SOCS-3 inhibits insulin activation of Stat5B
without modifying the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase activity. Two pieces of
evidence suggest that this negative regulation likely results from competition
between SOCS-3 and Stat5B binding to the same insulin receptor motif. First,
using a yeast two-hybrid system, we show that SOCS-3 binds to the insulin
receptor at phosphotyrosine 960, which is precisely where Stat5B binds. Second,
using confocal microscopy, we show that insulin induces translocation of SOCS-3
from an intracellular compartment to the cell membrane, leading to colocalization
of SOCS-3 with the insulin receptor. This colocalization is dependent upon
phosphorylation of insulin receptor tyrosine 960. Indeed, in cells expressing an 
insulin receptor mutant in which tyrosine 960 has been mutated to phenylalanine, 
insulin does not modify the cellular localization of SOCS-3. We have thus
revealed an insulin target gene of which the expression is potentiated upon
Stat5B activation. By inhibiting insulin-stimulated Stat5B, SOCS-3 appears to
function as a negative regulator of insulin signaling.

PMID: 10821852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2000 Sep;11(3):199-207.

STAT family of transcription factors in cytokine-mediated biological responses.

Takeda K(1), Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, and
CREST of Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Osaka University, 3-1
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan. ktakeda@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) family, consisting of
seven members, is involved in cytokine signal transduction. Biological roles of
each STAT family protein have now been elucidated through studies of gene
targeted mice. Stat1 knockout mice are defective in interferon-mediated
functions. Stat4 and Stat6 knockout mice show defective responses to IL-12 and
IL-4, respectively. Analyses of Stat5a and Stat5b knockout mice reveal important 
roles in prolactin-mediated mammary gland development and growth hormone-mediated
induction of sexual dimorphism, respectively. Conditional knockout study of Stat3
demonstrates its critical roles in cytokine-mediated functions in several
tissues, including T cells, macrophages, skin, and mammary gland.

PMID: 10817963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):13126-33.

SH2-B is required for growth hormone-induced actin reorganization.

Herrington J(1), Diakonova M, Rui L, Gunter DR, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

The Src homology-2 (SH2) domain-containing protein SH2-Bbeta is a substrate of
the growth hormone (GH) receptor-associated tyrosine kinase JAK2. Here we tested 
whether SH2-Bbeta is involved in GH regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Based
on cell fractionation and confocal microscopy, we find SH2-Bbeta present at the
plasma membrane and in the cytosol. SH2-Bbeta colocalized with filamentous actin 
in GH and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced membrane ruffles. To test
if SH2-Bbeta is required for actin reorganization, we transiently overexpressed
wild-type or mutant SH2-Bbeta in 3T3-F442A cells and assayed for GH- and
PDGF-induced membrane ruffling and fluid phase pinocytosis. Overexpression of
wild-type SH2-Bbeta enhanced ruffling and pinocytosis produced by submaximal GH
but not submaximal PDGF. Point mutant SH2-Bbeta (R555E) and truncation mutant
DeltaC555, both lacking a functional SH2 domain, inhibited membrane ruffling and 
pinocytosis induced by GH and PDGF. Mutant DeltaN504, which possesses a
functional SH2 domain and enhances JAK2 kinase activity in overexpression
systems, also inhibited GH-stimulated membrane ruffling. DeltaN504 failed to
inhibit GH-induced nuclear localization of Stat5B, indicating JAK2 is active in
these cells. Taken together, these results show that SH2-Bbeta is required for
GH-induced actin reorganization by a mechanism discrete from the action of
SH2-Bbeta as a stimulator of JAK2 kinase activity.

PMID: 10777618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):3168-77.

Differential binding to and regulation of JAK2 by the SH2 domain and N-terminal
region of SH2-bbeta.

Rui L(1), Gunter DR, Herrington J, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

SH2-Bbeta has been shown to bind via its SH2 (Src homology 2) domain to
tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 and strongly activate JAK2. In this study, we
demonstrate the existence of an additional binding site(s) for JAK2 within the
N-terminal region of SH2-Bbeta (amino acids 1 to 555) and the ability of this
region of SH2-B to inhibit JAK2. Four lines of evidence support the existence of 
this additional binding site(s). In a glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay, 
wild-type SH2-Bbeta and SH2-Bbeta(R555E) with a defective SH2 domain bind to both
tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 from growth hormone (GH)-treated cells and
non-tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 from control cells, whereas the SH2 domain of
SH2-Bbeta binds only to tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 from GH-treated cells.
Similarly, JAK2 is present in alphaSH2-B immunoprecipitates in the absence and
presence of GH, with GH substantially increasing the coprecipitation of JAK2 with
SH2-B. When coexpressed in COS cells, SH2-Bbeta coimmunoprecipitates not only
wild-type, tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 but also kinase-inactive,
non-tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2(K882E), although to a lesser extent. DeltaC555
(amino acids 1 to 555 of SH2-Bbeta) that lacks most of the SH2 domain binds
similarly to wild-type JAK2 and kinase-inactive JAK2(K882E). Experiments using a 
series of N- and C-terminally truncated SH2-Bbeta constructs indicate that the
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain (amino acids 269 to 410) and amino acids 410 to
555 are necessary for maximal binding of SH2-Bbeta to inactive JAK2, but neither 
region alone is sufficient for maximal binding. The SH2 domain of SH2-Bbeta is
necessary and sufficient for the stimulatory effect of SH2-Bbeta on JAK2 and
JAK2-mediated tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5B. In contrast, DeltaC555 lacking
the SH2 domain, and to a lesser extent the PH domain alone, inhibits JAK2.
DeltaC555 also blocks JAK2-mediated tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5B in COS
cells and GH-stimulated nuclear accumulation of Stat5B in 3T3-F442A cells. These 
data indicate that in addition to the SH2 domain, SH2-Bbeta has one or more
lower-affinity binding sites for JAK2 within amino acids 269 to 555. The
interaction via this site(s) in SH2-B with inactive JAK2 seems likely to increase
the local concentration of SH2-Bbeta around JAK2, thereby facilitating binding of
the SH2 domain to ligand-activated JAK2. This would result in a more rapid and
robust cellular response to hormones and cytokines that activate JAK2. This
interaction between inactive JAK2 and SH2-B may also help prevent abnormal
activation of JAK2.

PMCID: PMC85611
PMID: 10757801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2000 Apr;32(4):599-610.

Epidermal growth factor induces hypertrophic responses and Stat5 activation in
rat ventricular cardiomyocytes.

Rebsamen MC(1), Arrighi JF, Juge-Aubry CE, Vallotton MB, Lang U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Division of Immunology and Allergy,
Geneva 14, CH-1211, Switzerland.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) was tested for its ability to promote hypertrophic 
responses in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes. Exposure of these cells to 
100 n m EGF for 2-18 h resulted in a time-dependent increase in protein synthesis
reaching 174+/-18% of control values at 18 h. After 30 min stimulation, the mRNA 
levels of c-jun and c-fos were also increased 20- and 36-fold, respectively. We
also investigated EGF-induced activation of Stat (signal transducers and
activators of transcription) proteins as well as the possible interactions of
this signaling pathway with the p38 and p42/44 MAP kinases cascades. EGF did not 
activate Stat1 and Stat3, but did induce a rapid and transient activation of
Stat5, which corresponded mainly to Stat5b DNA-binding. The EGF-promoted Stat5
DNA-binding was decreased in a concentration-dependent manner by the p38 MAPK
inhibitor SB 203580 (IC(50)=1.2 microm), whereas it was tripled by 50 micro m PD 
98059, an inhibitor of the p42/44 MAPK cascade. This is the first demonstration
that EGF increases protein synthesis and early response gene expression in
cardiomyocytes, responses considered as markers of hypertrophy in these cells.
The results further show that EGF activates Stat5, that this response requires
p38 MAPK stimulation, and it is negatively modulated by p42/44 MAPK.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10756117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Novartis Found Symp. 2000;227:61-74; discussion 75-81.

Growth hormone pulse-activated STAT5 signalling: a unique regulatory mechanism
governing sexual dimorphism of liver gene expression.

Waxman DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, MA 02215, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) exerts sexually dimorphic effects on liver gene transcription
that are regulated by the temporal pattern of pituitary GH release; this release 
is intermittent in male rats and nearly continuous in females. Comparisons of
liver nuclear protein tyrosine phosphorylation in male and female rats have led
to the discovery that the liver transcription factor STAT5b is tyrosine
phosphorylated in male but not female rats in response to GH pulses. Intermittent
plasma GH pulses trigger a rapid and repeated tyrosine phosphorylation and
nuclear translocation of liver STAT5b in intact male rats, while the more
continuous pattern of GH exposure down-regulates the STAT5b signalling pathway in
female rat liver. The central importance of STAT5b for the physiological effects 
of GH pulses has been verified using a mouse gene knockout model. STAT5b gene
disruption leads to a major loss of multiple sexually differentiated responses
associated with the sexually dimorphic pattern of pituitary GH secretion.
Male-characteristic body growth rates and male-specific liver gene expression are
decreased to wild-type female levels in STAT5b-/- males, while female-predominant
liver gene products are increased in males to near female levels. STAT5b is thus 
a liver-expressed, latent cytoplasmic transcription factor that undergoes
repeated tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation in response to
intermittent plasma GH stimulation, and is a key intracellular mediator of the
stimulatory effects of GH pulses on male-specific liver gene transcription. Other
studies indicate, however, that STAT5a and STAT5b are both required for
constitutive expression in female, but not male liver, of certain GH-regulated
CYP enzymes. GH activation of both STAT5 proteins, which in turn form distinct
homodimeric and heterodimeric DNA-binding complexes, is thus an important
determinant of the sex-dependent and gene-specific effects that GH has on the
liver.

PMID: 10752065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1999 Jun;10(2):131-57.

Stat5a and Stat5b: fraternal twins of signal transduction and transcriptional
activation.

Grimley PM(1), Dong F, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20854, USA.

Stat5a and Stat5b are discretely encoded transcription factors that mediate
signals for a broad spectrum of cytokines. Their activation is often an integral 
component of redundant cytokine signal cascades involving complex cross-talk and 
pleiotropic gene regulation by Stat5 has been implicated in cellular functions of
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis with relevance to processes of
hematopoiesis and immunoregulation, reproduction, and lipid metabolism. Although 
Stat5a and Stat5b show peptide sequence similarities of > 90%, targeted gene
disruptions in mice yield distinctive phenotypes. Prolactin-directed mammary
gland maturation fails without functional Stat5a, while disruption of Stat5b in
males mitigates growth hormone effects on hepatic function and body mass. The
molecular basis for this biologic dichotomy is probably multifaceted. Limited
structural dissimilarities between the Stat5a and Stat5b transactivation domains,
or subtle differences in the DNA-binding affinities of Stat5 dimer pairs
undoubtedly influence gene regulation, but cell-dependent asymmetries in
availability of phosphorylated Stat5 can be an underlying factor. Differences in 
serine phosphorylation(s) of Stat5a and Stat5b, or Stat5 associations with
adaptor proteins or co-transcription factors are other potential sources of
functional disparity and the signal amplitude, frequency or duration also can be 
significant. In addition to Stat5 signal attenuation by phosphatase actions or
classical feedback inhibition, truncated forms of Stat5 lacking in
transactivation capacity may compete upstream for activation and diminish access 
of full length molecules to DNA binding sites.

PMID: 10743504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Hematol. 2000 Jan;71(1):46-54.

Constitutively active STAT5A and STAT5B in vitro and in vivo: mutation of STAT5
is not a frequent cause of leukemogenesis.

Yamada K(1), Ariyoshi K, Onishi M, Miyajima A, Hayakawa F, Towatari M, Saito H,
Oka Y, Asano S, Nosaka T, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Factors, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We recently identified several constitutively active forms of signal transducers 
and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5) using polymerase chain reaction-driven 
random mutagenesis followed by retrovirus-mediated expression screening. All
constitutively active STAT5 showed constitutive phosphorylation on their tyrosine
residues and induced factor-independent growth in a mouse interleukin-3-dependent
cell line, Ba/F3. Sequence analysis of these active STAT5 revealed two important 
mutations: S710F and N642H. The N642H mutation localized in the SH2 domain was
able to induce autonomous growth of Ba/F3 cells by itself, whereas S710F in the
effector domain was able to induce autonomous growth of Ba/F3 cells in concert
with a second mutation including H298R and E150G. Recently, constitutive
activation of STAT5 has been reported in patients' leukemic cells and is
implicated in leukemogenesis. We attempted to clarify whether leukemic cells
harbored activating mutations primarily in STAT5 proteins, and analyzed the
sequence of STAT5 derived from 49 leukemic patients. No mutations were found,
however, in the regions surrounding S710 and N642 of STAT5A and corresponding
residues of STAT5B. We also cloned full-length cDNAs for STAT5s from three
patients whose leukemic cells exhibited constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of 
the STAT5 protein and expressed the derived STAT5 proteins in Ba/F3 cells.
However, none of these clones exhibited constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation or 
gave rise to FI proliferation of Ba/F3 cells. These results indicate that
constitutive activation of STAT5 is a secondary event in most leukemias.

PMID: 10729993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Exp Hematol. 2000 Mar;28(3):294-304.

Thrombopoietin induces the generation of distinct Stat1, Stat3, Stat5a and Stat5b
homo- and heterodimeric complexes with different kinetics in human platelets.

Schulze H(1), Ballmaier M, Welte K, Germeshausen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Medical School Hannover,
Hannover, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the pivotal regulator of thrombocytopoiesis
and megakaryocytopoiesis, and binding to its receptor c-Mpl leads to activation
of at least two different signaling pathways: the Jak-Stat pathway and the
Ras-MAPK pathway. Our aim was to elucidate which Stat-complexes are formed in TPO
signal transduction in human blood platelets.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) in
order to analyze the formation of distinct Stat complexes on two distinct
oligonucleotide probes. Furthermore, we used immunoprecipitation and Western
blotting of protein lysates from TPO-stimulated platelets.
RESULTS: We found homodimers of Stat1alpha, Stat3, Stat5a, and Stat5b, as well as
heterodimers of Stat1/Stat3 and Stat5a/Stat5b, but no Stat1/Stat5 or Stat3/Stat5 
heterodimers are formed in platelets in response to TPO. Stat5 complexes bound to
labeled DNA with a fast kinetic followed by Stat3 and Stat1. The adapter protein 
CrkL is present in DNA-bound Stat5 complexes and predominantly bound to Stat5b.
The kinase ERK2 is also tyrosine phosphorylated after TPO-stimulation of
platelets but this activation does not modulate the phosphorylation of the serine
residues in the PXSP motif present in Stat1 and Stat3.
CONCLUSION: Our findings thus emphasize the differential regulation of Stat1,
Stat3, Stat5a, and Stat5b in platelets and may be an appropriate model of c-Mpl
signaling in mega-karyopoiesis.

PMID: 10720694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Blood. 2000 Mar 15;95(6):2118-25.

STAT5 activation contributes to growth and viability in Bcr/Abl-transformed
cells.

Sillaber C(1), Gesbert F, Frank DA, Sattler M, Griffin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

The transcription factor STAT5 is constitutively tyrosine phosphorylated and
activated after transformation of hematopoietic cells by p210Bcr/Abl. A truncated
form of STAT5B (triangle upSTAT5; aa, 1-683) that lacks tyrosine 699 and the
transcriptional activation domain was introduced into Ba/F3p210 cells under the
control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter. Treatment of these cells with
doxycycline, a tetracycline analogue, induced expression of triangle upSTAT5 and 
inhibited STAT5-dependent transcription. triangle upSTAT5 coprecipitated with
STAT5 and decreased Bcr/Abl-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of endogenous
STAT5. Induction of triangle upSTAT5 inhibited growth of Ba/F3p210 cells (26%-52%
of control levels at 4 days) but did not cause cell-cycle arrest. triangle
upSTAT5 reduced viability of Ba/F3p210 cells and increased sensitivity of the
cells to the cytotoxic drugs hydroxyurea and cytarabine. These results indicate
that high-level expression of triangle upSTAT5, as achieved here by using a
tetracycline-inducible promoter, inhibits STAT5 activity, reduces the growth rate
of Ba/F3p210 cells by inhibiting viability, and results in increased sensitivity 
to chemotherapeutic drugs. It is therefore likely that STAT5 activation plays a
role in the transformation of hematopoietic cell lines by p210Bcr/Abl. (Blood.
2000;95:2118-2125)

PMID: 10706883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Blood. 2000 Mar 15;95(6):2076-83.

Transforming properties of chimeric TEL-JAK proteins in Ba/F3 cells.

Lacronique V(1), Boureux A, Monni R, Dumon S, Mauchauffé M, Mayeux P, Gouilleux
F, Berger R, Gisselbrecht S, Ghysdael J, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)U434 INSERM, Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH), Paris, France.

The involvement of the cytokine signaling pathway in oncogenesis has long been
postulated. Recently, rearrangements of the gene encoding the tyrosine Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2) have been reported in human leukemias indicating a direct
JAK-signal transduction and activator of transcription (STAT)-mediated leukemic
process. The leukemia-associated TEL-JAK2 fusion protein is formed by the
oligomerization domain of the translocated ets leukemia (TEL) protein fused to
the catalytic domain of JAK2. TEL-mediated oligomerization results in a
constitutive tyrosine kinase activity that, in turn, is able to confer growth
factor independence to the murine hematopoietic interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent
Ba/F3 cell line. Results of the present study indicate that fusion proteins
containing the oligomerization domain of TEL and the tyrosine kinase domains of
Jak1, Jak2, JAK3, or TYK2 share similar properties and are able to efficiently
substitute for the survival and mitogenic signals controlled by IL-3, without
concomitant activation of the IL-3 receptor. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrated Stat5 as the only activated Stat factor in TEL-Jak2- and
TEL-Jak1-expressing cells, whereas other Stats, namely Stat1 and Stat3, could be 
detected in TEL-JAK3-, TEL-TYK2-, and also in TEL-ABL-expressing Ba/F3 cells.
High levels of expression of the Stat5-target genes pim-1, osm, and Cis were
observed in all the cytokine-independent cell lines. Furthermore, the expression 
of a dominant negative form of Stat5A markedly interfered with the growth factor 
independence process mediated by TEL-Jak2 in Ba/F3 cells. Because the BCR-ABL and
TEL-PDGFbetaR oncoproteins also activate Stat5, activation of this factor should 
be a crucial step in activated tyrosine kinase-mediated leukemogenesis. (Blood.
2000;95:2076-2083)

PMID: 10706877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Blood. 2000 Feb 15;95(4):1370-7.

Both stat5a and stat5b are required for antigen-induced eosinophil and T-cell
recruitment into the tissue.

Kagami Si(1), Nakajima H, Kumano K, Suzuki K, Suto A, Imada K, Davey HW, Saito Y,
Takatsu K, Leonard WJ, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Chiba, Japan.

Antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment into the airways of sensitized mice is
mediated by CD4(+) T cells and their cytokines, especially IL-5. In this study,
we found that the antigen-induced airway eosinophilia was diminished in
Stat5a-deficient (Stat5a(-/-)) mice and Stat5b-deficient (Stat5b(-/-)) mice. We
also found that antigen-induced CD4(+) T-cell infiltration and IL-5 production in
the airways were diminished in Stat5a(-/- )mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice. Moreover,
antigen-induced proliferation of splenocytes was diminished in Stat5a(-/- )mice
and Stat5b(-/-) mice, suggesting that the generation of antigen-primed T cells
may be compromised in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice and this defect may
account for the diminished antigen-induced T-cell infiltration into the airways. 
Interestingly, IL-4 and IL-5 production from anti-CD3-stimulated splenocytes was 
diminished in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice. However, antigen-specific
IgE and IgG1 production was diminished in Stat5a(-/-) mice but not in Stat5b(-/-)
mice, whereas antigen-specific IgG2a production was increased in Stat5a(-/-)
mice, suggesting the enhanced Th1 responses in Stat5a(-/-) mice. Finally, we
found that eosinophilopoiesis induced by the administration of recombinant IL-5
was also diminished in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice. Together, these
results indicate that both Stat5a and Stat5b are essential for induction of
antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment into the airways and that the defects in
antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment in Stat5a(-/-) mice and Stat5b(-/-) mice
result from both impaired IL-5 production in the airways and diminished IL-5
responsiveness of eosinophils. (Blood. 2000;95:1370-1377)

PMID: 10666213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Genes Dev. 2000 Jan 15;14(2):232-44.

Antiapoptotic activity of Stat5 required during terminal stages of myeloid
differentiation.

Kieslinger M(1), Woldman I, Moriggl R, Hofmann J, Marine JC, Ihle JN, Beug H,
Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Stat5 is activated by multiple receptors of hematopoietic cytokines. To study its
role during hematopoiesis, we have generated primary chicken myeloblasts
expressing different dominant-negative (dn) alleles of Stat5. This caused a
striking inability to generate mature cells, due to massive apoptosis during
differentiation. Bcl-2 was able to rescue differentiating cells expressing
dnStat5 from apoptosis, suggesting that during cytokine-dependent differentiation
the main function of the protein is to ensure cell survival. Our findings with
dnStat5-expressing chicken myeloblasts were confirmed with primary hematopoietic 
cells from Stat5a/Stat5b-deficient mice. Bone marrow cells from these animals
displayed a strong increase in apoptotic cell death during GM-CSF-dependent
functional maturation in vitro. The antiapoptotic protein Bcl-x was induced by
GM-CSF and IL-3 in a Stat5-dependent fashion. Ectopic expression of Bcl-x rescued
Stat5-deficient bone marrow cells from apoptosis, indicating that Stat5 promotes 
the survival of myeloid progenitor cells through its ability to induce
transcription of the bcl-x gene. Finally, the recruitment of myeloid cells to
inflammatory sites was found strongly impeded in Stat5-deficient mice. Taken
together, our findings suggest that Stat5 may promote cytokine-dependent survival
and proliferation of differentiating myeloid progenitor cells in stress or
pathological situations, such as inflammation.

PMCID: PMC316353
PMID: 10652277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Dec 20;158(1-2):111-6.

STAT5b mediates the GH-induced expression of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 mRNA in the liver.

Davey HW(1), McLachlan MJ, Wilkins RJ, Hilton DJ, Adams TE.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, AgResearch, Ruakura, Hamilton, New Zealand.
daveyh@agresearch.cri.nz

Suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS) proteins act as part of a classical
negative feedback loop regulating cytokine signal transduction. Expression of
SOCS proteins is induced in response to cytokines and down-regulates the cytokine
signal by inhibiting the JAK/STAT pathway. Growth hormone (GH) was previously
shown to induce strong transient expression of SOCS-3 and to a lesser extent CIS,
SOCS-1 and SOCS-2 in mouse liver (Adams, T.E., Hansen, J.A., Starr, R., Nicola,
N.A., Hilton, D.J., Billestrup, N., 1998. Growth hormone preferentially induces
the rapid, transient expression of SOCS-3, a novel inhibitor of cytokine receptor
signalling. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 1285-1287.). In this work we have compared
GH-induced SOCS gene expression in wild-type and STAT5b-deficient mice, and show 
that STAT5b is required for the induction of SOCS-2 and SOCS-3 in liver. In
contrast, the absence of STAT5b has no effect on the GH-induced expression of CIS
and SOCS-2 mRNA in the mammary gland. Suprisingly, there is no activation of
SOCS-3 expression in mammary glands of wild-type and STAT5b mutant mice following
GH administration. These results highlight both tissue- and factor-specific
differences in the regulation of SOCS gene expression by STAT5a/b.

PMID: 10630411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Jan;14(1):114-23.

Stat5b inhibits NFkappaB-mediated signaling.

Luo G(1), Yu-Lee L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) are latent
transcription factors that participate in cytokine signaling by regulating the
expression of early response genes. Our previous studies showed that Stat5
functions not only as a transcriptional activator but also as a transcriptional
inhibitor, depending on the target promoter. This report further investigates the
mechanism of Stat5b-mediated inhibition and demonstrates that PRL-inducible
Stat5b inhibits nuclear factorkappaB (NFkappaB) signaling to both the interferon 
regulatory factor-1 promoter and to the thymidine kinase promoter containing
multimerized NFkappaB elements (NFkappaB-TK). Further, PRL-inducible Stat5b
inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha signaling presumably by inhibiting
endogenous NFkappaB. This Stat5b-mediated inhibitory effect on NFkappaB signaling
is independent of Stat5b-DNA interactions but requires the carboxyl terminus of
Stat5b as well as Stat5b nuclear translocation and/or accumulation, suggesting
that Stat5b is competing for a nuclear factor(s) necessary for NFkappaB-mediated 
activation of target promoters. Increasing concentrations of the coactivator
p300/CBP reverses Stat5b inhibition at both the interferon-regulatory factor-1
and NFkappaB-TK promoters, suggesting that Stat5b may be squelching limiting
coactivators via protein-protein interactions as one mechanism of promoter
inhibition. These results further substantiate our observation that Stat factors 
can function as transcriptional inhibitors. Our studies reveal cross-talk between
the Stat5b and NFkappaB signal transduction pathways and suggest that
Stat5b-mediated inhibition of target promoters occurs at the level of
protein-protein interactions and involves competition for limiting coactivators.

PMID: 10628751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 31;464(3):159-63.

Insulin selectively activates STAT5b, but not STAT5a, via a JAK2-independent
signalling pathway in Kym-1 rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Storz P(1), Döppler H, Pfizenmaier K, Müller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Stuttgart, Allmandring 31, 70569,
Stuttgart, Germany. peter.storz@po.uni-stuttgart.de

The STAT multigene family of transcriptional regulators conveys signals from
several cytokines and growth factors upon phosphorylation by janus kinases (JAK).
Activation of STAT5 is typically mediated by JAK2, but more recent data indicate 
a direct activation by the insulin receptor kinase. STAT5 exists in two closely
homologous isoforms, STAT5a and b. We here describe the selective tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5b in Kym-1 cells in response to insulin. Blocking insulin
signalling by HNMPA-(AM)(3), an insulin receptor kinase inhibitor, resulted in
the loss of insulin-induced STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation, whereas the
inhibition of JAK2 by the JAK selective inhibitor tyrphostin AG490 had no effect.
By contrast, in the same cells, IFNgamma-induced STAT5b activation was
JAK2-dependent, indicating that this signal pathway is functional in Kym-1 cells.
We conclude from this rhabdomyosarcoma model that STAT5b, but not STAT5a is a
direct target of the insulin receptor kinase.

PMID: 10618497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Jan;30(1):59-68.

Association of STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5 proteins with the IL-2 receptor involves
different subdomains of the IL-2 receptor beta chain.

Delespine-Carmagnat M(1), Bouvier G, Bertoglio J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 461, Faculté de Pharmacie Paris-XI, Paris, France.

Upon IL-2 stimulation of T lymphocytes, the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) becomes
phosphorylated on specific tyrosine residues which serve as docking sites for
proteins containing SH2 or phosphotyrosine binding domains. To study the
interaction of the IL-2Rbeta chain with Shc and STAT proteins, subdomains of the 
IL-2Rbeta chain were expressed as tyrosine-phosphorylated glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins and used to pull-down interacting proteins from Kit
225 cell lysates. These experiments provide direct biochemical evidence that
binding to the IL-2R of the adaptor protein Shc requires phosphorylation of
Tyr-338 in the IL-2Rbeta acidic subdomain. In addition, we report that STAT
proteins that are activated by IL-2, i.e. STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5, indeed
associate with the IL-2Rbeta chain. Both the A and B isoforms of STAT5 were found
to associate with Tyr-510 of the IL-2Rbeta C-terminal region, depending on its
phosphorylation. In contrast, STAT1 and STAT3 associated with the IL-2Rbeta chain
through its acidic subdomain. These results indicate that the interaction between
IL-2Rbeta and STAT1 or 3 does not require either phosphorylation of the receptor 
or even the presence of tyrosine residues of IL-2Rbeta. Thus, the IL-2R recruits 
STAT proteins through different modes of interaction.

PMID: 10602027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Dec;13(12):2049-64.

Differentiation-dependent prolactin responsiveness and stat (signal transducers
and activators of transcription) signaling in rat ovarian cells.

Russell DL(1), Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA. rrylr@bcm.tmc.edu

PRL activates an important cytokine signaling cascade that is obligatory for
maintaining luteal cell function in the rat ovary. To determine when specific
components of this cascade are expressed and can be activated by PRL, we analyzed
the expression of receptor subtypes (short, PRL-R(s), and long, PRL-R(L)), the
presence and kinetics of Stat (signal transducer and activator of transcription) 
activation using the PRL-response element (PRL-RE) of the alpha2M
(alpha2-macroglobulin) gene, and the content and hormonal regulation of three
specific modulators of cytokine signaling; the tyrosine phosphatases (SHP-1 and
SHP-2), and the protein inhibitor of activated Stat3 (PIAS-3). These components
were analyzed in differentiating granulosa/ luteal cells of hypophysectomized (H)
rats and in corpora lutea of pregnant rats. Levels of PRL-R mRNAs increased as
granulosa cells differentiated and reached maximal levels in luteal cells of
pregnant rats where levels of PRL-R(s) approached those of PRL-R(L). The relative
concentrations shifted from a 27-fold excess of PRL-R(L) in preovulatory
granulosa cells to a 3.7-fold difference in luteal cells during midgestation.
Despite the increased PRL-R(L) expression in differentiated granulosa cells, PRL 
did not stimulate detectable activation of Stats. Rather PRL activation of Stat5,
principally Stat5b, occurred in association with luteinization. In contrast,
granulosa cells of untreated immature and H rats contained a high level of DNA
binding activity, which was shown to be comprised entirely of activated,
phosphorylated Stat3. Treatment with estrogen and FSH reduced the amount of
phosphorylated Stat3 and abolished its ability to bind DNA, an effect temporally 
related to increased PIAS-3. Expression of SHP-1 (but not SHP-2) was also
hormonally regulated; SHP-1 mRNA and protein were high in granulosa cells of H
rats, decreased by estrogen and FSH, and subsequently increased dramatically with
luteinization. Of particular note, SHP-1 was localized in cytoplasm of granulosa 
cells in atretic follicles but was distinctly nuclear in luteal cells, indicative
of different functional roles. Collectively, these results indicate that Stat3
and Stat5 are activated by distinct cytokine-signaling pathways modulated through
differentiation-dependent transcriptional regulation of signaling pathway
components and mediate distinct functional processes in the rat ovary: early
follicle growth and atresia vs. luteinization.

PMID: 10598581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(1):389-401.

DNA binding site selection of dimeric and tetrameric Stat5 proteins reveals a
large repertoire of divergent tetrameric Stat5a binding sites.

Soldaini E(1), John S, Moro S, Bollenbacher J, Schindler U, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
Maryland 20892, USA.

We have defined the optimal binding sites for Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers and
found that they share similar core TTC(T/C)N(G/A)GAA interferon gamma-activated
sequence (GAS) motifs. Stat5a tetramers can bind to tandemly linked GAS motifs,
but the binding site selection revealed that tetrameric binding also can be seen 
with a wide range of nonconsensus motifs, which in many cases did not allow
Stat5a binding as a dimer. This indicates a greater degree of flexibility in the 
DNA sequences that allow binding of Stat5a tetramers than dimers. Indeed, in an
oligonucleotide that could bind both dimers and tetramers, it was possible to
design mutants that affected dimer binding without affecting tetramer binding. A 
spacing of 6 bp between the GAS sites was most frequently selected, demonstrating
that this distance is favorable for Stat5a tetramer binding. These data provide
insights into tetramer formation by Stat5a and indicate that the repertoire of
potential binding sites for this transcription factor is broader than expected.

PMCID: PMC85094
PMID: 10594041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Anal Biochem. 1999 Dec 1;276(1):97-104.

A cellular reporter assay to monitor insulin receptor kinase activity based on
STAT 5-dependent luciferase gene expression.

Storz P(1), Döppler H, Horn-Müller J, Groner B, Pfizenmaier K, Müller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 
D-70569, Germany.

A highly sensitive method for determination of insulin receptor (IR) kinase
activity in whole cells, which is based on a STAT5 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5)-dependent reporter gene assay, has been developed. 
We show in Rat1 fibroblasts stably overexpressing the human IR (Rat1-HIR-cl5) an 
insulin-dependent direct association and phosphorylation of STAT5b by IR kinase. 
Rat1-HIR cells transfected with a luciferase gene reporter construct under
control of a STAT5-inducible promoter showed insulin-mediated induction of
STAT5-dependent luciferase activity, with peak activities around 8 h of insulin
treatment over a wide dose range. Transient STAT5b but not STAT5a cotransfection 
significantly enhanced reporter gene activity, yielding up to a fivefold
induction. Addition of the IR kinase inhibitor tyrphostin AG1024 down-regulated
luciferase induction in a dose-dependent manner. This is the first assay allowing
determination of IR kinase activity in intact cells in a 24-well culture and a
microtiter format. Kinetics of this cellular response, sensitivity range, and
signal amplitude make it well suited for automation and offer the potential for
establishing high-throughput screening systems for both insulin mimetic
substances and IR kinase antagonists in a simple nonradioactive assay.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10585749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35553-61.

SOCS/CIS protein inhibition of growth hormone-stimulated STAT5 signaling by
multiple mechanisms.

Ram PA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Cell Biology, Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The inhibition of growth hormone (GH) signaling by five members of the
GH-inducible suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS/CIS) family was investigated 
in transfected COS cells. Complete inhibition of GH activation of the signal
transducer STAT5b and STAT5b-dependent transcriptional activity was observed upon
expression of SOCS-1 or SOCS-3, while partial inhibition (CIS, SOCS-2) or no
inhibition (SOCS-6) was seen with other SOCS/CIS family members. SOCS-1, SOCS-2, 
SOCS-3, and CIS each strongly inhibited the GH receptor (GHR)-dependent tyrosine 
phosphorylation of JAK2 seen at low levels of transfected JAK2; however, only
SOCS-1 strongly inhibited the GHR-independent tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2
seen at higher JAK2 levels. To probe for interactions with GHR, in vitro binding 
assays were carried out using glutathione S-transferase-GHR fusion proteins
containing variable lengths of GHR's COOH-terminal cytoplasmic domain. CIS and
SOCS-2 bound to fusions containing as few as 80 COOH-terminal GHR residues,
provided the fusion protein was tyrosine-phosphorylated. By contrast, SOCS-3
binding required tyrosine-phosphorylated GHR membrane-proximal sequences, SOCS-1 
binding was tyrosine phosphorylation-independent, and SOCS-6 did not bind the GHR
fusion proteins at all. Mutation of GHR's membrane-proximal tyrosine residues 333
and 338 to phenylalanine suppressed the inhibition by SOCS-3, but not by CIS, of 
GH signaling to STAT5b. SOCS/CIS proteins can thus inhibit GH signaling to STAT5b
by three distinct mechanisms, distinguished by their molecular targets within the
GHR-JAK2 signaling complex, as exemplified by SOCS-1 (direct JAK2 kinase
inhibition), SOCS-3 (inhibition of JAK2 signaling via membrane-proximal GHR
tyrosines 333 and 338), and CIS and SOCS-2 (inhibition via membrane-distal
tyrosine(s)).

PMID: 10585430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35331-6.

STAT5b-deficient mice are growth hormone pulse-resistant. Role of STAT5b in
sex-specific liver p450 expression.

Davey HW(1), Park SH, Grattan DR, McLachlan MJ, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Private Bag 3123, Hamilton, New Zealand. 
daveyh@agresearch.cri.nz

The signal transducer and transcriptional activator STAT5b is required to
maintain the adult male pattern of liver gene expression and whole body pubertal 
growth rates, as demonstrated by the loss of these growth hormone (GH)
pulse-dependent responses in mice with a targeted disruption of the STAT5b gene. 
The present study investigates whether these phenotypes of STAT5b-deficient mice 
result from impaired intracellular GH signaling associated with a loss of GH
pulse responsiveness, as contrasted with a feminization of the pituitary GH
secretory profile leading to the observed feminization of body growth and liver
gene expression. Pulsatile GH replacement in hypophysectomized mice stimulated
body weight gain in wild-type but not in STAT5b-deficient mice. Expression of the
male-specific liver P450 enzyme CYP2D9, which is reduced to female levels in
hypophysectomized male mice, was restored to male levels by GH pulse replacement 
in wild-type but not in STAT5b-deficient mice. Similarly, a female-specific liver
CYP2B P450 enzyme that was up-regulated to female levels following hypophysectomy
of males was suppressed to normal basal male levels by GH pulses only in
wild-type hypophysectomized mice. Finally, urinary excretion of the
male-specific, GH pulse-induced major urinary protein was restored to normal male
levels following pulsatile GH treatment only in the case of wild-type
hypophysectomized mice. STAT5b-deficient mice are thus GH pulse-resistant,
supporting the proposed role of STAT5b as a key intracellular mediator of the
stimulatory effects of plasma GH pulses on the male pattern of liver gene
expression.

PMID: 10585399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 1999 May;1(2):95-101.

Activation of a functionally distinct 80-kDa STAT5 isoform by IL-5 and GM-CSF in 
human eosinophils and neutrophils.

Caldenhoven E(1), van Dijk TB, Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW, Koenderman L, de Groot
RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Hospital Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5), IL-3, and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) are hematopoietic cytokines which signal through a common beta subunit
(betac) of a heterodimeric receptor. Among the intracellular signaling pathways
activated via betac is the JAK/STAT pathway. We show that different STAT5
isoforms are activated by IL-5 and GM-CSF in eosinophils, neutrophils, and
differentiated eosinophilic HL-60 cells. Whereas IL-5 activated the wild-type
STAT5A and STAT5B proteins in HL60-eos cells, a carboxyl-terminally truncated
80-kDa STAT5 isoform was activated in mature eosinophils and neutrophils.
Surprisingly, while both isoforms bind strongly to an element from the
beta-casein promoter, only p80 STAT5 binds to the ICAM1-IRE. Consequently, a
carboxyl-terminal truncated STAT5 is capable of blocking STAT3-mediated
transcription of an IREtkCAT reporter construct. The cell type-specific
expression of these functionally distinct STAT5 isoforms might contribute to the 
pleiotropic effects of IL-5 and GM-CSF on different target cells.

PMID: 10356357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Nov;84(11):4214-9.

The C422F mutation of the growth hormone receptor gene is not responsible for
short stature.

Iida K(1), Takahashi Y, Kaji H, Onodera N, Takahashi MO, Okimura Y, Abe H,
Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.
960d640m@mailgate.kobe-u.ac.jp

A missense mutation, C422F, was identified in the intracellular domain of GH
receptor (GHR) in a Japanese short boy. Although this mutation was previously
reported in a patient with GH insensitivity syndrome (GHIS), it has not been
clear whether this mutation causes GH insensitivity. To clarify the effect of
this mutation on GH signal transduction, mutant GHR was expressed in CHO cells,
and its functional properties were investigated. There were no significant
differences in GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b (signal transducer
and activator of transcription) between wild-type GHR (GHR-wt)- and mutant GHR
(GHR-C422F)-expressing cells. Moreover, STAT5-mediated transcriptional activation
of GHR-C422F-expressing cells was comparable to that of GHR-wt-expressing cells. 
These findings indicated that the C422F mutation of GHR affected neither
GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation nor the transcriptional activation of STAT5. 
In addition, the analysis of genotypes and phenotypes of his family revealed that
body heights of family members with heterozygous or homozygous C422F mutations
were all within normal ranges, with the single exception of the proband. These in
vitro and in vivo results indicate that the C422F missense mutation of GHR is a
polymorphism that does not result in GHIS.

PMID: 10566675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 19;265(2):376-81.

STAT 1alpha/1beta, STAT 3 and STAT 5: expression and association with c-MET and
EGF-receptor in long-term cultures of human hepatocytes.

Runge DM(1), Runge D, Foth H, Strom SC, Michalopoulos GK.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Umwelttoxikologie, Innere Medizin, Martin-Luther Universität
Halle-Wittenberg, Franzosenweg 1a, Halle/Saale, D-06097, Germany.

Long-term cultures of human hepatocytes were maintained serum-free in a
chemically defined medium in the presence of HGF and EGF for up to 30 days. STAT 
1alpha/1beta, STAT 3, and STAT 5 were present and tyrosine phosphorylated
throughout the culture period in the cytosol as well as the nucleus. We show by
co-immunoprecipitation that a portion of the cellular pools of STAT 1alpha/1beta 
and STAT 5 is physically associated with c-MET and EGF-receptor.
Co-immunoprecipitation of STAT 3 with STAT 5 did occur in the cytosol but not in 
the nucleus, suggesting dimerization of the two STAT family members. The observed
differences of protein amounts and tyrosine phosphorylation between cytosol and
nucleus, the association of STAT proteins with EGF-receptor and c-MET and with
each other may all be involved in regulating the activity of the STAT
transcription factors. It is intriguing to speculate that STAT 5 may have a
modulating role in the regulation of STAT 3 activity.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10558875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Endocrinology. 1999 Nov;140(11):5126-35.

Growth hormone, but not prolactin, maintains, low-level activation of STAT5a and 
STAT5b in female rat liver.

Choi HK(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

STAT5b, a member of the signal transducers and activators of transcription
family, is activated in rat liver in response to the intermittent (pulsatile)
plasma pattern of GH that is characteristic of adult males. Previous studies have
shown that the near-continuous plasma GH pattern of adult female rats is
associated with a dramatic down-regulation of the STAT5 activation pathway. The
present study demonstrates the presence of a low-level STAT5 DNA-binding activity
in adult female rat liver and investigates the hormonal factors required for its 
maintenance. PRL is not responsible for this low-level STAT5 activity, as
demonstrated in experiments involving estrus cycle monitoring (to investigate a
possible role of the proestrus PRL surge), implantation of bromocriptine pellets 
(to eliminate PRL release by the pituitary), and direct injection of purified
PRL. Rather, the low-level STAT5 activity is shown to result from chronic plasma 
GH stimulation, as demonstrated by GH infusion studies carried out in
hypophysectomized rats. Furthermore, gel mobility supershift experiments
demonstrate that the same STAT5-containing DNA-binding complexes are formed by
both male and female adult rat liver extracts, albeit at approximately 10- to
20-fold lower levels by the female extracts. This DNA-binding activity is
primarily comprised of STAT5b but also contains STAT5a, which is shown to be
preferentially activated by the male plasma GH pattern in a manner similar to
STAT5b. Thus, the dominance of activated STAT5b, compared with STAT5a, in the
strong DNA-binding complexes formed in adult male rat liver nuclear extracts, is 
a reflection of the relative abundance in liver of the two STAT5 forms and is not
attributable to an intrinsic, preferential activation of STAT5b by plasma GH
pulses. The physiological significance of the low-level activated STAT5a and
STAT5b seen in female rat liver and its effects on liver gene expression are
uncertain but may involve the activation of female-expressed cytochromes P450 and
other liver genes.

PMID: 10537141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):29874-82.

STAT5b down-regulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
transcription by inhibition of ligand-independent activation function region-1
trans-activation domain.

Zhou YC(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Growth hormone-activated STAT5b inhibits by up to 80% the transcriptional
activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) alpha, a nuclear
receptor activated by diverse environmental chemicals and hypolipidemic drugs
classified as peroxisome proliferators. This inhibitory cross-talk between STAT5b
and PPAR is now reported for PPAR forms gamma and delta and for thyroid hormone
receptor, indicating a more general potential for inhibitory cross-talk between
JAK/STAT and nuclear receptor signaling pathways. Further investigations revealed
that SOCS-3, a growth hormone-inducible negative regulator of cytokine signaling 
to STAT5b, abolished the STAT5b inhibitory response. A constitutively active
STAT5b mutant failed to inhibit PPARalpha activity, indicating that STAT5b does
not induce synthesis of a more proximal PPARalpha inhibitor. STAT5b inhibition
was not reversed by overexpression of the heterodimerization partner of PPAR
(retinoid X receptor) or the nuclear receptor coactivators P300 and SRC-1,
suggesting that STAT5b does not inhibit PPARalpha by competing for these limiting
cellular cofactors. STAT5b did not inhibit a chimeric receptor comprised of yeast
GAL4 DNA-binding domain linked to the ligand binding/AF-2 trans-activation domain
of PPARalpha, indicating that the COOH-terminal AF-2 domain of PPAR is not the
target of STAT5b inhibition. Rather, STAT5b inhibited transcription driven by the
NH(2)-terminal ligand-independent AF-1 trans-activation domain of PPARalpha in a 
GAL4-linked chimera by approximately 80%. The conservation of this AF-1
trans-activation function in many nuclear receptors suggests that AF-1 may serve 
as an important target for inhibitory cross-talk between STAT transcription
factors and nuclear receptors in a variety of signaling pathways.

PMID: 10514468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Aug 20;154(1-2):37-43.

Cis desensitizes GH induced Stat5 signaling in rat liver cells.

Karlsson H(1), Gustafsson JA, Mode A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden. hanna.karlsson@mednut.ki.se

Recently a novel family of proteins, the Cis/Socs family, has been shown to
constitute negative regulators of cytokine-induced Jak/Stat signaling. Here we
demonstrate that Socs-2 and Cis mRNA expression in rat liver is dependent on the 
presence of growth hormone (GH), and that GH induce Cis mRNA expression in
cultures of primary rat hepatocytes. Furthermore, cotransfection studies in the
rat liver cell line, BRL-4, revealed that constitutive expression of Cis, but not
Socs-2, inhibited the GH-induced transactivation of a Stat5-responsive reporter
gene construct. This indicates a functional role for Cis in the desensitization
of GH activated Jak/Stat5 signaling in rat liver cells. In response to the
intermittent pattern of GH secretion in male rats, GH activates Stat5b signaling 
whereas this activation is blunted in female rats having a continuous pattern of 
GH secretion. We hypothesize that GH induction of Cis could be one mechanism by
which sexually dimorphic GH signaling via Stat5b is achieved in the rat liver.

PMID: 10509798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Oct;65(4):959-65.

STAT5 signaling in sexually dimorphic gene expression and growth patterns.

Davey HW(1), Wilkins RJ, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton, New Zealand.
daveyh@agresearch.cri.nz

The past 10 years have seen enormous advances in our understanding of how
cytokine signals are mediated intracellularly. Of particular significance was the
discovery of a family of seven Signal Transducer and Activators of Transcription 
(STAT) proteins. Each of these has now been studied in detail, and appropriate
gene-disrupted mouse models are available for all except STAT2 (Leonard and
O'Shea 1998). Fetal lethality is observed in Stat3-deficient mice, and various
immunodeficiencies characterize mice with disrupted Stat1, Stat4, and Stat6
genes, which is consistent with impaired signaling from the specific cytokines
that activate each of these proteins. The recent characterization of
Stat5-deficient mice has led to several unanticipated findings that point to
diverse biological functions for the two STAT5 forms, STAT5a and STAT5b. These
include roles for one or both STAT5 forms in the immune system, hematopoiesis,
sexually dimorphic growth, mammary development, hair growth, deposition of
adipose tissue, and pregnancy. Here we review the hormone- and cytokine-activated
signaling pathways in which STAT5 participates and the extensive evidence, from
laboratory animals, that these factors are required for sex-specific aspects of
development, including control of body size. Finally, we consider human growth
disorders that may involve defects in STAT5-dependent signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC1288266
PMID: 10486314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 16;263(1):201-5.

Stimulation of lipolysis but not of leptin release by growth hormone is abolished
in adipose tissue from Stat5a and b knockout mice.

Fain JN(1), Ihle JH, Bahouth SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee,
Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA. jfain@utmem.edu

The present studies examined the effects of growth hormone (GH) on lipolysis and 
leptin release by adipose tissue from mice incubated for 24 h in primary culture.
In adipose tissue from control mice GH enhanced lipolysis without affecting
leptin release. The lipolytic action of GH was unaffected in adipose tissue from 
Stat5b-/- male mice but leptin release was enhanced by GH in fat from Stat5b-/-
mice. In adipose tissue from Stat5ab-/- female mice no significant lipolytic
action of GH was seen but leptin release was enhanced by GH. An insulin-like
effect of GH on glucose conversion to lactate was also seen in mice deficient in 
Stat5ab-/-. These results suggest that the lipolytic action of GH involves the
Stat5 proteins while the insulin-like effects of GH on glucose metabolism and
leptin release involve different mechanisms.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10486277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Immunity. 1999 Aug;11(2):225-30.

Stat5 activation is uniquely associated with cytokine signaling in peripheral T
cells.

Moriggl R(1), Sexl V, Piekorz R, Topham D, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The activation and subsequent proliferation of peripheral T cells requires the
engagement of the T cell and a cytokine receptor, typically the IL-2 or IL-4
receptors. Critical to understanding the regulation of peripheral T cells is the 
knowledge of the unique contributions of each receptor to full T cell activation 
and cell cycle progression. Mice deficient in Stat5a and Stat5b have demonstrated
the essential role that these highly related proteins play in cell cycle
progression following peripheral T cell activation. Here we demonstrate that
activation of the Stat5 proteins by tyrosine phosphorylation is uniquely
contributed by cytokine receptor signaling and specifically does not occur
through the T cell receptor complex.

PMID: 10485657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Sep;56(3):473-7.

Developmental action of estrogen receptor-alpha feminizes the growth
hormone-Stat5b pathway and expression of Cyp2a4 and Cyp2d9 genes in mouse liver.

Sueyoshi T(1), Yokomori N, Korach KS, Negishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

We have studied the roles of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and the Stat5b
form of STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) in sex-specific
expression of Cyp2a4 (steroid 15alpha-hydroxylase) and Cyp2d9 (steroid
16alpha-hydroxylase) genes using ERalpha-deficient mice. ERalpha deficiency
resulted in the repression of the female-specific Cyp2a4 and expression of the
male-specific Cyp2d9 genes, respectively in females. In ERalpha-deficient males, 
the Cyp2d9 gene continued to be expressed. Nuclear localization of Stat5b occurs 
in both sexes of ERalpha-deficient mice, although it is normally observed in only
wild-type males. Nuclear localization of Stat5b correlates with the repression of
Cyp2a4 and expression of Cyp2d9, respectively. Because Stat5b was not detectable 
in liver nuclear extracts prepared from hypophysectomized ERalpha-deficient
females, the regulation by ERalpha appeared to be mediated through a pituitary
hormone (i.e., growth hormone). Thus, ERalpha appears to play a key role in the
mechanism that inhibits nuclear localization of Stat5b in female mice, leading to
feminization of a ERalpha-GH-Stat5b pathway and Cyp expression. Defaulting to
this ERalpha-dependent mechanism results in localization of Stat5b to nuclei,
which masculinizes the expression of Cyp genes in male mice.

PMID: 10462534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6396-407.

Suppression of STAT5 functions in liver, mammary glands, and T cells in
cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein 1 transgenic mice.

Matsumoto A(1), Seki Y, Kubo M, Ohtsuka S, Suzuki A, Hayashi I, Tsuji K, Nakahata
T, Okabe M, Yamada S, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, Kurume 839-0861, Japan.

Various cytokines utilize Janus kinase (JAK) and the STAT (signal transducers and
activators of transcription) family of transcription factors to carry out their
biological functions. Among STATs, two highly related proteins, STAT5a and
STAT5b, are activated by various cytokines, including prolactin, growth hormone, 
erythropoietin, interleukin 2 (IL-2), and IL-3. We have cloned a STAT5-dependent 
immediate-early cytokine-responsive gene, CIS1 (encoding cytokine-inducible
SH2-containing protein 1). In this study, we created CIS1 transgenic mice under
the control of a beta-actin promoter. The transgenic mice developed normally;
however, their body weight was lower than that of the wild-type mice, suggesting 
a defect in growth hormone signaling. Female transgenic mice failed to lactate
after parturition because of a failure in terminal differentiation of the mammary
glands, suggesting a defect in prolactin signaling. The IL-2-dependent
upregulation of the IL-2 receptor alpha chain and proliferation were partially
suppressed in the T cells of transgenic mice. These phenotypes remarkably
resembled those found in STAT5a and/or STAT5b knockout mice. Indeed, STAT5
tyrosine phosphorylation was suppressed in mammary glands and the liver.
Furthermore, the IL-2-induced activation of STAT5 was markedly inhibited in T
cells in transgenic mice, while leukemia inhibitory factor-induced STAT3
phosphorylation was not affected. We also found that the numbers of gamma delta T
cells, as well as those of natural killer (NK) cells and NKT cells, were
dramatically decreased and that Th1/Th2 differentiation was altered in transgenic
mice. These data suggest that CIS1 functions as a specific negative regulator of 
STAT5 in vivo and plays an important regulatory role in the liver, mammary
glands, and T cells.

PMCID: PMC84609
PMID: 10454585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 19;262(1):216-22.

PPARgamma ligand-dependent induction of STAT1, STAT5A, and STAT5B during
adipogenesis.

Stephens JM(1), Morrison RF, Wu Z, Farmer SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Life Sciences
Building, Room 508, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA. jsteph1@unix1.snce.lsu.edu

We have recently demonstrated that STAT1, STAT5A, and STAT5B are induced during
adipogenesis of cultured preadipocytes in a differentiation-dependent manner.
Members of the C/EBP and PPAR families of transcription factors have also been
shown to be induced during adipocyte differentiation and to play a significant
role in the regulation of fat-specific genes. In this investigation, we have
examined the ability of C/EBPs and PPARs to contribute to STAT protein expression
during conversion of non-precursor fibroblasts to functionally mature adipocytes.
For this study, NIH-3T3 fibroblasts engineered to ectopically co-express
C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta under the control of a tetracycline-responsive,
inducible expression system were utilized to assess STAT expression during
controlled adipogenesis. Data presented here demonstrate that STAT1, STAT5A, and 
STAT5B, but not STAT3 and STAT6, were induced in a tetracycline-responsive manner
during the differentiation of these engineered fibroblasts. The STAT protein
accumulation resulting from C/EBP expression was tightly coupled to the
morphological conversion of fibroblasts to adipocytes and represents an
expression profile identical to that reported for mature adipocytes in vivo. Data
are also presented demonstrating that STAT protein accumulation and adipocyte
conversion occurred only during controlled conditions leading to the expression
of PPARgamma and that the expression of these three STATs was tightly regulated
in a PPARgamma ligand dose-response fashion. These data illustrate that the
cascade of transcriptional events leading to adipogenesis regulate the STAT
family of transcription factors and that the differentiation-dependent
upregulation of STAT protein expression is regulated downstream of PPARgamma in a
ligand-dependent manner.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Sep;8(9):1741-9.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription STAT5b gene is a new partner
of retinoic acid receptor alpha in acute promyelocytic-like leukaemia.

Arnould C(1), Philippe C, Bourdon V, Gr goire MJ, Berger R, Jonveaux P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique, UPRES-INRA 952, CHRU, Rue du Morvan, 54511
Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) exhibits a characteristic t(15;17)
translocation that fuses the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene on 15q22 to the
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on 17q12-q21.1. In a small subset of
acute promyelocytic-like leukaemias (APL-L), RARA is fused to a different
partner: the pro-myelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF) gene on 11q23, the
nucleophosmin (NPM) gene on 5q35 or the nuclear mitotic apparatus (NuMA) gene on 
11q13. We report on the molecular characterization of a RARA gene re-arrangement 
in a patient with APL-L and demonstrate that the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription STAT5b gene is fused with RARA. STAT5b belongs to the janus
kinase (JAK)-STAT signalling pathway. Remarkably, the STAT5b component of the
chimeric protein is delocalized from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it
displays a microspeckled pattern. Therefore, unusual features of this APL-L might
result from dysregulation of the JAK/STAT5 signal transducing pathways in the
patient leukaemic cells. In this study, we identified STAT5b as a new gene fused 
to RARA in leukaemia; this is the first human tumour bearing a structurally
abnormal STAT gene.

PMID: 10441338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 15;163(4):2151-9.

Human IL-3 stimulates endothelial cell motility and promotes in vivo new vessel
formation.

Dentelli P(1), Del Sorbo L, Rosso A, Molinar A, Garbarino G, Camussi G, Pegoraro 
L, Brizzi MF.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Fisiopatologia Clinica, Università di
Torino, Italy.

Angiogenesis is a critical process for growth of new capillary blood vessels from
preexisting capillaries and postcapillary venules, both in physiological and
pathological conditions. Endothelial cell proliferation is a major component of
angiogenesis and it is regulated by several growth factors. It has been
previously shown that the human hemopoietic growth factor IL-3 (hIL-3),
predominantly produced by activated T lymphocytes, stimulates both endothelial
cell proliferation and functional activation. In the present study, we report
that hIL-3 is able to induce directional migration and tube formation of HUVEC.
The in vivo neoangiogenetic effect of hIL-3 was also demonstrated in a murine
model in which Matrigel was used for the delivery of the cytokine, suggesting a
role of hIL-3 in sustaining neoangiogenesis. Challenge of HUVEC with hIL-3 lead
to the synthesis of platelet-activating factor (PAF), which was found to act as
secondary mediator for hIL-3-mediated endothelial cell motility but not for
endothelial cell proliferation. Consistent with the role of STAT5 proteins in
regulating IL-3-mediated mitogenic signals, we herein report that, in
hIL-3-stimulated HUVEC, the recruitment of STAT5A and STAT5B, by the beta common 
(betac) subunit of the IL-3R, was not affected by PAF receptor blockade.

PMID: 10438956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22484-92.

Differential effects of prolactin and src/abl kinases on the nuclear
translocation of STAT5B and STAT5A.

Kazansky AV(1), Kabotyanski EB, Wyszomierski SL, Mancini MA, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030-3498, USA.

In this study, DNA binding and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5A and STAT5B were
compared with their subcellular localization determined using indirect
immunofluorescence microscopy. Following prolactin activation, both STAT5A and
STAT5B were rapidly translocated into the nucleus and displayed a
detergent-resistant, punctate nuclear staining pattern. Similar to prolactin
induction, src activation resulted in tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding of
both STAT5A and STAT5B. However, nuclear translocation of only STAT5B but not
STAT5A was observed. This selective nuclear translocation appears to be mediated 
via the carboxyl-terminal sequences in STAT5B. Furthermore, overexpression of a
dominant negative kinase-inactive mutant of JAK2 prevented prolactin-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT5A and STAT5B but did
not block src kinase activation and nuclear translocation of STAT5B. In
co-transfection assays, prolactin-mediated activation but not src kinase-mediated
activation of STAT5B resulted in the induction of a beta-casein promoter-driven
reporter construct. These results suggest that STAT5 activation by src may occur 
by a mechanism distinct from that employed in cytokine activation of the JAK/STAT
pathway, resulting in the selective nuclear translocation of STAT5B.

PMID: 10428824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Int Immunol. 1999 Aug;11(8):1283-94.

Activation of STAT5 by IL-4 relies on Janus kinase function but not on receptor
tyrosine phosphorylation, and can contribute to both cell proliferation and gene 
regulation.

Friedrich K(1), Kammer W, Erhardt I, Brändlein S, Sebald W, Moriggl R.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biozentrum), Physiologische
Chemie II, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

We have investigated mechanisms and consequences of STAT5 activation through the 
human IL-4 receptor (IL-4R). By functionally expressing receptor mutants in the
murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3, we could show that phosphorylated tyrosine residues
within the IL-4R alpha chain are dispensable for IL-4-induced STAT5 activity.
However, disruption of a membrane-proximal proline-rich sequence motif ('box1')
in either subunit of the bipartite IL-4R abolished not only ligand-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinases JAK1 and JAK3, but also IL-4-triggered 
activation of STAT5 and concomitant cell proliferation. A dominant-negative
version of STAT5b, but not of STAT5a, interfered with IL-4-induced DNA synthesis 
in Ba/F3 cells, suggesting an involvement of STAT5b in the control of cell
proliferation through IL-4R. Reporter gene experiments finally showed that
transcription from promoters of STAT5 target genes can be specifically induced by
challenging cells with IL-4, and that both STAT5a and STAT5b can contribute to
IL-4-triggered transcriptional control.

PMID: 10421786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Aug 1;74(2):278-91.

Ethanol inhibits prolactin-induced activation of the JAK/STAT pathway in cultured
astrocytes.

DeVito WJ(1), Stone S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Alcohol consumption has multiple effects in the central nervous system (CNS).
Whereas, alcohol is an immunosuppressive drug the effect of alcohol on the
neuroimmune system, remains unclear. In cultured astrocytes, prolactin (PRL)
induces mitogenesis and the expression of inflammatory cytokines, including tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF alpha). We have recently shown that whereas ethanol
does not inhibit PRL receptor binding, it markedly inhibits PRL-induced
mitogenesis and TNF alpha secretion in cultured astrocytes. It is clear that PRL 
activates the tyrosine phosphorylation of several proteins, including members of 
a novel family of protein tyrosine kinases, the Janus Kinases (JAKs). The aims of
this study were to characterize PRL-induced activation of the JAK/STAT (signal
transducers and activators of transcription) pathway, and to determine if ethanol
affects JAK/STAT activation in cultured astrocytes. We found that PRL
specifically increases the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, but not JAK1, JAK3, 
or Tyk2, and the subsequent phosphorylation of STAT1 alpha, STAT5a, and STAT5b.
Preincubation of astrocytes with ethanol markedly inhibited phosphorylation of
JAK2, STAT1 alpha, STAT5a, and STAT5b. In PRL-stimulated astrocytes, ethanol
inhibited binding of nuclear proteins to oligonucleotides corresponding to the
gamma-interferon activated sequence (GAS). Further, ethanol blocked PRL-induced
increases in interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) mRNA, a PRL/cytokine
inducible transcription factor involved in the regulation of a number of cytokine
inducible genes. The inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation by ethanol was not a 
general effect, however, as we found that ethanol increased basal and NGF-induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of extracellular signal-activated protein kinase-1
(ERK-1). These data indicate that ethanol inhibits PRL-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of the JAK/STAT pathway resulting in decreased nuclear GAS DNA
binding and inhibition of the PRL inducible gene, IRF-1. Thus, suggesting that
ethanol-induced inhibition of JAK2 phosphorylation may be one mechanism though
which ethanol could after the brain's response to injury or infection.

PMID: 10404396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Glia. 1999 Jun;26(4):344-52.

Signal transduction pathways induced by GM-CSF in microglia: significance in the 
control of proliferation.

Liva SM(1), Kahn MA, Dopp JM, de Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Mental Retardation Research Center, Brain Research
Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90024-1759, USA.

Communication between cells of the central nervous system (CNS) and of the immune
system is accomplished by a network of cytokines and growth factors. Certain
cytokines and growth factors cause activation of microglia, contributing to
inflammatory states in the CNS. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) has numerous effects on microglia, ranging from induction of
proliferation to changes in morphology. GM-CSF is also a growth factor for cells 
of the myeloid lineage, and the signal tranduction induced by GM-CSF in these
cells has been extensively studied. Most notably, the importance of the Jak/STAT 
and MAP kinase pathways in mitogenesis has been shown in many different systems. 
We show here that primary microglia and a microglia cell line, BV-2, have a
Jak/STAT expression pattern and GM-CSF inducibility similar to that of monocytes 
and macrophages. Primary microglia and BV-2 cells expressed identical Jak/STATs: 
Jakl, Jak2, Jak3, Tyk2, STAT1alpha/beta, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT6. In
addition, GM-CSF induced Jak2, STAT5A, and STAT5B in BV-2 cells, as it does in
monocytes and macrophages. Immunocytochemical analysis showed that STAT5
translocates to the nucleus following GM-CSF stimulation of microglia. We also
found the MAP kinases, ERK1 and ERK2, to be phosphorylated in microglia and BV-2 
cells following induction by GM-CSF. Jak2, STAT5A, STAT5B, and ERKs are known to 
be important in controlling cellular proliferation. Drugs that block these
pathways may become tools to control inflammation in the CNS by limiting
microglial proliferation.

PMID: 10383053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 22;96(13):7172-7.

Identification of SH2-bbeta as a potent cytoplasmic activator of the tyrosine
kinase Janus kinase 2.

Rui L(1), Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0622, USA.

Janus kinases (JAKs) are cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases critical for signaling by
growth hormone (GH) and many other ligands that bind to members of the cytokine
receptor superfamily. SH2-Bbeta was previously identified as a JAK2-interacting
protein that is tyrosyl phosphorylated in response to GH and other cytokines that
activate JAK2. In this study, we examined whether SH2-Bbeta alters the activity
of JAK2. SH2-Bbeta, when coexpressed with JAK2, significantly increased the
tyrosyl phosphorylation of JAK2 and multiple other cellular proteins and
stimulated the kinase activity of JAK2 by approximately 20-fold. Coexpression of 
SH2-Bbeta with JAK2 dramatically increased tyrosyl phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5B and Stat3, physiological
substrates of JAK2. SH2-Bbeta(R555E) with a defective Src homology 2 domain was
unable to stimulate JAK2 and JAK2-mediated tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5B and 
Stat3. More importantly, SH2-Bbeta enhanced GH-induced tyrosyl phosphorylation of
endogenous JAK2 and ligand-induced tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5B by
endogenous JAK2. In contrast, SH2-Bbeta did not potentiate the activation of
other tyrosine kinases including the receptors for platelet-derived growth
factor, epidermal growth factor, or nerve growth factor (TrkA), tyrosine kinases 
that also bind SH2-Bbeta. These data demonstrate that SH2-Bbeta is a potent
cytoplasmic activator of JAK2 and is thereby expected to be an important cellular
regulator of signaling by GH and other hormones and cytokines that activate JAK2.

PMCID: PMC22043
PMID: 10377387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):4980-8.

SOCS-3 is tyrosine phosphorylated in response to interleukin-2 and suppresses
STAT5 phosphorylation and lymphocyte proliferation.

Cohney SJ(1), Sanden D, Cacalano NA, Yoshimura A, Mui A, Migone TS, Johnston JA.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

Members of the recently discovered SOCS/CIS/SSI family have been proposed as
regulators of cytokine signaling, and while targets and mechanisms have been
suggested for some family members, the precise role of these proteins remains to 
be defined. To date no SOCS proteins have been specifically implicated in
interleukin-2 (IL-2) signaling in T cells. Here we report SOCS-3 expression in
response to IL-2 in both T-cell lines and human peripheral blood lymphocytes.
SOCS-3 protein was detectable as early as 30 min following IL-2 stimulation,
while CIS was seen only at low levels after 2 h. Unlike CIS, SOCS-3 was rapidly
tyrosine phosphorylated in response to IL-2. Tyrosine phosphorylation of SOCS-3
was observed upon coexpression with Jak1 and Jak2 but only weakly with Jak3. In
these experiments, SOCS-3 associated with Jak1 and inhibited Jak1
phosphorylation, and this inhibition was markedly enhanced by the presence of
IL-2 receptor beta chain (IL-2Rbeta). Moreover, following IL-2 stimulation of T
cells, SOCS-3 was able to interact with the IL-2 receptor complex, and in
particular tyrosine phosphorylated Jak1 and IL-2Rbeta. Additionally, in
lymphocytes expressing SOCS-3 but not CIS, IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation 
of STAT5b was markedly reduced, while there was only a weak effect on
IL-3-mediated STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation. Finally, proliferation induced by 
both IL-2- and IL-3 was significantly inhibited in the presence of SOCS-3. The
findings suggest that when SOCS-3 is rapidly induced by IL-2 in T cells, it acts 
to inhibit IL-2 responses in a classical negative feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC84319
PMID: 10373548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 25;274(26):18686-92.

Regulation of prolactin receptor (PRLR) gene expression in insulin-producing
cells. Prolactin and growth hormone activate one of the rat prlr gene promoters
via STAT5a and STAT5b.

Galsgaard ED(1), Nielsen JH, Møldrup A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensensvej 6,
DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. edg@hagedorn.dk

Expression of the prolactin receptor (PRLR) gene is increased in pancreatic
islets during pregnancy and in vitro in insulin-producing cells by growth hormone
(GH) and prolactin (PRL). The 5'-region of the rat PRLR gene contains at least
three alternative first exons that are expressed tissue-specifically because of
differential promoter usage. We show by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction analysis that both exon 1A- and exon 1C-containing PRLR transcripts are 
expressed in rat islets and that human (h)GH, ovine (o)PRL, and bovine (b)GH
increase exon 1A expression 6.5 +/- 0. 8-fold, 6.8 +/- 0.7-fold, and 3.9 +/-
0.7-fold and exon 1C expression 4.8 +/- 0.4-fold, 4.4 +/- 0.6-fold, and 2.5 +/-
0.7-fold, respectively. Expression of exon 1B was not detectable. The
transcriptional activities of reporter constructs containing the 1A, 1B, or 1C
promoter were found to be 22.8-fold, 2.7-fold, and 8. 0-fold, respectively, above
that of a promoterless reporter construct when transfected into the
insulin-producing INS-1 cells. The transcriptional activity of the 1A promoter
construct was increased 8.9 +/- 1.9-fold by 0.5 microgram/ml hGH. Responsiveness 
to hGH of the 1A promoter was localized to the region from -225 to +81 with
respect to the transcription start site. This region contains the sequence
TTCTAGGAA that by gel retardation experiments was shown to bind the transcription
factors STAT5a and STAT5b in response to stimulation by hGH, oPRL, or bGH.
Mutation of this gamma-activated sequence-like element completely abolished
transcriptional induction of the 1A promoter by hGH. Our results suggest that GH 
and PRL increase the levels of exon 1A- and 1C-containing PRLR mRNA species and
furthermore that the transcriptional activity of the 1A promoter is increased via
activation of STAT5a and STAT5b.

PMID: 10373481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Immunity. 1999 May;10(5):525-35.

Distinct roles of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and STAT5 pathways in
IL-7-mediated development of human thymocyte precursors.

Pallard C(1), Stegmann AP, van Kleffens T, Smart F, Venkitaraman A, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van
Leeuwenhoekhuis, Amsterdam.

Here, we define the IL-7R-activated signal that promotes survival and
proliferation of T cell progenitors and demonstrate that it is distinct from the 
signals that induce differentiation. We show that IL-7 activates PKB and STAT5 in
human thymocytes. Into T cell precursors we introduced chimeric receptors with a 
cytoplasmic domain of the IL-7R that is no longer able to activate PI-3K/PKB and 
STAT5 and tested the transduced cells in a fetal thymic organ culture. We also
examined the T cell precursor activity of progenitors expressing
dominant-negative forms of PI-3K or STAT5B. These experiments revealed that
PI-3K/PKB activation is essential for the survival and proliferation of T cell
precursors and suggest that STAT5 activated by IL-7 mediates T cell
differentiation.

PMID: 10367898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Blood. 1999 Jun 15;93(12):4154-66.

Dominant negative mutants implicate STAT5 in myeloid cell proliferation and
neutrophil differentiation.

Ilaria RL Jr(1), Hawley RG, Van Etten RA.

Author information: 
(1)The Simmons Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School,
Dallas, TX, USA.

STAT5 is a member of the signal transducers and activation of transcription
(STAT) family of latent transcription factors activated in a variety of cytokine 
signaling pathways. We introduced alanine substitution mutations in highly
conserved regions of murine STAT5A and studied the mutants for dimerization, DNA 
binding, transactivation, and dominant negative effects on erythropoietin-induced
STAT5-dependent transcriptional activation. The mutations included two near the
amino-terminus (W255KR-->AAA and R290QQ-->AAA), two in the DNA-binding domain
(E437E-->AA and V466VV-->AAA), and a carboxy-terminal truncation of STAT5A
(STAT5A/triangle up53C) analogous to a naturally occurring isoform of rat STAT5B.
All of the STAT mutant proteins were tyrosine phosphorylated by JAK2 and
heterodimerized with STAT5B except for the WKR mutant, suggesting an important
role for this region in STAT5 for stabilizing dimerization. The WKR, EE, and VVV 
mutants had no detectable DNA-binding activity, and the WKR and VVV mutants, but 
not EE, were defective in transcriptional induction. The VVV mutant had a
moderate dominant negative effect on erythropoietin-induced STAT5 transcriptional
activation, which was likely due to the formation of heterodimers that are
defective in DNA binding. Interestingly, the WKR mutant had a potent dominant
negative effect, comparable to the transactivation domain deletion mutant,
triangle up53C. Stable expression of either the WKR or triangle up53C STAT5
mutants in the murine myeloid cytokine-dependent cell line 32D inhibited both
interleukin-3-dependent proliferation and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF)-dependent differentiation, without induction of apoptosis. Expression of 
these mutants in primary murine bone marrow inhibited G-CSF-dependent granulocyte
colony formation in vitro. These results demonstrate that mutations in distinct
regions of STAT5 exert dominant negative effects on cytokine signaling, likely
through different mechanisms, and suggest a role for STAT5 in proliferation and
differentiation of myeloid cells.

PMID: 10361113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):16965-72.

STAT protein recruitment and activation in c-Kit deletion mutants.

Brizzi MF(1), Dentelli P, Rosso A, Yarden Y, Pegoraro L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Turin, Turin 10126, Italy.

Stem cell factor (SCF) and its tyrosine kinase receptor, c-Kit, play a crucial
role in regulating migration and proliferation of melanoblasts, germ cells, and
hemopoietic cell progenitors by activating a number of intracellular signaling
molecules. Here we report that SCF stimulation of myeloid cells or fibroblasts
ectopically expressing c-Kit induces physical association with and tyrosine
phosphorylation of three signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STATs) as follows: STAT1alpha, STAT5A, and STAT5B. Other STAT proteins are not
recruited upon SCF stimulation. Recruitment of STATs leads to their dimerization,
nuclear translocation, and binding to specific promoter-responsive elements.
Whereas STAT1alpha, possibly in the form of homodimers, binds to the
sis-inducible DNA element, STAT5 proteins, either as STAT5A/STAT5B or
STAT5/STAT1alpha heterodimers, bind to the prolactin-inducible element of the
beta-casein promoter. The tyrosine kinase activity of Kit appears essential for
STAT activation since a kinase-defective mutant lacking a kinase insert domain
was inactive in STAT signaling. However, another mutant that lacked the
carboxyl-terminal region retained STAT1alpha activation and nuclear translocation
but was unable to fully activate STAT5 proteins, although it mediated their
transient phosphorylation. These results indicate that different intracellular
domains of c-Kit are involved in activation of the various STAT proteins.

PMID: 10358045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. FEBS Lett. 1999 Apr 30;450(1-2):1-7.

MEK is a negative regulator of Stat5b in PDGF-stimulated cells.

Valgeirsdóttir S(1), Ruusala A, Heldin CH.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Biomedical Center, Uppsala, Sweden.

In this study we show that platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced DNA
binding as well as transcriptional activation of Stat5b are markedly increased by
inhibition of the MAP (mitogen-activated protein) kinase kinase MEK. In addition 
to the previously demonstrated tyrosine phosphorylation, we show that serine and 
threonine phosphorylation of Stat5b is increased in response to PDGF stimulation.
However, inhibition of MEK had no effect on the phosphorylation level of Stat5b
or on the nuclear translocation of Stat5b. These observations indicate that MEK
is a negative modulator of PDGF-induced Stat5b activation through a mechanism not
involving direct phosphorylation of Stat5b.

PMID: 10350046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Stem Cells. 1999;17(3):138-46.

Functional roles of STAT family proteins: lessons from knockout mice.

Akira S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, CREST of Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya.

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are activated 
in response to a large number of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. Upon
activation following the binding of ligands to their receptors, STAT proteins
dimerize, translocate to the nucleus, and bind to the promoters of specific
target genes. To date, seven mammalian members of the STAT family have been
identified. Although some cytokines and growth factors can activate multiple STAT
proteins, some STATs are activated with considerable specificity. The
physiological role of each individual STAT protein is now being examined through 
the study of "knockout" mice, harboring a null allele for the particular gene.
STAT1-deficient mice exhibit a selective signaling defect in response to
interferons. STAT4 and STAT6 are essential for Thl-and Th2-responses,
respectively. STAT5a-deficient mice exhibit defective mammary gland development. 
A study of STAT5b-deficient mice indicates that STAT5b mediates the sexually
dimorphic effects of growth hormone in the liver. STAT5a and 5b also play
different biological roles in the immune system. STAT3-deficient mice die during 
early embryogenesis, but the role of STAT3 in adult tissues can be assessed by
utilizing the CreloxP recombination system to ablate the gene later in life.
Analyses of tissue-specific STAT3-deficient mice indicate that STAT3 plays a
crucial role in a variety of biological functions, including cell growth,
suppression of apoptosis, and cell motility.

PMID: 10342556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Blood. 1999 Jun 1;93(11):3757-73.

Protein kinase B (c-Akt), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and STAT5 are activated 
by erythropoietin (EPO) in HCD57 erythroid cells but are constitutively active in
an EPO-independent, apoptosis-resistant subclone (HCD57-SREI cells).

Bao H(1), Jacobs-Helber SM, Lawson AE, Penta K, Wickrema A, Sawyer ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia campus 
of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

We found that erythropoietin (EPO) and stem cell factor (SCF) activated protein
kinase B (PKB/Akt) in EPO-dependent HCD57 erythroid cells. To better understand
signals controlling proliferation and viability, erythroid cells that resist
apoptosis in the absence of EPO were subcloned and characterized (HCD57-SREI
cells). Constitutive activations of PKB/Akt, STAT5a, and STAT5b were noted in
these EPO-independent cells. PI3-kinase activity was an upstream activator of
PKB/Akt because the PI3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 blocked both constitutive
PKB/Akt and factor-dependent PKB/Akt activity. The LY294002 study showed that
proliferation and viability of both HCD57-SREI and HCD57 cells correlated with
the activity of PKB/Akt; however, PKB/Akt activity alone did not protect these
cells from apoptosis. Treatment of HCD57 cells with SCF also activated PKB/Akt,
but did not protect from apoptosis. This result suggested that PKB/PI3-kinase
activity is necessary but not sufficient to promote viability and/or
proliferation. Constitutive STAT5 activity, activated through an unknown pathway 
not including JAK2 or EPOR, may act in concert with the constitutive
PI3-kinase/PKB/Akt pathway to protect the EPO-independent HCD57-SREI cells from
apoptosis and promote limited proliferation.

PMID: 10339482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 May 19;258(3):565-71.

EGF-induced activation of Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5b is unrelated to the
stimulation of DNA synthesis in cultured hepatocytes.

Guren TK(1), Abrahamsen H, Thoresen GH, Babaie E, Berg T, Christoffersen T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. t.k.guren@labmed.uio.no

Transcription factors of the STAT family have been implicated in regulation of
cell proliferation. EGF activates several STAT proteins in liver. We have studied
the relationship between STAT activation and the growth-stimulatory effect of EGF
in rat hepatocytes, assessing specific DNA-binding activity of STAT proteins in
electrophoretic mobility-shift and supershift assays. In freshly isolated
hepatocytes, EGF activated Stat1, Stat3, and, particularly, Stat5b. However, the 
ability of EGF to produce this activation was rapidly attenuated when the cells
were cultured, while the activation by IFN-gamma (Stat1) and IL-6 (Stat3) was
sustained. Hepatocytes cultured for 24-48 h are highly sensitive to the
stimulatory effect of EGF on S phase entry. In these cells EGF did not detectably
activate Stat1, Stat3, or Stat5b but markedly stimulated MAP kinase (Erk1/2).
Thus, although EGF has the ability to activate several STAT proteins, this did
not seem to be part of the mitogenic mechanisms used by the EGF receptor in
hepatocytes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 7;274(19):13434-42.

Insulin inhibits growth hormone signaling via the growth hormone
receptor/JAK2/STAT5B pathway.

Ji S(1), Guan R, Frank SJ, Messina JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Insulin is important for maintaining the responsiveness of the liver to growth
hormone (GH). Insulin deficiency results in a decrease in liver GH receptor (GHR)
expression, which can be reversed by insulin administration. In osteoblasts,
continuous insulin treatment decreases the fraction of cellular GHR localized to 
the plasma membrane. Thus, it is not clear whether hyperinsulinemia results in an
enhancement or inhibition of GH action. We asked whether continuous insulin
stimulation, similar to what occurs in hyperinsulinemic states, results in GH
resistance. Our present studies suggest that insulin treatment of hepatoma cells 
results in a time-dependent inhibition of acute GH-induced phosphorylation of
STAT5B. Whereas total protein levels of JAK2 were not reduced after insulin
pretreatment for 16 h, GH-induced JAK2 phosphorylation was inhibited. There was a
concomitant decrease in GH binding and a reduction in immunoreactive GHR levels
following pretreatment with insulin for 8-24 h. In summary, continuous insulin
treatment in rat H4 hepatoma cells reduces GH binding, immunoreactive GHR,
GH-induced phosphorylation of JAK2, and GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT5B. These findings suggest that hepatic GH resistance may develop when a
patient exhibits chronic hyperinsulinemia, a condition often observed in patients
with obesity and in the early stage of Type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 10224108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Exp Med. 1999 Apr 19;189(8):1229-42.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5 activation by BCR/ABL is
dependent on intact Src homology (SH)3 and SH2 domains of BCR/ABL and is required
for leukemogenesis.

Nieborowska-Skorska M(1), Wasik MA, Slupianek A, Salomoni P, Kitamura T,
Calabretta B, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)5 is constitutively
activated in BCR/ ABL-expressing cells, but the mechanisms and functional
consequences of such activation are unknown. We show here that BCR/ABL induces
phosphorylation and activation of STAT5 by a mechanism that requires the BCR/ABL 
Src homology (SH)2 domain and the proline-rich binding site of the SH3 domain.
Upon expression in 32Dcl3 growth factor-dependent myeloid precursor cells, STAT5 
activation-deficient BCR/ABL SH3+SH2 domain mutants functioned as tyrosine kinase
and activated Ras, but failed to protect from apoptosis induced by withdrawal of 
interleukin 3 and/or serum and did not induce leukemia in severe combined
immunodeficiency mice. In complementation assays, expression of a dominant-active
STAT5B mutant (STAT5B-DAM), but not wild-type STAT5B (STAT5B-WT), in 32Dcl3 cells
transfected with STAT5 activation-deficient BCR/ABL SH3+SH2 mutants restored
protection from apoptosis, stimulated growth factor-independent cell cycle
progression, and rescued the leukemogenic potential in mice. Moreover, expression
of a dominant-negative STAT5B mutant (STAT5B-DNM) in 32Dcl3 cells transfected
with wild-type BCR/ABL inhibited apoptosis resistance, growth factor-independent 
proliferation, and the leukemogenic potential of these cells. In retrovirally
infected mouse bone marrow cells, expression of STAT5B-DNM inhibited
BCR/ABL-dependent transformation. Moreover, STAT5B-DAM, but not STAT5B-WT,
markedly enhanced the ability of STAT5 activation-defective BCR/ABL SH3+SH2
mutants to induce growth factor-independent colony formation of primary mouse
bone marrow progenitor cells. However, STAT5B-DAM did not rescue the growth
factor-independent colony formation of kinase-deficient K1172R BCR/ABL or the
triple mutant Y177F+R522L+ Y793F BCR/ABL, both of which also fail to activate
STAT5. Together, these data demonstrate that STAT5 activation by BCR/ABL is
dependent on signaling from more than one domain and document the important role 
of STAT5-regulated pathways in BCR/ABL leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2193033
PMID: 10209040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Circ Res. 1999 Apr 16;84(7):785-96.

Thrombopoietin stimulates endothelial cell motility and neoangiogenesis by a
platelet-activating factor-dependent mechanism.

Brizzi MF(1), Battaglia E, Montrucchio G, Dentelli P, Del Sorbo L, Garbarino G,
Pegoraro L, Camussi G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Università di Torino and Dipartimento di
Scienze Cliniche e Biologiche, Torino, Italy.

In this study, we demonstrate that human umbilical cord vein-derived endothelial 
cells (HUVECs) expressed c-Mpl, the thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor, and that TPO
activates HUVECs in vitro, as indicated by directional migration, synthesis of
1-alkyl-/1-acyl-platelet-activating factor (PAF) and interleukin-8 (IL-8), and
phosphorylation of the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 
STAT1 and STAT5B. The observation that WEB 2170 and CV3988, 2 structurally
unrelated PAF receptor antagonists, prevented the motility of HUVECs induced by
TPO suggests a role of PAF as secondary mediator. Moreover, kinetic analysis of
TPO-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT demonstrated that STAT5B activation 
temporally correlated with the synthesis of PAF. PAF, in turn, induced a rapid
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5B and PAF receptor blockade, by WEB 2170,
preventing both TPO- and PAF-mediated STAT5B activation. The in vivo angiogenic
effect of TPO, studied in a mouse model of Matrigel implantation, demonstrated
that TPO induced a dose-dependent angiogenic response that required the presence 
of heparin. Moreover, the in vivo angiogenic effect of TPO was inhibited by the
PAF receptor antagonist WEB 2170 but not by the anti-basic fibroblast growth
factor neutralizing antibody. These results indicate that the effects of TPO are 
not restricted to cells of hematopoietic lineages, because TPO is able to
activate endothelial cells and to induce an angiogenic response in which the
recruitment of endothelial cells is mediated by the synthesis of PAF. Moreover,
biochemical analysis supports the hypothesis that STAT5B may be involved in the
signaling pathway leading to PAF-dependent angiogenesis.

PMID: 10205146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Immunity. 1999 Feb;10(2):249-59.

Stat5 is required for IL-2-induced cell cycle progression of peripheral T cells.

Moriggl R(1), Topham DJ, Teglund S, Sexl V, McKay C, Wang D, Hoffmeyer A, van
Deursen J, Sangster MY, Bunting KD, Grosveld GC, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Many cytokines activate two highly homologous Stat proteins, 5a and 5b. Mice
deficient in both genes lack all growth hormone and prolactin functions but
retain functions associated with cytokines such as erythropoietin. Here, we
demonstrate that, while lymphoid development is normal, Stat5a/b mutant
peripheral T cells are profoundly deficient in proliferation and fail to undergo 
cell cycle progression or to express genes controlling cell cycle progression. In
addition, the mice lack NK cells, develop splenomegaly, and have T cells with an 
activated phenotype, phenotypes seen in IL-2 receptor beta chain-deficient mice. 
These phenotypes are not seen in mice lacking Stat5a or Stat5b alone. The results
demonstrate that the Stat5 proteins, redundantly, are essential mediators of IL-2
signaling in T cells.

PMID: 10072077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 1999 Jan-Jul;19(1-4):75-120.

The Jak-STAT pathway: cytokine signalling from the receptor to the nucleus.

Heim MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.

The Jak-STAT pathway was originally discovered through the study of interferon
induced intracellular signal transduction. Meanwhile, a large number of
cytokines, hormones and growth factors have been found to activate Jaks and
STATs. Jaks (Janus Kinases) are a unique class of tyrosine kinases that associate
with cytokine receptors. Upon ligand binding, they activate members of the Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STAT) family through phosphorylation
on a single tyrosine. Activated STATs form dimers, translocate to the nucleus,
bind to specific response elements in promotors of target genes, and
transcriptionally activate these genes. Both positive and negative regulations of
the Jak-STAT pathway have been identified. In a positive feedback loop,
interferons transcriptionally activate the genes for components of the interferon
stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). A number of cytokines that activate the
Jak-STAT pathway, e.g. IL-6, IL-4, LIF, G-CSF, have been shown to upregulate the 
expression of SOCS-JABs-SSIs, a recently discovered class of STAT inhibitors.
Targeted disruption of genes for a number of Jaks and STATs in mice have revealed
specific biological functions for many of them. Although most of the STATs are
activated in cell culture by many different ligands, STAT knockout mice mostly
show defects in a single or a few cytokine dependent processes. STAT1 knockout
mice have an impaired interferon signalling, STAT4 knockouts impaired IL-12
signalling, STAT5a knockouts impaired prolactin signalling, STAT5b knockouts
impaired growth hormone signalling, and STAT6 knockout impaired IL-4 and IL-13
signalling. Defects in the Jak-STAT pathway have already been identified in a
number of human diseases. Prominent amongst them are leukaemias, lymphomas and
inherited immunodeficiency syndromes. It can be expected that additional Jak-STAT
related diseases will be identified over the next years. To date, specific STAT
inhibitory drugs are not known, but a number of specific protein-protein
interactions in the Jak-STAT pathway are potential targets for pharmaceutical
interventions.

PMID: 10071751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Blood. 1999 Mar 15;93(6):1980-91.

Interferon-alpha activates multiple STAT proteins and upregulates
proliferation-associated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in human T cells.

Matikainen S(1), Sareneva T, Ronni T, Lehtonen A, Koskinen PJ, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
sampsa.matikainen@ktl.fi

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) is a pleiotropic cytokine that has antiviral,
antiproliferative, and immunoregulatory functions. There is increasing evidence
that IFN-alpha has an important role in T-cell biology. We have analyzed the
expression of IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in anti-CD3-activated human T
lymphocytes. The induction of these genes is associated with interleukin-2
(IL-2)-induced T-cell proliferation. Treatment of T lymphocytes with IFN-alpha,
IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 upregulated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 gene expression. 
IFN-alpha also sensitized T cells to IL-2-induced proliferation, further
suggesting that IFN-alpha may be involved in the regulation of T-cell
mitogenesis. When we analyzed the nature of STAT proteins capable of binding to
IL-2Ralpha, pim-1, and IRF-1 GAS elements after cytokine stimulation, we observed
IFN-alpha-induced binding of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4, but not STAT5 to all of
these elements. Yet, IFN-alpha was able to activate binding of STAT5 to the
high-affinity IFP53 GAS site. IFN-alpha enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, and STAT5b. IL-12 induced STAT4 and IL-2 and IL-15
induced STAT5 binding to the GAS elements. Taken together, our results suggest
that IFN-alpha, IL-2, IL-12, and IL-15 have overlapping activities on human T
cells. These findings thus emphasize the importance of IFN-alpha as a T-cell
regulatory cytokine.

PMID: 10068671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 12;274(11):7421-30.

Distinctive roles of STAT5a and STAT5b in sexual dimorphism of hepatic P450 gene 
expression. Impact of STAT5a gene disruption.

Park SH(1), Liu X, Hennighausen L, Davey HW, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Stat5b gene disruption leads to an apparent growth hormone (GH) pulse
insensitivity associated with loss of male-characteristic body growth rates and
male-specific liver gene expression (Udy, G. B., Towers, R. P., Snell, R. G.,
Wilkins, R. J., Park, S. H., Ram, P. A., Waxman, D. J., and Davey, H. W. (1997)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 7239-7244). In the present study, disruption 
of the mouse Stat5a gene, whose coding sequence is approximately 90% identical to
the Stat5b gene, resulted in no loss of expression in male mice of several
sex-dependent, GH-regulated liver cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. By contrast, the
loss of STAT5b feminized the livers of males by decreasing expression of
male-specific CYPs (CYP2D9 and testosterone 16alpha-hydroxylase) while increasing
to female levels several female-predominant liver CYPs (CYP3A, CYP2B, and
testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase). Since STAT5a is thus nonessential for these male
GH responses, STAT5b homodimers, but not STAT5a-STAT5b heterodimers, probably
mediate the sexually dimorphic effects of male GH pulses on liver CYP expression.
In female mice, however, disruption of either Stat5a or Stat5b led to striking
decreases in several liver CYP-catalyzed testosterone hydroxylase activities.
Stat5a or Stat5b gene disruption also led to the loss of a female-specific,
GH-regulated hepatic CYP2B enzyme. STAT5a, which is much less abundant in liver
than STAT5b, and STAT5b are therefore both required for constitutive expression
in female but not male mouse liver of certain GH-regulated CYP steroid
hydroxylases, suggesting that STAT5 protein heterodimerization is an important
determinant of the sex-dependent and gene-specific effects that GH has on the
liver.

PMID: 10066807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Anim Genet. 1999 Feb;30(1):72.

A highly polymorphic GT-repeat in the bovine STAT5B encoding gene on BTA19.

Meyer L(1), Brockmann G, Schwerin M, Seyfert HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute for the Biology of Farm
Animals, Dummerstorf, Germany.

PMID: 10050298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 26;274(9):5333-8.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-activated signaling pathways in 
human neutrophils. Involvement of Jak2 in the stimulation of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase.

Al-Shami A(1), Naccache PH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Rhumatologie et Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du
CHUL, and the Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University,
Sainte Foy, Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) regulates many of the
biological activities of human neutrophils. The signaling pathways via which
these effects are mediated are not fully understood. We have shown previously
that GM-CSF treatment of human neutrophils activates the Janus kinase/signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Jak/STAT) pathway and, more
specifically, Jak2, STAT3, and STAT5B in neutrophils. GM-CSF also stimulates the 
activity of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) in a tyrosine
kinase-dependent manner. Here we report that pretreating the cells with a Jak2
inhibitor (AG-490) abolishes tyrosine phosphorylation of the p85 subunit of
PI3-kinase induced by GM-CSF. Furthermore, p85 was found to associate with Jak2, 
but not with Lyn, in stimulated cells in situ and with its autophosphorylated
form in vitro; however, Jak2 did not bind to either of the two Src homology 2
(SH2) domains of the p85 subunit of PI3-kinase. Although STAT5B bound to the
carboxyl-terminal SH2 domain of p85, it was absent from the complex containing
PI3-kinase and Jak2. These results suggest that stimulation of the activity of
PI3-kinase induced by GM-CSF is mediated by Jak2 and that the association between
Jak2 and p85 depends on an adaptor protein yet to be identified.

PMID: 10026141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):1910-8.

The significance of tetramerization in promoter recruitment by Stat5.

John S(1), Vinkemeier U, Soldaini E, Darnell JE Jr, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

Stat5a and Stat5b are rapidly activated by a wide range of cytokines and growth
factors, including interleukin-2 (IL-2). We have previously shown that these
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT proteins) are key
regulatory proteins that bind to two tandem gamma interferon-activated site (GAS)
motifs within an IL-2 response element (positive regulatory region III [PRRIII]) 
in the human IL-2Ralpha promoter. In this study, we demonstrate cooperative
binding of Stat5 to PRRIII and explore the molecular basis underlying this
cooperativity. We demonstrate that formation of a tetrameric Stat5 complex is
essential for the IL-2-inducible activation of PRRIII. Stable tetramer formation 
of Stat5 is mediated through protein-protein interactions involving a tryptophan 
residue conserved in all STATs and a lysine residue in the Stat5 N-terminal
domain (N domain). The functional importance of tetramer formation is shown by
the decreased levels of transcriptional activation associated with mutations in
these residues. Moreover, the requirement for STAT protein-protein interactions
for gene activation from a promoter with tandemly linked GAS motifs can be
relieved by strengthening the avidity of protein-DNA interactions for the
individual binding sites. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that a
dimeric but tetramerization-deficient Stat5 protein can activate only a subset of
target sites. For functional activity on a wider range of potential recognition
sites, N-domain-mediated oligomerization is essential.

PMCID: PMC83984
PMID: 10022878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cell. 1999 Jan 8;96(1):121-30.

Functional association of Nmi with Stat5 and Stat1 in IL-2- and IFNgamma-mediated
signaling.

Zhu M(1), John S, Berg M, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

Using the coiled-coil region of Stat5b as the bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen, 
we identified the association of Nmi, a protein of unknown function previously
reported as an N-Myc interactor. We further show that Nmi interacts with all
STATs except Stat2. We evaluated two cytokine systems, IL-2 and IFNgamma, and
demonstrate that Nmi augments STAT-mediated transcription in response to these
cytokines. Interestingly, Nmi lacks an intrinsic transcriptional activation
domain; instead, Nmi enhances the association of CBP/p300 coactivator proteins
with Stat1 and Stat5, and together with CBP/p300 can augment IL-2- and
IFNgamma-dependent transcription. Therefore, our data not only reveal that Nmi
can potentiate STAT-dependent transcription, but also suggest that it can augment
coactivator protein recruitment to at least some members of a group of
sequence-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 9989503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 19;274(8):5138-45.

A functional DNA binding domain is required for growth hormone-induced nuclear
accumulation of Stat5B.

Herrington J(1), Rui L, Luo G, Yu-Lee LY, Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

The mechanisms regulating the cellular distribution of STAT family transcription 
factors remain poorly understood. To identify regions of Stat5B required for
ligand-induced nuclear accumulation, we constructed a cDNA encoding green
fluorescent protein (GFP) fused to the N terminus of Stat5B and performed
site-directed mutagenesis. When co-expressed with growth hormone (GH) receptor in
COS-7 cells, GFP-Stat5B is tyrosyl-phosphorylated, forms dimers, and binds DNA in
response to GH in a manner indistinguishable from untagged Stat5B. In multiple
cell types, laser scanning confocal imaging of GFP-Stat5B co-expressed with GH
receptor shows that GFP-Stat5B undergoes a rapid, dramatic accumulation in the
nucleus upon GH stimulation. We introduced alanine substitutions in several
regions of Stat5B and assayed for GH-dependent nuclear localization. Only the
mutation that prevented binding to DNA (466VVVI469) abrogated GH-stimulated
nuclear localization. This mutant fusion protein is tyrosyl-phosphorylated and
dimerizes in response to GH. These results suggest that either high affinity
binding to DNA contributes to nuclear accumulation of Stat5B or that this region 
is crucial for two functions, namely accumulation of Stat5B in the nucleus and
DNA binding. Thus, we have identified a mutant Stat5 defective in nuclear
localization despite its ability to be tyrosyl-phosphorylated and to dimerize.

PMID: 9988763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Feb;13(2):213-27.

Down-regulation of liver JAK2-STAT5b signaling by the female plasma pattern of
continuous growth hormone stimulation.

Gebert CA(1), Park SH, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston Universitiy, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The suppression of male-specific, GH pulse-induced, liver transcription in adult 
female rats has been linked to the down-regulation of STAT5b activation by the
female plasma pattern of near-continuous GH exposure. The mechanism underlying
this down-regulation was studied in the rat liver cell line CWSV-1, where
continuous GH suppressed the level of activated (tyrosine- phosphorylated) STAT5b
to approximately 10-20% of the maximal GH pulse-induced STAT5b signal within 3 h.
In contrast to the robust JAK2 kinase-dependent STAT5b activation loop that is
established by a GH pulse, JAK2 kinase signaling to individual STAT5b molecules
was found to be short lived in cells treated with GH continuously. Moreover,
maintenance of the low-level STAT5b signal required ongoing protein synthesis and
persisted for at least 7 days provided that GH was present in the culture
continuously. Increased STAT5b DNA-binding activity was observed in cells treated
with the proteasome inhibitor MG132, suggesting that at least one component of
the GH receptor (GHR)-JAK2-STAT5b signaling pathway becomes labile in response to
continuous GH treatment. The phosphotyrosine phosphatase inhibitor pervanadate
fully reversed the down-regulation of STAT5b DNA-binding activity in continuous
GH-treated cells by a mechanism that involves both increased STAT5b activation
and decreased STAT5b dephosphorylation. Moreover, the requirement for ongoing GH 
stimulation and active protein synthesis to maintain STAT5b activity in
continuous GH-treated cells were both eliminated by pervanadate treatment,
suggesting that phosphotyrosine dephosphorylation may be an obligatory first step
in the internalization/degradation pathway for the GHR-JAK2 complex. Finally, the
sustaining effect of the serine kinase inhibitor H7 on GH pulse-induced JAK2
signaling to STAT5b was not observed in continuous GH-treated cells. These
findings suggest a model where continuous GH exposure of liver cells
down-regulates the STAT5b pathway by a mechanism that involves enhanced
dephosphorylation of both STAT5b and GHR-JAK2, with the latter step leading to
increased internalization/degradation of the re-ceptor-kinase complex.

PMID: 9973252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):2672-81.

Cross-talk between janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK-STAT) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha)
signaling pathways. Growth hormone inhibition of pparalpha transcriptional
activity mediated by stat5b.

Zhou YC(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Hepatic peroxisome proliferation induced by structurally diverse non-genotoxic
carcinogens is mediated by the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor (PPARalpha) and can be inhibited by growth hormone (GH). GH-stimulated
Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (JAK2/STAT5b)
signaling and the PPAR activation pathway were reconstituted in COS-1 cells to
investigate the mechanism for this GH inhibitory effect. Activation of STAT5b
signaling by either GH or prolactin inhibited, by up to 80-85%, ligand-induced,
PPARalpha-dependent reporter gene transcription. GH failed to inhibit
15-deoxy-Delta12, 14-prostaglandin-J2-stimulated gene transcription mediated by
an endogenous COS-1 PPAR-related receptor. GH inhibition of PPARalpha activity
required GH receptor and STAT5b and was not observed using GH-activated STAT1 in 
place of STAT5b. GH inhibition was not blocked by the mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathway inhibitor PD98059. STAT5b-PPARalpha protein-protein interactions
could not be detected by anti-STAT5b supershift analysis of PPARalpha-DNA
complexes. The GH inhibitory effect required the tyrosine phosphorylation site
(Tyr-699) of STAT5b, an intact STAT5b DNA binding domain, and the presence of a
COOH-terminal trans-activation domain. Moreover, GH inhibition was reversed by a 
COOH-terminal-truncated, dominant-negative STAT5b mutant. STAT5b must thus be
nuclear and transcriptionally active to mediate GH inhibition of PPARalpha
activity, suggesting an indirect inhibition mechanism, such as competition for an
essential PPARalpha coactivator or STAT5b-dependent synthesis of a more proximal 
PPARalpha inhibitor. The cross-talk between STAT5b and PPARalpha signaling
pathways established by these findings provides new insight into the mechanisms
of hormonal and cytokine regulation of hepatic peroxisome proliferation.

PMID: 9915797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jan;13(1):38-56.

Termination of growth hormone pulse-induced STAT5b signaling.

Gebert CA(1), Park SH, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

STAT5b (signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b) is a key mediator of
the effects of plasma GH pulses on male-specific liver gene expression. STAT5b is
activated in liver cells in vivo by physiological pulses of GH and then is
rapidly deactivated. Investigation of the cellular events involved in this
activation/deactivation cycle using the rat liver cell line CWSV-1 established
that a brief exposure to GH and the associated activation of JAK2 (Janus kinase
2) tyrosine kinase activity are both necessary and sufficient to initiate all of 
the downstream steps associated with STAT5b activation by tyrosine
phosphorylation and the subsequent deactivation of both JAK2 kinase and STAT5b.
JAK2 signaling to STAT5b at the conclusion of a GH pulse could be sustained by
the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide or by the proteasome inhibitor
MG132, indicating that termination of this JAK2-catalyzed STAT activation loop
requires synthesis of a labile or GH-inducible protein factor and is facilitated 
by the proteasome pathway. This factor may be a phosphotyrosine phosphatase,
since the phosphatase inhibitor pervanadate both sustained GH pulse-induced JAK2 
signaling to STAT5b and blocked the rapid deactivation of phosphorylated STAT5b
(t(1/2) = 8.8 +/- 0.9 min) seen in its absence. Finally, the serine kinase
inhibitor H7 blocked down-regulation of JAK2 signaling to STAT5b in a manner that
enabled cells to respond to a subsequent GH pulse without the need for the
approximately 3-h interpulse interval normally required for full recovery of GH
pulse responsiveness. Termination of GH pulse-induced STAT5b signaling is thus a 
complex process that involves multiple biochemical events. These are proposed to 
include the down-regulation of JAK2 signaling to STAT5b via a cycloheximide- and 
H7-sensitive step, proteasome-dependent degradation of a key component or
regulatory factor, and dephosphorylation leading to deactivation of the
receptor-kinase signaling complex and its STAT5b substrate via the action of a
phosphotyrosine phosphatase.

PMID: 9892011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jan;8(1):35-44.

A Lys644Glu substitution in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) causes
dwarfism in mice by activation of STATs and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.

Li C(1), Chen L, Iwata T, Kitagawa M, Fu XY, Deng CX.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Diseases Branch, 10/9N105, National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases National Institutes of Health, 10 Center 
Drive, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Missense mutations of human fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) result in
several skeletal dysplasias, including hypochondroplasia, achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia. To study the function of FGFR3 in bone growth and to
create animal models for the FGFR3-related inherited skeletal disorders, we
introduced a point mutation (Lys644Glu) into the murine FGFR3 genome using a
knock-in approach. We found that the Lys644Glu mutation resulted in retarded
endochondral bone growth with severity directly linked to the expression level of
the mutated Fgfr3. Mice heterozygous for the mutation ( Fgfr3(TD/+) ) expressed
the mutant allele at approximately 20% of the wild-type level and exhibited a
mild bone dysplasia. However, when the copy number of the mutant allele increased
from one (Fgfr3(TD/+) to two (Fgfr3(TD/TD), the retardation of bone growth became
more severe and showed phenotypes resembling those of achondroplasia patients,
characterized by a dramatically reduced proliferation of growth plate cartilage, 
macrocephaly and shortening of the long bones, which was most pronounced in the
femur. Molecular analysis revealed that expression of the mutant receptor caused 
the activation of Stat1, Stat5a and Stat5b, and the up-regulation of p16, p18 and
p19 cell cycle inhibitors, leading to dramatic expansion of the resting zone of
chondrocytes at the expense of the proliferating chondrocytes. The mutant growth 
plates consequently were in a less active state and generated fewer maturing and 
hypertrophic chondrocytes. These data provide direct genetic evidence that the
point mutations in FGFR3 cause human skeletal dysplasias and uncover a mechanism 
through which the FGFR3 signals regulate bone growth by modulating expression of 
Stats and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.

PMID: 9887329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Science. 1999 Jan 8;283(5399):222-5.

STAT5 interaction with the T cell receptor complex and stimulation of T cell
proliferation.

Welte T(1), Leitenberg D, Dittel BN, al-Ramadi BK, Xie B, Chin YE, Janeway CA Jr,
Bothwell AL, Bottomly K, Fu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The role of STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) proteins in T
cell receptor (TCR) signaling was analyzed. STAT5 became immediately and
transiently phosphorylated on tyrosine 694 in response to TCR stimulation.
Expression of the protein tyrosine kinase Lck, a key signaling protein in the TCR
complex, activated DNA binding of transfected STAT5A and STAT5B to specific STAT 
inducible elements. The role of Lck in STAT5 activation was confirmed in a
Lck-deficient T cell line in which the activation of STAT5 by TCR stimulation was
abolished. Expression of Lck induced specific interaction of STAT5 with the
subunits of the TCR, indicating that STAT5 may be directly involved in TCR
signaling. Stimulation of T cell clones and primary T cell lines also induced the
association of STAT5 with the TCR complex. Inhibition of STAT5 function by
expression of a dominant negative mutant STAT5 reduced antigen-stimulated
proliferation of T cells. Thus, TCR stimulation appears to directly activate
STAT5, which may participate in the regulation of gene transcription and T cell
proliferation during immunological responses.

PMID: 9880255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Dec 1;258(2):784-93.

Selective coupling of STAT factors to the mouse prolactin receptor.

Mayr S(1), Welte T, Windegger M, Lechner J, May P, Heinrich PC, Horn F, Doppler
W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Innsbruck,
Austria.

Prolactin has been reported to induce distinct sets of signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) in a cell-type-specific fashion. In the
mammary epithelium, although STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6 are present
in a latent form, only STAT5A and STAT5B are activated. This selective activation
of STAT5 by prolactin was also observed in COS-7 cells cotransfected with the
long form of the mouse prolactin receptor (PRL-R) and expression vectors for
STAT1, STAT3, STAT5 and STAT6. Mutated PRL-Rs and chimeric erythropoietin/gp130
(EPO/gp130) receptors with a tyrosine-containing motif attached at the carboxy
terminus were employed to determine the sites in the PRL-R required for the
specific activation of STAT5. The experiments revealed the importance of two
motifs containing Y477 and Y578 in the PRL-R. When linked to the EPO/gp130
receptor, these sequences were sufficient to specifically induce DNA binding of
STAT5 and to activate transcription from the beta-casein gene promoter. By
contrast, only weakly they induced DNA binding of STAT6 and STAT3 and did not
induce STAT1. A synthetic nonapeptide with phosphorylated Y477 was able to
disrupt STAT5 DNA binding in vitro. Our results define structural domains within 
the carboxy terminus of the PRL-R which recruit STAT5 for signalling and which
are capable of distinguishing STAT5 from other STAT proteins. The activity of
STAT5 forms with deletions of the carboxy terminus was induced more strongly than
that of their full-length counterparts 2 min after activation of the PRL-R. This 
effect was not dependent on the presence of Y477 and Y578 in the PRL-R,
indicating that facilitated activation of short STAT5 isoforms relies on
mechanisms other than increased coupling to specific regions of the PRL-R.

PMID: 9874248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 18;273(51):33936-41.

A single amino acid in the DNA binding regions of STAT5A and STAT5B confers
distinct DNA binding specificities.

Boucheron C(1), Dumon S, Santos SC, Moriggl R, Hennighausen L, Gisselbrecht S,
Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire (ICGM), INSERM U363, Hôpital Cochin, 
27 rue du Fbg St Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

STAT5A and STAT5B are two highly related transcription factors encoded by two
distinct genes. STAT5A and STAT5B are activated by a broad range of cytokines and
growth factors. Although they can be differentially activated, the functional
difference between these two molecules relative to their structure is not known. 
Here we demonstrated that STAT5A and STAT5B homodimers have distinct DNA binding 
preferences. Chimeric STAT5 molecules allowed us to identify a region between
amino acid 420 and 545 responsible for the DNA binding specificity. This region
is located in the previously characterized DNA binding region of STAT proteins.
Sequence comparison between STAT5A and STAT5B from different species showed a
difference of 5 amino acids in the region 420-545 between STAT5A and STAT5B.
Substitution of these amino acids demonstrated that a glycine residue at position
433 in STAT5B and a glutamic residue at a similar position in STAT5A determined
the DNA binding specificity. These data indicate that STAT5A and STAT5B
homodimers may have distinct function and probably regulate the expression of
common as well as distinct genes.

PMID: 9852045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Dec;12(12):1903-13.

Heat shock protein 90-dependent (geldanamycin-inhibited) movement of the
glucocorticoid receptor through the cytoplasm to the nucleus requires intact
cytoskeleton.

Galigniana MD(1), Scruggs JL, Herrington J, Welsh MJ, Carter-Su C, Housley PR,
Pratt WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor 48109, USA.

We use here a chimera of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) and the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) to test the notion that the protein chaperone heat
shock protein-90 (hsp90) is required for steroid-dependent translocation of the
receptor through the cytoplasm along cytoskeletal tracks. The GFP-GR fusion
protein undergoes steroid-mediated translocation from the cytoplasm to the
nucleus, where it is transcriptionally active. Treatment of 3T3 cells containing 
steroid-bound GFP-GR with geldanamycin, a benzoquinone ansamycin that binds to
hsp90 and disrupts its function, inhibits dexamethasone-dependent translocation
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. The t1/2 for translocation in the absence of
geldanamycin is approximately 5 min, and the t1/2 in the presence of geldanamycin
is approximately 45 min. In cells treated for 1 h with the cytoskeletal
disrupting agents colcemid, cytochalasin D, and beta,beta'-iminodipropionitrile
to completely disrupt the microtubule, microfilament, and intermediate filament
networks, respectively, the GFP-GR still translocates rapidly to the nucleus in a
strictly dexamethasone-dependent manner but translocation is no longer affected
by geldanamycin. After withdrawal of the cytoskeletal disrupting agents for 3 h, 
normal cytoskeletal architecture is restored, and geldanamycin inhibition of
dexamethasone-dependent GFP-GR translocation is restored. We suggest that in
cells without an intact cytoskeletal system, the GFP-GR moves through the
cytoplasm by diffusion. However, under physiological conditions in which the
cytoskeleton is intact, diffusion is limited, and the GFP-GR utilizes a movement 
machinery that is dependent upon hsp90 chaperone activity. In contrast to the GR,
GFP-STAT5B, a signaling protein that is not complexed with hsp90, undergoes
GH-dependent translocation to the nucleus in a manner that is not dependent upon 
hsp90 chaperone activity.

PMID: 9849964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Virol. 1999 Jan;73(1):368-76.

Mammary gland expression of mouse mammary tumor virus is regulated by a novel
element in the long terminal repeat.

Qin W(1), Golovkina TV, Peng T, Nepomnaschy I, Buggiano V, Piazzon I, Ross SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6142, USA.

Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) infects both lymphoid tissue and lactating
mammary gland during its infectious cycle, but some endogenous MMTVs are
transcribed only in lymphoid cells. We found a lymphoid cell-specific endogenous 
MMTV that was converted to a milk-borne, infectious virus through recombination
with an exogenously transmitted MMTV. The changed expression pattern correlated
with the alteration of a single base pair in the long terminal repeat of the
lymphoid cell-specific virus. Transgenic mice with the element from either the
milk-borne or lymphoid cell-specific virus upstream of the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene showed the same pattern of expression as the
virus from which the regulatory sequences were derived. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays with mammary cell extracts showed that the site from the milk-borne 
virus was preferentially bound by a prolactin-inducible factor that poorly bound 
the altered site from the lymphoid cell-specific virus. The complex that formed
on the milk-borne virus-specific oligonucleotide supershifted with anti-Stat5b
antibody. Mice lacking either Stat5a or Stat5b had dramatically reduced levels of
MMTV transcripts in mammary gland but not in lymphoid tissue. Thus, a member of
the STAT family of transcription factors is involved in the tissue-specific
expression of mouse mammary tumor virus in vivo. This is the first example of the
involvement of a member of the STAT family of transcription factors in the
control of tissue-specific expression.

PMCID: PMC103842
PMID: 9847341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Exp Med. 1998 Dec 7;188(11):2067-74.

Stat5b is essential for natural killer cell-mediated proliferation and cytolytic 
activity.

Imada K(1), Bloom ET, Nakajima H, Horvath-Arcidiacono JA, Udy GB, Davey HW,
Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

We have analyzed the immune system in Stat5-deficient mice. Although Stat5a-/-
splenocytes have a partial defect in anti-CD3-induced proliferation that can be
overcome by high dose interleukin (IL)-2, we now demonstrate that defective
proliferation in Stat5b-/- splenocytes cannot be corrected by this treatment.
Interestingly, this finding may be at least partially explained by diminished
expression of the IL-2 receptor beta chain (IL-2Rbeta), which is a component of
the receptors for both IL-2 and IL-15, although other defects may also exist.
Similar to the defect in proliferation in activated splenocytes, freshly isolated
splenocytes from Stat5b-/- mice exhibited greatly diminished proliferation in
response to IL-2 and IL-15. This results from both a decrease in the number and
responsiveness of natural killer (NK) cells. Corresponding to the diminished
proliferation, basal as well as IL-2- and IL-15-mediated boosting of NK cytolytic
activity was also greatly diminished. These data indicate an essential
nonredundant role for Stat5b for potent NK cell-mediated proliferation and
cytolytic activity.

PMCID: PMC2212377
PMID: 9841920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Stem Cells. 1998;16(6):397-403.

Differential activation of functionally distinct STAT5 proteins by IL-5 and
GM-CSF during eosinophil and neutrophil differentiation from human CD34+
hematopoietic stem cells.

Caldenhoven E(1), van Dijk TB, Tijmensen A, Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW,
Koenderman L, de Groot RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Hospital Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) and granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) are important cytokines for the proliferation, differentiation, and
activation of myeloid lineages. The JAK/STAT pathway is one of the signaling
pathways implicated in mediating biological responses induced by these cytokines.
Previous studies have demonstrated that these cytokines predominantly activate an
80 kDa STAT5 isoform in mature granulocytes. To better understand the role of
STAT proteins during growth and differentiation of granulocytes, we evaluated
differentiation of human CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells ex vivo toward
eosinophils and neutrophils. Bandshift experiments showed that in an early stage 
of both differentiation pathways (14 days), the 94 kDa STAT5B protein was
activated by both IL-5 (eosinophil lineage) and GM-CSF (neutrophil lineage).
However, during maturation of both lineages (days 21 and 28), increased
expression of a functionally distinct 80 kDa STAT5 isoform was observed,
resulting in heterodimer DNA-binding complexes containing both the 94 and 80 kDa 
STAT5 proteins. The finding that functionally distinct isoforms of STAT5 are
activated during the early and late differentiation stages of granulocytes
suggests that they might be involved in regulating different biological functions
in these cells.

PMID: 9831865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31222-9.

The interleukin-4 receptor activates STAT5 by a mechanism that relies upon common
gamma-chain.

Lischke A(1), Moriggl R, Brändlein S, Berchtold S, Kammer W, Sebald W, Groner B, 
Liu X, Hennighausen L, Friedrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biozentrum), Physiologische
Chemie II, Am Hubland, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany.

Interleukin (IL)-4 signaling proceeds via cytoplasmic activation of the Janus
kinases JAK1 and JAK3 and the signal transducer and activator of transcription
STAT6. We show that the IL-4 receptor, like other cytokine receptor systems
utilizing the common receptor gamma-chain (gammac), is also connected to a
signaling pathway that involves STAT5. Both STAT5a and STAT5b become
tyrosine-phosphorylated and acquire specific DNA-binding properties in response
to IL-4 receptor stimulation in the murine pro-B cell line Ba/F3. In preactivated
human T cells, STAT5 became activated in an IL-4-dependent fashion as assayed by 
IL-4-induced STAT5 translocation from the cytoplasm to the cell nucleus and by
binding to cognate DNA. Moreover, stimulation of preactivated human T cells by
IL-4 led to specific transcriptional up-regulation of STAT5 target genes. IL-4
receptor-mediated STAT5 activation is dependent on the presence of gammac and
JAK3 within the receptor complex. In COS-7 cells, the JAK/STAT pathway leading
from the IL-4 receptor to STAT5-dependent regulation of a reporter gene relied
largely on coexpression of JAK3. In Ba/F3 cells, studies on signal transduction
evoked by directed specific receptor homo- or heterodimerization revealed that
STAT5 activation can be triggered exclusively by IL-4R heterodimers containing
gammac.

PMID: 9813029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 13;273(46):30218-24.

Differential control of the phosphorylation state of proline-juxtaposed serine
residues Ser725 of Stat5a and Ser730 of Stat5b in prolactin-sensitive cells.

Yamashita H(1), Xu J, Erwin RA, Farrar WL, Kirken RA, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

Transcription factors of the Stat family are controlled by protein kinases.
Phosphorylation of a positionally conserved tyrosine residue is obligatory for
Stat dimerization, nuclear translocation, and specific DNA binding. Studies of
Stat1 and Stat3 have suggested that serine phosphorylation may also regulate
function. We now identify serine residues located in a conserved PSP motif of
Stat5a (Ser725) and Stat5b (Ser730) as major phosphorylation sites, using
mutagenesis, phosphoamino acid analysis, and site-specific
anti-Stat5-phosphoserine antibodies. Unexpectedly, phosphorylation control of
this PSP motif differed between the highly homologous Stat5a and Stat5b proteins.
Whereas Ser725 of Stat5a was constitutively phosphorylated both in COS-7 cells
and Nb2 lymphocytes, phosphorylation of Ser730 of Stat5b was markedly stimulated 
by prolactin. The data also suggested the existence of a second major serine
phosphorylation site in Stat5a. Interestingly, constitutive phosphorylation of
the PSP motif was suppressed by PD98059 but not by staurosporine under conditions
in which both agents inhibited mitogen-activated protein kinases. Furthermore,
pretreatment of cells with staurosporine, PD98059, H7, or wortmannin did not
prevent either Stat5a or Stat5b from becoming maximally serine-phosphorylated
after prolactin exposure. We propose that two pathways regulate Stat5 serine
phosphorylation, one that is prolactin-activated and PD98059-resistant and one
that is constitutively active and PD98059-sensitive and preferentially targets
Stat5a. Finally, phosphorylation of the PSP motif of Stat5a or Stat5b was not
essential for DNA binding or transcriptional activation of a beta-casein reporter
gene in COS-7 cells, suggesting that serine kinase control of Stat5 activity
differs from that of Stat1 and Stat3.

PMID: 9804779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Sep;9(9):795-803.

Functional rescue of Stat5a-null mammary tissue through the activation of
compensating signals including Stat5b.

Liu X(1), Gallego MI, Smith GH, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Prolactin induces mammopoiesis and lactogenesis through the Janus kinase-signal
transducers and activators of transcription pathway, with Stat5a being a
principal and obligate cytoplasmic and nuclear signaling molecule. Mice from
which the Stat5a gene has been deleted fail to develop functional mammary tissue 
during their first pregnancy. Lobuloalveolar outgrowth is curtailed, and
epithelial cells fail to progress to functional differentiation. Here, we
investigate whether the effect of Stat5a deficiency is restricted to the
epithelium and whether the gland has the capacity to activate alternative
signaling pathways that could restore development and function. Mammary gland
transplant experiments showed that Stat5a-deficient epithelium does not
differentiate in wild-type stroma, thus demonstrating a cell-autonomous role for 
Stat5a. The capacity of Stat5a-deficient mammary tissue to develop and secrete
milk was measured after consecutive pregnancies and with postpartum suckling.
Neither of these regimens could independently restore lactation. However, the
combination of several pregnancies and suckling stimuli resulted in a partial
establishment of lactation and an increase of Stat5b activity. These experiments 
demonstrate that the mammary gland has inherent plasticity that allows it to use 
different signals to achieve its ultimate purpose, the production of milk to
nurture newborn offspring.

PMID: 9751123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Sep 15;243(2):347-58.

EGF modulates expression of STAT5 in mammary epithelial cells.

Petersen H(1), Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Hudddinge, S-141
86, Sweden.

HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cells are capable of differentiating in vitro. By
growing cells in EGF-containing medium, and upon confluence withdrawing EGF,
these cells become competent at responding to lactogenic hormone treatment and
expressing milk proteins. We found that during proliferation and at confluence
STAT5A and STAT5B proteins were expressed at equal levels or with STAT5B being
predominant. In competent cells, expression levels of STAT5A and STAT5B increased
markedly with STAT5A now being the predominant form, an expression pattern
resembling the expression patterns of STAT5 proteins seen during mammary gland
differentiation in vivo. This suggests that EGF has a suppressive effect on STAT5
expression, in particular, STAT5A, which we conclude to be mediated through
ras/raf/MEK/MAPK pathway and to a lesser extent through a PI3-kinase-mediated
pathway. Furthermore, we also found that EGF regulated a nuclear phosphatase
capable of dephosphorylating tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5. Our data show that
HC11 cells have retained the expression patterns of STAT5 proteins seen in vivo. 
This makes HC11 cells useful for studying molecular mechanisms regulating
expression of STAT factors and their participation in differentiation processes
of mammary gland.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9743594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):5852-60.

A sequence of the CIS gene promoter interacts preferentially with two associated 
STAT5A dimers: a distinct biochemical difference between STAT5A and STAT5B.

Verdier F(1), Rabionet R, Gouilleux F, Beisenherz-Huss C, Varlet P, Muller O,
Mayeux P, Lacombe C, Gisselbrecht S, Chretien S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire (ICGM), Institut National de la Santé
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM U363), Hopital Cochin, Université René
Descartes, F75014 Paris, France.

Two distinct genes encode the closely related signal transducer and activator of 
transcription proteins STAT5A and STAT5B. The molecular mechanisms of gene
regulation by STAT5 and, particularly, the requirement for both STAT5 isoforms
are still undetermined. Only a few STAT5 target genes, among them the CIS
(cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein) gene, have been identified. We cloned
the human CIS gene and studied the human CIS gene promoter. This promoter
contains four STAT binding elements organized in two pairs. By electrophoretic
mobility shift assay studies using nuclear extracts of UT7 cells stimulated with 
erythropoietin, we showed that these four sequences bound to STAT5-containing
complexes that exhibited different patterns and affinities: the three upstream
STAT binding sequences bound to two distinct STAT5-containing complexes (C0 and
C1) and the downstream STAT box bound only to the slower-migrating C1 band. Using
nuclear extracts from COS-7 cells transfected with expression vectors for the
prolactin receptor, STAT5A, and/or STAT5B, we showed that the C1 complex was
composed of a STAT5 tetramer and was dependent on the presence of STAT5A. STAT5B 
lacked this property and bound with a stronger affinity than did STAT5A to the
four STAT sequences as a homodimer (C0 complex). This distinct biochemical
difference between STAT5A and STAT5B was confirmed with purified activated STAT5 
recombinant proteins. Moreover, we showed that the presence on the same side of
the DNA helix of a second STAT sequence increased STAT5 binding and that only
half of the palindromic STAT binding sequence was sufficient for the formation of
a STAT5 tetramer. Again, STAT5A was essential for this cooperative tetrameric
association. This property distinguishes STAT5A from STAT5B and could be
essential to explain the transcriptional regulation diversity of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC109171
PMID: 9742102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Aug;64(2):245-58.

Characterization of cytokine differential induction of STAT complexes in primary 
human T and NK cells.

Yu CR(1), Young HA, Ortaldo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, National Institutes of Health, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Cytokines, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-12, and IL-15 are key regulators of human
peripheral blood T and NK cell activation and differentiation but the precise
mechanisms that give rise to their differential activities within these cells are
not clear. Recent studies reveal that a family of transcription factors, signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) directly mediate many
cytokine signals. We analyzed the activation of STATs in primary human T and NK
cells by a variety of specific cytokines. We demonstrate that IL-12 induces STAT4
only in freshly isolated primary NK cells, but not in primary T cells, consistent
with the lack of the IL-12 receptor in resting T cells. In contrast, IL-4 induces
different C epsilon GAS DNA-protein binding complexes in both T and NK cells.
Moreover, IL-4 costimulation with IL-2 or IL-12 does not alter their own
preferential GAS-like DNA binding patterns when C epsilon-, Fc gamma RI-, and SIE
GAS motif containing oligonucleotide probes are compared, suggesting that
induction of GAS-like DNA-protein binding complexes by IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12 is
highly selective and represents one important factor in determining specific gene
activation. In addition, IL-6 and IL-2 synergistically induce homo- and
heterodimerized STAT1 alpha and STAT3 in both NK and T cells, consistent with
their reported synergism in modulating perforin gene expression. We further
demonstrated that IL-2, -7, and -15 induce multiple STAT proteins, including
STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT1 alpha, STAT3, and another unidentified Fc gamma RI GAS
DNA-binding protein. Finally, we observed that activated STAT5a and STAT5b
proteins form distinct Fc gamma RI GAS binding patterns in T and NK cells,
suggesting that they might have different roles in gene regulation. Our data
provide evidence that the differential responses in gene expression and cell
activation seen in primary NK and T cells on direct stimulation with different
cytokines may be a direct result of distinct activation of STAT transcription
factors.

PMID: 9715265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 15;161(4):1594-7.

Identification of an additional isoform of STAT5 expressed in immature
macrophages.

Lokuta MA(1), McDowell MA, Paulnock DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, Madison 53706-1532, USA.

We are interested in understanding the molecular basis of macrophage (Mphi)
differentiation and activation by cytokines. Recent reports have suggested that
the transcription factor STAT5 may play a role in Mphi differentiation. In the
experiments described here, we assessed the expression of STAT5-related molecules
in three Mphi cell lines, RAW 264.7, WEHI-3, and WEHI-3D+, which represent
different stages of Mphi maturation, and also in primary peritoneal and bone
marrow Mphi from BALB/c mice. The studies revealed that the previously
characterized STAT5a and STAT5b isoforms are detectable at both the mRNA and
protein levels in these Mphi populations. Additional STAT5-related proteins were 
detected by immunoblot analysis and were preferentially expressed in both the
immature WEHI-3 cell population and the adherent bone marrow population
containing immature Mphi. These results identify new isoforms of STAT5 and
demonstrate that distinct patterns of expression of STAT5-related proteins are
observed in Mphi at different stages of maturation.

PMID: 9712020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 14;273(33):20779-84.

Positive selection of apoptosis-resistant cells correlates with activation of
dominant-negative STAT5.

Bovolenta C(1), Testolin L, Benussi L, Lievens PM, Liboi E.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biological Chemistry, University of Verona, Verona 37134,
Milano, Italy.

The STAT5 activation has important roles in cell differentiation, cell cycle
control, and development. However, the potential implications of STAT5 in the
control of apoptosis remain unexplored. To evaluate any possible link between the
erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) JAK2/STAT5 transduction pathway and apoptosis, we 
have investigated apoptosis-resistant cells (ApoR) that arose from positive
selection of the erythroid-committed Ba/F3EpoR cells triggered to apoptosis by
ectopic expression of the HOX-B8 homeotic gene. We show that JAK2 is normally
activated by Epo in both Ba/F3EpoR and ApoR cells. In contrast, both STAT5a and
STAT5b isoforms are uniquely activated in a C-truncated form (86 kDa) only in
ApoR cells. Analysis of ApoR and Ba/F3EpoR subclones confirmed that the switch to
the truncated STAT5 isoform coincides with apoptosis survival and that ApoR do
not derive from preexisting cells with a shortened STAT5. In addition, ApoR cells
die in the absence of Epo. This indicates that resistance to apoptosis is not
because of a general defect in the apoptotic pathway of ApoR cells. Furthermore, 
we show that the 86-kDa STAT5 protein presents a dominant-negative (DN)
character. We hypothesize that the switch to a DN STAT5 may be part of a
mechanism that allows ApoR cells to be selectively advantaged during apoptosis.
In conclusion, we provide evidence for a functional correlation between a
naturally occurring DN STAT5 and a biological response.

PMID: 9694822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Blood. 1998 Jul 15;92(2):443-51.

Erythropoietin induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2, STAT5A, and STAT5B in
primary cultured human erythroid precursors.

Oda A(1), Sawada K, Druker BJ, Ozaki K, Takano H, Koizumi K, Fukada Y, Handa M,
Koike T, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan.

We examined signaling by erythropoietin in highly purified human colony forming
unit-erythroid cells, generated in vitro from CD34(+) cells. We found that
erythropoietin induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2, STAT5A, and STAT5B.
Tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2 reaches a peak around 10 minutes after
stimulation and is maximum at 5 U/mL of erythropoietin. Tyrosine phosphorylation 
of STAT5 is accompanied by the translocation of activated STAT5 to the nucleus as
shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) using 32Pi-labeled STAT5
binding site in the beta-casein promoter. Tyrosine phosphorylation STAT1 or STAT3
was not detected in human erythroid precursors after stimulation with
erythropoietin. Crkl, an SH2/SH3 adapter protein, becomes coimmunoprecipitated
specifically with STAT5 from erythropoietin-stimulated erythroid cells; although 
it was shown to become associated with c-Cbl in the studies using cell lines.
Thus, human erythroid precursors can be expanded in vitro in sufficient numbers
and purity to allow its usage in signal transduction studies. This report sets a 
basis for further studies on signaling in primary cultured human erythroid
precursors, which in turn contribute to our better understanding in the
differentiation processes of erythrocytes and their precursors.

PMID: 9657743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 3;273(27):17128-37.

Colony-stimulating factor-1 stimulates the formation of multimeric cytosolic
complexes of signaling proteins and cytoskeletal components in macrophages.

Yeung YG(1), Wang Y, Einstein DB, Lee PS, Stanley ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Stimulation of macrophages with colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) results in
the protein tyrosine phosphorylation of the CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R) and many
other, primarily cytosolic, proteins. Stimulation by CSF-1 at 4 degreesC was used
to facilitate the purification and identification of the proteins of the
cytosolic anti-phosphotyrosine (PY)-reactive fraction (alphaPY-RF) involved in
downstream signaling pathways. Confocal microscopy revealed that the PY proteins 
are in close proximity to the CSF-1R at the plasma membrane. The alphaPY-RF
contained pre-existing complexes of PY proteins and non-PY proteins which
generally increased in size and PY protein content following CSF-1 stimulation.
PY proteins identified by microsequencing and Western blotting include Cbl,
STAT3, STAT5a, STAT5b, SHP-1, Shc, and two novel proteins pp57 and pp37. Other
proteins included cytoskeletal/contractile proteins (paxillin, vimentin,
elongation factor-1alpha, F-actin, tropomyosin, and myosin regulatory light
chain), Ras family signaling proteins (p85 (phosphoinositide 3-kinase), Vav,
Ras-GTPase-activating protein SH3 domain-binding protein, and Grb2), DnaJ-like
protein, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. CSF-1 induced the de novo 
recruitment of Cbl, STAT3, STAT5a, STAT5b, p85, SHP-1, Shc, vimentin, and Grb2 to
complexes and caused pre-existing complexes involving Vav, elongation
factor-1alpha, and F-actin to increase in size. These studies indicate that
CSF-1-induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation is associated with the
reorganization of complexes of cytoskeletal, signaling, and other proteins that
mediate CSF-1-regulated motility and growth.

PMID: 9642280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):3871-9.

Identification and characterization of a constitutively active STAT5 mutant that 
promotes cell proliferation.

Onishi M(1), Nosaka T, Misawa K, Mui AL, Gorman D, McMahon M, Miyajima A,
Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Signaling, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are
transcription factors which are activated by phosphorylation on tyrosine residues
upon stimulation by cytokines. Seven members of the STAT family are known,
including the closely related STAT5A and STAT5B, which are activated by various
cytokines. Except for prolactin-dependent beta-casein production in mammary gland
cells, the biological consequences of STAT5 activation in various systems are not
clear. We applied PCR-driven random mutagenesis and a retrovirus-mediated
expression screening system to identify constitutively active forms of STAT5. By 
this strategy, we have identified a constitutively active STAT5 mutant which has 
two amino acid substitutions; one is located upstream of the putative DNA binding
domain (H299R), and the other is located in the transactivation domain (S711F).
The mutant STAT5 was constitutively phosphorylated on tyrosine residues,
localized in the nucleus, and was transcriptionally active. Expression of the
mutant STAT5 partially dispenses with interleukin 3 (IL-3) as a growth stimulant 
of IL-3-dependent cell lines. Further analyses of the mutant STAT5 have
demonstrated that both of the mutations are required for nuclear localization,
efficient transcriptional activation, and induction of IL-3-independent growth of
an IL-3-dependent cell line, Ba/F3, and have indicated that a molecular basis for
the constitutive activation is the stability of the phosphorylated form of the
mutant STAT5.

PMCID: PMC108971
PMID: 9632771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Br J Haematol. 1998 Jun;101(3):521-8.

Differential constitutive activation between STAT-related proteins and MAP kinase
in primary acute myelogenous leukaemia.

Hayakawa F(1), Towatari M, Iida H, Wakao H, Kiyoi H, Naoe T, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Many cytokines and growth factors stimulate multiple signal transduction pathways
essential for proliferation in human acute leukaemia cells, including a
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway and a Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) pathway. We have previously 
shown constitutive activation of MAP kinase in approximately 50% of acute
myelogenous leukaemia (AML) samples. Recently, STAT proteins have been reported
to be constitutively activated in 10-20% of AML cases. STAT3 and STAT5 are the
main STAT proteins activated in haemopoietic progenitors in response to cytokines
such as IL-3, GM-CSF, erythropoietin and thrombopoietin. Although the possibility
of STAT1 protein as a substrate for MAP kinase at a serine residue has been
suggested, the cross-talk between STATs and MAP kinase pathways in vivo,
especially in leukaemia cells, remains unknown. We examined the phosphorylation
of STAT 3 and STAT 5 at the tyrosine residues in AML samples in which MAP kinase 
activity had already been found. 40/50 primary AML cases (80%) exhibited
constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay showed DNA binding activity of STAT5 correlated with tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5. Similarly, with respect to STAT3, 17/23 cases examined 
(74%) showed constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. In addition, we
examined the tyrosyl-phosphorylation of STAT5 isoforms, STAT5A and STAT5B, in 20 
AML cases, and found selective STAT5B phosphorylation in the absence of STAT5A
phosphorylation in three cases. Furthermore, in certain AML cases, constitutive
activation of MAP kinase and STAT proteins occurred independently. No significant
correlation of MAP kinase activation was observed with either tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT3/STAT5 or positive DNA binding of STAT proteins. These
results suggest that constitutive activation of STAT proteins occurs commonly and
that the causes of constitutive activation of these two major cascades are
heterogeneous in AML.

PMID: 9633897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell. 1998 May 29;93(5):841-50.

Stat5a and Stat5b proteins have essential and nonessential, or redundant, roles
in cytokine responses.

Teglund S(1), McKay C, Schuetz E, van Deursen JM, Stravopodis D, Wang D, Brown M,
Bodner S, Grosveld G, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

A variety of cytokines mediate the activation of Janus protein tyrosine kinases
(Jaks). The Jaks then phosphorylate cellular substrates, including members of the
signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) family of transcription
factors. Among the Stats, the two highly related proteins, Stat5a and Stat5b, are
activated by a variety of cytokines. To assess the role of the Stat5 proteins,
mutant mice were derived that have the genes deleted individually or together.
The phenotypes of the mice demonstrate an essential, and often redundant, role
for the two Stat5 proteins in a spectrum of physiological responses associated
with growth hormone and prolactin. Conversely, the responses to a variety of
cytokines that activate the Stat5 proteins, including erythropoietin, are largely
unaffected.

PMID: 9630227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 May;12(5):675-87.

Binding of STAT5a and STAT5b to a single element resembling a
gamma-interferon-activated sequence mediates the growth hormone induction of the 
mouse acid-labile subunit promoter in liver cells.

Ooi GT(1), Hurst KR, Poy MN, Rechler MM, Boisclair YR.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Section, Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

After birth, the endocrine actions of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and -II 
become increasingly important. In postnatal animals, most of circulating IGFs
occur in 150-kDa complexes formed by association of an acid-labile subunit (ALS) 
with complexes of IGF and IGF-binding protein-3. ALS is synthesized almost
exclusively in liver. GH stimulates the transcription of the ALS gene, resulting 
in increased hepatic mRNA and circulating ALS levels. To map the GH response
element, a series of 5'-deletion fragments of the mouse ALS promoter (nt -2001 to
-49, A(+1)TG) were inserted in the luciferase reporter plasmid pGL3 and
transfected into the H4-II-E rat hepatoma cell line. GH stimulated the activity
of promoter fragments with 5'-ends between nucleotide (nt) -2001 and nt -653 by
1.9- to 2.7-fold. This stimulation was abolished by deletion of the region
located between nt -653 and nt -483. This region contains two sites, ALS-GAS1 and
ALS-GAS2, that resemble the gamma-interferon activated sequence (GAS). Mutation
of the ALS-GAS1 site, but not of the ALS-GAS2 site, eliminated the response to GH
when assessed in the context of a GH-responsive promoter fragment, indicating
that ALS-GAS1 was necessary for GH induction. Three tandem copies of ALS-GAS1
were sufficient to confer GH inducibility to the minimal promoter of the
thymidine kinase gene. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, ALS-GAS1 formed 
a specific, GH-dependent protein-DNA complex with nuclear extracts from H4-II-E
cells. Using antibodies directed against members of the family of signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT), this complex was shown to be 
composed of STAT5a and STAT5b. Identical results were obtained when transfections
and mobility shift assays were performed in primary rat hepatocytes in which the 
endogenous ALS gene is expressed. Thus, the transcriptional activation of the
mouse ALS gene by GH is mediated by the binding of STAT5 isoforms to a single
GAS-like element.

PMID: 9605930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1998 Apr;30(4):751-61.

Angiotensin II activates Stat5 through Jak2 kinase in cardiac myocytes.

McWhinney CD(1), Dostal D, Baker K.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Hood Research Program, Weis Center for Research, Danville, Pennsylvania 
17822, USA.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) treatment was recently shown to activate Jak2, Stat1, and
Stat3 proteins in cardiac myocytes. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors have been shown to be an effective clinical treatment following
myocardial infarction, implying that inhibition of Ang II production is
beneficial in this pathological condition. Some of the effects of Ang II in
cardiac myocytes may be mediated by the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. The AT1
receptor was the first G-protein-coupled-receptor reported to activate the
JAK-STAT pathway. Recently, however, another G-protein-coupled-receptor (i.e.
serotonin) was also shown to signal through the JaK2 and STAT proteins in
myoblasts. We hypothesized that Ang II treatment might also activate Stat5
transcription factors in cardiac myocytes. In this study, we provide evidence
that the G-protein-coupled, Ang II type I (AT1) receptor couples to activation of
Stat5 through Jak2 kinase in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. Angiotensin II
induces a 1.5- to 10-fold increase in a Stat5 transcription complex, which binds 
to the prolactin-inducing element (PIE). By Western analysis, Stat5 protein
levels were shown to be tyrosine phosphorylated two- to three-fold over control, 
following. Ang II treatment of cardiac myocytes. Phosphorylation of Stat5a and
Stat5b proteins was rapid and sustained (30-60 min), and Jak2 kinase
co-immunoprecipitated with activated Stat5 proteins. In cardiac myocytes, Stat5
proteins co-immunoprecipitated with the AT1 receptor. Selective inhibition of
Jak2 kinase with AG-490 blocked formation of prolactin-inducing factor (PIF)
complexes by Ang II, suggesting that Jak2 kinase was required for the tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat5 in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 9602424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Blood. 1998 Apr 15;91(8):3017-27.

Prolonged STAT1 activation related to the growth arrest of malignant lymphoma
cells by interferon-alpha.

Grimley PM(1), Fang H, Rui H, Petricoin EF 3rd, Ray S, Dong F, Fields KH, Hu R,
Zoon KC, Audet S, Beeler J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Multiple biologic effects of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha), including cell growth 
inhibition and antiviral protection, are initiated by tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT proteins. Although this signal pathway has been intensively investigated,
the relevance of STAT signal persistence has received scant attention. Using
paired isogenic lymphoma cells (Daudi), which either are sensitive or resistant
to growth inhibition by IFN-alpha, we found comparable initial tyrosine
phosphorylation of multiple STAT proteins; however, the phosphorylation durations
and associated DNA-binding activities diverged. Phosphorylation and DNA-binding
capacity of STAT1 decreased after 4 to 8 hours in resistant cells, as compared
with 24 to 32 hours in sensitive cells, whereas phosphorylation of STAT3 and
STAT5b was briefer in both lines. Functional significance of the prolonged STAT1 
signal, therefore, was explored by experimental interruption of tyrosine
phosphorylation, either by premature withdrawal of the IFN-alpha or deferred
addition of pharmacologically diverse antagonists: staurosporine (protein kinase 
inhibitor), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (growth promoter), or
aurintricarboxylic acid (ligand competitor). Results indicated that an
approximately 18-hour period of continued STAT1 phosphorylation was associated
with growth arrest, but that antiviral protection developed earlier. These
differences provide novel evidence of a temporal dimension to IFN-alpha signal
specificity and show that duration of STAT1 activation may be a critical variable
in malignant cell responsiveness to antiproliferative therapy.

PMID: 9531615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Immunol. 1998 Jan 1;160(1):28-31.

HIV-1 infection induces a selective reduction in STAT5 protein expression.

Pericle F(1), Pinto LA, Hicks S, Kirken RA, Sconocchia G, Rusnak J, Dolan MJ,
Shearer GM, Segal DM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

HIV-1 infection is accompanied by qualitative and quantitative defects in CD4+ T 
lymphocytes. Loss of immune function in HIV patients is usually associated with a
profound dysregulation of cytokine production. To investigate whether cytokine
signaling defects occur during HIV infection, PHA blasts from healthy human
donors were infected with two strains of HIV-1 and screened for the expression of
STAT proteins used in cytokine signaling. A selective decrease in STAT5B was seen
8 days after infection with the BZ167 dual-tropic HIV isolate, but not with the
Ba-L, M-tropic strain. Based on these findings, purified T cells from
HIV-infected patients in different stages of disease were also tested for STAT
expression; decreases in STAT5A, STAT5B, and STAT1alpha were observed in all
patients. The reduction in STATs seen in vivo and in vitro after HIV infection
may contribute to the loss of T cell function in HIV disease.

PMID: 9551952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Apr;12(4):556-67.

Dominant negative variants of the SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase inhibit prolactin
activation of Jak2 (janus kinase 2) and induction of Stat5 (signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5)-dependent transcription.

Berchtold S(1), Volarevic S, Moriggl R, Mercep M, Groner B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Tumor Biology Center and
Department of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany.

PRL plays a central role in the regulation of milk protein gene expression in
mammary epithelial cells and in the growth and differentiation of lymphocytes. It
confers its activity through binding to a specific transmembrane, class I
hematopoietic receptor. Ligand binding leads to receptor dimerization and
activation of the tyrosine kinase Jak (janus kinase) 2, associated with the
membrane-proximal, intracellular domain of the receptor. Jak2 phosphorylates and 
activates Stat5, a member of the Stat (signal transducers and activators of
transcription) family. PRL receptor also activates SHP-2, a cytosolic tyrosine
phosphatase. We investigated the connection between these two signaling events
and derived a dominant negative mutant of SHP-2 comprising the two SH2 domains
[SHP-2(SH2)2]. An analogous variant of the SHP-1 phosphatase [SHP-1(SH2)2] was
used as a control. The dominant negative mutant of SHP-2 was found to inhibit the
induction of tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity of m-Stat5a,
m-Stat5b, and the carboxyl-terminal deletion variant m-Stat5adelta749, as well as
the transactivation potential of m-Stat5a and m-Stat5b. The dominant negative
mutant SHP-1(SH2)2 had no effect. The kinase activity of Jak2 is also dependent
on a functional SHP-2 phosphatase. We propose that SHP-2 relieves an inhibitory
tyrosine phosphorylation event in Jak2 required for Jak2 activity, Stat5
phosphorylation, and transcriptional induction.

PMID: 9544991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Blood. 1998 Mar 15;91(6):1901-8.

Carboxyl-truncated STAT5beta is generated by a nucleus-associated serine protease
in early hematopoietic progenitors.

Meyer J(1), Jucker M, Ostertag W, Stocking C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Virus Genetics, Heinrich-Pette-Institut fur
experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der Universitat Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany.

Hematopoiesis is tightly controlled by a family of cytokines that signal through 
a related set of receptors. The pleiotropic and overlapping response of a cell to
different cytokines is reflected in the number and complex pattern of activated
signal transducers. Of special interest is STAT5, which is stimulated by a large 
and diverse set of cytokines. In addition to the two highly homologous proteins, 
STAT5A and STAT5B, encoded by duplicated genes, expression and activation of a
dominant-negative, carboxyl-truncated form has also been described in early
hematopoietic progenitors. We show here that a protease expressed in early
hematopoietic cells cleaves the alpha forms of STAT5A/5B (p96/p94) to generate
carboxyl-truncated beta forms (p80/p77). Inhibition studies assigned this
protease to the serine class of endopeptidases. Cell fractionation experiments
showed that the protease is associated with the nucleus in a constitutively
activated form and does not require an activated STAT5 substrate. The ability of 
a protease to modulate the specificity of an activated transcription factor is
unprecedented and underlines the importance of proteases in regulation of cell
functions.

PMID: 9490672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Endocrinology. 1998 Apr;139(4):1936-42.

Establishment and characterization of a simian virus 40-transformed
temperature-sensitive rat luteal cell line.

Sugino N(1), Zilberstein M, Srivastava RK, Telleria CM, Nelson SE, Risk M, Chou
JY, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
60612-7342, USA.

The primary culture of rat luteal cells and their long-term maintenance have been
difficult. Low cellular yields have limited the possibility for the study of gene
regulation in luteal cells. The goal of this study was to develop a cell line to 
serve as a model by which to study the expression and regulation of various genes
specific to luteal cells. We attempted to develop a luteal cell line by
transformation of large luteal cells through infection with a
temperature-sensitive simian virus (SV-40 tsA209) mutant that has a
temperature-sensitive mutation required for the maintenance of cell
transformation. We report here the successful establishment of such a cell line, 
designated GG-CL cells. Large luteal cells were purified to homogeneity by flow
cytometry from corpora lutea of day 14 pregnant rats, cultured for 24 h, and then
infected with the SV-40 tsA209 mutant virus. Transformed cells were maintained at
the permissive temperature (33 C) until colonies were identified. Several
colonies of transformed cells were isolated and passaged. They multiplied at 33 C
and formed multilayers. At the nonpermissive temperature (40 C), cells reverted
to the normal differentiated phenotype similar to the primary luteal cells in
culture. To determine whether GG-CL cells express the genes found in normal
luteal cells, messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was examined by either Northern
analysis or RT-PCR with primers specific to each mRNA. GG-CL cells were found to 
express receptors for interleukin-6 and glucocorticoid, as well as the newly
discovered estrogen receptor-beta (ER-beta) and the orphan nuclear receptor nur
77. No receptors for ER-alpha, progesterone, LH, or PRL could be detected. This
cell line also expressed 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20alpha-HSD), but 
not cholesterol side-chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (P450scc),
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, or aromatase cytochrome P450 (P450arom).
Although the cells did not express the PRL receptor, they did express Janus
kinase (JAK2) and signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat5b),
and, when transfected with the PRL receptor, they responded to PRL with a marked 
inhibition in 20alpha-HSD mRNA expression. In addition, estradiol enhanced
ER-beta expression in a dose-dependent manner whereas cAMP stimulation caused a
marked and rapid increase in the expression of the orphan receptor nur 77. In
summary, a temperature-sensitive cell line was successfully established from the 
large luteal cells of rat corpora lutea. These cells express key genes encoding
enzymes and receptors inherent to this defined luteal cell population and respond
to stimulation by PRL, estradiol, and cAMP.

PMID: 9528980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Endocrinology. 1998 Apr;139(4):1872-82.

Lactogenic hormone-inducible phosphorylation and gamma-activated site-binding
activities of Stat5b in primary rat Leydig cells and MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor
cells.

Kanzaki M(1), Morris PL.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription Stat5b has been implicated
in signal transduction pathways for a number of cytokines and growth factors,
including GH and PRL. Although these lactogenic hormones have the potential to
enhance gonadotropin-induced steroidogenesis, the role of GH and PRL in the
testis has long been and remains the subject of controversy. In this report we
provide, to our knowledge, the first evidence of Stat5b protein expression in the
testis and characterize the activation of Stat5b by these lactogenic hormones in 
primary rat progenitor, immature and adult Leydig cells, and mouse MA-10 Leydig
tumor cells. In MA-10 cells, both GH and PRL mediate tyrosine phosphorylation of 
Janus kinase (JAK) 2 and Stat5b and induce DNA-binding activity of Stat5b. GH
enhances both PIE (PRL-inducible element) and Fc gammaRI gamma-activated sites
(GAS), but PRL modulates only PIE GAS. In primary Leydig cells isolated from
18-day-old rats, GH, but not PRL, activates cytoplasmic Stat5b and induces the
binding of translocated nuclear Stat5b to GAS elements. Although Stat5b protein
is expressed in both Percoll- and elutriator-purified adult rat Leydig cells,
neither GH nor PRL treatment results in Stat5b-DNA binding. Our studies indicate 
that the MA-10 cell has the capacity to bind both GH and PRL and provides a
useful model system with which to study the distinct testicular roles of these
hormones. Moreover, our findings suggest that progenitor and immature Leydig
cells are functional targets for GH in the immature rat, suggestive of a role for
GH-Stat5b in testicular development. Our data indicate that lactogenic
hormone-inducible transcriptional activation may target distinct gene expression 
in a signaling cascade(s) involving Stat5b but also imply coordinate control by
multiple Leydig cell factors.

PMID: 9528973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):1783-92.

Characterization of Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers and heterodimers and their
association with the glucocortiocoid receptor in mammary cells.

Cella N(1), Groner B, Hynes NE.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

The lactogenic hormones, i.e., prolactin and glucocorticoids, act in concert to
stimulate transcription factors responsible for hormone-dependent milk protein
gene expression. In the mammary gland, prolactin activates Stat5a and Stat5b and 
glucocorticoids activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Immunoprecipitation
experiments revealed that in mammary cells, Stat5a, Stat5b, and the GR are
physically associated in vivo. The association is not dependent on lactogenic
hormone treatment and is evident at all stages of mammary gland development.
Immunodepletion experiments indicated that a fraction of GR and Stat5 proteins
are not associated, suggesting that there are different intracellular pools of
these proteins. Lactogenic hormone treatment of HC11 mammary cells resulted in
tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5b, dimerization, and rapid nuclear
translocation of both Stat5 proteins. Following hormone treatment, Stat5a-Stat5b 
heterodimers were detected by their coimmunoprecipitation. In addition,
immunodepletion experiments followed by gel shift analyses revealed the presence 
of active Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers. In mammary cells, Stat5b homodimers are
less abundant than Stat5a homodimers. Although the GR does not bind the Stat5 DNA
binding site directly, it could be detected with the Stat5-DNA complex. These
results suggest that glucocorticoids affect milk protein gene expression via
association of the GR with Stat5. Thus, there is a functional coupling between
Stat-dependent and nuclear hormone receptor-dependent gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC121408
PMID: 9528750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Biol Reprod. 1998 Feb;58(2):295-301.

Lactogenic hormone signal transduction.

Yu-Lee LY(1), Luo G, Book ML, Morris SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
yulee@bcm.tmc.edu

The peptide hormone prolactin (PRL) is known to regulate numerous target tissues.
Among the less well-known targets are cells of the immune system, including T
cells, B cells, and macrophages. Our laboratory has cloned a panel of
PRL-inducible T-cell activation genes for use in studies investigating how PRL
modulates the biology of cells of the immune system. This article focuses on two 
such PRL-inducible genes. One is a transcription factor called interferon
regulatory factor-1, whose expression is regulated by signaling molecules along
the PRL-inducible JAK/Stat signaling pathway. These signaling molecules include
Stat1 and CBP as positive mediators and, unexpectedly, Stat5b as a negative
mediator. A second PRL-inducible gene is c15/RNUDC, a novel nuclear movement
protein, which may provide a link between PRL signaling and signaling via the
lipid second messenger, platelet activating factor.

PMID: 9475379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):1058-63.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-activated signaling pathways in 
human neutrophils. Selective activation of Jak2, Stat3, and Stat5b.

Al-Shami A(1), Mahanna W, Naccache PH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Rhumatologie et Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du
CHUL, and Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Ste-Foy,
Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) regulates many of the
biological functions of human neutrophils. This includes the stimulation of
protein synthesis and the tyrosine phosphorylation of various proteins among
which is JAK2. The present study was aimed at characterizing in detail the
pattern of activation by GM-CSF of the JAK/STAT pathway in human neutrophils. The
results obtained show that the stimulation of human neutrophils by GM-CSF
specifically led to tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and had no effect on JAK1,
JAK3, or TYK2. Furthermore, GM-CSF induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 
and STAT5 but not of STAT1, STAT2, STAT4, or STAT6. Tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT3 was transient reaching its maximum at 15 min. STAT5 presented a different
pattern of tyrosine phosphorylation. The anti-STAT5 antibodies identified two
proteins at 94 and 92 kDa. The 94-kDa STAT5 was constitutively tyrosine
phosphorylated and showed no change upon GM-CSF stimulation. On the other hand,
the 92-kDa STAT5 was tyrosine phosphorylated within 1 min of GM-CSF treatment and
this was maintained for at least 30 min. By the use of specific antibodies, it
was determined that only STAT5B, and not STAT5A, was tyrosine phosphorylated in
GM-CSF-treated neutrophils. Furthermore, GM-CSF treatment induced an increase in 
the ability of STAT3 and STAT5B, but not STAT5A, to bind DNA probes. The
specificity of the pattern of activation of the JAK/STAT pathway suggests that it
may be directly linked to the modulation of the functions of mature nondividing, 
human neutrophils by GM-CSF.

PMID: 9422769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):28-32.

Activation of the Jak2-Stat5 signaling pathway in Nb2 lymphoma cells by an
anti-apoptotic agent, aurintricarboxylic acid.

Rui H(1), Xu J, Mehta S, Fang H, Williams J, Dong F, Grimley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA. hrui@usuhs.mil

Biological effects of many hormones and cytokines are mediated through
receptor-associated Jak tyrosine kinases and cytoplasmic Stat transcription
factors, including critical physiological processes such as immunity,
reproduction, and cell growth and differentiation. Pharmaceuticals that control
Jak-Stat pathways are therefore of considerable interest. Here we demonstrate
that a single Jak-Stat pathway can be activated by aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA),
a negatively charged triphenylmethane derivative (475 Da) with anti-apoptotic
properties. In prolactin (PRL)-dependent Nb2 lymphocytes, ATA sustained cell
growth in the absence of hormone and mimicked rapid PRL-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of Jak2 and activation of Stat5a and Stat5b with tyrosine
phosphorylation, heterodimerization, DNA binding, and induction of the
Stat5-regulated pim-1 protooncogene. ATA also mimicked PRL activation of serine
kinases ERK1 and ERK2. However, unlike PRL, ATA did not regulate Stat1 or Stat3. 
ATA also did not affect Jak3, which is activated in these cells by interleukin-2 
family cytokines. Although the mechanism and specificity by which ATA activates
Jak2, Stat5, and ERKs in Nb2 cells are still unclear, the present study
demonstrates that certain hormone or cytokine effects on Jak-Stat pathways can be
discretely imitated by a low molecular weight, non-peptide pharmaceutical. The
results are also consistent with Stat5 involvement in lymphocyte growth and
survival.

PMID: 9417042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1997 Oct 20;133(2):169-76.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibition decreases growth hormone
stimulated transcription mediated by STAT5.

Pircher TJ(1), Flores-Morales A, Mui AL, Saltiel AR, Norstedt G, Gustafsson JA,
Haldosén LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

We have investigated the possible involvement of the MAPK pathway in the growth
hormone(GH)-induced activation of one of the members of signal transducers and
activators of transcription, STAT5, by using the MAPK kinase (MEK) inhibitor
PD98059. PD98059 treatment of Chinese hamster ovarian cells, stably transfected
with the GH receptor (CHOA cells), abolished the GH-induced MAPK activity.
PD98059 decreased the amount of GH-induced STAT5 in nuclear extract with
DNA-binding capacity. Furthermore, GH dependent transcription of a STAT5
regulated reporter gene was inhibited by PD98059. The MEK inhibitor did not
reduce GH-stimulated nuclear translocation of STAT5. We also investigated if
PD98059 differentially influences the activation of the two STAT5 homologs,
STAT5a and STAT5b, which differ mainly at the C-terminal end, one of the
differences being the presence of a possible MAPK phosphorylation site in STAT5a.
Expression plasmids for these transcription factors were transfected into CHOA
cells together with a reporter gene. GH-stimulated fold induction of
transcription was reduced by PD98059 in STAT5a but not in STAT5b overexpressing
cells. A MAPK phosphorylation site-mutated version of STAT5a was also transfected
into CHOA cells. GH-stimulated fold induction of cotransfected reporter gene was 
not reduced by PD98059 in cells overexpressing mutant STAT5a. The above data show
that the MAPK pathway is required for the full activation of one of the STAT5
isoforms (STAT5a).

PMID: 9406863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1997 Oct 20;133(2):141-9.

Mammary Stat5 abundance and activity are not altered with lactation state in
cows.

Wheeler TT(1), Kuys YM, Broadhurst MM, Molenaar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, New Zealand Pastoral Agriculture Research Institute,
Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton. wheelert@agresearch.cri.nz

Stat5 is a key intracellular mediator of prolactin signalling and can activate
transcription of milk proteins in response to prolactin. Therefore, in animals
such as mice where lactation is dependent on prolactin, Stat5 is likely to play
an important role in establishing or maintaining lactation in the mammary gland. 
However, little is known about its role in lactation in the dairy cow. In order
to address this, the levels of Stat5a and Stat5b protein, mRNA and Stat5
DNA-binding activity were measured in mammary tissue from mice and cows at
different lactational states. In the cow, Stat5a and Stat5b protein and mRNA
levels, as well as Stat5 DNA-binding activity were unaltered between pregnancy
and established lactation. In contrast, in the mouse Stat5a and Stat5b protein,
as well as Stat5 DNA-binding activity were clearly increased during lactation
whereas Stat5a and Stat5b mRNA levels were highest during pregnancy as has been
previously described. In both species only a minority of the epithelial cell
nuclei were Stat5 positive during established lactation. These results suggest
that there are significant differences in the biological role of Stat5 in
controlling lactation between ruminants and rodents.

PMID: 9406860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cell Immunol. 1997 Nov 1;181(2):172-81.

IL-2 and IL-7 induce heterodimerization of STAT5 isoforms in human peripheral
blood T lymphoblasts.

Rosenthal LA(1), Winestock KD, Finbloom DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4555, USA.

Despite differences in T cell responses induced by interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-7,
both cytokines modulate T cell functions by activation of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription (STAT) proteins. We examined the contribution of the 
two isoforms of STAT5, STAT5A and STAT5B, to IL-2- and IL-7-induced activation of
human peripheral blood T lymphoblasts. Both cytokines induced assembly of STAT5A 
and STAT5B containing complexes capable of binding to the interferon-gamma
activation sequence (GAS), and these complexes rapidly translocated (within 1
min) into the nucleus of IL-2- or IL-7-treated cells. The kinetics of this
translocation were delayed in IL-7-treated as compared to IL-2-treated cells.
IL-2 and IL-7 were equivalent in their ability to induce tyrosine phosphorylation
of STAT5A and STAT5B and to facilitate binding of these STATs to an immobilized
GAS element. Both IL-2 and IL-7 induced substantial amounts of STAT5A/STAT5B
heterodimerization. Moreover, we observed constitutive association of STAT3 with 
each STAT5 isomer. These data suggest that IL-2 and IL-7 induce assembly of STAT 
heterodimers in a similar manner and that subsequent cellular responses may be
driven by induction of similar sets of genes.

PMID: 9398404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Eur J Immunol. 1997 Oct;27(10):2737-40.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces a unique set of STAT
factors in murine dendritic cells.

Welte T(1), Koch F, Schuler G, Lechner J, Doppler W, Heufler C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, University of Innsbruck,
Austria.

Cytokine-mediated signaling pathways were studied in mouse dendritic cells (DC)
by analysis of the activation pattern of STAT factors. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays were performed to detect STAT isoform-specific complexes.
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) simultaneously induced 
complexes containing STAT1, STAT3, STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT6. In non-DC, a similar
broad activation pattern of STAT factors by GM-CSF or other cytokines has not
been observed so far. By comparison, in peritoneal macrophages, GM-CSF induced a 
complex with the properties of a truncated form of STAT5. Other cytokines tested 
on DC either failed to induce STAT factors [interleukin (IL)-1 beta, IL-2,
IL-15], or activated the same STAT factors as observed in peritoneal macrophages 
(IL-4, IFN-gamma). Our results implicate a specific effect of GM-CSF on STAT
signaling in DC which might account for the cell type-specific effect of this
cytokine on development and function.

PMID: 9368634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 24;272(43):26841-9.

Transcriptional inhibition by Stat5. Differential activities at growth-related
versus differentiation-specific promoters.

Luo G(1), Yu-Lee L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) induces transcriptional activation of not only growth-related
genes such as interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) but also
differentiation-specific genes such as beta-casein through a signaling cascade
consisting of Janus kinases and Stat (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) factors. To understand better the role of Stats in PRL signaling, 
we cloned rat Stat5b from a PRL-responsive T cell line Nb2. A Stat5b-specific
peptide antibody was generated. In PRL receptor reconstituted COS cells
cotransfected with Stat5b or Stat5a, both Stat5 proteins become tyrosine
phosphorylated and bind to the IRF-1 GAS (interferon-gamma activation sequence)
element in a PRL-inducible manner. Unexpectedly, both Stat5b and Stat5a inhibit
PRL induction of the IRF-1 promoter, but they mediate PRL stimulation of the
beta-casein promoter. Stat5-mediated inhibition was observed only at the native
IRF-1 promoter and not at the isolated IRF-1 GAS element linked to a heterologous
thymidine kinase promoter. Mutational analyses showed that the DNA binding
activity of Stat5b is not required, but the carboxyl-terminal transactivation
domain is essential for Stat5b to inhibit PRL induction of the IRF-1 promoter.
These results suggest that Stat5b mediates inhibition via protein-protein
interactions. In contrast, both DNA binding and transactivation domains of Stat5b
are required to mediate PRL induction of the beta-casein promoter. Furthermore, a
carboxyl-terminal truncated dominant negative Stat5b can reverse Stat5b
inhibition at the IRF-1 promoter. These studies suggest that Stat proteins can
act as not only positive but also negative regulators of gene transcription.
Further, Stat5 can modulate gene expression without binding to DNA but via
protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 9341115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Sep 30;94(20):10657-62.

Constitutive and impaired signaling of leptin receptors containing the Gln -->
Pro extracellular domain fatty mutation.

White DW(1), Wang DW, Chua SC Jr, Morgenstern JP, Leibel RL, Baumann H, Tartaglia
LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Leptin (OB), an adipocyte-secreted circulating hormone, and its receptor (OB-R)
are key components of an endocrine loop that regulates mammalian body weight. In 
this report we have analyzed signal transduction activities of OB-R containing
the fatty mutation [OB-R(fa)], a single amino acid substitution at position 269
(Gln --> Pro) in the OB-R extracellular domain that results in the obese
phenotype of the fatty rat. We find that this mutant receptor exhibits both
ligand-independent transcriptional activation via interleukin 6 and hematopoietin
receptor response elements and ligand-independent activation of signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins 1 and 3. However, OB-R(fa) is
unable to constitutively activate STAT5B and is highly impaired for ligand
induced activation of STAT5B compared with OB-R(wt). Introduction of the fatty
mutation into a OB-R/G-CSF-R chimera generates a receptor with constitutive
character that is similar but distinct from that of OB-R(fa). Constitutive mutant
OB-R(fa) receptor signaling is repressed by coexpression of OB-R(wt). The
implications of an extracellular domain amino acid substitution generating a
cytokine receptor with a partially constitutive phenotype are discussed both in
terms of the mechanism of OB-R triggering and the biology of the fatty rat.

PMCID: PMC23439
PMID: 9380691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Blood. 1997 Sep 1;90(5):1768-76.

STAT5A-deficient mice demonstrate a defect in granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-induced proliferation and gene expression.

Feldman GM(1), Rosenthal LA, Liu X, Hayes MP, Wynshaw-Boris A, Leonard WJ,
Hennighausen L, Finbloom DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892-4555, USA.

Responses of cells to cytokines typically involve the activation of a family of
latent DNA binding proteins, referred to as signal transducers and activators of 
transcription (STAT) proteins, which are critical for the expression of early
response genes. Of the seven known STAT proteins, STAT5 (originally called
mammary gland factor) has been shown to be activated by several cytokines, such
as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-3
(IL-3), and IL-5, which are known to play important roles in growth and
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors. In this report we have used mice
that are deficient in STAT5A (one of two homologues of STAT5) to study the role
of STAT5A in GM-CSF stimulation of cells. When bone marrow-derived macrophages
were generated by differentiation with macrophage-CSF (M-CSF), exposure of cells 
from wild-type mice to GM-CSF resulted in a typical pattern of assembly of DNA
binding proteins specific for the gamma activation sequence (GAS) element within 
the beta-casein promoter. However, in cells from the STAT5A null mouse one of the
shifted bands was absent. Immunoblotting analysis in the null mice showed that
lack of STAT5A protein resulted in no alteration in activation of STAT5B by
tyrosine phosphorylation. Proliferation experiments revealed that, when exposed
to increasing concentrations of GM-CSF, cells derived from the null mice grew
considerably more slowly than cells derived from the wild-type mice. Moreover,
expression of GM-CSF-dependent genes, CIS and A1, was markedly inhibited in cells
derived from null mice as compared with those of wild-type mice. The decreased
expression observed with A1, a bcl-2 like gene, may account in part for the
suppression of growth in cells from the null mice. These data suggest that the
presence of STAT5A during the GM-CSF-induced assembly of STAT5 dimers is critical
for the formation of competent transcription factors that are required for both
gene expression and cell proliferation.

PMID: 9292509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 15;272(33):20954-60.

Promoter-dependent synergy between glucocorticoid receptor and Stat5 in the
activation of beta-casein gene transcription.

Lechner J(1), Welte T, Tomasi JK, Bruno P, Cairns C, Gustafsson J, Doppler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Innsbruck,
Fritz-Pregl-Strasse 3, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Steroid hormone receptors and Stat factors comprise two distinct families of
inducible transcription factors. Activation of a member of each family, namely
the glucocorticoid receptor by glucocorticoids and Stat5 by prolactin, is
required for the efficient induction of the expression of milk protein genes in
the mammary epithelium. We have studied the mode of interaction between Stat5 and
the glucocorticoid receptor in the activation of beta-casein gene transcription. 
The functional role of potential half-palindromic glucocorticoid receptor-binding
sites mapped previously in the promoter region was investigated. beta-Casein gene
promoter chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs containing mutations and
deletions in these sites were tested for their responsiveness to the synergistic 
effect of prolactin and dexamethasone employing COS-7 cells or HC11 mammary
epithelial cells. Synergism depended on promoter regions containing intact
binding sites for the glucocorticoid receptor and Stat5. The carboxyl-terminal
transactivation domains of Stat5a and Stat5b were not required for this
synergism. Our results suggest that in lactogenic hormone response elements
glucocorticoid receptor molecules bound to nonclassical half-palindromic sites
gain competence as transcriptional activators by the interaction with Stat5
molecules binding to vicinal sites.

PMID: 9252424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3426-34.

Growth hormone-induced tyrosyl phosphorylation and deoxyribonucleic acid binding 
activity of Stat5A and Stat5B.

Smit LS(1), Vanderkuur JA, Stimage A, Han Y, Luo G, Yu-Lee LY, Schwartz J,
Carter-Su C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
49109-0622, USA.

GH is known to activate JAK2 tyrosine kinase and members of the Stat family of
transcription factors, including Stats 1, 3, and 5. The recent observation that
at least two Stat5 proteins (Stat5A and Stat5B) exist in mouse and human, raises 
the question of whether GH activates both Stat5A and Stat5B and, if so, whether
the requirements for activation are the same. An initial report investigating
this issue demonstrated GH-dependent activation of Stat5A but not Stat5B. In this
paper, we demonstrate (in COS cells expressing rat GH receptor (rGHR) and either 
Stat5A or Stat5B, 3T3-F442A fibroblasts, and CHO cells expressing rGHR) that GH
induces tyrosyl phosphorylation of both Stat5A and Stat5B. Similar time courses
of phosphorylation were observed for the two proteins. Interestingly, the pattern
of observed bands differs for the two forms of Stat5. Two closely migrating
Stat5A bands can be detected in cells treated with or without GH. Both of these
bands become tyrosyl phosphorylated in response to GH. Three species of Stat5B
are observed in untreated cells. An additional, more slowly migrating Stat5B
band, appears upon treatment with GH. The three more slower migrating Stat5B
bands observed in response to GH contain phosphorylated tyrosyl residues. We
further demonstrate that GH induces binding of Stat5A and Stat5B, as well as
Stat1, to the GAS-like element in the beta-casein promoter. We and others have
demonstrated previously that specific regions of GHR are required for
GH-dependent activation of what is here identified as Stat5B. To gain insight
into the mechanism by which GH promotes tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5A,
GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5A was examined in CHO cells
expressing truncated and mutated rGHR. The results indicate that Stat5A and
Stat5B require the same regions of rGHR for maximal activation by GH: the
C-terminal half of the cytoplasmic domain; tyrosines 333 and/or 338 in the
N-terminal half of the cytoplasmic domain; and the regions required for JAK2
activation. To dissect further the mechanism by which GH activates Stat5A and B, 
the requirement for JAK2 in GH-dependent Stat5 tyrosyl phosphorylation was
assessed using JAK2-deficient cells expressing GHR (gamma2A-GHR) and the
wild-type parental cell line expressing GHR (2C4-GHR). GH-induced tyrosyl
phosphorylation of Stat5B in 2C4-GHR cells but not in the JAK2 deficient,
gamma2A-GHR cells, indicating that JAK2 is required for GH-dependent tyrosyl
phosphorylation of Stat5B. Western blotting revealed that Stat5A is not expressed
in this cell type. Taken together, these findings suggest that: 1) GH activates
both Stat5A and Stat5B in several cell types; 2) the pattern of bands observed
differs for Stat5A and Stat5B; 3) GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of Stat5A 
requires specific regions of GHR, and these requirements are the same as for
Stat5B; and 4) JAK2 kinase is required for GH-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation
of Stat5B and, most likely, Stat5A.

PMID: 9231797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 11;272(28):17694-702.

Interaction of growth hormone-activated STATs with SH2-containing phosphotyrosine
phosphatase SHP-1 and nuclear JAK2 tyrosine kinase.

Ram PA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) rapidly stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation followed by
serine/threonine phosphorylation of multiple cytoplasmic STAT transcription
factors, including one, STAT5b, that is uniquely responsive to the temporal
pattern of plasma GH stimulation in rat liver and is proposed to play a central
role in the activation of male-expressed liver genes by GH pulses in vivo
(Waxman, D. J., Ram, P. A., Park, S. H., and Choi, H. K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
270, 13262-13270). We now show that JAK2, the GH receptor-associated tyrosine
kinase, is present both in the cytosol and in the nucleus in cultured liver cells
and in rat liver in vivo and that GH-activated STAT3 but not STAT5b becomes
associated with nuclear JAK2. GH is also shown to activate by 3-4-fold SHP-1, a
phosphotyrosine phosphatase that contains two src homology 2 (SH2) domains. GH
also induces nuclear translocation and binding of SHP-1 to
tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5b, suggesting that this GH-activated phosphatase may
play a role in dephosphorylation leading to deactivation of nuclear STAT5b
following the termination of a plasma GH pulse in male rat liver in vivo. No such
association of SHP-1 with GH-activated STAT3 was detected, a finding that could
help explain the marked desensitization of STAT3, but not STAT5b, to subsequent
GH pulses following an initial GH activation event.

PMID: 9211920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7239-44.

Requirement of STAT5b for sexual dimorphism of body growth rates and liver gene
expression.

Udy GB(1), Towers RP, Snell RG, Wilkins RJ, Park SH, Ram PA, Waxman DJ, Davey HW.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Science Group, AgResearch, Ruakura, Private Bag 3123, Hamilton, New
Zealand.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription, STAT5b, has been implicated
in signal transduction pathways for a number of cytokines and growth factors,
including growth hormone (GH). Pulsatile but not continuous GH exposure activates
liver STAT5b by tyrosine phosphorylation, leading to dimerization, nuclear
translocation, and transcriptional activation of the STAT, which is proposed to
play a key role in regulating the sexual dimorphism of liver gene expression
induced by pulsatile plasma GH. We have evaluated the importance of STAT5b for
the physiological effects of GH pulses using a mouse gene knockout model. STAT5b 
gene disruption led to a major loss of multiple, sexually differentiated
responses associated with the sexually dimorphic pattern of pituitary GH
secretion. Male-characteristic body growth rates and male-specific liver gene
expression were decreased to wild-type female levels in STAT5b-/- males, while
female-predominant liver gene products were increased to a level intermediate
between wild-type male and female levels. Although these responses are similar to
those observed in GH-deficient Little mice, STAT5b-/- mice are not GH-deficient, 
suggesting that they may be GH pulse-resistant. Indeed, the dwarfism, elevated
plasma GH, low plasma insulin-like growth factor I, and development of obesity
seen in STAT5b-/- mice are all characteristics of Laron-type dwarfism, a human
GH-resistance disease generally associated with a defective GH receptor. The
requirement of STAT5b to maintain sexual dimorphism of body growth rates and
liver gene expression suggests that STAT5b may be the major, if not the sole,
STAT protein that mediates the sexually dimorphic effects of GH pulses in liver
and perhaps other target tissues. STAT5b thus has unique physiological functions 
for which, surprisingly, the highly homologous STAT5a is unable to substitute.

PMCID: PMC23803
PMID: 9207075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 20;272(25):15760-4.

Signaling of type II oncostatin M receptor.

Auguste P(1), Guillet C, Fourcin M, Olivier C, Veziers J, Pouplard-Barthelaix A, 
Gascan H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, 4 rue Larrey, CHU Angers, 49033 Angers
Cedex, France.

Oncostatin M (OSM) mediates its bioactivities through two different heterodimer
receptors. They both involve the gp130-transducing receptor, which dimerizes with
either leukemia inhibitory receptor beta or with OSM receptor beta (OSMRbeta) to 
generate, respectively, type I and type II OSM receptors. Co-precipitation of
gp130-associated proteins, flow cytometry, polymerase chain reaction, and
tyrosine phosphorylation analyses allowed the characterization of both types of
OSM receptors expressed on the surface of different cell lines. It also allowed
the detection of a large size protein, p250, that specifically associates to the 
type II OSM receptor components and that is tyrosine-phosphorylated after the
activation peak of the gp130.OSMRbeta heterocomplex. The restricted expression of
type I OSM receptor by the JAR choriocarcinoma cell line, and type II receptor by
the A375 melanoma cell line, permitted the characterization of their signaling
machineries. Both type I and type II OSM receptors activated Jak1, Jak2, and Tyk2
receptor-associated tyrosine kinases. The information is next relayed to the
nucleus by the STAT3 transcriptional activator, which is recruited by both types 
of OSM receptors. In addition, STAT5b was specifically activated through the
gp130.OSMRbeta type II heterocomplex. The signaling pathway differences observed 
between the common type I LIF/OSM receptor and the specific type II OSM receptor 
might explain some of the bioactivities specifically displayed by OSM.

PMID: 9188471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 13;272(24):15459-65.

Two discrete regions of interleukin-2 (IL2) receptor beta independently mediate
IL2 activation of a PD98059/rapamycin/wortmannin-insensitive Stat5a/b serine
kinase.

Kirken RA(1), Malabarba MG, Xu J, DaSilva L, Erwin RA, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Rui
H, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, 21702-1201,
USA.Kirken@mail.ncifcrf.gov

Many cytokines, hormones, and growth factors activate Janus kinases to tyrosine
phosphorylate select members of the Stat transcription factors. For full
transcriptional activation, Stat1 and Stat3 also require phosphorylation of a
conserved serine residue within a mitogen-activated protein kinase
phosphorylation consensus site. On the other hand, two recently identified and
highly homologous Stat5a and Stat5b proteins lack this putative mitogen-activated
protein kinase phosphorylation site. The present study set out to establish
whether Stat5a and Stat5b are under the control of an interleukin-2
(IL2)-activated Stat5 serine kinase. We now report that IL2 stimulated marked
phosphorylation of serine and tyrosine residues of both Stat5a and Stat5b in
human T lymphocytes and in several IL2-responsive lymphocytic cell lines. No
Stat5a/b phosphothreonine was detected. Phosphoamino acid analysis also revealed 
that Stat5a/b phosphotyrosine levels were maximized within 1-5 min of IL2
stimulation, whereas serine phosphorylation kinetics were slower. Interestingly, 
IL2-induced serine phosphorylation of Stat5a differed quantitatively and
temporally from that of Stat5b with Stat5a serine phosphorylation leveling off
after 10 min and the more pronounced Stat5b response continuing to rise for at
least 60 min of IL2 stimulation. Furthermore, we identified two discrete domains 
of IL2 receptor beta (IL2Rbeta) that could independently restore the ability of a
truncated IL2Rbeta mutant to mediate Stat5a/b phosphorylation and DNA binding to 
the gamma-activated site of the beta-casein gene promoter. These observations
demonstrated that there is no strict requirement for one particular IL2Rbeta
region for Stat5 phosphorylation. Finally, we established that the IL2-activated 
Stat5a/b serine kinase is insensitive to several selective inhibitors of known
IL2-stimulated kinases including MEK1/MEK2 (PD98059), mTOR (rapamycin), and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (wortmannin) as determined by phosphoamino acid and
DNA binding analysis, thus suggesting that a yet-to-be-identified serine kinase
mediates Stat5a/b activation.

PMID: 9182578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 30;272(22):14098-103.

Prolactin stimulates serine/tyrosine phosphorylation and formation of
heterocomplexes of multiple Stat5 isoforms in Nb2 lymphocytes.

Kirken RA(1), Malabarba MG, Xu J, Liu X, Farrar WL, Hennighausen L, Larner AC,
Grimley PM, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Transcription factors of the Stat gene family are selectively activated by many
hormones and cytokines. Stat5 originally was cloned as a prolactin-stimulated
DNA-binding protein, but is also activated by non-lactogenic cytokines in many
cell types. The recent identification of two distinct Stat5 genes, which encode a
94-kDa Stat5a and a 92-kDa Stat5b as well as several lower molecular weight
isoforms, suggests additional complexity and combinatorial possibilities for
transcriptional regulation. We now report a biochemical analysis of prolactin
activation of Stat proteins in Nb2 lymphocytes, which was associated with: 1)
rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5a, Stat5b, a COOH-terminally truncated
80-kDa Stat5 form, Stat1alpha, and Stat3; 2) rapid and selective formation of
Stat5a/b heterodimers, without involvement of Stat1alpha or Stat3; 3) marked
serine, but not threonine phosphorylation of Stat5a and Stat5b; and 4) the
appearance of two qualitatively distinct Stat5 protein complexes, which
discriminated between oligonucleotides corresponding to the prolactin response
elements of the beta-casein and interferon regulatory factor-1 gene promoters.
Collectively, our analyses showed that Stat5a and Stat5b respond similarly to
prolactin receptor activation, but also suggested that the two genes have evolved
unique properties that may contribute to the specificity of receptors that
utilize Stat5 signaling proteins.

PMID: 9162035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem J. 1997 May 15;324 ( Pt 1):231-6.

Prolactin stimulates the JAK2 and focal adhesion kinase pathways in human breast 
carcinoma T47-D cells.

Canbay E(1), Norman M, Kilic E, Goffin V, Zachary I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Marlborough Street, Bristol BS2 8HW, U.K.

Treatment of T47-D human breast carcinoma cells with recombinant prolactin
(rhPRL) induced a concentration- and time-dependent increase in the
phosphotyrosine content of JAK2. rhPRL also stimulated JAK2 tyrosine
phosphorylation more weakly in three other breast carcinoma lines, MCF-7, ZR-75-1
and MDA-MB-231. Furthermore it stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of two
isoforms of the transcriptional activator STAT5, STAT5a and STAT5b. Surprisingly,
rhPRL treatment of T47-D cells also stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of focal 
adhesion kinase (FAK), as determined by immunoprecipitation with
anti-phosphotyrosine antibody followed by immunoblotting with a specific FAK
antibody. The effect of rhPRL was rapid and concentration-dependent, being
maximal at 5 ng/ml. At rhPRL concentrations above 25 ng/ml, FAK tyrosine
phosphorylation declined but remained above control levels at 100 ng/ml. rhPRL
also stimulated paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation in T47-D cells with similar
concentration- and time-dependence. In a second human breast carcinoma cell line,
MCF-7, rhPRL produced very similar effects on FAK and paxillin tyrosine
phosphorylation. These findings identify a new protein tyrosine kinase pathway in
the action of the lactogenic hormone rhPRL and represent the first report that a 
hormone acting through a member of the haemopoietin receptor superfamily can
regulate the FAK/paxillin pathway.

PMCID: PMC1218421
PMID: 9164861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11128-32.

Mapping of a cytoplasmic domain of the human growth hormone receptor that
regulates rates of inactivation of Jak2 and Stat proteins.

Hackett RH(1), Wang YD, Sweitzer S, Feldman G, Wood WI, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

It has been previously demonstrated that growth hormone (GH)-stimulated tyrosine 
phosphorylation of Jak2 and Stat5a and Stat5b occurs in FDP-C1 cells expressing
either the entire GH receptor or truncations of the cytoplasmic domain expressing
only the membrane-proximal 80 amino acids. However, other receptor domains that
might modulate rates of GH activation and inactivation of this cascade have not
been examined. Here we have defined a region in the human GH receptor between
amino acids 520 and 540 in the cytoplasmic domain that is required for
attenuation of GH-activated Jak/Stat signaling. Immunoprecipitations with
antibodies to Jak2 indicate that the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 is
associated with this kinase in cells exposed to GH. To address the possibility
that SHP-1 could function as a negative regulator of GH signaling, liver extracts
from motheaten mice deficient in SHP-1 or unaffected littermates were analyzed
for activation of Stats and Jak2. Extracts from motheaten mice displayed
prolonged activation of the Stat proteins as measured by their ability to
interact with DNA and prolonged tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2. These results
delineate a novel domain in the GH receptor that regulates the inactivation of
the Jak/Stat pathway and appears to be modulated by SHP-1.

PMID: 9111009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Apr;11(4):400-14.

Regulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5b
activation by the temporal pattern of growth hormone stimulation.

Gebert CA(1), Park SH, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Plasma GH profiles, intermittent in adult male and continuous in adult female
rats, respectively, activate unique patterns of gene transcription in male and
female rat liver. Pulsatile, but not continuous, GH exposure activates liver
STAT5 (signal transducer and activator of transcription-5) by tyrosine
phosphorylation, leading to nuclear translocation, and is proposed to play a key 
role in GH pulse-regulated male-specific liver gene expression. The mechanisms
underlying the GH pattern dependence of STAT5 activation are presently
investigated using a rat hepatocyte-derived cell line. Rat GH stimulated tyrosine
phosphorylation followed by serine or threonine phosphorylation, leading to
activation of the DNA-binding activity of STAT5b, the major STAT5 form present in
these cells. Maximal STAT5b activation required a full 20 min at a
receptor-saturating GH concentration of 50 ng/ml, suggesting that hormone binding
leading to receptor dimerization is a relatively slow process. Repeat cycles of
GH pulsation led to repeat cycles of STAT5b activation followed by deactivation, 
similar to rat liver in vivo. Full responsiveness to succeeding GH pulses
required a minimum GH off-time of > or = 2.5 h, but was independent of new
protein synthesis. Continuous GH exposure led to down-regulation of activated
STAT5b, consistent with the desensitization of this GH pulse-activated pathway
observed in female rat liver. The rapid deactivation of STAT5b after termination 
of a GH pulse involved phosphotyrosine dephosphorylation as a key first step and 
could be blocked by pervanadate, a phosphotyrosine phosphatase inhibitor.
Unexpectedly, serine/threonine kinase inhibitors also inhibited STAT5b
deactivation. These studies establish that STAT5b is responsive to the temporal
pattern of GH stimulation and demonstrate a role for both a tyrosine phosphatase 
and a serine/threonine kinase in resetting this JAK/STAT signaling apparatus so
that it may respond to subsequent rounds of GH pulse activation.

PMID: 9092792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 18;94(6):2295-300.

Stat5 is a physiological substrate of the insulin receptor.

Chen J(1), Sadowski HB, Kohanski RA, Wang LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

Using the cytoplasmic domain of the insulin receptor (IR) in a yeast two-hybrid
screen, we identified a cDNA clone encoding the C-terminal 308 amino acids of
human Stat5b (Stat5b-Ct). Stat5b-Ct is tyrosine phosphorylated by purified IR
kinase domain in vitro. Insulin stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of
overexpressed Stat5b-Ct and endogenous Stat5 in cells overexpressing IR. Stat5
may be a direct target of the IR and, as a member of the Stat family of
transcription factors, may play a role in the regulation of gene transcription by
insulin. In support of this hypothesis, perfusion of mouse liver with insulin
promotes rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5 and activation of Stat5 DNA
binding. Moreover, refeeding of fasted mice leads to rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation and stimulation of enhanced DNA-binding activity of Stat5
extracted from liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose tissues. Taken together, our
data strongly suggest that IR interacts with and phosphorylates Stat5 in vitro
and in tissues physiologically sensitive to insulin.

PMCID: PMC20081
PMID: 9122188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Genes Dev. 1997 Jan 15;11(2):179-86.

Stat5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and lactogenesis.

Liu X(1), Robinson GW, Wagner KU, Garrett L, Wynshaw-Boris A, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1812, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) induces mammary gland development (defined as mammopoiesis) and
lactogenesis. Binding of PRL to its receptor leads to the phosphorylation and
activation of STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins,
which in turn promote the expression of specific genes. The activity pattern of
two STAT proteins, Stat5a and Stat5b, in mammary tissue during pregnancy suggests
an active role for these transcription factors in epithelial cell differentiation
and milk protein gene expression. To investigate the function of Stat5a in
mammopoiesis and lactogenesis we disrupted this gene in mice by gene targeting.
Stat5a-deficient mice developed normally and were indistinguishable from
hemizygous and wild-type littermates in size, weight, and fertility. However,
mammary lobuloalveolar outgrowth during pregnancy was curtailed, and females
failed to lactate after parturition because of a failure of terminal
differentiation. Although Stat5b has a 96% similarity with Stat5a and a
superimposable expression pattern during mammary gland development it failed to
counterbalance for the absence of Stat5a. These results document that Stat5a is
the principal and an obligate mediator of mammopoietic and lactogenic signaling.

PMID: 9009201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Blood. 1997 Jan 15;89(2):483-92.

Thrombopoietin signal transduction in purified murine megakaryocytes.

Drachman JG(1), Sabath DF, Fox NE, Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington Medical Center, Division of Hematology, Seattle
98195, USA.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is a recently cloned cytokine that binds to its receptor,
Mpl, and promotes hematopoietic expansion and maturation, primarily of the
megakaryocyte lineage. The signaling pathways responsible for these events are
thought to involve the Janus family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (JAKs) and
the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs), which are
activated by tyrosine phosphorylation. Previous investigators have studied these 
molecules in engineered and naturally occurring cell lines. To investigate the
molecular basis for TPO signal transduction in a more physiologic target, we
determined the pattern of JAK and STAT activation in purified, normal urine
megakaryocytes. These results are compared with those of established cell lines
that only proliferate (Ba/F3- mMPL and DA-1-TPO) or only differentiate (L8057) in
response to TPO. From these findings, a model is proposed to explain the
physiologic roles of JAK2, TYK2, STAT3, and STAT5 in TPO signaling. Furthermore, 
previous studies of the physical interaction between Mpl and the JAKs are
extended, showing a difference in the association of JAK2 and TYK2 with the TPO
receptor. Finally, we show that, in the cell line Ba/F3-mMPL, the closely related
proteins STAT5A and STAT5B are both activated by TPO stimulation and are capable 
of heterodimerization. Together, these results further our understanding of the
early stages of megakaryocyte and platelet development.

PMID: 9002950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Stem Cells. 1997;15 Suppl 1:105-11; discussion 112.

Jaks and Stats in cytokine signaling.

Ihle JN(1), Nosaka T, Thierfelder W, Quelle FW, Shimoda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.

Hematopoiesis is regulated through the binding of cytokines to receptors of the
cytokine receptor superfamily. Although lacking catalytic domains, members of the
cytokine receptor superfamily mediate ligand-dependent activation of protein
tyrosine phosphorylation through their association and activation of members of
the Janus kinase (Jak) family of protein tyrosine kinases. The activated Jaks
phosphorylate the receptors which creates docking sites for SH2-containing
signaling proteins which are tyrosine phosphorylated following their association 
with the complex. Among the substrates of tyrosine phosphorylation are members of
the signal transducers and activators of the transcription family of proteins
(Stats). Various cytokines induce the tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of 
one or more of the seven family members. The pattern of Stat activation provides 
a level of cytokine individuality that is not observed in the activation of other
signaling pathways. The role of various Stats in the biological responses to
cytokines has been assessed through the analysis of receptor mutations which
disrupt Stat activation and more recently by disruption of the genes in mice. Our
results have demonstrated that the activation of Stat5a and Stat5b by
erythropoietin is critical for the activation of a number of immediate early
genes but is not required for a mitogenic response. Mice in which the genes for
Stat4 and Stat6 are disrupted are viable but lack functions that are mediated by 
interleukin 12 (IL-12) or IL-4, respectively, suggesting that these Stats perform
very specific functions in immune responses.

PMID: 9368330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31863-8.

Lactogenic hormone activation of Stat5 and transcription of the beta-casein gene 
in mammary epithelial cells is independent of p42 ERK2 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase activity.

Wartmann M(1), Cella N, Hofer P, Groner B, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Hynes NE.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, P.O. Box 2543, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
hynes@fmi.ch

HC11 mammary epithelial cells have been used to characterize molecular events
involved in the regulation of milk protein gene expression. Treatment of HC11
cells with the lactogenic hormones prolactin, insulin, and glucocorticoids
results in transcription of the beta-casein gene. Prolactin induces a signaling
event which involves tyrosine phosphorylation of the mammary gland factor, Stat5,
a member of the family of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(Stat). Here we show that HC11 cells express two Stat5 proteins, Stat5a and
Stat5b. Phosphopeptide and phosphoamino acid analysis of Stat5a and Stat5b
immunoprecipitated from phosphate-labeled HC11 cells revealed that both proteins 
were constitutively phosphorylated on serine. Lactogenic hormone treatment
resulted in the appearance of a tyrosine-phosphorylated peptide in both Stat5
proteins. Consistent with this observation, a Western blot analysis of Stat5a and
Stat5b showed that lactogenic hormones induced a rapid, transient increase in
phosphotyrosine which paralleled the binding of Stat5 to its cognate recognition 
sequence in the beta-casein gene promoter. Lactogenic hormone treatment of the
HC11 cells also led to a rapid activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase pathway. We examined the role of this pathway in beta-casein transcription
using a specific MAP kinase kinase inhibitor, PD98059. Concentrations of PD98059 
which completely abrogated lactogen-induced MAP kinase activation did not affect 
the phosphorylation state of Stat5, its DNA binding activity, or transcriptional 
activation of a beta-casein reporter construct. This indicates that the MAP
kinase pathway does not contribute to lactogenic hormone induction of the
beta-casein gene.

PMID: 8943229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Dec;10(12):1496-506.

Activation of Stat5a and Stat5b by tyrosine phosphorylation is tightly linked to 
mammary gland differentiation.

Liu X(1), Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive, and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5 was originally
identified as a mammary gland factor (MGF) that binds to promoter sequences of
milk protein genes and activates their transcription. We have generated
isoform-specific antibodies against Stat5a or Stat5b and show that both isoforms 
are present in similar amounts at the protein level in mammary tissues of virgin,
pregnant, lactating, and involuting mice. In contrast, Stat5 phosphorylation is
very low in immature virgins, rises sharply during late pregnancy, and declines
rapidly during involution. Upon phosphorylation, Stat5a and Stat5b form homo- and
heterodimers. The induction of Stat5 phosphorylation during late pregnancy
correlates with the transcriptional activation of milk protein genes. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift analysis, we demonstrated
that the DNA-binding activity detected during lactation is composed of both
Stat5a and Stat5b, but not of other STATs. The hypothesis that Stat5 is directly 
involved in mammary cell differentiation was tested in estrous cycle and in
transgenic mice with impaired mammary development. Transient differentiation of
mammary alveolar cells and milk protein gene expression during estrus in virgin
female mice coincide with transient Stat5 phosphorylation. Impaired mammary
development and very low levels of milk protein gene expression in mice carrying 
the truncated form of the cell fate protein Int3 correlated with reduced
phosphorylation and heterodimer formation.

PMID: 8961260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6937-44.

Activation of different Stat5 isoforms contributes to cell-type-restricted
signaling in response to interferons.

Meinke A(1), Barahmand-Pour F, Wöhrl S, Stoiber D, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Austria.

Tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factor Stat5 occur
in response to stimuli like granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor,
interleukin-3, or erythropoietin that stimulate both proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells. It is unclear whether Stat5 is part of a 
proliferative response or part of the events leading to cellular differentiation.
Here we report that agents promoting differentiation but not proliferation of
hematopoietic cells, like phorbol ester or both types of interferons (IFNs),
activate Stat5 in promonocytic U937 cells. Both IFN types caused tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding of predominantly one Stat5 isoform (Stat5a)
despite expression of both Stat5a and Stat5b proteins. Monocytic differentiation 
of U937 cells led to a strong decrease in IFN-gamma-mediated activation of Stat5 
but not of Stat1. Transactivation of Stat5-target genes occurred in response to
IFN-gamma, which activates both Stat5 and Stat1, but not in response to
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, which activates only Stat5.
Tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat5 is not generally part of the IFN response.
IFN-gamma did not cause Stat5 activation in HeLa cells, despite the expression of
both Stat5 isoforms at similar levels. By contrast, IFN-alpha caused tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding of exclusively the b isoform of Stat5, and
activated Stat5b formed a DNA binding activity previously found in HeLa cells and
designated IFN-alpha activation factor 2. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that ligand binding of IFN receptors leads to an isoform-specific activation of
Stat5 in a restricted number of cell lineages. Moreover, they suggest that Stat5 
might be part of the differentiation response of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC231697
PMID: 8943349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Nov;10(11):1425-43.

Growth hormone receptor cytoplasmic domain differentially promotes tyrosine
phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription 5b and 3 by
activated JAK2 kinase.

Yi W(1), Kim SO, Jiang J, Park SH, Kraft AS, Waxman DJ, Frank SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, USA.

GH-induced activation of JAK2, a GH receptor (GHR)-associated tyrosine kinase,
leads to tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STATs (signal transducers and
activators of transcription) 1, 3, and 5. The present study investigates the
importance of the GHR cytoplasmic domain in the activation of STAT3 and STAT5b.
As the perimembranous Box1 region of the GHR cytoplasmic domain is necessary for 
activation of wild-type (WT) JAK2 by GH, we examined this question using GHR/JAK2
chimeras that have an activatable JAK2 kinase domain replacing the GHR
cytoplasmic domain. STAT5b and STAT3, when each was coexpressed in COS-7 cells
with WT GHR and WT JAK2, were both strongly tyrosine phosphorylated in response
to GH. Coexpression of STAT3 with GHR/ JAK2 chimeras resulted in a strong
GH-independent tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 that was 40% as active as that
seen with WT GHR plus WT JAK2, whereas STAT5b was more minimally phosphorylated
(13% of WT GHR plus WT JAK2) when coexpressed with chimeras devoid of the GHR
cytoplasmic domain. Transient coexpression of each STAT together with WT JAK2 and
GHR COOH-terminal truncation mutants indicated that a GH-induced STAT3-DNA
binding complex, but not a STAT5b-DNA binding complex, was detectable when a GHR 
devoid of 85% of the cytoplasmic domain COOH-terminus (but eliciting significant 
JAK2 tyrosine phosphorylation) was expressed. In vitro binding experiments using 
GST/GHR cytoplasmic domain fusions demonstrated that both STATs could interact at
a low basal level with GHR regions distal to residue 317. Phosphorylation of
tyrosine residues in those distal regions greatly enhanced the receptor's
interaction with STAT5b, but not STAT3. We conclude that GH induces activation of
STAT3 and STAT5b by two different pathways: one primarily dependent on activation
of JAK2 (STAT3) and another that is additionally reliant on the presence of an
intact and tyrosine-phosphorylated GHR cytoplasmic domain (STAT5b).

PMID: 8923468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6141-8.

Naturally occurring dominant negative variants of Stat5.

Wang D(1), Stravopodis D, Teglund S, Kitazawa J, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Stat5 was initially identified as a prolactin-induced member of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) family in sheep. However, Stat5 
is also activated in the response to a variety of cytokines. In mice, and
possibly in other species, there exist two Stat5 genes (Stat5a and Stat5b) that
encode proteins of 92 and 94 kDa that are 95% identical. In the studies described
here, we demonstrate that naturally occurring carboxyl-truncated, variant Stat5
proteins of 77 and 80 kDa exist and that these proteins are inducibly tyrosine
phosphorylated in the response to several cytokines and form heterodimers with
the full-length, wild-type proteins. Using expression constructs encoding
truncated forms, we demonstrate that the truncated forms can be tyrosine
phosphorylated and bind DNA. Surprisingly, the tyrosine phosphorylation of the
carboxyl-truncated forms is considerably more stable than that of the wild-type
proteins. Overexpression of a carboxyl-truncated Stat5a in cells resulted in the 
specific inhibition of the transcriptional activation by interleukin-3 of the
genes for oncostatin M (Osm) and the cytokine-inducible, SH2 domain-containing
gene (Cis), both of which have been shown to be normally regulated by Stat5.
Although Stat5 dominantly suppressed the induction of these genes, no effects on 
cell proliferation were observed. Together, the results demonstrate the natural
existence of potentially dominantly suppressive variants of Stat5 and implicate
the carboxyl domain of Stats in transcriptional regulation and functions related 
to dephosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC231617
PMID: 8887644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5691-700.

Deletion of the carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain of MGF-Stat5 results in 
sustained DNA binding and a dominant negative phenotype.

Moriggl R(1), Gouilleux-Gruart V, Jähne R, Berchtold S, Gartmann C, Liu X,
Hennighausen L, Sotiropoulos A, Groner B, Gouilleux F.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Biology Center, Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Freiburg,
Germany.

The Stat (signal transducer and activator of transcription) factors transmit
cytokine, growth factor, and hormone responses. Seven members of the Stat gene
family are known. MGF-Stat5a has been discovered as a mediator of the prolactin
response in mammary epithelial cells. Two closely related variants of Stat5,
Stat5a and Stat5b, are encoded by distinct genes. We examined the functional
properties of the carboxyl termini of these molecules. Wild-type Stat5a (794
amino acids) and the carboxyl-terminal deletion mutant Stat5a delta 772 supported
prolactin-induced transcription of a beta-casein promoter-reporter construct in
COS7 cells; Stat5a delta 750 did not. Upon prolactin activation, tyrosine
phosphorylation and the specificity of DNA binding were indistinguishable among
the three Stat5a variants. Tyrosine dephosphorylation and the downregulation of
the DNA-binding activity were delayed in the Stat5a delta 750 mutant. The
carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain of Stat5a, amino acids 722 to 794, can
be conferred to the DNA-binding domain of the yeast transcription factor GAL4.
Coexpression of Stat5a or Stat5b and of the carboxyl-terminal deletion mutants
resulted in the suppression of transcriptional induction in COS or Ba/F3 cells.
We propose that Stat5a delta 750 and Stat5b delta 754 are lacking functional
transactivation domains and exert their dominant negative effects by blocking the
DNA-binding site in Stat5-responsive gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC231569
PMID: 8816482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):22175-82.

Stat6 and Jak1 are common elements in platelet-derived growth factor and
interleukin-4 signal transduction pathways in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts.

Patel BK(1), Wang LM, Lee CC, Taylor WG, Pierce JH, LaRochelle WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Both platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) play major
roles in cell proliferation, differentiation, chemotaxis, and other functional
responses. Here, we demonstrate that Stat6, previously shown to be activated by
only IL-4 and IL-3, becomes activated after PDGF stimulation of NIH 3T3
fibroblasts. PDGF BB, and to a lesser extent PDGF AA, rapidly induced DNA binding
activity from NIH 3T3 cell lysates utilizing the immunoglobulin heavy chain germ 
line epsilon promoter (Iepsilon) that specifically binds to Stat6 in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. DNA binding activity could be detected
within 5 min and reached maximum levels at approximately 20 min in parental NIH
3T3 cells. An identical mobility shift and time course of PDGF-mediated Iepsilon 
binding activity was more pronounced in lysates of NIH 3T3 transfectants
overexpressing human Stat6 (NIH 3T3-Stat6). The observed radiolabeled Iepsilon
mobility shift was competed by unlabeled Iepsilon as well as by the beta-casein
gene promoter but not by the interferon-alpha-stimulated response element or the 
interferon-gamma response region of the guanylate-binding protein gene. A
Stat6-specific polyclonal antisera also supershifted the PDGF-induced Iepsilon
mobility shift. After PDGF BB treatment, a 100-kDa tyrosine phosphorylated
species was detected in anti-Stat6 immunoprecipitates. Cycloheximide had little
effect on Stat6 tyrosine phosphorylation. In addition to Stat6, Stat5a, and
Stat5b, PDGF BB also induced Jak1 tyrosine phosphorylation suggesting a potential
pathway for Stat activation. Strikingly, the concurrent addition of IL-4 enhanced
PDGF BB-induced Iepsilon binding activity, Jak1 tyrosine phosphorylation, and
[3H]thymidine incorporation. These results provide evidence that Stat6 and Jak1
are common elements in PDGF and IL-4 signaling pathways and suggest that IL-4
could play a role in potentiating certain known PDGF-induced biological
responses.

PMID: 8703030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 16;271(33):19768-73.

Growth hormone promotes the association of transcription factor STAT5 with the
growth hormone receptor.

Xu BC(1), Wang X, Darus CJ, Kopchick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Edison Biotechnology Institute, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, USA.

Members of the cytokine/growth hormone (GH)/prolactin receptor superfamily
transduce signals by association and activation of JAK tyrosine kinases. For GH
receptor (GHR), both JAK2 and the GHR undergo tyrosine phosphorylation upon GH
stimulation. Also, GH has recently been shown to activate the transcription
factor STAT5 by tyrosine phosphorylation. In the present study, we demonstrate
that GH induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of different isoforms of STAT5 in 
mouse L cells stably transfected with a cDNA encoding porcine GHR (pGHR). In this
cell system, STAT5 directly interacts with the GHR in a GH-dependent manner.
Additionally, GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 and the interaction of
STAT5 with GHR can be observed in mouse 3T3-F442A cells which express endogenous 
mouse GHR. Interestingly, when cDNAs encoding the two mouse STAT5 homologs
(STAT5A and STAT5B) were individually transfected into mouse L cells expressing
pGHR, only STAT5A demonstrated the ability to interact with the pGHR and
subsequently underwent GH-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation. STAT5B did not.
Therefore, the GH-dependent interaction of a particular STAT5 with
tyrosine-phosphorylated GHR may play an important role in GH-mediated signal
transduction.

PMID: 8702683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Blood. 1996 Aug 15;88(4):1206-14.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor preferentially activates the
94-kD STAT5A and an 80-kD STAT5A isoform in human peripheral blood monocytes.

Rosen RL(1), Winestock KD, Chen G, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Finbloom DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD
20892-4555, USA.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) induces immediate
effects in monocytes by activation of the Janus kinase (JAK2) and STAT
transcription factor (STAT5) pathway. Recent studies have identified homologues
of STAT5, STAT5A, and STAT5B, as well as lower molecular weight variants of
STAT5. To define the activation of the STAT5 homologues and lower molecular
weight variant in human monocytes and monocytes differentiated into macrophages
by culture in macrophage-CSF (M-CSF), we measured the GM-CSF induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5A, STAT5B, and any lower molecular weight STAT5 isoforms.
Freshly isolated monocytes expressed 94-kD STAT5A, 92-kD STAT5B, and an 80-kD
STAT5A molecule. Whereas 94-kD STAT5A was clearly tyrosine phosphorylated and
bound to the enhancer element, the gamma response region (GRR), of the Fc gamma
RI gene, substantially less tyrosine phosphorylated STAT5B bound to the
immobilized GRR element. Macrophages lost their ability to express the 80-kD
STAT5A protein, but retained their ability to activate STAT5A. STAT5A-STAT5A
homodimers and STAT5A-STAT5B heterodimers formed in response to GM-CSF.
Therefore, activation of STAT5A predominates compared to STAT5B when assayed by
direct immunoprecipitation and by evaluation of bound STATs to immobilized GRR.
Selective activation of STAT5 homologues in addition to generation of lower
molecular isoforms may provide specificity and control to genes expressed in
response to cytokines such as GM-CSF.

PMID: 8695838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 2;271(31):18350-4.

Formation of STAT5-containing DNA binding complexes in response to
colony-stimulating factor-1 and platelet-derived growth factor.

Novak U(1), Mui A, Miyajima A, Paradiso L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville 3050, Australia.

Colony-stimulating factor (CSF-1) activates several members belonging to the STAT
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) family of transcription
factors. We investigated the DNA binding complexes activated by CSF-1 in several 
cell lines and compared them with complexes activated by platelet-derived growth 
factor and interleukin 3. Our results indicate that the SIF-A complex activated
by CSF-1 and platelet-derived growth factor may contain STAT3/STAT5 heterodimers 
binding to the high affinity SIF binding site, m67. In addition, both growth
factors activate one or several STAT5-containing protein complexes binding to the
prolactin-inducible element, PIE. The formation of these complexes was cell type 
and growth factor specific. Interleukin 3 activated only PIE binding complexes
containing STAT5A and STAT5B and did not activate m67 binding complexes. It
appears, therefore, that STAT5 cannot bind to m67 as a homodimer, but it can bind
if it is dimerized with STAT3, whereas it can bind to the PIE element without
being either complexed with STAT3 or any other known STAT protein, possibly as a 
homodimer or as STAT5A/STAT5B heterodimer. However, in addition, STAT5 may
heterodimerize with other proteins and form novel PIE binding complexes.

PMID: 8702476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 3;271(18):10738-44.

Cloning of human Stat5B. Reconstitution of interleukin-2-induced Stat5A and
Stat5B DNA binding activity in COS-7 cells.

Lin JX(1), Mietz J, Modi WS, John S, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

We have isolated a second human Stat5 cDNA, Stat5B, and demonstrated that the
genes encoding both Stat5A and Stat5B are located at chromosome 17q11.2. Both
genes were constitutively transcribed in peripheral blood lymphocytes. By using
specific antisera, we demonstrated that both Stat5A and Stat5B are activated by
interleukin-2 (IL-2) in peripheral blood lymphocytes, natural killer-like YT
leukemia cells, and human T cell lymphotropic virus type I-transformed MT-2 T
cells. In COS-7 cells, which constitutively express the Janus family tyrosine
kinase Jak1, reconstitution of IL-2-induced Stat5A and Stat5B DNA binding
activities was dependent on the coexpression of Jak3 along with the IL-2 receptor
beta chain and the common cytokine receptor gamma-chain. This IL-2-induced Stat5 
activation was dependent on the presence of either of two tyrosines (Tyr-392 or
Tyr-510) in the IL-2 receptor beta chain, indicating that either of these two
tyrosines can serve as a docking site. Moreover, we demonstrated that human Stat5
activation is also dependent on Tyr-694 in Stat5A and Tyr-699 in Stat5B,
indicating that these tyrosines are required for dimerization. The COS-7
reconstitution system described herein provides a valuable assay for further
elucidation of the IL-2-activated JAK-STAT pathway.

PMID: 8631883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 May;10(5):508-18.

Characterization and cloning of STAT5 from IM-9 cells and its activation by
growth hormone.

Silva CM(1), Lu H, Day RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville 22908, USA.

The interaction of GH with its receptor has been shown to lead to the
phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
family of transcription factors. We demonstrate here that GH activates the
tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 in the human IM-9 lymphocyte cell line. Western
blotting indicates that GH also activates STAT5 in human embryonic kidney cells
(293), which stably express the rabbit GH receptor. Although it has been shown
previously that GH activates both STATs 1 and 3 in the 3T3-F442A mouse
preadipocyte cell line, we demonstrate that GH also activates STAT5 in these
cells. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we examined the interaction of
proteins with DNA elements containing consensus STAT-binding sequences. Proteins 
prepared from GH-treated 3T3-F442A cells bound to the c-sis inducible element of 
the human c-fos gene (m67 SIE), whereas proteins from GH-treated IM-9 cells did
not. However, proteins from GH-treated IM-9 cells did interact with
oligonucleotides containing either an interferon response element or the
lactogenic hormone-responsive region. Treatment of IM-9 cells with
interferon-gamma also induced protein interactions with these elements although
the complexes were distinctly different than those seen with GH treatment. Using 
STAT-specific antibodies, we demonstrate that the GH-induced DNA-protein complex 
formed with the lactogenic hormone-responsive region contained STAT5, while the
interferon-gamma-induced complex contained STAT1. These results implicate STAT5
as a downstream mediator of GH action in IM-9 cells. We report here the cloning
of two forms of STAT5, STAT5A and STAT5B, from an IM-9 cDNA library. Northern
blot analysis demonstrated multiple-forms of STAT5 mRNA in IM-9 cells.

PMID: 8732682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1622-31.

Erythropoietin induces activation of Stat5 through association with specific
tyrosines on the receptor that are not required for a mitogenic response.

Quelle FW(1), Wang D, Nosaka T, Thierfelder WE, Stravopodis D, Weinstein Y, Ihle 
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

The cytoplasmic domain of the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) contains a
membrane-distal region that is dispensable for mitogenesis but is required for
the recruitment and tyrosine phosphorylation of a variety of signaling proteins. 
The membrane-proximal region of 96 amino acids is necessary and sufficient for
mitogenesis as well as Jak2 activation, induction of c-fos, c-myc, cis, the
T-cell receptor gamma locus (TCR-gamma), and c-pim-1. The studies presented here 
demonstrate that this region is also necessary and sufficient for the activation 
of Stat5A and Stat5B. The membrane-proximal domain contains a single tyrosine,
Y-343, which when mutated eliminates the ability of the receptor to couple Epo
binding to the activation of Stat5. Furthermore, peptide competitions demonstrate
that this site, when phosphorylated, can disrupt Stat5 DNA binding activity,
consistent with a role of Y-343 as a site of recruitment to the receptor. Cells
expressing the truncated, Y343F mutant (a mutant with a Y-to-F alteration at
position 343) proliferate in response to Epo in a manner comparable to that of
the controls. However, in these cells, Epo stimulation does not induce the
appearance of transcripts for cis, TCR-gamma, or c-fos, suggesting a role for
Stat5 in their regulation.

PMCID: PMC231148
PMID: 8657137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 22;271(12):6752-7.

Two separate signal transducer and activator of transcription proteins regulate
transcription of the serine proteinase inhibitor-3 gene in hepatic cells.

Kordula T(1), Ripperger J, Morella KM, Travis J, Baumann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia 306022, USA.

The serine proteinase inhibitor (SPI-3) gene expression is transcriptionally
regulated by interleukin (IL)-6 and glucocorticoids in hepatic cells. To identify
the transcription factors involved in regulation of the SPI-3
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs we overexpressed Signal
Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins (STAT1, STAT3, STAT5B, 
and STAT6) and CAAT enhancer-binding protein beta. Specific signaling pathways
were activated by cointroduced receptors for growth hormone, IL-3, IL-4, or
chimeric receptors containing the cytoplasmic domain of gp130. STAT3 and STAT5B
induced transcription via the SPI-3 promoter. The STAT5B response was
substantially enhanced by truncation of the 5'-flanking region from -1021 to
-148. The responsiveness to STAT3 and STAT5B required the STAT binding element at
-132 to -124. This element was sufficient to confer regulation onto a
heterologous promoter gene construct. In contrast, overexpression of CAAT
enhancer-binding protein beta reduced the transcriptional activity of the SPI-3
promoter, presumably by interfering with STAT protein binding to the promoter
element. The SPI-3 gene is the first example of an acute phase gene that is
responsive to both STAT3 and STAT5B.

PMID: 8636096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;74(4):277-80.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of the rat Stat5 and Yy1 genes.

Chen KS(1), Paladugu A, Aldaz CM, Gould MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53792, USA.

Rat beta-casein gene expression is controlled in part by the positively acting
factor Stat5 and the negatively acting factor Yy1. Partial cDNAs encoding the SH2
domain of rat Stat5a and Stat5b and the zinc finger domain of rat Yy1 have been
cloned by an RT-PCR based approach. The nucleotide sequences encoding the SH2
domain of rat Stat5a and Stat5b are 75% homologous. The rat Yy1 cDNA is 95%
homologous to its human and mouse counterparts in the zinc finger domain-encoding
region. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we have localized Stat5a to rat
chromosome band 10q32.1 and Yy1 to rat chromosome band 6q32.

PMID: 8976384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 15;270(50):29998-30006.

Transcription factors Stat3 and Stat5b are present in rat liver nuclei late in an
acute phase response and bind interleukin-6 response elements.

Ripperger JA(1), Fritz S, Richter K, Hocke GM, Lottspeich F, Fey GH.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

Proteins binding at the interleukin-6 response element of the rat alpha 2
macroglobulin gene were purified by a combination of chromatographic procedures
including binding site-specific DNA-affinity chromatography as the principal
step. Three polypeptides of 92, 91, and 86 kDa were enriched approximately
6,300-fold from nuclei of rat livers excised 12 h after the induction of an
experimental acute phase response. Amino acid sequence analysis identified the
86- and 91-kDa species as two forms of the transcription factor Stat3 and the
92-kDa species as the factor Stat5b. This identification was confirmed by gel
mobility shift-supershift experiments using specific antisera for Stat3 and
Stat5. Unexpectedly, activated Stat5 was also detected in the nuclei of untreated
control rats. cDNA clones representing Stat3 and two isoforms of Stat5b were
isolated from a cDNA library prepared with mRNA from rat livers excised at the
peak of an experimental acute phase response. Full-length Stat5b, predicted from 
cDNA, consisted of 786 amino acids, while the variant Stat5b delta 40C lacked 41 
amino acids at the COOH terminus. The amino acid sequence of rat Stat5b showed
26.7% overall identity with rat Stat3, 87.3% with sheep Stat5a, 92.5% with murine
Stat5a, and 98.7% with murine Stat5b.

PMID: 8530402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 6;270(40):23254-7.

STAT3 and STAT5B are targets of two different signal pathways activated by
hematopoietin receptors and control transcription via separate cytokine response 
elements.

Lai CF(1), Ripperger J, Morella KK, Wang Y, Gearing DP, Horseman ND, Campos SP,
Fey GH, Baumann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Transient transfection of expression vectors for various members of the
hematopoietin receptor family and STAT proteins into COS-1 cells indicated that
each receptor was capable of stimulating the DNA binding activity of STAT1,
STAT3, and STAT5B. However, gp130 preferentially activated STAT1 and STAT3.
Activation of STAT5B differed from that of the other two in that the box 3
sequence motif in the cytoplasmic domain of gp130 was not required. Moreover,
STAT5B and STAT3 enhanced gene transcription via separate regulatory elements.
This study has identified two potential signal transduction pathways by which
hematopoietin receptors, including the interleukin-6 receptor, control
transcription of acute phase plasma protein genes in hepatic cells.

PMID: 7559477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 12;92(19):8831-5.

Cloning and expression of Stat5 and an additional homologue (Stat5b) involved in 
prolactin signal transduction in mouse mammary tissue.

Liu X(1), Robinson GW, Gouilleux F, Groner B, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive, and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Prolactin (PRL) induces transcriptional activation of milk protein genes, such as
the whey acidic protein (WAP), beta-casein, and beta-lactoglobulin genes, through
a signaling cascade encompassing the Janus kinase Jak2 and the mammary gland
factor (MGF; also called Stat5), which belongs to the family of proteins of
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT). We isolated and
sequenced from mouse mammary tissue Stat5 mRNA and a previously unreported
member, which we named Stat5b (Stat5 is renamed to Stat5a). On the protein level 
Stat5a and Stat5b show a 96% sequence similarity. The 5' and 3' untranslated
regions of the two mRNAs are not conserved. Stat5a comprises 793 amino acids and 
is encoded by a mRNA of 4.2 kb. The Stat5b mRNA has a size of 5.6 kb and encodes 
a protein of 786 amino acids. Both Stat5a and Stat5b recognized the GAS site
(gamma-interferon-activating sequence; TTCNNNGAA) in vitro and mediated
PRL-induced transcription in COS cells transfected with a PRL receptor. Stat5b
also induced basal transcription in the absence of PRL. Similar levels of Stat5a 
and Stat5b mRNAs were found in most tissues of virgin and lactating mice, but a
differential accumulation of the Stat5 mRNAs was found in muscle and mammary
tissue. The two RNAs are present in mammary tissue of immature virgin mice, and
their levels increase up to day 16 of pregnancy, followed by a decline during
lactation. The increase of Stat5 expression during pregnancy coincides with the
activation of the WAP gene.

PMCID: PMC41061
PMID: 7568026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Leukoc Biol. 1995 May;57(5):799-803.

Interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and
interleukin-5 transduce signals through two forms of STAT5.

Mui AL(1), Wakao H, Harada N, O'Farrell AM, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, Palo Alto, California.

Recently, JAK2 kinase was found to be one of the tyrosine kinases activated by
interleukin-3 (IL-3) in target cells. JAK2 belongs to a family of kinases that
act upstream of transcription factors called STATs. STATs exist in the cytoplasm 
as latent, transcriptionally inactive forms until, in response to extracellular
signals, they become phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, translocate to the
nucleus, and bind to specific DNA elements. Because IL-3 activates JAK2, we
searched for the STAT(s) that might transduce IL-3 signals. Several lines of
evidence suggest that IL-3 uses the murine homologue of STAT5, a factor
originally purified from sheep. Unexpectedly, during isolation of the murine
homologue, we found two highly related molecules that we have designated STAT5A
and STAT5B.

PMID: 7539031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 15;14(6):1166-75.

Interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor and interleukin-5
transduce signals through two STAT5 homologs.

Mui AL(1), Wakao H, O'Farrell AM, Harada N, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304-1104, USA.

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) is an important regulator of hemopoiesis and considerable
effort has been directed towards the study of its mechanism of signal
transduction. In this paper, we describe the first molecular identification of a 
STAT transcription factor that is activated by IL-3. STATs exist in a
cytoplasmic, transcriptionally inactive form which, in response to extracellular 
signals, become tyrosine phosphorylated and translocate to the nucleus where they
bind to specific DNA elements. Several of these DNA elements were found which
bind proteins in an IL-3-responsive manner. Analysis of these bandshift complexes
with available antibodies to the known STATs suggests that IL-3 activates the
DNA-binding ability of STAT5, a protein which was originally characterized as a
prolactin-responsive transcription factor in sheep. IL-5 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), which share a common
signaling receptor subunit with IL-3, also activate STAT5. Unexpectedly, two
murine STAT5 homologs, 96% identical to each other at the amino acid level, were 
isolated and IL-3-dependent GAS binding could be reconstituted in COS cells
transfected with IL-3 receptor and either STAT5 cDNA. In IL-3-dependent
hemopoietic cells, both forms of STAT5 are expressed and activated in response to
IL-3.

PMCID: PMC398194
PMID: 7720707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


