
1. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32841-55. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5301.

Suppressor of Ty homolog-5, a novel tumor-specific human telomerase reverse
transcriptase promoter-binding protein and activator in colon cancer cells.

Chen R(1), Zhu J(1), Dong Y(1), He C(1,)(2), Hu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310016, China. (2)Biomedical Research Center and Key
Laboratory of Biotherapy of Zhejiang Province, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016, China.

The human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter promotes differential
hTERT gene expression in tumor cells and normal cells. However, information on
the mechanisms underlying the differential hTERT transcription and induction of
telomerase activity in tumor cells is limited. In the present study, suppressor
of Ty homolog-5 (SPT5), a protein encoded by the SUPT5H gene, was identified as a
novel tumor-specific hTERT promoter-binding protein and activator in colon cancer
cells. We verified the tumor-specific binding activity of SPT5 to the hTERT
promoter in vitro and in vivo and detected high expression levels of SUPT5H in
colorectal cancer cell lines and primary human colorectal cancer tissues. SUPT5H 
was more highly expressed in colorectal cancer cases with distant metastasis than
in cases without distant metastasis. Inhibition of endogenous SUPT5H expression
by SUPT5H gene-specific short hairpin RNAs effectively attenuated hTERT
promoter-driven green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression, whereas no detectable
effects on CMV promoter-driven GFP expression in the same cells were observed. In
addition, inhibition of SUPT5H expression not only effectively repressed
telomerase activity, accelerated telomere shortening, and promoted cell
senescence in colon cancer cells, but also suppressed cancer cell growth and
migration. Our results demonstrated that SPT5 contributes to the up-regulation of
hTERT expression and tumor development, and SUPT5H may potentially be used as a
novel tumor biomarker and/or cancer therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4741733
PMID: 26418880  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Proteome Res. 2015 Apr 3;14(4):1888-99. doi: 10.1021/pr501288h. Epub 2015 Mar
24.

Validation of a novel shotgun proteomic workflow for the discovery of
protein-protein interactions: focus on ZNF521.

Bernaudo F(1), Monteleone F(2), Mesuraca M(1), Krishnan S(2), Chiarella E(1),
Scicchitano S(1), Cuda G(2), Morrone G(1), Bond HM(1), Gaspari M(2).

Author information: 
(1)†Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Laboratory of Molecular
Haematopoiesis and Stem Cell Biology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro 88100, 
Italy. (2)‡Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Proteomics@UMG,
University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro 88100, Italy.

The study of protein-protein interactions is increasingly relying on mass
spectrometry (MS). The classical approach of separating immunoprecipitated
proteins by SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel digestion is long and labor-intensive.
Besides, it is difficult to integrate it with most quantitative MS-based
workflows, except for stable isotopic labeling of amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC). This work describes a fast, flexible and quantitative workflow for the
discovery of novel protein-protein interactions. A cleavable cross-linker,
dithiobis[succinimidyl propionate] (DSP), is utilized to stabilize protein
complexes before immunoprecipitation. Protein complex detachment from the
antibody is achieved by limited proteolysis. Finally, protein quantitation is
performed via (18)O labeling. The workflow has been optimized concerning (i) DSP 
concentration and (ii) incubation times for limited proteolysis, using the stem
cell-associated transcription cofactor ZNF521 as a model target. The interaction 
of ZNF521 with the core components of the nuclear remodelling and histone
deacetylase (NuRD) complex, already reported in the literature, was confirmed.
Additionally, interactions with newly discovered molecular partners of
potentially relevant functional role, such as ZNF423, Spt16, Spt5, were
discovered and validated by Western blotting.

PMID: 25774781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cell Res. 2015 Mar;25(3):288-305. doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.19. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

The Integrator complex controls the termination of transcription at diverse
classes of gene targets.

Skaar JR(1), Ferris AL(2), Wu X(3), Saraf A(4), Khanna KK(5), Florens L(4),
Washburn MP(6), Hughes SH(2), Pagano M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, 522 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. (2)HIV 
Drug Resistance Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(3)Cancer Research Technology Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc.,
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(4)The Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 6411, USA. (5)QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland 4006,
Australia. (6)1] The Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO
6411, USA [2] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (7)1] Department of Pathology,
Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York University School of Medicine,
522 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
522 First Avenue New York, NY 10016, USA.

Complexes containing INTS3 and either NABP1 or NABP2 were initially characterized
in DNA damage responses, but their biochemical function remained unknown. Using
affinity purifications and HIV Integration targeting-sequencing (HIT-Seq), we
find that these complexes are part of the Integrator complex, which binds RNA
Polymerase II and regulates specific target genes. Integrator cleaves snRNAs as
part of their processing to their mature form in a mechanism that is intimately
coupled with transcription termination. However, HIT-Seq reveals that Integrator 
also binds to the 3' end of replication-dependent histones and promoter proximal 
regions of genes with polyadenylated transcripts. Depletion of Integrator
subunits results in transcription termination failure, disruption of histone mRNA
processing, and polyadenylation of snRNAs and histone mRNAs. Furthermore,
promoter proximal binding of Integrator negatively regulates expression of genes 
whose transcripts are normally polyadenylated. Integrator recruitment to all
three gene classes is DSIF-dependent, suggesting that Integrator functions as a
termination complex at DSIF-dependent RNA Polymerase II pause sites.

PMCID: PMC4349240
PMID: 25675981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 20;5:5531. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6531.

Integrator complex regulates NELF-mediated RNA polymerase II pause/release and
processivity at coding genes.

Stadelmayer B(1), Micas G(2), Gamot A(2), Martin P(3), Malirat N(4), Koval S(4), 
Raffel R(2), Sobhian B(4), Severac D(5), Rialle S(5), Parrinello H(5), Cuvier
O(6), Benkirane M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS UPR1142, Laboratory of Molecular
Virology; MGX-Montpellier GenomiX, 141 rue de la Cardonille, Montpellier 34396,
France [2] LBME-CNRS, Cell Cycle Chromatin Dynamics Laboratory. University Paul
Sabatier, Toulouse 31061, France [3] INRA, TOXALIM (Research Centre in Food
Toxicology), Toulouse 31300, France [4] IGF, MGX-Montpellier GenomiX, France.
(2)LBME-CNRS, Cell Cycle Chromatin Dynamics Laboratory. University Paul Sabatier,
Toulouse 31061, France. (3)1] LBME-CNRS, Cell Cycle Chromatin Dynamics
Laboratory. University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse 31061, France [2] INRA, TOXALIM
(Research Centre in Food Toxicology), Toulouse 31300, France. (4)Institute of
Human Genetics, CNRS UPR1142, Laboratory of Molecular Virology; MGX-Montpellier
GenomiX, 141 rue de la Cardonille, Montpellier 34396, France. (5)IGF,
MGX-Montpellier GenomiX, France. (6)1] LBME-CNRS, Cell Cycle Chromatin Dynamics
Laboratory. University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse 31061, France [2] INRA, TOXALIM
(Research Centre in Food Toxicology), Toulouse 31300, France [3] IGF,
MGX-Montpellier GenomiX, France.

RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) pausing/termination shortly after initiation is a
hallmark of gene regulation. Here, we show that negative elongation factor (NELF)
interacts with Integrator complex subunits (INTScom), RNAPII and Spt5. The
interaction between NELF and INTScom subunits is RNA and DNA independent. Using
both human immunodeficiency virus type 1 promoter and genome-wide analyses, we
demonstrate that Integrator subunits specifically control NELF-mediated RNAPII
pause/release at coding genes. The strength of RNAPII pausing is determined by
the nature of the NELF-associated INTScom subunits. Interestingly, in addition to
controlling RNAPII pause-release INTS11 catalytic subunit of the INTScom is
required for RNAPII processivity. Finally, INTScom target genes are enriched in
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transactivation response element/NELF binding
element and in a 3' box sequence required for small nuclear RNA biogenesis.
Revealing these unexpected functions of INTScom in regulating RNAPII
pause-release and completion of mRNA synthesis of NELF-target genes will
contribute to our understanding of the gene expression cycle.

PMCID: PMC4263189
PMID: 25410209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 27;5:4263. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5263.

DSIF and NELF interact with Integrator to specify the correct
post-transcriptional fate of snRNA genes.

Yamamoto J(1), Hagiwara Y(1), Chiba K(1), Isobe T(1), Narita T(2), Handa H(3),
Yamaguchi Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences,
Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan. (3)Department of Nanoparticle
Translational Research, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo 160-8402, Japan. (4)1]
Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Yokohama 226-8501, Japan [2] PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency,
Kawaguchi 332-0012, Japan.

The elongation factors DSIF and NELF are responsible for promoter-proximal RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) pausing. NELF is also involved in 3' processing of
replication-dependent histone genes, which produce non-polyadenylated mRNAs. Here
we show that DSIF and NELF contribute to the synthesis of small nuclear RNAs
(snRNAs) through their association with Integrator, the large multisubunit
complex responsible for 3' processing of pre-snRNAs. In HeLa cells, Pol II,
Integrator, DSIF and NELF accumulate at the 3' end of the U1 snRNA gene.
Knockdown of NELF results in misprocessing of U1, U2, U4 and U5 snRNAs, while
DSIF is required for proper transcription of these genes. Knocking down NELF also
disrupts transcription termination and induces the production of polyadenylated
U1 transcripts caused by an enhanced recruitment of cleavage stimulation factor. 
Our results indicate that NELF plays a key role in determining the
post-transcriptional fate of Pol II-transcribed genes.

PMID: 24968874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):154-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.550. Epub 2014 Jan 20.

Systems level-based RNAi screening by high content analysis identifies UBR5 as a 
regulator of estrogen receptor-a protein levels and activity.

Bolt MJ(1), Stossi F(1), Callison AM(1), Mancini MG(1), Dandekar R(1), Mancini
MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) is a central transcription factor that regulates
mammary gland physiology and a key driver in breast cancer. In the present study,
we aimed to identify novel modulators of ERa-mediated transcriptional regulation 
via a custom-built siRNA library screen. This screen was directed against a
variety of coregulators, transcription modifiers, signaling molecules and DNA
damage response proteins. By utilizing a microscopy-based, multi-end point,
estrogen responsive biosensor cell line platform, the primary screen identified a
wide range of factors that altered ERa protein levels, chromatin remodeling and
mRNA output. We then focused on UBR5, a ubiquitin ligase and known oncogene that 
modulates ERa protein levels and transcriptional output. Finally, we demonstrated
that UBR5 also affects endogenous ERa target genes and E2-mediated cell
proliferation in breast cancer cells. In conclusion, our multi-end point RNAi
screen identified novel modulators of ERa levels and activity, and provided a
robust systems level view of factors involved in mechanisms of nuclear receptor
action and pathophysiology. Utilizing a high throughput RNAi screening approach
we identified UBR5, a protein commonly amplified in breast cancer, as a novel
regulator of ERa protein levels and transcriptional activity.

PMID: 24441042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 22;110(43):17290-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1314754110. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Structural basis for Spt5-mediated recruitment of the Paf1 complex to chromatin.

Wier AD(1), Mayekar MK, Héroux A, Arndt KM, VanDemark AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260.

Polymerase associated factor 1 complex (Paf1C) broadly influences gene expression
by regulating chromatin structure and the recruitment of RNA-processing factors
during transcription elongation. The Plus3 domain of the Rtf1 subunit mediates
Paf1C recruitment to genes by binding a repeating domain within the elongation
factor Spt5 (suppressor of Ty). Here we provide a molecular description of this
interaction by reporting the structure of human Rtf1 Plus3 in complex with a
phosphorylated Spt5 repeat. We find that Spt5 binding is mediated by an extended 
surface containing phosphothreonine recognition and hydrophobic interfaces that
interact with residues outside the Spt5 motif. Changes within these interfaces
diminish binding of Spt5 in vitro and chromatin localization of Rtf1 in vivo. The
structure reveals the basis for recognition of the repeat motif of Spt5, a key
player in the recruitment of gene regulatory factors to RNA polymerase II.

PMCID: PMC3808610
PMID: 24101474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Genes Dev. 2013 Aug 15;27(16):1821-33. doi: 10.1101/gad.210211.112.

E3-ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 determines the fate of AID-associated RNA polymerase II
in B cells.

Sun J(1), Keim CD, Wang J, Kazadi D, Oliver PM, Rabadan R, Basu U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York 10032, USA.

Programmed mutagenesis of the immunoglobulin locus of B lymphocytes during class 
switch recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation requires RNA polymerase II
(polII) transcription complex-dependent targeting of the DNA mutator
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). AID deaminates cytidine residues on 
substrate sequences in the immunoglobulin (Ig) locus via a
transcription-dependent mechanism, and this activity is stimulated by the RNA
polII stalling cofactor Spt5 and the 11-subunit cellular noncoding RNA 3'-5'
exonucleolytic processing complex RNA exosome. The mechanism by which the RNA
exosome recognizes immunoglobulin locus RNA substrates to stimulate AID DNA
deamination activity on its in vivo substrate sequences is an important question.
Here we report that E3-ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 destabilizes AID-associated RNA
polII by a ubiquitination event, leading to generation of 3' end free RNA exosome
RNA substrates at the Ig locus and other AID target sequences genome-wide. We
found that lack of Nedd4 activity in B cells leads to accumulation of RNA exosome
substrates at AID target genes and defective CSR. Taken together, our study links
noncoding RNA processing following RNA polII pausing with regulation of the
mutator AID protein. Our study also identifies Nedd4 as a regulator of noncoding 
RNAs that are generated by stalled RNA polII genome-wide.

PMCID: PMC3759698
PMID: 23964096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 11;8(4):e61055. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061055. Print 2013.

CTR9, a component of PAF complex, controls elongation block at the c-Fos locus
via signal-dependent regulation of chromatin-bound NELF dissociation.

Yoo HS(1), Seo JH, Yoo JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Department of Life Sciences, Pohang
University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea.

PAF complex (PAFc) is an RNA polymerase II associated factor that controls
diverse steps of transcription. Although it is generally associated with actively
transcribed genes, a repressive PAFc has also been suggested. Here, we report
that PAFc regulates the transition from transcription initiation to transcription
elongation. PAFc repressed IL-6-induced, but not TNF-a-induced, immediate early
gene expression. PAFc constitutively associated with the 5'-coding region of the 
c-Fos locus, then transiently dissociated upon IL-6 stimulation. When CTR9, a
component of PAFc, was depleted, higher levels of serine 5-phosphorylated or
serine 2-phosphorylated forms of RNA Polymerase II were associated with the
unstimulated c-Fos locus. We also observed an increased association of CDK9, a
kinase component of the pTEF-b elongation factor, with the c-Fos locus in the
CTR9-depleted condition. Furthermore, association of negative elongation factor, 
NELF, which is required to proceed to the elongation phase, was significantly
reduced by CTR9 depletion, whereas elongation factor SPT5 recruitment was
enhanced by CTR9 depletion. Finally, the chromatin association of CTR9 was
specifically controlled by IL-6-induced kinase activity, because a JAK2 kinase
inhibitor, AG-490, blocked its association. In conclusion, our data suggest that 
PAFc controls the recruitment of NELF and SPT5 to target loci in a signal- and
locus-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC3623864
PMID: 23593388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Bioessays. 2013 Jun;35(6):553-60. doi: 10.1002/bies.201200179. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Pausing for thought: disrupting the early transcription elongation checkpoint
leads to developmental defects and tumourigenesis.

Jennings BH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transcriptional Regulation Group, UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK.
barbara.jennings@ucl.ac.uk

Factors affecting transcriptional elongation have been characterized extensively 
in in vitro, single cell (yeast) and cell culture systems; however, data from the
context of multicellular organisms has been relatively scarce. While studies in
homogeneous cell populations have been highly informative about the underlying
molecular mechanisms and prevalence of polymerase pausing, they do not reveal the
biological impact of perturbing this regulation in an animal. The core components
regulating pausing are expressed in all animal cells and are recruited to the
majority of genes, however, disrupting their function often results in discrete
phenotypic effects. Mutations in genes encoding key regulators of transcriptional
pausing have been recovered from several genetic screens for specific phenotypes 
or interactions with specific factors in mice, zebrafish and flies. Analysis of
these mutations has revealed that control of transcriptional pausing is critical 
for a diverse range of biological pathways essential for animal development and
survival.

© 2013 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3698693
PMID: 23575664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jan;1829(1):98-104. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.11.007.
Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Transcription elongation factors DSIF and NELF: promoter-proximal pausing and
beyond.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Shibata H, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Japan.

DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) and negative elongation factor (NELF) were
originally identified as factors responsible for transcriptional inhibition by
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosyl-benzimidazole (DRB) and were later found to
control transcription elongation, together with P-TEFb, at the promoter-proximal 
region. Although there is ample evidence that these factors play roles throughout
the genome, other data also suggest gene- or tissue-specific roles for these
factors. In this review, we discuss how these apparently conflicting data can be 
reconciled. In light of recent findings, we also discuss the detailed mechanism
by which these factors control the elongation process at the molecular level.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: RNA polymerase II Transcript
Elongation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23202475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;19(11):1108-15. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2399. Epub 2012
Oct 14.

Cyclin-dependent kinase control of the initiation-to-elongation switch of RNA
polymerase II.

Larochelle S(1), Amat R, Glover-Cutter K, Sansó M, Zhang C, Allen JJ, Shokat KM, 
Bentley DL, Fisher RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA.

Promoter-proximal pausing by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) ensures gene-specific
regulation and RNA quality control. Structural considerations suggested a
requirement for initiation-factor eviction in elongation-factor engagement and
pausing of transcription complexes. Here we show that selective inhibition of
Cdk7--part of TFIIH--increases TFIIE retention, prevents DRB sensitivity-inducing
factor (DSIF) recruitment and attenuates pausing in human cells. Pause release
depends on Cdk9-cyclin T1 (P-TEFb); Cdk7 is also required for Cdk9-activating
phosphorylation and Cdk9-dependent downstream events--Pol II C-terminal domain
Ser2 phosphorylation and histone H2B ubiquitylation--in vivo. Cdk7 inhibition,
moreover, impairs Pol II transcript 3'-end formation. Cdk7 thus acts through
TFIIE and DSIF to establish, and through P-TEFb to relieve, barriers to
elongation: incoherent feedforward that might create a window to recruit
RNA-processing machinery. Therefore, cyclin-dependent kinases govern Pol II
handoff from initiation to elongation factors and cotranscriptional RNA
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3746743
PMID: 23064645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Rep. 2012 Oct 25;2(4):722-31. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.041. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

DSIF restricts NF-<U+03BA>B signaling by coordinating elongation with mRNA processing of
negative feedback genes.

Diamant G(1), Amir-Zilberstein L, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Dikstein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

NF-<U+03BA>B is central for immune response and cell survival, and its deregulation is
linked to chronic inflammation and cancer through poorly defined mechanisms. I<U+03BA>Ba
and A20 are NF-<U+03BA>B target genes and negative feedback regulators. Upon their
activation by NF-<U+03BA>B, DSIF is recruited, P-TEFb is released, and their elongating 
polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD) remains hypophosphorylated. We
show that upon DSIF knockdown, mRNA levels of a subset of NF-<U+03BA>B targets are not
diminished; yet much less I<U+03BA>Ba and A20 protein are synthesized, and NF-<U+03BA>B
activation is abnormally prolonged. Further analysis of I<U+03BA>Ba and A20 mRNA
revealed that a significant portion is uncapped, unspliced, and retained in the
nucleus. Interestingly, the Spt5 C-terminal repeat (CTR) domain involved in
elongation stimulation through P-TEFb is dispensable for I<U+03BA>Ba and A20 regulation.
These findings assign a function for DSIF in cotranscriptional mRNA processing
when elongating Pol II is hypophosphorylated and define DSIF as part of the
negative feedback regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23041311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Exp Med. 2012 Oct 22;209(11):2099-111. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112145. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

A role for the RNA pol II-associated PAF complex in AID-induced immune
diversification.

Willmann KL(1), Milosevic S, Pauklin S, Schmitz KM, Rangam G, Simon MT, Maslen S,
Skehel M, Robert I, Heyer V, Schiavo E, Reina-San-Martin B, Petersen-Mahrt SK.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Editing Laboratory, London Research Institute, South Mimms EN6 3LD,
England, UK.

Antibody diversification requires the DNA deaminase AID to induce DNA instability
at immunoglobulin (Ig) loci upon B cell stimulation. For efficient cytosine
deamination, AID requires single-stranded DNA and needs to gain access to Ig
loci, with RNA pol II transcription possibly providing both aspects. To
understand these mechanisms, we isolated and characterized endogenous
AID-containing protein complexes from the chromatin of diversifying B cells. The 
majority of proteins associated with AID belonged to RNA polymerase II elongation
and chromatin modification complexes. Besides the two core polymerase subunits,
members of the PAF complex, SUPT5H, SUPT6H, and FACT complex associated with AID.
We show that AID associates with RNA polymerase-associated factor 1 (PAF1)
through its N-terminal domain, that depletion of PAF complex members inhibits
AID-induced immune diversification, and that the PAF complex can serve as a
binding platform for AID on chromatin. A model is emerging of how RNA polymerase 
II elongation and pausing induce and resolve AID lesions.

PMCID: PMC3478926
PMID: 23008333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jan;1829(1):105-15. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.08.007.
Epub 2012 Sep 6.

The Spt4-Spt5 complex: a multi-faceted regulator of transcription elongation.

Hartzog GA(1), Fu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of MCD Biology, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064,
USA. hartzog@ucsc.edu

In all domains of life, elongating RNA polymerases require the assistance of
accessory factors to maintain their processivity and regulate their rate. Among
these elongation factors, the Spt5/NusG factors stand out. Members of this
protein family appear to be the only transcription accessory proteins that are
universally conserved across all domains of life. In archaea and eukaryotes, Spt5
associates with a second protein, Spt4. In addition to regulating elongation, the
eukaryotic Spt4-Spt5 complex appears to couple chromatin modification states and 
RNA processing to transcription elongation. This review discusses the
experimental bases for our current understanding of Spt4-Spt5 function and recent
studies that are beginning to elucidate the structure of Spt4-Spt5/RNA polymerase
complexes and mechanism of Spt4-Spt5 action. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled: RNA polymerase II Transcript Elongation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3545043
PMID: 22982195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11159-69. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00720-11. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Mechanism of glycyrrhizic acid inhibition of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus: disruption of CTCF-cohesin-mediated RNA polymerase II pausing and
sister chromatid cohesion.

Kang H(1), Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4268, USA.

Glycyrrhizic acid (GA), a derivative of licorice, selectively inhibits the growth
of lymphocytes latently infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.
The mechanism involves the deregulation of the multicistronic latency transcript,
including the failure to generate the mature forms of viral mRNA encoding LANA.
We show here that GA disrupts an RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) complex that
accumulates at the CTCF-cohesin binding site within the first intron of the
latency transcript. GA altered the enrichment of the RNAPII pausing complex,
along with pausing factors SPT5 and NELF-A, at the intragenic CTCF-cohesin
binding sites. GA blocked the interaction of cohesin subunit SMC3 with another
cohesin subunit, RAD21, and reduced SPT5 interaction with RNAPII. Covalent
coupling of GA to a solid support revealed that GA interacts with several
cellular proteins, including SMC3 and SPT5, but not their respective interaction 
partners RAD21 and RNAPII. GA treatment also inhibited the transcription of some 
cellular genes, like c-myc, which contain a similar CTCF-cohesin binding site
within the first intron. We also found that GA leads to a more general loss of
sister chromatid cohesion for cellular chromosomes. These findings suggest that
RNAPII pauses at intragenic CTCF-cohesin binding sites and that abrogation of
this pausing by GA leads to loss of proper mRNA production and defects in sister 
chromatid cohesion, a process important for both viral and cellular chromosome
stability.

PMCID: PMC3194953
PMID: 21880767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8569-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00496-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Comprehensive proteomic analysis of influenza virus polymerase complex reveals a 
novel association with mitochondrial proteins and RNA polymerase accessory
factors.

Bradel-Tretheway BG(1), Mattiacio JL, Krasnoselsky A, Stevenson C, Purdy D,
Dewhurst S, Katze MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The trimeric RNA polymerase complex (3P, for PA-PB1-PB2) of influenza A virus
(IAV) is an important viral determinant of pathogenicity and host range
restriction. Specific interactions of the polymerase complex with host proteins
may be determining factors in both of these characteristics and play important
roles in the viral life cycle. To investigate this question, we performed a
comprehensive proteomic analysis of human host proteins associated with the
polymerase of the well-characterized H5N1 Vietnam/1203/04 isolate. We identified 
over 400 proteins by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS),
of which over 300 were found to bind to the PA subunit alone. The most intriguing
and novel finding was the large number of mitochondrial proteins (~20%) that
associated with the PA subunit. These proteins mediate molecular transport across
the mitochondrial membrane or regulate membrane potential and may in concert with
the identified mitochondrion-associated apoptosis inducing factor (AIFM1) have
roles in the induction of apoptosis upon association with PA. Additionally, we
identified host factors that associated with the PA-PB1 (68 proteins) and/or the 
3P complex (34 proteins) including proteins that have roles in innate antiviral
signaling (e.g., ZAPS or HaxI) or are cellular RNA polymerase accessory factors
(e.g., polymerase I transcript release factor [PTRF] or Supt5H). IAV
strain-specific host factor binding to the polymerase was not observed in our
analysis. Overall, this study has shed light into the complex contributions of
the IAV polymerase to host cell pathogenicity and allows for direct
investigations into the biological significance of these newly described
interactions.

PMCID: PMC3165779
PMID: 21715506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;31(16):3312-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05318-11. Epub 2011 Jun 
13.

The RPB2 flap loop of human RNA polymerase II is dispensable for transcription
initiation and elongation.

Palangat M(1), Grass JA, Langelier MF, Coulombe B, Landick R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

The flap domain of multisubunit RNA polymerases (RNAPs), also called the wall,
forms one side of the RNA exit channel. In bacterial RNAP, the mobile part of the
flap is called the flap tip and makes essential contacts with initiation and
elongation factors. Cocrystal structures suggest that the orthologous part of
eukaryotic RNAPII, called the flap loop, contacts transcription factor IIB
(TFIIB), but the function of the flap loop has not been assessed. We constructed 
and tested a deletion of the flap loop in human RNAPII (subunit RPB2 <U+0394>873-884)
that removes the flap loop interaction interface with TFIIB. Genome-wide analysis
of the distribution of the RNAPII with the flap loop deletion expressed in a
human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK 293) revealed no effect of the flap loop on
global transcription initiation, RNAPII occupancy within genes, or the efficiency
of promoter escape and productive elongation. In vitro, the flap loop deletion
had no effect on promoter binding, abortive initiation or promoter escape,
TFIIS-stimulated transcript cleavage, or inhibition of transcript elongation by
the complex of negative elongation factor (NELF) and
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) sensitivity-inducing factor
(DSIF). A modest effect on transcript elongation and pausing was suppressed by
TFIIF. Although similar to the flap tip of bacterial RNAP, the RNAPII flap loop
is not equivalently essential.

PMCID: PMC3147802
PMID: 21670157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Cells. 2011 Feb;16(2):231-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01481.x. Epub
2011 Jan 4.

Erythropoiesis is regulated by the transcription elongation factor Foggy/Spt5
through gata1 gene regulation.

Taneda T(1), Zhu W, Cao Q, Watanabe H, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Wada T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 226-8503, Japan.

Recent studies have showed that transcription elongation factors regulate early
development. Foggy/Spt5 is a subunit of DRB sensitivity-inducing factor, which
negatively and positively regulates transcription elongation. Here, we report
that the positive function of Foggy/Spt5 is required for gata1 expression during 
zebrafish embryonic hematopoiesis. Antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
(MO)-mediated knockdown of foggy/spt5 has led to a reduction in the expression of
gata1 and the gata1 target genes alas2 and hbae3 and inhibited proper hemoglobin 
production. By contrast, expression of hematopoietic stem cell and endothelial
markers, including scl, lmo2, gata2, fli-1, and flk-1, and expression of biklf,
whose product directs gata1 expression via its direct binding to the gata1
promoter, were unaltered, suggesting that gata1 is a functionally important
target gene of Foggy/Spt5. The MO-mediated gata1 repression was relieved by
forced expression of wild-type foggy/spt5, but not by a mutant lacking the
positive function. Therefore, this study provides evidence that Foggy/Spt5 plays 
an important role in gata1 gene expression and erythropoiesis through its
transcriptional activation domain.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21205096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jan;1809(1):34-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.11.001. 
Epub 2010 Nov 13.

Pol II waiting in the starting gates: Regulating the transition from
transcription initiation into productive elongation.

Nechaev S(1), Adelman K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

Proper regulation of gene expression is essential for the differentiation,
development and survival of all cells and organisms. Recent work demonstrates
that transcription of many genes, including key developmental and
stimulus-responsive genes, is regulated after the initiation step, by pausing of 
RNA polymerase II during elongation through the promoter-proximal region. Thus,
there is great interest in better understanding the events that follow
transcription initiation and the ways in which the efficiency of early elongation
can be modulated to impact expression of these highly regulated genes. Here we
describe our current understanding of the steps involved in the transition from
an unstable initially transcribing complex into a highly stable and processive
elongation complex. We also discuss the interplay between factors that affect
early transcript elongation and the potential physiological consequences for
genes that are regulated through transcriptional pausing.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3021596
PMID: 21081187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell. 2010 Apr 30;141(3):432-45. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.030.

c-Myc regulates transcriptional pause release.

Rahl PB(1), Lin CY, Seila AC, Flynn RA, McCuine S, Burge CB, Sharp PA, Young RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Jul;10(7):455.
    Cell. 2010 Apr 30;141(3):399-400.

Recruitment of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription initiation apparatus 
to promoters by specific DNA-binding transcription factors is well recognized as 
a key regulatory step in gene expression. We report here that promoter-proximal
pausing is a general feature of transcription by Pol II in mammalian cells and
thus an additional step where regulation of gene expression occurs. This suggests
that some transcription factors recruit the transcription apparatus to promoters,
whereas others effect promoter-proximal pause release. Indeed, we find that the
transcription factor c-Myc, a key regulator of cellular proliferation, plays a
major role in Pol II pause release rather than Pol II recruitment at its target
genes. We discuss the implications of these results for the role of c-Myc
amplification in human cancer.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2864022
PMID: 20434984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2010 Feb;30(1):31-42. doi:
10.3109/10799890903517921.

Promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II: an opportunity to regulate gene
transcription.

Fujita T(1), Schlegel W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland.

Transcription of eukaryotic genes by RNA polymerase II (pol II) is a complex,
highly regulated multiphasic process. Pol II pauses in the proximity of the
promoter on a large fraction of transcribed genes. Transcription initiation and
elongation of transcripts are under distinct control. Induced gene expression can
thus be due to enhanced initiation and/or stimulated elongation. Pausing and
resumption of the elongation of transcripts is under the control of transcription
elongation factors. Three of them, P-TEFb, DSIF, and NELF have been well
characterized as protein complexes with multiple general but also gene specific
functions. Elongation factors execute checkpoint functions but serve also as
targets for signaling processes which regulate gene expression. Due to the
general importance of transcription elongation factors, it is difficult to
delineate the mechanisms by which elongation of specific genes is regulated by
specific intracellular signals. However, it is clear that the controlled pausing 
of pol II provides an opportunity to finely control timing and quantity of
transcriptional output.

PMID: 20170405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 May 5;319(1-2):63-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.01.020.
Epub 2010 Jan 25.

Transcription elongation factors are involved in programming hormone production
in pituitary neuroendocrine GH4C1 cells.

Fujita T(1), Piuz I, Schlegel W.

Author information: 
(1)Fondation pour Recherches Médicales, Medical Faculty of the University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Transcription elongation of many eukaryotic genes is regulated. Two negative
transcription elongation factors,
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) sensitivity-inducing
factor (DSIF) and negative elongation factor (NELF) are known to stall
collaboratively RNA polymerase II promoter proximally. We discovered that DSIF
and NELF are linked to hormone expression in rat pituitary GH4C1 cells. When
NELF-E, a subunit of NELF or Spt5, a subunit of DSIF was stably knocked-down,
prolactin (PRL) expression was increased both at the mRNA and protein levels. In 
contrast, stable knock-down of only Spt5 abolished growth hormone (GH)
expression. Transient NELF-E knock-down increased coincidentally PRL expression
and enhanced transcription of a PRL-promoter reporter gene. However, no direct
interaction of NELF with the PRL gene could be demonstrated by chromatin
immuno-precipitation. Thus, NELF suppressed PRL promoter activity indirectly. In 
conclusion, transcription regulation by NELF and DSIF is continuously involved in
the control of hormone production and may contribute to neuroendocrine cell
differentiation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20097260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genes Dev. 2009 Dec 1;23(23):2765-77. doi: 10.1101/gad.1834709.

DSIF, the Paf1 complex, and Tat-SF1 have nonredundant, cooperative roles in RNA
polymerase II elongation.

Chen Y(1), Yamaguchi Y, Tsugeno Y, Yamamoto J, Yamada T, Nakamura M, Hisatake K, 
Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Transcription elongation factor DSIF/Spt4-Spt5 is capable of promoting and
inhibiting RNA polymerase II elongation and is involved in the expression of
various genes. While it has been known for many years that DSIF inhibits
elongation in collaboration with the negative elongation factor NELF, how DSIF
promotes elongation is largely unknown. Here, an activity-based biochemical
approach was taken to understand the mechanism of elongation activation by DSIF. 
We show that the Paf1 complex (Paf1C) and Tat-SF1, two factors implicated
previously in elongation control, collaborate with DSIF to facilitate efficient
elongation. In human cells, these factors are recruited to the FOS gene in a
temporally coordinated manner and contribute to its high-level expression. We
also show that elongation activation by these factors depends on P-TEFb-mediated 
phosphorylation of the Spt5 C-terminal region. A clear conclusion emerging from
this study is that a set of elongation factors plays nonredundant, cooperative
roles in elongation. This study also shows unambiguously that Paf1C, which is
generally thought to have chromatin-related functions, is involve directlyd in
elongation control.

PMCID: PMC2788331
PMID: 19952111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem J. 2009 Dec 23;425(2):373-80. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091422.

Crystal structure of the human transcription elongation factor DSIF hSpt4 subunit
in complex with the hSpt5 dimerization interface.

Wenzel S(1), Martins BM, Rösch P, Wöhrl BM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Biomacromolecules, Universitätsstr. 30, D-95447 Bayreuth, 
Germany.

The eukaryotic transcription elongation factor DSIF [DRB
(5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole) sensitivity-inducing factor]
is composed of two subunits, hSpt4 and hSpt5, which are homologous to the yeast
factors Spt4 and Spt5. DSIF is involved in regulating the processivity of RNA
polymerase II and plays an essential role in transcriptional activation of
eukaryotes. At several eukaryotic promoters, DSIF, together with NELF (negative
elongation factor), leads to promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II. In
the present paper we describe the crystal structure of hSpt4 in complex with the 
dimerization region of hSpt5 (amino acids 176-273) at a resolution of 1.55 A (1
A=0.1 nm). The heterodimer shows high structural similarity to its homologue from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Furthermore, hSpt5-NGN is structurally similar to the
NTD (N-terminal domain) of the bacterial transcription factor NusG. A homologue
for hSpt4 has not yet been found in bacteria. However, the archaeal transcription
factor RpoE" appears to be distantly related. Although a comparison of the
NusG-NTD of Escherichia coli with hSpt5 revealed a similarity of the
three-dimensional structures, interaction of E. coli NusG-NTD with hSpt4 could
not be observed by NMR titration experiments. A conserved glutamate residue,
which was shown to be crucial for dimerization in yeast, is also involved in the 
human heterodimer, but is substituted for a glutamine residue in Escherichia coli
NusG. However, exchanging the glutamine for glutamate proved not to be sufficient
to induce hSpt4 binding.

PMID: 19860741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Cycle. 2009 Nov 15;8(22):3636-42. Epub 2009 Nov 24.

Insights into the function of the human P-TEFb component CDK9 in the regulation
of chromatin modifications and co-transcriptional mRNA processing.

Pirngruber J(1), Shchebet A, Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, 
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) was originally characterized as a transcription 
elongation factor which regulates RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) activity following
transcriptional initiation. However, recent evidence from a number of studies
have shown that CDK9 plays an important role in regulating not only RNAPII
activity but also co-transcriptional histone modification and mRNA processing
events such as splicing and 3' end processing. Importantly, our previous work and
the work presented here demonstrate that CDK9 functions to guide a complex
network of chromatin modifications including histone H2B monoubiquitination
(H2Bub1), H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and H3K36me3. This function
appears to be dependent upon not only the phosphorylation of the RNA Polymerase
II C-terminal domain but also upon other CDK9 targets such as the Suppressor of
Ty Homolog-5 (SUPT5H), Negative Elongation Factor-E (NELF-E) and probably the
human Rad6 homolog UBE2A. We provide a working model by which CDK9 may control
co-transcriptional replication-dependent histone mRNA 3' end processing in an
H2Bub1 and H3K4me3-dependent manner and uncover new and important differences
between the functions of human CDK9 and its yeast counterparts Ctk1 and Bur1.

PMID: 19844166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):4002-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00189-09. Epub 2009 May 
18.

Chromatin structure is implicated in "late" elongation checkpoints on the U2
snRNA and beta-actin genes.

Egloff S(1), Al-Rawaf H, O'Reilly D, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom.

The negative elongation factor NELF is a key component of an early elongation
checkpoint generally located within 100 bp of the transcription start site of
protein-coding genes. Negotiation of this checkpoint and conversion to productive
elongation require phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II (pol II), NELF, and DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) by
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). P-TEFb is dispensable for
transcription of the noncoding U2 snRNA genes, suggesting that a NELF-dependent
checkpoint is absent. However, we find that NELF at the end of the 800-bp U2 gene
transcription unit and RNA interference-mediated knockdown of NELF causes a
termination defect. NELF is also associated 800 bp downstream of the
transcription start site of the beta-actin gene, where a "late" P-TEFb-dependent 
checkpoint occurs. Interestingly, both genes have an extended nucleosome-depleted
region up to the NELF-dependent control point. In both cases, transcription
through this region is P-TEFb independent, implicating chromatin in the formation
of the terminator/checkpoint. Furthermore, CTCF colocalizes with NELF on the U2
and beta-actin genes, raising the possibility that it helps the positioning
and/or function of the NELF-dependent control point on these genes.

PMCID: PMC2704739
PMID: 19451231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genes Cells. 2009 Mar;14(3):343-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01273.x. Epub
2009 Feb 4.

Role of human transcription elongation factor DSIF in the suppression of
senescence and apoptosis.

Komori T(1), Inukai N, Yamada T, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

DSIF is an evolutionarily conserved, ubiquitously expressed, heterodimeric
transcription elongation factor composed of two subunits, Spt4 and Spt5. Previous
biochemical studies have shown that DSIF positively and negatively regulates RNA 
polymerase II elongation in collaboration with other protein factors. While
several data suggest that DSIF is a 'general' elongation factor, there is also
evidence that DSIF exerts a tissue- and gene-specific function. Here we sought to
address the question of whether physiological functions of DSIF are general or
specific, by using a sophisticated knockdown approach and gene expression
microarray analysis. We found that Spt5 is essential for cell growth of various
human cell lines and that Spt5 knockdown causes senescence and apoptosis.
However, Spt5 knockdown affects a surprisingly small number of genes. In Spt5
knockdown cells, the p53 signaling pathway is activated and mediates part of the 
knockdown-induced transcriptional change, but apoptotic cell death occurs in the 
absence of p53. Structure-function analysis of Spt5 shows that the C-terminal
approximately 300 amino acid residues are not required to support cell
proliferation. These results suggest that one of the functions of Spt5 is to
suppress senescence and apoptosis, and that this function is exerted through its 
association with Spt4 and Pol II.

PMID: 19210550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Nov;36(20):e135. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn630. Epub 2008 Oct
1.

Analysis of factor interactions with RNA polymerase II elongation complexes using
a new electrophoretic mobility shift assay.

Cheng B(1), Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The elongation phase of transcription by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) is
controlled by a carefully orchestrated series of interactions with both negative 
and positive factors. However, due to the limitations of current methods and
techniques, not much is known about whether and how these proteins physically
associate with the engaged polymerases. To gain insight into the detailed
mechanisms involved, we established an experimental system for analyzing direct
factor interactions to RNAP II elongation complexes on native gels, namely
elongation complex electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EC-EMSA). This new assay
effectively allowed detection of interactions of TFIIF, TTF2, TFIIS, DSIF and
P-TEFb with elongation complexes generated from a natural promoter using an
immobilized template. As an application of this assay system, we characterized
the association of transcription elongation factor DSIF with RNAP II elongation
complexes and discovered that the nascent transcript facilitated recruitment of
DSIF. Examples of how the system can be manipulated to address different
questions are provided. EC-EMSA should be useful for further investigation of
factor interactions with RNAP II elongation complexes.

PMCID: PMC2582608
PMID: 18832375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 6;370(3):414-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.080. Epub 2008 Mar 26.

The small hSpt4 subunit of the human transcription elongation factor DSIF is a
Zn-finger protein with alpha/beta type topology.

Wenzel S(1), Schweimer K, Rösch P, Wöhrl BM.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Bayreuth, Lehrstuhl für Struktur und Chemie der Biopolymere &
Research Center for Biomacromolecules, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany.

The eukaryotic transcription elongation factor
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) sensitivity inducing
factor (DSIF), is involved in regulating the processivity of RNA polymerase II.
DSIF plays also a role in transcriptional activation, and in concert with the
negative elongation factor NELF causes promoter proximal pausing of RNA
polymerase II. Furthermore, DSIF has also been implicated in regulating the
transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus proviral DNA. Human DSIF is
composed of the two subunits, hSpt4 (p14) and hSpt5 (p160), corresponding to the 
yeast homologs Spt4 and Spt5. Here we show the purification and characterization 
of the small subunit, hSpt4. We were able to purify the protein in a soluble form
separately from the larger hSpt5 subunit. CD and NMR spectroscopy show that the
purified protein hSpt4 exhibits an alpha/beta topology with a well defined
tertiary structure. Furthermore metal analysis by ICP-OES indicates that the
protein contains a functional 4-Cys Zn-finger.

PMID: 18373978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 18;283(3):1317-23. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Interplay between E-box and NF-kappaB in regulation of A20 gene by DRB
sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF).

Amir-Zilberstein L(1), Dikstein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The NF-kappaB target gene A20 serves as a paradigm for gene-specific control of
transcription elongation. This gene is regulated by the elongation factor DSIF
(DRB sensitivity-inducing factor) under basal and NF-kappaB-activated states by
two distinct mechanisms. Prior to NF-kappaB stimulation, the A20 gene is occupied
by polymerase II, and elongation is inhibited by DSIF. This inhibition is
mediated by an upstream promoter element termed ELIE (elongation inhibitory
element). Upon NF-kappaB activation, inhibition of the A20 gene by DSIF persists,
but now NF-kappaB and the core promoter regulate DSIF instead of ELIE. Here we
investigated the regulation of DSIF by ELIE and the regulatory switch from ELIE
to NF-kappaB following NF-kappaB induction. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
revealed two distinct protein complexes that specifically interact with ELIE, one
of which is the E-box protein USF1. Interestingly, USF1 is displaced from the A20
promoter upon induction of NF-kappaB. A mutation in the E-box section of ELIE
diminished the binding of USF1 and DSIF recruitment. Consistent with these
findings, the E-box is crucial for DSIF inhibition in resting, but not
NF-kappaB-stimulated, cells. These findings reveal a dynamic regulation of DSIF
involving either E-box or NF-kappaB depending on the physiological circumstances.

PMID: 17962196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(12):4064-75. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

DSIF contributes to transcriptional activation by DNA-binding activators by
preventing pausing during transcription elongation.

Zhu W(1), Wada T, Okabe S, Taneda T, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology and Integrated Research
Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama
226-8501, Japan.

The transcription elongation factor
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) sensitivity-inducing
factor (DSIF) regulates RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) processivity by promoting, in 
concert with negative elongation factor (NELF), promoter-proximal pausing of
RNAPII. DSIF is also reportedly involved in transcriptional activation. However, 
the role of DSIF in transcriptional activation by DNA-binding activators is
unclear. Here we show that DSIF acts cooperatively with a DNA-binding activator, 
Gal4-VP16, to promote transcriptional activation. In the absence of DSIF,
Gal4-VP16-activated transcription resulted in frequent pausing of RNAPII during
elongation in vitro. The presence of DSIF reduced pausing, thereby supporting
Gal4-VP16-mediated activation. We found that DSIF exerts its positive effects
within a short time-frame from initiation to elongation, and that NELF does not
affect the positive regulatory function of DSIF. Knockdown of the gene encoding
the large subunit of DSIF, human Spt5 (hSpt5), in HeLa cells reduced
Gal4-VP16-mediated activation of a reporter gene, but had no effect on expression
in the absence of activator. Together, these results provide evidence that
higher-level transcription has a stronger requirement for DSIF, and that DSIF
contributes to efficient transcriptional activation by preventing RNAPII pausing 
during transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC1919491
PMID: 17567605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(14):5246-59. Epub 2007 May 14.

Differential regulation of NF-kappaB by elongation factors is determined by core 
promoter type.

Amir-Zilberstein L(1), Ainbinder E, Toube L, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Dikstein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

NF-kappaB transcription factors activate genes important for immune response,
inflammation, and cell survival. P-TEFb and DSIF, which are positive and negative
transcription elongation factors, respectively, both regulate NF-kappaB-induced
transcription, but the mechanism underlying their recruitment to NF-kappaB target
genes is unknown. We show here that upon induction of NF-kappaB, a subset of
target genes is regulated differentially by either P-TEFb or DSIF. The regulation
of these genes and their occupancy by these elongation factors are dependent on
the NF-kappaB enhancer and the core promoter type. Converting a TATA-less
promoter to a TATA promoter switches the regulation of NF-kappaB from DSIF to
P-TEFb. Accumulation or displacement of DSIF and P-TEFb is dictated by the
formation of distinct initiation complexes (TFIID dependent or independent) on
the two types of core promoter. The underlying mechanism for the dissociation of 
DSIF from TATA promoters upon NF-kappaB activation involves the phosphorylation
of RNA polymerase II by P-TEFb. The results highlight a regulatory link between
the initiation and the elongation phases of the transcription reaction and
broaden our comprehension of the NF-kappaB pathway.

PMCID: PMC1951948
PMID: 17502349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 10;104(15):6182-7. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Identification of a regulator of transcription elongation as an accessory factor 
for the human Mediator coactivator.

Malik S(1), Barrero MJ, Jones T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10021, USA. maliks@rockefeller.edu

The multiprotein Mediator coactivator complex is universally required for
transcription of metazoan genes. It has been proposed to function by interfacing 
between transcriptional activators and the RNA polymerase II machinery. However, 
in vitro transcription systems reconstituted from homogeneous preparations of RNA
polymerase II, the general transcription initiation factors, and the cofactor PC4
display relatively robust activator (HNF-4)-dependent activity, which,
nonetheless, can be further stimulated by Mediator. By contrast, an
unfractionated nuclear extract-based system in which Mediator has been
immunodepleted displays a near-absolute dependence on ectopic Mediator. Here, we 
identified and purified an activity, MSA-2, that confers extract-like Mediator
responsiveness to our reconstituted system. Mass spectrometric analyses
identified its two constituent polypeptides as hSpt5 and hSpt4, which also
comprise the elongation factor DSIF. Mechanistically, MSA-2/DSIF acts by
restricting overall transcription in the pure system, thereby imposing a strong
Mediator dependence. Our data thus point to potential mechanisms for Mediator
function beyond its presently believed role in promoting the initial formation of
the RNA polymerase II-containing preinitiation complex.

PMCID: PMC1851085
PMID: 17404243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(16):6094-104.

Transcriptional pausing caused by NELF plays a dual role in regulating
immediate-early expression of the junB gene.

Aida M(1), Chen Y, Nakajima K, Yamaguchi Y, Wada T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8503, Japan.

Human 5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole sensitivity-inducing
factor (DSIF) and negative elongation factor (NELF) negatively regulate
transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) in vitro. However, the
physiological roles of this negative regulation are not well understood. Here, by
using a number of approaches to identify protein-DNA interactions in vivo, we
show that DSIF- and NELF-mediated transcriptional pausing has a dual function in 
regulating immediate-early expression of the human junB gene. Before induction by
interleukin-6, RNAPII, DSIF, and NELF accumulate in the promoter-proximal region 
of junB, mainly at around position +50 from the transcription initiation site.
After induction, the association of these proteins with the promoter-proximal
region continues whereas RNAPII and DSIF are also found in the downstream
regions. Depletion of a subunit of NELF by RNA interference enhances the junB
mRNA level both before and after induction, indicating that DSIF- and
NELF-mediated pausing contributes to the negative regulation of junB expression, 
not only by inducing RNAPII pausing before induction but also by attenuating
transcription after induction. These regulatory mechanisms appear to be conserved
in other immediate-early genes as well.

PMCID: PMC1592793
PMID: 16880520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 1;20(5):601-12.

Gene-specific requirement for P-TEFb activity and RNA polymerase II
phosphorylation within the p53 transcriptional program.

Gomes NP(1), Bjerke G, Llorente B, Szostek SA, Emerson BM, Espinosa JM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 15;20(6):643-7.

Activation of the p53 pathway mediates cellular responses to diverse forms of
stress. Here we report that the p53 target gene p21(CIP1) is regulated by stress 
at post-initiation steps through conversion of paused RNA polymerase II (RNAP II)
into an elongating form. High-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
(ChIP) demonstrate that p53-dependent activation of p21(CIP1) transcription after
DNA damage occurs concomitantly with changes in RNAP II phosphorylation status
and recruitment of the elongation factors DSIF (DRB Sensitivity-Inducing Factor),
P-TEFb (Positive Transcription Elongation Factor b), TFIIH, TFIIF, and FACT
(Facilitates Chromatin Transcription) to distinct regions of the p21(CIP1) locus.
Paradoxically, pharmacological inhibition of P-TEFb leads to global inhibition of
mRNA synthesis but activation of the p53 pathway through p53 accumulation,
expression of specific p53 target genes, and p53-dependent apoptosis. ChIP
analyses of p21(CIP1) activation in the absence of functional P-TEFb reveals the 
existence of two distinct kinases that phosphorylate Ser5 of the RNAP II
C-terminal domain (CTD). Importantly, CTD phosphorylation at Ser2 is not required
for p21(CIP1) transcription, mRNA cleavage, or polyadenylation. Furthermore,
recruitment of FACT requires CTD kinases, yet FACT is dispensable for p21(CIP1)
expression. Thus, select genes within the p53 pathway bypass the requirement for 
P-TEFb and RNAP II phosphorylation to trigger a cellular response to inhibition
of global mRNA synthesis.

PMCID: PMC1410802
PMID: 16510875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell. 2006 Jan 20;21(2):227-37.

P-TEFb-mediated phosphorylation of hSpt5 C-terminal repeats is critical for
processive transcription elongation.

Yamada T(1), Yamaguchi Y, Inukai N, Okamoto S, Mura T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Human DSIF, a heterodimer composed of hSpt4 and hSpt5, plays opposing roles in
transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II). Here, we describe an 
evolutionarily conserved repetitive heptapeptide motif (consensus = G-S-R/Q-T-P) 
in the C-terminal region (CTR) of hSpt5, which, like the C-terminal domain (CTD) 
of RNA Pol II, is highly phosphorylated by P-TEFb. Thr-4 residues of the CTR
repeats are functionally important phosphorylation sites. In vitro, Thr-4
phosphorylation is critical for the elongation activation activity of DSIF, but
not to its elongation repression activity. In vivo, Thr-4 phosphorylation is
critical for epidermal growth factor (EGF)-inducible transcription of c-fos and
for efficient progression of RNA Pol II along the gene. We consider this
phosphorylation to be a switch that converts DSIF from a repressor to an
activator. We propose the "mini-CTD" hypothesis, in which phosphorylated CTR is
thought to function in a manner analogous to phosphorylated CTD, serving as an
additional code for active elongation complexes.

PMID: 16427012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 18;102(42):15036-41. Epub 2005 Oct 7.

A negative elongation factor for human RNA polymerase II inhibits the anti-arrest
transcript-cleavage factor TFIIS.

Palangat M(1), Renner DB, Price DH, Landick R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Formation of productive transcription complexes after promoter escape by RNA
polymerase II is a major event in eukaryotic gene regulation. Both negative and
positive factors control this step. The principal negative elongation factor
(NELF) contains four polypeptides and requires for activity the two-polypeptide
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribobenzimidazole-sensitivity inducing factor (DSIF).
DSIF/NELF inhibits early transcript elongation until it is counteracted by the
positive elongation factor P-TEFb. We report a previously undescribed activity of
DSIF/NELF, namely inhibition of the transcript cleavage factor TFIIS. These two
activities of DSIF/NELF appear to be mechanistically distinct. Inhibition of
nucleotide addition requires > or = 18 nt of nascent RNA, whereas inhibition of
TFIIS occurs at all transcript lengths. Because TFIIS promotes escape from
promoter-proximal pauses by stimulating cleavage of back-tracked nascent RNA,
TFIIS inhibition may help DSIF/NELF negatively regulate productive transcription.

PMCID: PMC1257689
PMID: 16214896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):651-8.

Zebrafish foggy/spt 5 is required for migration of facial branchiomotor neurons
but not for their survival.

Cooper KL(1), Armstrong J, Moens CB.

Author information: 
(1)HHMI, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Transcript elongation is a critical step in the production of mature messenger
RNAs. Many factors have been identified that are required for transcript
elongation, including Spt 5. Studies in yeast determined that spt 5 is required
for cell viability, and analyses in Drosophila indicate Spt 5 is localized to
sites of active transcription, suggesting it is required generally for
transcription. However, the requirement for spt 5 for cell viability in a
metazoan organism has not been addressed. We determined that zebrafish foggy/spt 
5 is required cell-autonomously for the posterior migration of facial
branchiomotor neurons from rhombomere 4 (r4) into r6 and r7 of the hindbrain.
These genetic mosaics also give us the unique opportunity to determine whether
spt 5 is required for mRNA transcription equivalently at all loci by addressing
two processes within the same cell-neuronal migration and cell viability. In a
wild-type host, spt 5 null facial branchiomotor neurons survive to at least 5
days postfertilization while failing to migrate posteriorly. This finding
indicates that spt 5-dependent transcript elongation is required
cell-autonomously for a complex cell migration but not for the survival of these 
same cells. This work provides evidence that transcript elongation is not a
global mechanism equivalently required by all loci and may actually be under more
strict developmental regulation.

Developmental Dynamics 234:651-658, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2597073
PMID: 16193504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(17):7473-83.

NF-kappaB-repressing factor inhibits elongation of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 transcription by DRB sensitivity-inducing factor.

Dreikhausen U(1), Hiebenthal-Millow K, Bartels M, Resch K, Nourbakhsh M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical School Hannover, Germany.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is able to establish a latent
infection during which the integrated provirus remains transcriptionally silent. 
In response to specific stimuli, the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) is highly
activated, enhancing both transcriptional initiation and elongation. Here, we
have identified a specific binding sequence of the nuclear NF-kappaB-repressing
factor (NRF) within the HIV-1 LTR. The aim of this work was to define the role of
NRF in regulating the LTR. Our data show that the endogenous NRF is required for 
transcriptional activation of the HIV-1 LTR in stimulated cells. In unstimulated 
cells, however, NRF inhibits HIV-1 LTR activity at the level of transcription
elongation. Binding of NRF to the LTR in unstimulated cells prevents recruitment 
of elongation factor DRB sensitivity-inducing factor and formation of processive 
elongation complexes by hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II. Our data suggest
that NRF interrupts the regulatory coupling of LTR binding factors and
transcription elongation events. This inhibitory mechanism might contribute to
transcriptional quiescence of integrated HIV-1 provirus.

PMCID: PMC1190279
PMID: 16107696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Retrovirology. 2004 Dec 27;1:46.

Modulating HIV-1 replication by RNA interference directed against human
transcription elongation factor SPT5.

Ping YH(1), Chu CY, Cao H, Jacque JM, Stevenson M, Rana TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
yhping@ym.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Several cellular positive and negative elongation factors are
involved in regulating RNA polymerase II processivity during transcription
elongation in human cells. In recruiting several of these regulatory factors to
the 5' long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter during transcription elongation, HIV-1
modulates replication of its genome in a process mediated by the virus-encoded
transactivator Tat. One particular cellular regulatory factor, DSIF subunit human
SPT5 (hSpt5), has been implicated in both positively and negatively regulating
transcriptional elongation but its role in Tat transactivation in vivo and in
HIV-1 replication has not been completely elucidated.
RESULTS: To understand the in vivo function of hSpt5 and define its role in Tat
transactivation and HIV-1 replication, we used RNA interference (RNAi) to
specifically knockdown hSpt5 expression by degrading hSpt5 mRNA.
Short-interfering RNA (siRNA) designed to target hSpt5 for RNAi successfully
resulted in knockdown of both hSpt5 mRNA and protein levels, and did not
significantly affect cell viability. In contrast to hSpt5 knockdown,
siRNA-mediated silencing of human mRNA capping enzyme, a functionally important
hSpt5-interacting cellular protein, was lethal and showed a significant increase 
in cell death over the course of the knockdown experiment. In addition, hSpt5
knockdown led to significant decreases in Tat transactivation and inhibited HIV-1
replication, indicating that hSpt5 was required for mediating Tat transactivation
and HIV-1 replication.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings presented here showed that hSpt5 is a bona fide
positive regulator of Tat transactivation and HIV-1 replication in vivo. These
results also suggest that hSpt5 function in transcription regulation and mRNA
capping is essential for a subset of cellular and viral genes and may not be
required for global gene expression.

PMCID: PMC545048
PMID: 15620346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 May 18;101(20):7572-7. Epub 2004 May 10.

Functional interactions of RNA-capping enzyme with factors that positively and
negatively regulate promoter escape by RNA polymerase II.

Mandal SS(1), Chu C, Wada T, Handa H, Shatkin AJ, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology, Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood 
Johnson Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Capping of the 5' ends of nascent RNA polymerase II transcripts is the first
pre-mRNA processing event in all eukaryotic cells. Capping enzyme (CE) is
recruited to transcription complexes soon after initiation by the phosphorylation
of Ser-5 of the carboxyl-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase
II. Here, we analyze the role of CE in promoter clearance and its functional
interactions with different factors that are involved in promoter clearance.
FCP1-mediated dephosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminal domain results in a
drastic decrease in cotranscriptional capping efficiency but is reversed by the
presence of DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF). These results suggest
involvement of DSIF in CE recruitment. Importantly, CE relieves transcriptional
repression by the negative elongation factor, indicating a critical role of CE in
the elongation checkpoint control mechanism during promoter clearance. This
functional interaction between CE and the negative elongation factor documents a 
dynamic role of CE in promoter clearance beyond its catalytic activities.

PMCID: PMC419647
PMID: 15136722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3324-36.

Human Spt6 stimulates transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II in vitro.

Endoh M(1), Zhu W, Hasegawa J, Watanabe H, Kim DK, Aida M, Inukai N, Narita T,
Yamada T, Furuya A, Sato H, Yamaguchi Y, Mandal SS, Reinberg D, Wada T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Recent studies have suggested that Spt6 participates in the regulation of
transcription by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). However, its underlying mechanism
remains largely unknown. One possibility, which is supported by genetic and
biochemical studies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is that Spt6 affects chromatin
structure. Alternatively, Spt6 directly controls transcription by binding to the 
transcription machinery. In this study, we establish that human Spt6 (hSpt6) is a
classic transcription elongation factor that enhances the rate of RNAPII
elongation. hSpt6 is capable of stimulating transcription elongation both
individually and in concert with DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF),
comprising human Spt5 and human Spt4. We also provide evidence showing that hSpt6
interacts with RNAPII and DSIF in human cells. Thus, in vivo, hSpt6 may regulate 
multiple steps of mRNA synthesis through its interaction with histones,
elongating RNAPII, and possibly other components of the transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC381665
PMID: 15060154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(6):2444-54.

Elongation inhibition by DRB sensitivity-inducing factor is regulated by the A20 
promoter via a novel negative element and NF-kappaB.

Ainbinder E(1), Amir-Zilberstein L, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Dikstein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

A20 is an immediate-early NF-kappaB target gene. Prior to NF-kappaB stimulation, 
the A20 promoter is bound by the polymerase II machinery to allow rapid
transcription activation. Here we show that the basal A20 transcription is
repressed at the level of elongation in a promoter-specific fashion.
Immunodepletion in vitro and RNA interference in cultured cells suggest that the 
basal elongation inhibition is conferred by DRB sensitivity-inducing factor
(DSIF). We have identified a negative upstream promoter element called ELIE that 
controls DSIF activity. Remarkably, following NF-kappaB stimulation, inhibition
of the A20 promoter by DSIF persists, but it is now regulated by NF-kappaB rather
than ELIE. Similar regulation by DSIF is shown for another NF-kappaB-responsive
gene, the IkappaBalpha gene. These findings reveal an intimate and dynamic
relationship between DSIF inhibition of elongation and promoter-bound
transcription factors. The potential significance of the differential regulation 
of DSIF activity by cis-acting elements is discussed.

PMCID: PMC355833
PMID: 14993282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:19-25.

Genetic regulation of cardiac patterning in zebrafish.

Yelon D(1), Feldman JL, Keegan BR.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Department of Cell Biology, Skirball Institute
of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10016, USA.

PMID: 12858519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Dev. 2003 Jun 1;17(11):1402-14.

NELF and DSIF cause promoter proximal pausing on the hsp70 promoter in
Drosophila.

Wu CH(1), Yamaguchi Y, Benjamin LR, Horvat-Gordon M, Washinsky J, Enerly E,
Larsson J, Lambertsson A, Handa H, Gilmour D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

NELF and DSIF collaborate to inhibit elongation by RNA polymerase IIa in extracts
from human cells. A multifaceted approach was taken to investigate the potential 
role of these factors in promoter proximal pausing on the hsp70 gene in
Drosophila. Immunodepletion of DSIF from a Drosophila nuclear extract reduced the
level of polymerase that paused in the promoter proximal region of hsp70.
Depletion of one NELF subunit in salivary glands using RNA interference also
reduced the level of paused polymerase. In vivo protein-DNA cross-linking showed 
that NELF and DSIF associate with the promoter region before heat shock.
Immunofluorescence analysis of polytene chromosomes corroborated the
cross-linking result and showed that NELF, DSIF, and RNA polymerase IIa
colocalize at the hsp70 genes, small heat shock genes, and many other chromosomal
locations. Finally, following heat shock induction, DSIF and polymerase but not
NELF were strongly recruited to chromosomal puffs harboring the hsp70 genes. We
propose that NELF and DSIF cause polymerase to pause in the promoter proximal
region of hsp70. The transcriptional activator, HSF, might cause NELF to
dissociate from the elongation complex. DSIF continues to associate with the
elongation complex and could serve a positive role in elongation.

PMCID: PMC196072
PMID: 12782658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genes Cells. 2003 Apr;8(4):371-8.

Structure-function analysis of human Spt4: evidence that hSpt4 and hSpt5 exert
their roles in transcriptional elongation as parts of the DSIF complex.

Kim DK(1), Inukai N, Yamada T, Furuya A, Sato H, Yamaguchi Y, Wada T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, and Frontier Collaborative
Research Center, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The human Spt4/Spt5 complex, termed DRB-sensitivity inducing factor
(DSIF) is a dual regulator of transcription that stimulates, or, when cooperating
with negative elongation factor (NELF), represses RNA polymerase II (RNAPII)
elongation. Spt4 and Spt5 are also thought to be involved in mRNA capping,
homologous DNA recombination, and transcription-coupled DNA repair. As a first
step to understanding how these proteins regulate diverse cellular processes, we 
investigated the structure and function of hSpt4 in vitro.
RESULTS: Immunodepletion of hSpt5 from HeLa nuclear extracts resulted in the
efficient co-depletion of hSpt4. Using DSIF-depleted nuclear extracts and a
series of Spt4 mutants, we examined the amino acid sequence of hSpt4 which was
important for hSpt5 binding and for transcriptional repression and activation by 
DSIF. Unexpectedly, the zinc finger of hSpt4, which is critical for the yeast
counterpart to function in vivo, was dispensable for hSpt5 binding and for
transcriptional regulation in vitro.
CONCLUSION: These and other results suggest: (i) that the central region of hSpt4
is necessary and sufficient for its function in vitro and (ii) that there is no
free hSpt4 or hSpt5 in cells. We propose that hSpt4 and hSpt5 exert their roles
in transcriptional regulation, and possibly in other nuclear processes, as parts 
of the DSIF complex.

PMID: 12653964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(6):1863-73.

Human transcription elongation factor NELF: identification of novel subunits and 
reconstitution of the functionally active complex.

Narita T(1), Yamaguchi Y, Yano K, Sugimoto S, Chanarat S, Wada T, Kim DK,
Hasegawa J, Omori M, Inukai N, Endoh M, Yamada T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnolog, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
4259 Nagatsuka, Yokohama 226-8503, Japan.

The multisubunit transcription elongation factor NELF (for negative elongation
factor) acts together with DRB (5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole)
sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF)/human Spt4-Spt5 to cause transcriptional
pausing of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). NELF activity is associated with five
polypeptides, A to E. NELF-A has sequence similarity to hepatitis delta antigen
(HDAg), the viral protein that binds to and activates RNAPII, whereas NELF-E is
an RNA-binding protein whose RNA-binding activity is critical for NELF function. 
To understand the interactions of DSIF, NELF, and RNAPII at a molecular level, we
identified the B, C, and D proteins of human NELF. NELF-B is identical to COBRA1,
recently reported to associate with the product of breast cancer susceptibility
gene BRCA1. NELF-C and NELF-D are highly related or identical to the protein
called TH1, of unknown function. NELF-B and NELF-C or NELF-D are integral
subunits that bring NELF-A and NELF-E together, and coexpression of these four
proteins in insect cells resulted in the reconstitution of functionally active
NELF. Detailed analyses using mutated recombinant complexes indicated that the
small region of NELF-A with similarity to HDAg is critical for RNAPII binding and
for transcriptional pausing. This study defines several important protein-protein
interactions and opens the way for understanding the mechanism of DSIF- and
NELF-induced transcriptional pausing.

PMCID: PMC149481
PMID: 12612062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2003 Jan;48(1):9-17.

[Molecular switch for mRNA synthesis rate].

[Article in Japanese]

Wada T(1), Yamaguchi Y, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)tawada@bio.titech.ac.jp

PMID: 12607259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biomed Sci. 2002 May-Jun;9(3):234-45.

MCEF, the newest member of the AF4 family of transcription factors involved in
leukemia, is a positive transcription elongation factor-b-associated protein.

Estable MC(1), Naghavi MH, Kato H, Xiao H, Qin J, Vahlne A, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, N.Y., USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor-b (P-TEFb) contains CDK9 and cyclin
T(1). P-TEFb was affinity purified from a stably transfected cell line that
expresses epitope-tagged CDK9, and proteins that appeared to be specifically
bound were sequenced. In addition to CDK9, previously identified isoforms of
cyclin T (including T(1), T(2A) and T(2B)), HSP90 and CDC37, this analysis
identified a novel protein named MCEF. Cloning of its cognate cDNA revealed that 
MCEF is the newest member of the AF4 family of transcription factors involved in 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. MCEF RNA was expressed in all human tissues
examined, and antisera directed against recombinant MCEF specifically
immunoprecipitated P-TEFb. Ectopic expression of MCEF did not activate HIV-1
replication, and tethering of MCEF to a promoter did not activate transcription.

Copyright 2002 National Science Council, ROC and S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12065898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(9):2918-27.

Evidence that negative elongation factor represses transcription elongation
through binding to a DRB sensitivity-inducing factor/RNA polymerase II complex
and RNA.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Inukai N, Narita T, Wada T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Yokohama, Japan.

Negative elongation factor (NELF) is a human transcription factor complex that
cooperates with DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF)/hSpt4-hSpt5 to repress
elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). NELF activity is associated with five
polypeptides, including NELF-A, a candidate gene product for Wolf-Hirschhorn
syndrome, and NELF-E, a putative RNA-binding protein with arginine-aspartic acid 
(RD) dipeptide repeats. Here we report several important findings regarding the
DSIF/NELF-dependent elongation control. First, we have established an effective
method for purifying the active NELF complex using an epitope-tagging technique. 
Second, the five polypeptides each are important and together are sufficient for 
its function in vitro. Third, NELF does not bind to either DSIF or RNAPII alone
but does bind to the preformed DSIF/RNAPII complex. Fourth, NELF-E has a
functional RNA-binding domain, whose mutations impair transcription repression
without affecting known protein-protein interactions. Taken together, we propose 
that NELF causes RNAPII pausing through binding to the DSIF/RNAPII complex and to
nascent transcripts. These results also have implications for how DSIF and NELF
are regulated in a gene-specific manner in vivo.

PMCID: PMC133766
PMID: 11940650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1623-32.

The elongation factors Pandora/Spt6 and Foggy/Spt5 promote transcription in the
zebrafish embryo.

Keegan BR(1), Feldman JL, Lee DH, Koos DS, Ho RK, Stainier DY, Yelon D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell Biology, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, USA.

Precise temporal and spatial control of transcription is a fundamental component 
of embryonic development. Regulation of transcription elongation can act as a
rate-limiting step during mRNA synthesis. The mechanisms of stimulation and
repression of transcription elongation during development are not yet understood.
We have identified a class of zebrafish mutations (pandora, sk8 and s30) that
cause multiple developmental defects, including discrete problems with
pigmentation, tail outgrowth, ear formation and cardiac differentiation. We
demonstrate that the pandora gene encodes a protein similar to Spt6, a proposed
transcription elongation factor. Additionally, the sk8 and s30 mutations are null
alleles of the foggy/spt5 locus, which encodes another transcription elongation
factor. Through real-time RT-PCR analysis, we demonstrate that Spt6 and Spt5 are 
both required for efficient kinetics of hsp70 transcription in vivo. Altogether, 
our results suggest that Spt6 and Spt5 play essential roles of comparable
importance for promoting transcription during embryogenesis. This study provides 
the first genetic evidence for parallel functions of Spt6 and Spt5 in metazoans
and establishes a system for the future analysis of transcription elongation
during development.

PMID: 11923199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(4):1079-93.

Spt5 cooperates with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat by preventing
premature RNA release at terminator sequences.

Bourgeois CF(1), Kim YK, Churcher MJ, West MJ, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, England.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein activates
transcription elongation by stimulating the Tat-activated kinase (TAK/p-TEFb), a 
protein kinase composed of CDK9 and its cyclin partner, cyclin T1. CDK9 is able
to hyperphosphorylate the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of 
RNA polymerase during elongation. In addition to TAK, the transcription
elongation factor Spt5 is required for the efficient activation of
transcriptional elongation by Tat. To study the role of Spt5 in HIV transcription
in more detail, we have developed a three-stage Tat-dependent transcription assay
that permits the isolation of active preinitiation complexes, early-stage
elongation complexes, and Tat-activated elongation complexes. Spt5 is recruited
in the transcription complex shortly after initiation. After recruitment of Tat
during elongation through the transactivation response element RNA, CDK9 is
activated and induces hyperphosphorylation of Spt5 in parallel to the
hyperphosphorylation of the CTD of RNA polymerase II. However, immunodepletion
experiments demonstrate that Spt5 is not required for Tat-dependent activation of
the kinase. Chase experiments using the Spt5-depleted extracts demonstrate that
Spt5 is not required for early elongation. However, Spt5 plays an important role 
in late elongation by preventing the premature dissociation of RNA from the
transcription complex at terminator sequences and reducing the amount of
polymerase pausing at arrest sites, including bent DNA sequences. This novel
biochemical function of Spt5 is analogous to the function of NusG, an elongation 
factor found in Escherichia coli that enhances RNA polymerase stability on
templates and shows sequence similarity to Spt5.

PMCID: PMC134635
PMID: 11809800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Mol Biol. 2001 Sep 28;312(4):675-85.

The peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 interacts with hSpt5 phosphorylated by Cdk9.

Lavoie SB(1), Albert AL, Handa H, Vincent M, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 
75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

We identify and characterize several phosphorylated forms of the hSpt5 subunit of
the DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF). A 175-kDa phosphorylated form of
hSpt5 is bound to nuclei of interphase HeLa cells. This form is rapidly
dephosphorylated when cultured cells are exposed to various drugs belonging to
distinct chemical families. All these compounds are known to inhibit the protein 
kinase Cdk9, which phosphorylates in vitro hSpt5 and Rpb1, the largest subunit of
RNA polymerase II. The efficiency to promote the dephosphorylation of both
proteins matches their capacity to inhibit purified Cdk9 kinase, suggesting that 
Cdk9 is the major kinase phosphorylating hSpt5 and Rpb1 in vivo. We show that
Cdk9 phosphorylates both the CTR1 and the CTR2 domains of recombinant hSpt5.
These domains contain numerous serine-proline and threonine-proline residues
similar to those found in the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of Rpb1. The
structural homology between hSpt5 CTRs and the Rpb1 CTD is further highlighted by
the presence on both proteins of a phosphoepitope recognized by the monoclonal
antibody CC-3. Of particular interest, the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1
interacts with Cdk9-phosphorylated hSpt5. Cdk9 dependent phosphorylation of Rpb1 
and hSpt5 followed by Pin1 interaction might thus contribute to the regulation of
transcription, pre-mRNA maturation, and the dynamics of these proteins in
interphase and mitosis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11575923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):42601-9. Epub 2001 Sep 11.

A highly purified RNA polymerase II elongation control system.

Renner DB(1), Yamaguchi Y, Wada T, Handa H, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Studying the sensitivity of transcription to the nucleotide analog
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole has led to the discovery of a
number of proteins involved in the regulation of transcription elongation by RNA 
polymerase II. We have developed a highly purified elongation control system
composed of three purified proteins added back to isolated RNA polymerase II
elongation complexes. Two of the proteins,
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole sensitivity-inducing factor
(DSIF) and negative elongation factor (NELF), act as negative transcription
elongation factors by increasing the time the polymerase spent at pause sites.
P-TEFb reverses the negative effect of DSIF and NELF through a mechanism
dependent on its kinase activity. TFIIF is a general initiation factor that
positively affects elongation by decreasing pausing. We show that TFIIF
functionally competes with DSIF and NELF, and this competition is dependent on
the relative concentrations of TFIIF and NELF.

PMID: 11553615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Curr Biol. 2001 Feb 20;11(4):R144-6.

Transcription elongation: the 'Foggy' is liftingellipsis.

Zorio DA(1), Bentley DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UCHSC, 4200 E. 9th Avenue, 
Colorado, Denver 80262, USA.

Transcription can be controlled by regulating either the initiation or elongation
of RNA chains. Recent studies highlight the importance of an elongation
regulator, Spt5, in controlling gene expression in yeast, fruit fly and
zebrafish; Spt5 may provide a link between transcriptional elongation and cell
fate.

PMID: 11250170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):12951-8. Epub 2000 Dec 8.

DSIF and NELF interact with RNA polymerase II elongation complex and HIV-1 Tat
stimulates P-TEFb-mediated phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II and DSIF during
transcription elongation.

Ping YH(1), Rana TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, and Molecular 
Biosciences Graduate Program at Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854,
USA.

Control of transcription elongation requires a complex interplay between the
recently discovered positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) and
negative transcription elongation factors,
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) sensitivity inducing
factors (DSIF) and the negative elongation factor (NELF). Activation of HIV-1
gene expression is regulated by a nascent RNA structure, termed TAR RNA, in
concert with HIV-1 Tat protein and these positive and negative elongation
factors. We have used a stepwise RNA pol II walking approach and Western blotting
to determine the dynamics of interactions between HIV-1 Tat, DSIF/NELF, and the
transcription complexes actively engaged in elongation. In addition, we developed
an in vitro kinase assay to determine the phosphorylation status of proteins
during elongation stages. Our results demonstrate that DSIF/NELF associates with 
RNA pol II complexes during early transcription elongation and travels with
elongation complexes as the nascent RNA is synthesized. Our results also show
that HIV-1 Tat protein stimulated DSIF and RNA pol II phosphorylation by P-TEFb
during elongation. These findings reveal a molecular mechanism for the negative
and positive regulation of transcriptional elongation at the HIV-1 promoter.

PMID: 11112772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nature. 2000 Nov 16;408(6810):366-9.

A regulator of transcriptional elongation controls vertebrate neuronal
development.

Guo S(1), Yamaguchi Y, Schilbach S, Wada T, Lee J, Goddard A, French D, Handa H, 
Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco,
California 94080, USA.

The development of distinct vertebrate neurons is defined by the unique profiles 
of genes that neurons express. It is accepted that neural genes are regulated at 
the point of transcription initiation, but the role of messenger RNA elongation
in neural gene regulation has not been examined. Here we describe the mutant
foggy, identified in a genetic screen for mutations that affect neuronal
development in zebrafish, that displayed a reduction of dopamine-containing
neurons and a corresponding surplus of serotonin-containing neurons in the
hypothalamus. Positional cloning disclosed that Foggy is a brain-enriched nuclear
protein that is structurally related to the transcription elongation factor Spt5 
(refs 5-12). Foggy is not part of the basic transcription apparatus but a
phosphorylation-dependent, dual regulator of transcription elongation. The
mutation disrupts its repressive but not its stimulatory activity. Our results
provide molecular, genetic and biochemical evidence that negative regulators of
transcription elongation control key aspects of neuronal development.

PMID: 11099044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell. 2000 Jun;5(6):1067-72.

FACT relieves DSIF/NELF-mediated inhibition of transcriptional elongation and
reveals functional differences between P-TEFb and TFIIH.

Wada T(1), Orphanides G, Hasegawa J, Kim DK, Shima D, Yamaguchi Y, Fukuda A,
Hisatake K, Oh S, Reinberg D, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Yokohama, Japan.

We report that the chromatin-specific transcription elongation factor FACT
functions in conjunction with the RNA polymerase II CTD kinase P-TEFb to
alleviate transcription inhibition by DSIF (DRB sensitivity-inducing factor) and 
NELF (negative elongation factor). We find that the kinase activity of TFIIH is
dispensable for this activity, demonstrating that TFIIH-mediated CTD
phosphorylation is not involved in the regulation of FACT and DSIF/NELF
activities. Thus, we propose a novel transcriptional regulatory network in which 
DSIF/NELF inhibition of transcription is prevented by P-TEFb in cooperation with 
FACT. This study uncovers a novel role for FACT in the regulation of
transcription on naked DNA that is independent of its activities on chromatin
templates. In addition, this study reveals functional differences between P-TEFb 
and TFIIH in the regulation of transcription.

PMID: 10912001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell. 1999 Apr 2;97(1):41-51.

NELF, a multisubunit complex containing RD, cooperates with DSIF to repress RNA
polymerase II elongation.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Takagi T, Wada T, Yano K, Furuya A, Sugimoto S, Hasegawa J, Handa
H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Yokohama, Japan.

DRB is a classic inhibitor of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (pol 
II). Since DRB generally affects class II genes, factors involved in this process
must play fundamental roles in pol II elongation. Recently, two elongation
factors essential for DRB action were identified, namely DSIF and P-TEFb. Here we
describe the identification and purification from HeLa nuclear extract of a third
protein factor required for DRB-sensitive transcription. This factor, termed
negative elongation factor (NELF), cooperates with DSIF and strongly represses
pol II elongation. This repression is reversed by P-TEFb-dependent
phosphorylation of the pol II C-terminal domain. NELF is composed of five
polypeptides, the smallest of which is identical to RD, a putative RNA-binding
protein of unknown function. This study reveals a molecular mechanism for DRB
action and a regulatory network of positive and negative elongation factors.

PMID: 10199401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):8085-92.

Structure and function of the human transcription elongation factor DSIF.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Wada T, Watanabe D, Takagi T, Hasegawa J, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

5,6-Dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) is a classic inhibitor of 
transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (pol II). We have previously
identified and purified a novel transcription elongation factor, termed DSIF (for
DRB sensitivity-inducing factor), that makes transcription sensitive to DRB. DSIF
is composed of 160- and 14-kDa subunits, which are homologs of the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae transcription factors Spt5 and Spt4. DSIF may either repress or
stimulate transcription in vitro, depending on conditions, but its physiological 
function remains elusive. Here we characterize the structure and function of DSIF
p160. p160 is shown to be a ubiquitous nuclear protein that forms a stable
complex with p14 and interacts directly with the pol II largest subunit. Mutation
analysis of p160 is used to identify structural features essential for its in
vitro activity and to map the domains required for its interaction with p14 and
pol II. Finally, a p160 mutant that represses DSIF activity in a
dominant-negative manner is identified and used to demonstrate that DSIF
represses transcription from various promoters in vivo.

PMID: 10075709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. EMBO J. 1998 Dec 15;17(24):7395-403.

Evidence that P-TEFb alleviates the negative effect of DSIF on RNA polymerase
II-dependent transcription in vitro.

Wada T(1), Takagi T, Yamaguchi Y, Watanabe D, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Recently, a positive and a negative elongation factor, implicated in
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) inhibition of
transcription elongation, has been identified. P-TEFb is a positive transcription
elongation factor and the DRB-sensitive kinase that phosphorylates the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (Pol II). PITALRE, a
member of the Cdc2 family of protein kinases, is the catalytic subunit of P-TEFb.
DSIF is a human homolog of the yeast Spt4-Spt5 complex and renders elongation of 
transcription sensitive to DRB. DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) binds to
RNA Pol II and may directly regulate elongation. Here we show a functional
interaction between P-TEFb and DSIF. The reduction of P-TEFb activity induced by 
either DRB, antibody against PITALRE, or immunodepletion resulted in a negative
effect of DSIF on transcription. DSIF acts at an early phase of elongation, and
the prior action of P-TEFb makes transcription resistant to DSIF. The state of
phosphorylation of CTD determines the DSIF-RNA Pol II interaction, and may
provide a direct link between P-TEFb and DSIF. Taken together, this study reveals
a molecular basis for DRB action and suggests that P-TEFb stimulates elongation
by alleviating the negative action of DSIF.

PMCID: PMC1171084
PMID: 9857195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Mol Biol. 1998 Mar 27;277(2):179-97.

Role of the human homolog of the yeast transcription factor SPT5 in HIV-1
Tat-activation.

Wu-Baer F(1), Lane WS, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75235-8594, USA.

The transactivator protein Tat stimulates transcriptional elongation from the
HIV-1 LTR. One mechanism by which Tat increases HIV-1 transcription is by
interacting with RNA polymerase II and TFIIH to increase phosphorylation of the
polymerase C-terminal domain. Recent studies indicate that specific elongation
factors may also be required to modulate Tat function. Here, we used biochemical 
analysis and in vitro transcription assays to identify cellular factors required 
for Tat activation. This analysis resulted in the purification of a cellular
factor Tat-CT1 which is a human homolog of the yeast transcription factor SPT5.
Immunodepletion of Tat-CTl from HeLa extract demonstrated that this factor was
involved in transcriptional activation by Tat. However, the absence of this
factor from HeLa extract did not prevent transcriptional activation by VP16.
These findings are consistent with a model in which Tat-mediated effects on
transcriptional elongation are mediated in part by the action of the human
homolog of the yeast transcription factor SPT5.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press Limited.

PMID: 9514752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jun 2;409(1):74-8.

Human Supt5h protein, a putative modulator of chromatin structure, is reversibly 
phosphorylated in mitosis.

Stachora AA(1), Schäfer RE, Pohlmeier M, Maier G, Ponstingl H.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Division for Molecular Biology of Mitosis,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins Spt4p, Spt5p and Spt6p are involved in
transcriptional repression by modulating the structure of chromatin. From HeLa
cells we have purified a human homologue of Spt5p, Supt5hp, and show here that
the protein is reversibly phosphorylated in mitosis. The cloned cDNA predicts a
protein of 1087 residues with 31% identity to yeast Spt5p. It includes an acidic 
N-terminus, a putative nuclear localization signal and a C-terminal region
containing two different repeated motifs. One of them, with the consensus
sequence P-T/S-P-S-P-Q/A-S/G-Y, is similar to the C-terminal domain in the
largest subunit of RNA polymerase II.

PMID: 9199507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Genomics. 1996 Dec 15;38(3):421-4.

Isolation, sequencing, and mapping of the human homologue of the yeast
transcription factor, SPT5.

Chiang PW(1), Fogel E, Jackson CL, Lieuallen K, Lennon G, Qu X, Wang SQ, Kurnit
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor
48109, USA. pwchiang@umich.edu

We isolated the human homologue, SUPT5H, of the yeast transcription factor, SPT5.
The human homologue is 1088 aa long compared to 1063 aa for the yeast gene.
SUPT5H maps to 19q13, near the ryanodine receptor. Like its family member,
SUPT6H, and like yeast SPT5, SUPT5H has a very acidic 5' domain. Like its family 
member, SUPT6H, but unlike yeast SPT5 or SPT6, SUPT5H has seven MAP kinase sites 
at its 5' end. In addition, SUPT5H lacks the novel 6-amino-acid repeat (consensus
is S-T/A-W-G-G-A/Q) at the C-terminus of yeast SPT5. This argues that while there
is functional similarity between SPT5 and SUPT5H, the molecules differ in the
signals to which they respond.

PMID: 8975720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


